Public Disclosure Authorized

The World Bank Group

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 75814-LB

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of

PROGRESS REPORT
ON THE
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
LEBANESE REPUBLIC
FOR THE PERIOD FY11-FY14

April 18, 2013

MNCO2 Country Management Unit
Middle East and North Africa Region
Strategy Unit

Middle East and North Africa Region
International Finance Corporation
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS
Fiscal Year
January 1 to December 31
(Exchange Rate Effective April 2, 2013)
Currency Unit
LL1,507.5

= Lebanese Pound (LL)
= US$1

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA

Analytical and Advisory Activities

LBP

Lebanese Pound

BdL

Banque du Liban (Central Bank of Lebanon)

LNG

Liquefied Natural Gas

BLC

Banque Libanaise pour le Commerce

LTF

Lebanon Trust Fund

CAS

Country Assistance Strategy

MDTF

Multi Donor Trust Fund

CPS

Country Partnership Strategy

MEHE

Ministry of Education & Higher Education

EC

European Commission

MENA

Middle East and North Africa

EdL

Electricitidu Liban (Lebanon Electric)

MIGA

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

EDP

Education Development Project

MILES

ESW

Economic Sector Work

MOEW

Macro-economy, Investment Climate, Labor,
Education and Social Protection
Ministry of Energy and Water

FY

Fiscal Year

MOF

Ministry of Finance

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

MTEF

Medium-Term Expenditure Framework

GEF

Global Environment Facility

NPTP

National Poverty Targeting Program

GoL

Government of Lebanon

SEF

Sustainable Energy Finance

IBRD

SIL

Specific Investment Loan

ICT

International Bank for Reconstruction &
Development
Information and Communication Technology

SME

Small and Medium Enterprises

IDF

Institutional Development Fund

TA

Technical Assistance

IFC

International Finance Corporation

TF

Trust Fund

IL

Investment Lending

WBG

World Bank Group

Vice President
Director
Task Manager

IBRD
Inger Andersen
Ferid Belhaj
Mouna Couzi

IFC
Dimitris Tsitsiragos
Mouayed Makhlouf
Thomas Jacobs

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the close and fruitful collaboration with the
Government of Lebanon in the preparation of this Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report
(CASPR). This CASPR was prepared by members of the World Bank Group's Lebanon Country
Team, including Mouna Couzi, Thomas James Jacobs, Pilar Maisterra, Janette Uhlmann, Anne
Njuguna, Mary Eunice Barroso, Stefano Mocci, Haneen Ismail Sayed, Claire Kfouri, Chantal
Reliquet, Simon Stolp, Ziad Nakat, Eric Le Borgne, Chadi Bou Habib, Wael Mansour, Randa
Akeel, Juan Manuel Moreno, Gustavo Demarco, Angela Elzir, Alaa Sarhan, Paul Prettitore,
Fabian Seiderer, Victor Mulas, David Satola, Ingrid Ivins, Victoria Gyllerup, Yousra Mohamed
Abdelrahman, Rapti A. Goonesekere, Amal El Karagy, Persephone Economou, and Bushra
Ghulam Mohammad under the overall leadership of Ferid Belhaj.

ii

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR FY11-FY14
LEBANESE REPUBLIC

CONTENTS

I.

INTRODUCTION

II.

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES..........................3......

III. PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND LESSONS LEARNED.

.......................

..............

IV. PROGRESS TOWARDS ACHIEVING CPS OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES

V.

1

....................................................................

THE WAY FORWARD

3

..................... 7
.....................

..................................................

............

VI. RISKS ............................................................................

11
13

15

TABLES

Table 1: Lebanon: Selected Economic Indicators, 2009-20 15.............

................

Table 2: Summary of CPSPR Findings on the FYI 1-13 CPS Results Matrix .....
Table 3: World Bank Program for the period FY1 1-FY14

4

......... 12

.................................

15

Annexes
Annex I: CPS Results Matrix and Progress to Date ..................................

17

Annex II: Detailed Overview on Progress to Date under the Various Sectors

..

.............. 27

Annex A2: Lebanon at a Glance

......

........ 32

.

............ 35

................................

Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance & Management
Annex B3: IFC Investment Operations Program.
Annex B5: Social Indicators

............................

........................................

......

36

......... 37

Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators

...........................................

38

Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators

...........................................

40

Annex B8a: IBRD Operations Portfolio and Grants

..................................

41

Annex B8b: Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio ..................

42

Annex B8c: MIGA Outstanding Exposure

43

.......................................

111

PROGRESS REPORT - COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (FY11-FY14)
LEBANESE REPUBLIC
I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This Progress Report assesses the implementation of the World Bank Group's (WBG)
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Lebanon for FY11-FY14. Preparations for the CPS
followed three years of political instability in Lebanon, in the aftermath of the Israel-Lebanon
hostilities in 2006. The hostilities instigated a deep political divide which paralyzed Parliament and
the Government and increased political violence. After the Doha Accord in 2008, and the formation
of a National Unity Government in November 2009, a period of political stability paved the way for a
renewed focus on the critical reforms to improve Lebanon's fiscal and debt sustainability, create
employment, provide adequate infrastructure and social services, and support social inclusion.
2.
The CPS discussions, which began with the Government in early 2010, were aimed at
putting the economy on a path to sustained broad-based economic growth, by focusing on four
strategic goals over a period of four years: (i) Growth and Fiscal Sustainability; (ii) Competitive
Business Environment; (iii) Economic Infrastructure (electricity, water, transport, environment and
waste management, local development); and (iv) Human Capital Development and Social Protection.
3.
The CPS envisaged a program of investment lending, as well as analytical and advisory
services (AAA) through the existing portfolio complemented by new lending ranging between
US$375 and US$550 million. This program is supported by investments and advisory services
provided by the International Finance Corporation (IFC). The CPS is anchored in the country's
sectarian and consensus-based political reality, which makes it hard to pursue ambitious reforms.
4.
The CPS envisaged a two-tiered approach: (i) a Core Program of engagement consisting
of the existing portfolio, selected new investments in basic services, as well as technical assistance
and analytical work to inform and build momentum around key reforms (Tier I); and (ii) a deeper
engagement in additional areas where traction for reform would develop, including budget support
should Lebanon implement a sound macroeconomic framework and introduce a robust reform
program positively impacting the fiscal situation (Tier II). Progress on implementation of the Core
Program would be assessed regularly, with the Government of Lebanon (GoL) and the Bank Group
agreeing on areas for possible scale-up of WBG engagement.
5.
The difficult country context and the political and economic impact of exogenous shocks
instigated by the spillover of the Arab Spring, especially the uprising in neighboring Syria,
have strongly affected Lebanon. The influx of Syrian refugees has had not only a humanitarian
dimension but also developmental consequences. To date, there are 427,000 people registered as
refugees or awaiting registration with UNHCR (up from 120,000 in November 2012) with many
more not registered. It is expected that the number will continue to grow and possibly reach one
million by year end. This displacement is putting a strain on hosting communities that already face
challenges in terms of service delivery and poverty levels. The turmoil in Syria is also affecting the
Lebanese economy more generally, both in terms of increased risk premia vis-A-vis private sector
investment and blocked trade routes.
6.
A total of US$297 million in new IBRD commitments have been made since the start of
CPS implementation in the areas of water, education, cultural heritage and SME financing (see
Table 3). In addition, the Social Protection and Promotion Project (US$30 million), and the Mobile
1

Internet Ecosystem Project (US$6.4 million) are envisaged to be presented for Board approval before
the end of FY13. IFC has committed around US$680 million between FY11 and FY13 in a
combination of loans, guarantees and equity investments in banking, microfinance, insurance and
Information and Communication Technology (ICT). In addition, IFC has provided a range of
advisory services to: (i) scale up Sustainable Energy Finance; (ii) increase access to finance for
SMEs (with a particular focus on women-owned SMEs); (iii) develop the "ARZ" green building
rating system; and (iv) conduct a series of green building assessments.
7.
Progress on structural economic reforms, however, has not been achieved. This is due to
the continuous political tensions, which culminated in the resignation of Prime Minister Najib Mikati
on March 22, 2013. Mikati had formed his Government in June 2011 after five months of difficult
consultations. The current Government has assumed a caretaker role, until a new Cabinet is formed
by PM-designate Tammam Salam. Continuous political fragmentation has hindered the
Government's ability to reach consensus on economic reform and on addressing the country's
infrastructure deficiencies.
8.
A notable exception is the Energy Sector. The Government was able to start addressing the
sector's constraints and approved in June 2010 the Policy Paper for the Electricity Sector, which
establishes a road map for investments and reform. Although some progress has been made, broader
sector reforms remain at risk due to potential lack of public financing and difficulties inherent to
Lebanon's political economy.
The strategic thrust of the CPS and two-tiered approach remains relevant. However, the
9.
heightened risks and their impact on the country program since the discussion of the CPS in 2010
requires a revision of the more ambitious goals. Economic and social vulnerabilities, as well as
internal and regional risks identified during CPS preparation have substantially increased. With the
emergence of the Arab Spring and increased regional instability, the Bank Group's assistance
program has been characterized by a protracted period of uncertainty and political instability. As
such, scaling back of the strategic goals is warranted (Strategic Goal 1 has been recast as:
StrengthenedFiscal and Public FinancialManagement; and Goal 2 has been narrowed to: Improved
Competiveness).
10.
Nonetheless, progress has been made towards achieving CPS milestones and outcomes.
Reforms in certain sectors have progressed, albeit timidly, and a number of the indicators under the
four pillars have been met or are on track to be met. The Results Matrix presented in Annex 1 has
been revised to reflect more realistic, gender-sensitive and measurable targets by ensuring alignment
with the country's program for the end of the CPS period. Going forward, new projects will
incorporate a systematic integration of gender issues.
11.
The Bank Group will continue to support the Government with lending for investments
in key economic infrastructure, as well as technical assistance and analytical work that will
inform and build momentum around key reforms. Complementing the existing program, stronger
focus will be placed on transformational sectors that show potential for progress under the present
circumstances, e.g. the electricity sector, with promising government and stakeholder consensus, the
water sector as per the priorities identified in the National Water Sector Strategy, and possibly
transport. The Bank will also continue to monitor the escalating Syrian crisis, and its socioeconomic,
fiscal and developmental ramifications, while evaluating the impact of this risk on the WBG
program.

2

II.

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

12.
The CPS strategic thrust remains relevant in light of the country's persisting
development challenges, which have been compounded by regional developments. The conflict
in neighboring Syria over the past two years has imposed a security, political, and economic toll on
Lebanon, fueling division along sectarian lines, and sparking repeated incidents of violence across
the country. These incidents have materially impacted the economy and diverted the Government's
attention from the envisaged reform process towards more immediate political and security concerns.
13.
Growth performance has remained below potential due to the country's
macroeconomic volatility, infrastructure bottlenecks, inadequate support to innovation,
distorted product and labor market regulations, and weak governance. The economy continues
to struggle to generate jobs necessary to absorb high unemployment and new entrants to the labor
force. Unemployment remains especially high among youth and women. The majority of the labor
force continues to be employed in low productivity service jobs and only 29 percent of workers are in
formal wage employment, i.e., with access to social security and protected by labor regulations.
The macro-fiscal framework remains fragile, posing challenges for medium-term growth
14.
Lebanon's growth spurt stopped in 2011, in part due to regional turmoil, domestic
political uncertainty and repeated security incidents. After growing by an average of 7.5 percent
in the four years through 2010, real GDP growth slowed to an estimated 3 percent in 2011 and to 1.4
percent in 2012 (Table 1). Key drivers of the slowdown were tourism, services, exports and
construction. Contingent on an improved political and security situation, a moderate rebound in
economic growth is projected for 2013 (to 2.3 percent). Key risks to the outlook are the uncertainties
linked to the June 2013 parliamentary elections, and spillovers from the Syrian civil war.
15.
Key structural reforms are required to overcome deep-rooted obstacles if higher
growth rates are to be achieved. Severe bottlenecks remain in infrastructure, especially in
electricity, transport and water, which will require significant levels of investment. Moreover,
economic volatility (including dependence on foreign financial inflows), inefficient public spending,
anticompetitive laws and practices, and low incentives to innovate need to be addressed not only to
improve growth and job creation, but also to facilitate necessary fiscal adjustment.
Maintaining a prudent approach to economic management in the midst of a volatile
16.
political and security environment remains critical. Lebanon's (large) financial sector is feeling
the effects of the Syrian crisis and regional uncertainties. High fiscal and current account deficits
increase exposure to shocks. Careful fiscal management is crucial, particularly in light of the
substantial exposure of commercial banks to sovereign risk.
The improvement in public finances was overturned in 2012, in part due to a structural
17.
increase in expenditure. From 2006 to 2012, public debt decreased by 47 percentage points of GDP,
primarily driven by record economic growth. During that period, the fiscal deficit shrank from 11.1
to 6.4 percent of GDP, mostly due to cyclical factors. 2012 marked a sharp reversal in fiscal
consolidation: the primary central government surplus shrank by 3.7 percentage points of GDP to a
deficit of 0.7 percent of GDP. Revenue performance weakened following the deceleration of the
economy while expenditure expanded briskly, mostly due to the cost of living adjustment for public
sector workers. Public debt remains high at 134.3 percent of GDP in 2012.
18.
Amid an accommodative monetary stance, money supply and lending to the private
sector remained buoyant. Money supply (M3) increased by 6.7 percent (yoy) in end-2012 thanks to
3

the continuous inflow of foreign deposits attracted by the wide LBP-USD spreads. Notwithstanding
rising sovereign credit risk, the dollarization rate of deposits remained stable. Lending to the private
sector grew broadly in line with nominal GDP growth. To further stimulate the economy, BdL
introduced a US$1.46 billion stimulus package providing discounted financing to the housing sector
and some innovative economic activities.
Table 1: Lebanon: Selected Economic Indicators, 2009-2015
2009
Real sector

Real GDP
Real GDP per Capita

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Act.
Prel.
Est.
Proj.
(annualpercentage change, unless otherwise specified)

8.5
7.7

7.0
6.2

3.0
2.3

1.4
0.7

2.3
1.5

4.0
3.2

3.8
3.0

2.8
23.1

4.9
12.1

5.7
7.1

5.7
6.1

4.9
8.0

3.7
10.0

3.0
10.0

Money and prices

CPI Inflation (p.a)
Money (M3, including non-resident deposits)
Investment & saving

Gross Capital Formation
Gross Domestic Savings

(percent ofGDP, unless otherwise specified)

34.7
6.9

33.9
5.9

29.8
12.1

29.4
8.8

30.0
9.6

31.3
11.0

31.2
11.4

24.7
33.4
-8.7
2.4

22.8
31.0
-8.2
2.3

23.5
29.8
-6.4
3.0

23.0
31.8
-8.9
-0.7

23.2
32.1
-8.9
-0.7

23.5
31.7
-8.3
-0.1

23.5
31.8
-8.3
0.0

-19.5
-24.1
18.4

-20.4
-26.1
18.4

-12.1
-17.7
18.4

-14.4
-20.6
18.3

-15.7
-20.4
17.9

-16.4
-20.3
17.3

-16.9
-19.8
16.6

147.6

141.7

133.8

134.3

134.2

132.9

132.9

52,236
1,507.5
34,651

55,965
1,507.5
37,124

60,442
1,507.5
40,094

64,740
1,507.5
42,945

69,420
1,507.5
46,050

74,724
1,507.5
49,568

79,727
1,507.5
52,887

Central Government Finance

Revenue (including grants)
Total expenditure and net lending
Overall balance (deficit (-))
Primary Balance (deficit (-))
Extemal sector

Current Account Balance
Trade Balance (GNFS)
Gross Reserves (months of imports GNFS)
Total Public Debt
Debt-to-GDP ratio (percent)
Memorandum Items:

Nominal GDP (in billion LBP)
Exchange Rate, Average (LBP/US$)
GDP (in million US$)

Source: Government data, and World Bank staff estimates and projections.

19.
Lebanon faces significant fiscal challenges going forward. Based on current policies, the
fiscal deficit is projected to remain elevated, at 8.9 percent of GDP in both 2012 and 2013. With
limited fiscal space, pressures on the expenditure side (e.g., increase in public sector wages) would
likely require a strengthened tax take. Revenue measures, however, have repeatedly stumbled due to
a lack of political and social consensus. If implemented without revenue offset, the proposed change
in the structure of salary scales could weaken the Lebanese economy through the return of
unsustainable debt dynamics, pressures on the peg, lower economic growth, and increased
unemployment. Reforming the public sector pension system would further reduce the negative
impact, but such reform cannot be separated from the need for strengthening social safety nets.
20.
The Syrian civil war exposed Lebanon's internal weaknesses and negatively impacted
economic growth. While the economy was already slowing down in 2011, the Syrian conflict
accelerated that movement. Private consumption dropped as precautionary saving rose due to
security concerns. Uncertain final demand and security concerns have also affected private
investment. Additionally, the political deadlock in the country, linked to the events in Syria, impeded
long awaited reforms to improve the business environment, tackle infrastructure bottlenecks, increase
4

competitiveness, and facilitate access to credit. Government consumption, however, slightly
increased as a direct result of the crisis due to spending on public services such as education, health,
and security. The Syrian crisis also put negative pressures on net exports.
21.
Lebanese banks have proved resilient to regional turbulence. Seven Lebanese banks are
currently operating in Syria. Their market share before the crisis was around 22 percent of total
Syrian deposits. Lebanese banks' assets in Syrian branches are estimated at US$2 billion and belong
to strong banks, which have adequate reserve coverage and therefore do not impose an unreasonable
added risk. These banks have increased their provisions to cover these losses. This will impact their
profitability in the short term. However, the medium-term outlook remains positive. Lebanese banks
are also impacted by the Cyprus banking crisis as their branches hold an estimated US$2.5 billion in
deposits. The impact is, however, seen as minor by markets with Lebanese banks' stock prices
largely unaffected by the surprise announcement of the tax on deposits.
The business environment is still in need of reform
22.
The Private Sector continues to suffer from the cost of transaction-based taxes
regulatory compliance and unfair competition. Corruption plays a significant role in the
application of taxes and regulations, public service connections, and public procurement. Although
corporate tax rates are not high, a variety of indirect taxes, duties and fees applied on transactions
impose a high cost on day-to-day business operations and discourage formality.
23.
A number of laws have been prepared and sent to Parliament where they remain
pending. Weak coordination among government agencies reduces the quality and impedes the
implementation of reforms at the national level. While decrees relating to company dispute
resolution, arbitration and mediation are in effect, laws on competition, procurement, e-Commerce,
and collateral as well as updates to the commercial code, trademark law and company law are
awaiting Parliamentary ratification. Preparations continue on the insurance, insolvency/bankruptcy,
construction and urban laws and on the commercial registry.
24.
Political instability continues to impede the development of efficient public-private
dialogue. When it exists, the public-private dialogue is personalized, informal and non-transparent.
Lack of coordination among civil society, universities, private sector and the diaspora hinders a
structured and comprehensive debate about economic and financial issues. While the Lebanese
private sector has some comparative advantages in the ICT sector, it has been unable to scale up for
lack of a well-structured public-private dialogue on strategic priorities.
Weak infrastructure services remain a major constraintfor economic growth
25.
Continued under-investment and the slow pace of reform have not improved the
perilous state of the Lebanese electricity sector. Public supply covers around 60 percent of
electricity demand, while technical and commercial losses exceed 30 percent of the generated
production. Generation and distribution assets are in poor condition and expensive fuel continues to
be used for generation in the absence of lower cost natural gas, while power tariffs have not been
revised since 1996. As a result, the sector cost the Government in 2012 over US$2.2 billion in fuel
subsidies per annum, or about 4 percent of GDP, representing almost half of the overall fiscal deficit
of the country. The fiscal burden represented by the sector will become worse, if the current shortterm infrastructure investments are completed without moving forward with meaningful institutional
and financial reforms. The Government is, however, moving forward in developing its offshore oil

The Minister of Finance has introduced new e-taxation measures aimed at reducing the cost of paying taxes.

5

and gas resources and is launching the tender process for the first licensing round for offshore gas
and oil exploration.
26.
Lebanon's water supply sector continues to be unable to meet demand, and service
provision remains weak. Currently, average technical and commercial losses of water are as high as
40 percent and further aggravate supply shortages. Small scale private water vendors, most of whom
are unregulated and many of whom are illegal, provide water of dubious quality. Unless measures
are taken to improve distribution efficiency and increase storage capacity, chronic water shortages
are expected to occur as early as 2020.
27.
Similarly, transport remains a major constraint on economic and social development.
Institutional capacity to oversee urban transport services is weak, and regulations to ensure minimum
levels of quality and safety are rarely enforced. Although international and primary roads are well
distributed throughout the country and in good condition, secondary and local roads are in a poor
state with less than 20 percent considered to be in acceptable condition. The GoL continues to face
major challenges in enforcing traffic rules and regulations, promoting private sector investments in
urban transport services, and mobilizing funding to carry out regular road maintenance. Public
transport services need to be better organized and developed. Moreover, excess costs, time-intensive
port clearance and land border crossings continue to impact Lebanon's competitiveness in trade.
Although considered a priority by the Government, the Environment sector remains neglected
28.
Until recently, the Environment sector has been a secondary priority, characterized by
an incomplete legal framework and ineffective policies. Environmental neglect has had an impact
on the economy resulting in a degradation amounting to US$800 million in 2005 (equivalent to 3.7
percent of GDP). Domestic and industrial discharge is released largely untreated in nature, and the
pollution of water resources is compounded by agricultural and dumps runoffs. The Ministry of
Energy and Water (MOEW) launched a National Wastewater Strategy in December 2012, and the
Government's National Municipal Solid Waste Strategy is to be finalized by June 2013. No strategy
exists for air pollution management although a number of air monitoring stations are being installed
and managed on an ad hoc basis.
Social vulnerabilities remain significant
29.
Poverty remains significant and regional disparities in living conditions are acute.
Nearly 27 percent of the Lebanese population, or 1 million people, are poor, living on less than US$4
per day, with an estimated 8 percent, or 300,000 people, living on less than US$2.40 per day. Poverty
is significantly higher in some regions, such as the North, which accounts for 21 percent of
Lebanon's population. Almost 40 percent of the poor and 46 percent of the extreme poor are
concentrated in slums around major cities. Over half of Lebanese citizens are able to cover only basic
needs, and 63 percent are not able to afford the basic necessities at some time. Of those who do have
surplus, almost 30 percent save for unexpected emergency/medical expenses, and only 7 percent save
to invest capital in business or assets.
30.
The influx of displaced Syrians is imposing a significant burden on Lebanon's ability to
provide services to local hosting communities and to the refugees. A large number of Syrians
have settled with host communities, many of which are already experiencing high levels of poverty.
Lebanese host communities are therefore bearing the brunt of the crisis, with emerging tensions
related to issues such as increasing rents, rising prices, and competition for livelihood opportunities.
Service provision, local governance strengthening, agricultural sector support, and civil society
6

assistance will be required along with infrastructure repair, livelihood assistance, and provision of
shelter.
31.
Primary healthcare services continue to be dominated by the private sector, as over 80
percent of facilities are privately owned. Only 10 percent of the population uses non-governmental
primary care centers, and only 20 percent of the population relies on a family physician. Maternal
mortality (150 deaths per 100,000 live births), is relatively high compared to other countries with
similar incomes. Weaknesses in the primary care system contribute to higher health care costs,
reduce the quality of care and generally worsen the equity of health service delivery. Approximately
half of the population is formally uninsured and more than 60 percent of total health spending is paid
out of pocket by households.
The economic downturn over the past two years has exerted pressure on household
32.
incomes, with rising food and energy prices taxing the poor and vulnerable. Geographic
disparities are striking within the country, as infrastructure investment and service delivery remain
concentrated in the Greater Beirut area. Moreover, Lebanon's North, the country's most
impoverished area, is feeling the effects of a sustained influx of displaced Syrians, putting the
Government's already constrained ability to deliver basic services under further pressure.
The CPS program remains relevant to support Government's priorities
33.
A Rapid Progress Review, conducted with GoL in September 2011 following the first
year of CPS implementation, recognized the persisting development challenges identified in the
strategy and the validity of the Bank Group's focus. The slow progress achieved in structural
reforms over the past two years further reinforces the urgency of addressing the CPS' priority areas:
declining private investment and heightened regional risks highlight the need for improving
competitiveness; lack of investment and growing demand call for improvement of basic
infrastructure services; high unemployment and low growth highlight the necessity for interventions
in the labor market, and for investments in public education; lastly, the deterioration of the fiscal
situation, combined with sluggish growth and increased unemployment, calls for an efficient and
inclusive social protection system for the most vulnerable. Continued attention to these challenges
and to building strong momentum for reform remain central to Lebanon's development prospects.
III. PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND

LESSONS LEARNED

Portfolio performance is mixed
34.
Portfolio Overview: As of March 31, 2013 the portfolio consists of 14 active projects
financed from a variety of sources including: IBRD, Lebanon Trust Fund (LTF), State and Peace
Building Fund (SPBF), Institutional Development Fund (IDF), and Program on Forests (PROFOR)
resources. These financing sources support interventions in sectors that include education, social
protection, urban development, transport, water, environment, private sector, social services,
telecommunications, and fiscal management reform, and represent a total commitment of US$477.7
million, of which a total of US$147.2 million has been disbursed. Four out of 14 projects are in
problem status: (i) the Second Emergency Social ProtectionImplementation Support Project (US$6
million; LTF) is undergoing restructuring to address unsatisfactory implementation of one of its
components; (ii) both the Second Education Development Project (US$40 million; IBRD) and the
Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (US$200 million; IBRD) experienced effectiveness delays due
to lengthy Parliamentary ratification procedures; and (iii) the National Volunteer Services Program
(US$2 million; SPBF) was delayed in meeting effectiveness conditions which hindered

7

implementation. The Lebanon portfolio is challenging as existing macro, governance, organizational,
and capacity issues are further compounded by the country's complex political economy 2.
35.
The underlying causes of mixed portfolio performance relate largely to the macro and
policy environment of the country which affects project implementation. For example, the two
loans approved by the Board since the launch of the CPS (the GreaterBeirut Water Supply Project
and the Second Education Development Project), experienced significant delays in becoming
effective, due to repeated delays in Cabinet approval, GoL loan signature, or Parliamentary
ratification. 3 These projects were only declared effective in 2012, 19 months after they were
approved. With elections looming and Lebanese political forces shifting into campaign mode, it is
likely that the remaining two projects approved by the Board since the launch of the CPS (the
Cultural Heritage and Urban Development Additional Financing and the Innovation and SME
Project) will face similar delays.
36.
Disbursement during the CPS period also reflects the impact of effectiveness delays. In
FY11, the average disbursement ratio for Lebanon stood at 44 percent, compared to 11 percent for
the MNA Region and 22 percent for the Bank, placing Lebanon as the second best performer in the
MNA Region. An increase of the disbursement ratio in FY11 versus FY10 was largely driven by the
acceleration of disbursements of several projects nearing their closing dates. However, in FY12 the
average disbursement ratio declined to 6 percent. The disbursement ratio now stands at only 3.5
percent. Declining disbursement can be attributed to the above-mentioned delays in effectiveness of
the GreaterBeirut Water Supply Project and the Second EducationDevelopment Project.
37.
IFC's Investment Portfolio stands at US$223 million in 12 companies as of end December
2012 and continues to perform well. The portfolio is concentrated in the financial markets sector
(particularly trade finance) followed by manufacturing and services. Guarantees to banks to facilitate
trade flows totaled US$676 million. With US$370 million of guarantees in FY12, Lebanon was the
most active user of the Global Trade Finance Program in the MENA region. In addition, a US$2
million equity investment was made in an early-stage ICT firm based in Tripoli helping to expand
operations and more than double its staff, while US$124 million in equity was invested in Medgulf
SAL, a Lebanese insurance company active across the MENA region. IFC also committed a US$2
million loan to a local microfinance institution, IFC's first investment in the sector in Lebanon, and
an US$8 million investment was approved to finance the improvement of distribution and collection
services in the electricity sector.
Trust Funds play a key role in the Lebanon Portfolio
38.
Trust Funds are integrated in the Bank's portfolio and support critical institutional
development. Bank-administered trust funds, including the Lebanon Trust Fund (LTF) 4, finance a
number of activities including: (i) improvement of Lebanon's social services; (ii) support to the
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority; (iii) improvement of water resources and agricultural
management; (iv) increase in youth civic engagement to improve youth employability and strengthen
social cohesion; and (v) assistance to the GoL and EdL in managing PCB inventories and disposal
2 Because of the macroeconomic situation and political environment, as well as a track record of unsatisfactory project outcomes,
Lebanon projects receive two risk flags (Country Environment and Country Record) from inception.
When political tensions escalate, political parliamentary blocs resort to boycotting parliamentary work. While the Parliament
has a constitutional responsibility to ratify all foreign loans and to examine draft laws referred by the Cabinet, the legislature has
been beset by repeated lack of quorum, which has resulted in repeated delays of the ratification of World Bank projects.
4 The Lebanon Trust Fund (LTF) was approved in September 2006 to assist in the rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure, and
recovery following the July/August 2006 hostilities. A total grant of US$70 million was transferred from IBRD surplus to the
Trust Fund.

8

options. Currently, there are nine active projects financed by trust funds (two by LTF, three by SPBF,
three by IDF, and technical assistance by PROFOR) for a total of US$14.5 million. One of the
recently approved IDF Grants aims to support civil society capacity development in the Ba'albeckHermel area. Specifically, the Grant will help poor communities secure their ID cards and other key
documents. The Grant has a strong gender focus and is expected to benefit around 800 women
through the provision of training and seminars on self-representation. The Trust Fund for Lebanon
was established to promote recovery from the 2006 conflict and provides a good example of
Bank/IFC integration. US$15 million of the LTF has enabled IFC to finance risk sharing facilities
and advisory projects and assist SMEs in gaining access to finance. In addition to funding a range of
IFC advisory projects, the LTF helped IFC leverage an additional US$120 million of SME finance
from local banks. Given this success, extension of the trust fund beyond its current 2014 end date is
being pursued.
39.
A good share of the operations envisaged under the CPS has been approved, with
US$297 million of new IBRD commitments provided in FY 11-FY13 for four investment operations
in the water, education, cultural heritage and urban development, and private sectors. The level of
new financing made available to the GoL during the first two and a half years of the CPS is in line
with the Tier I scenario, which envisaged a program concentrated on new investment lending
complemented by Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA).
The Bank's portfolio is complemented by outreach efforts and close partnership with other donors
40.
Over the past two years, the World Bank Group scaled up external communications,
civil society outreach and partnerships. The Bank Group has worked closely with the Government
to support communications through various workshops and consultative forums to disseminate the
results of studies and sustain momentum on policy reform, including business environment, public
financial management, energy, water, transport, regional development, education and social
protection. Public outreach was carried out under the 800-household survey on water connections in
the Ba'albeck area with PPIAF funding to determine the principal barriers to connecting households
to the infrastructure, which is key to the economic and financial sustainability of the water utility.5 A
new effort to reach out to Parliament is underway, with a view to sensitizing the legislative branch to
the scope and objectives of the Bank's engagement in Lebanon, and to seek Parliamentarians' views.
41.
At the same time, donor coordination continues in support of the Government's
economic reform program, as well as through a broad range of Bank activities. Multi and bi-lateral
donors, including Canada, Italy, France, Agence Frangaise de D6veloppement, Arab Fund, Kuwait
Fund, Islamic Development Bank, the European Union and the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic
Affairs, actively co-finance or collaborate with the Bank Group in the areas of Water, Energy,
Cultural Heritage and Urban Development, Urban Transport, Environment, Social Protection and
Investment Climate. The Bank Group will continue to play a key role in leveraging donor flows in
the coming period, particularly in the areas of energy and transport.
42.
Lessons learned from closed projects: Four projects have closed over the CPS period: the
FirstMunicipal InfrastructureProject (US$30.1 million LTF); the Beka'a Emergency Water Supply
Project (US$15 million LTF); the Ba'albeck Water and Wastewater Project (US$43.5 million
IBRD); and the Emergency Power Sector Reform Capacity Reinforcement Project (US$5 million

The survey included questions on the gender impact of the Beka'a Regional Water Establishment's service delivery, which
allowed for an assessment of different gender experiences of access to and usage of water at the household level. This allowed for
a better understanding of how to operationalize gender in the water sector. Lessons learned are being applied to the Greater
Beirut Water Supply Project and to assist MOEW with implementation of the National Water Sector Strategy.

9

LTF). Several lessons from these operations will be useful in terms of informing future engagement
in these important sectors.
*

In the Water sector, and despite the Ba'albeck and West Beka'a projects having provided
target beneficiaries with significantly improved access to municipal water and sanitation
services, subscriptions to the regional water authority lagged over the project period, with
many residents preferring to obtain water through other more expensive sources. The
rebuilding of trust in publically provided services and subsequent modification of consumer
behavior is a lengthy process that must be accounted for in the design and implementation of
projects. This issue is especially relevant in water supply augmentation projects, such as the
Greater Beirut Water Supply Project, currently under implementation.

*

The Emergency Power Sector Reform Capacity Reinforcement Project informed the
development of the Government's Policy Paper for the Electricity sector, which is now the
cornerstone of the reform program. The Project also supported the investigation of Liquefied
Natural Gas (LNG) as a lower cost, more environmentally friendly option for power
generation. This encouraged the Ministry of Energy and Water to move ahead with plans to
develop an LNG facility. However, the Project's support for corporatization of EdL failed to
navigate the complex political economy surrounding this issue, and highlights the significant
politicization that will likely complicate progress on any higher-level reform agenda.

*

While initial results of IFC projects are encouraging, local banks' perception of high risk
associated with SMEs and atypical market segments (e.g., women-owned businesses, and
sustainable energy) continues to restrict lending; innovative approaches are needed to reach
these underserved markets. The proposed extension of the Trust Fund for Lebanon for a
further 6 years provides an opportunity to encourage further outreach to SMEs without ready
access to traditional bank financing.

43.
Main lessons for future CPS design and implementation: Bank assistance to Lebanon will
continue to be subject to substantial risks and will require flexibility to respond to emerging
challenges and changing priorities. The following important lessons can be drawn:
*

The overall fragile economic and political environment requires a flexible approach to
the work program so that the team can adapt to changing circumstances. Flexibility,
informed-risk taking and pragmatism are essential to successful engagement in such a
dynamic and uncertain operating environment.

*

Lending and analytical work should be deployed strategically, carefully sequenced, and
targeted to areas where there are realistic prospects for reform. AAA work in particular
has an important role to play in supporting nascent reform efforts and informing subsequent
lending operations.

*

Design simpler projects, use adaptable instruments and set realistic expectations. Give
greater attention to outcome/impact indicators, avoiding ambitious outcomes that are
unrealistic in the country context.
Project Readiness Filters. Ensure project readiness before approval, and all conditions of
effectiveness are met during preparation.
Effectiveness/ratification delays. Work closely with GoL in facilitating - to the extent
possible - the project effectiveness process through direct outreach to Parliament. Such
discussion has started already with members of Parliament.

*
*

*

Expand outreach and partnership with Government and civil society, including the
private sector, free media, and islands of public sector excellence. Increase the involvement
10

of local authorities/NGOs in prioritization, decision making, and implementation of local
level services.
*

Maintain a contingency to enable the Bank to support emergent or unanticipated needs.
Full commitment of Bank Group resources would limit the Bank's ability to respond
effectively in the event of crises, especially in social programs addressing the most
vulnerable.

IV. PROGRESS

TOWARDS ACHIEVING

CPS OBJECTIVES AND

OUTCOMES

44.
Because of the difficult country environment, a revision of CPS objectives towards more
realistic goals was warranted. However, progress has been made towards achieving the CPS
milestones and outcomes. The strategic goals were slightly revised towards less ambitious objectives
(Strategic Goal 1 Strengthened Fiscal and Public Financial Management; Goal 2 Improved
Competitiveness; Goal 3 Improved Economic Infrastructure; and Goal 4 Enhanced Human Capital

Development and Social Protection). Reforms in certain sectors have progressed, albeit timidly, and a
number of the indicators under the four pillars have been met or are on track to be met. Progress against
the milestones under the four development goals of the CPS, based on the revised strategic goals,
outcomes and indicators, is detailed in the Results Matrix (Annex I). A detailed report on progress to date
can be found in Annex II.
Goal 1 - Strengthened Fiscal and Public FinancialManagement
Good progress on the outcomes for all underlying goals has been achieved. The outcome of better
informed fiscal policy decisions was partially achieved for the area of strengthening the Fiscal Space.
As for Public Financial Management (PFM), the outcome of improved transparency and control
environment in public financial management was also partially achieved6 . The outcome of enhanced
capacity of Central Administration of Statistics (CAS) to carry out and analyze key survey for
Statistical Capacity Building was also partially achieved. Through a component on "engendering"
statistics funded by Bank TA, three analytical pieces were carried out by CAS on Gender and
Education, Gender and Health, and Gender and Labor. The CAS now has a link on Gender statistics
on their website and has launched a series called "Statistics in Focus", which initially covered Gender
statistics and has since been expanded to cover other sectors.
Goal 2 -

Improved Competitiveness

The underlying strategic goals for Business Environment have been partially achieved through
support of the WBG program in the areas of Access to Finance for SMEs and Women Entrepreneurs,
and in Telecommunications. The two new projects in these areas have been designed to be genderinformed, and to track the impact on women with the aim of reducing gender inequalities in access to
employment and entrepreneurship opportunities.
Goal 3 - Improved Economic Infrastructure
Reforms in the Water sector have progressed well and the outcome of increased access to and
reliability of potable water in targeted project areas was fully achieved. In the Electricity sector, the
Bank provided technical assistance for the development of an Energy Efficiency Framework and an
action plan for promoting energy efficiency measures in Lebanon. The outcome of improved
capacity to implement the Government's electricity sector reform strategy has only been partially
achieved to date. In the Urban Transport sector, the outcome of improved efficiency of existing
urban transport infrastructure and traffic management in the city of Beirut and Greater Beirut Area
6 The institutional strengthening of the PFM project has contributed to the emergence of female managers at the Ministry of
Finance (MoF). The two new units set up with the project support - the macro-fiscal and cash management units - are both
managed by women.

11

has been fully achieved, as traffic management is being reformed through the implementation of a
new Traffic Management program and the operation of a traffic management system. In the Local
Development area, the outcome of basic services restored and support for local recovery and
development are partially achieved to date. In the Environment sector, targets towards improved
environmental management have been partially achieved.
Goal 4 - Enhanced Human Capital Development and Social Protection
The strategic goals in the Education sector are progressing slowly. However, progress in the
implementation of the EDP II still needs to be determined given its recent effectiveness in January
2013 following extensive delays in Parliament ratification. In addition, the goal of improved
availability of education data for decision making in the Ministry of Education and Higher Education
is partially achieved. In the area of Social Protection and Social Safety Nets, although the planned
reforms at the National Social Security Fund were dropped, good progress was achieved with the
formal adoption of the National Poverty Targeting Program (NPTP) in 2009, as well as the approval
of the New Entrants to Work program in 2011 by the Government. The NPTP has also ensured
gender equality by aiming to target 50 percent of female beneficiaries for the provision of benefits. In
the first round, out of the 84,322 total beneficiaries, 40,173 beneficiaries were female, or
approximately 48 percent.
Table 2: Summary of CPSPR Findings on the FY11-13 CPS Results Matrix
(On the basis of revised CPS strategic goals, outcomes and indicators)
Strategy Goal 1
Strengthened Fiscal and
Public Financial
Management
1.1 Strengthening Fiscal
Space
- Better informed fiscal
policy decisions

1.2 Public Financial
Management
- Improved transparency
and control environmient
in public financial
management
1.3 Statistical Capacity
Building
- Enhanced capacity of
Central Admin. of
Statistics to carry out and
analyze key survey

Strategy Goal 2
Improved
Competitiveness
1

Strategy Goal 3
Improved Economic
Infrastructure

2.1 Business Environment
- Improved business
environment

3.1 Electricity
- Improved capacity to
implement the
Government's electricity
sector reform strategy

2.2 Access of Finance for
SMEs and Women
Enterprises
- Improved access to
finance among SMEs and
Women Entrepreneurs

3.2 Water
- Increased access to and
reliability of potable water
in targeted project areas

S

i~2.3 Trade and Regional

S

3.3Transport
- Improved efficiency of
existing urban transport
infrastructure and traffic
management in the city of
Beirut and Greater Beirut
Area

Integration
- Improved access by
private sector to trade
financing

2.4 Telecommunications
- Improved capacity of
develop strategy for and
regulate the
telecommunications sector

Environment and Waste
Management
- Improved environmental
management
3.5 Local Development
- Basic services restored
and local recovery and
development supported

Achieved

Strategy Goal 4
Enhanced Human Capital
Development and Social
Protection
4.1 Education
- Increase availability of
education data for
decision making in
Ministry of Education and
Higher Education

Partially achieved

12

0

Not achieved

4.2 Social Protection and
Social Safety Net
- Improved
administration, delivery
and financial
sustainability and
targeting of social
services

H3.4

V

4

45.
Notable achievements have been made during the CPS period to strengthen gender
awareness and women's participation in society. According to MOSA's National Social
Development Strategy, prevalence of poverty is high among female-headed households in Lebanon.
The Social Promotion and Protection Project is aiming to target overall 50 percent female
beneficiaries out of a total number of direct beneficiaries through grants for income-generating
activities and the provision of social services. The New Entrants to Work Program under ESPISP II
targets 50 percent of women enrollment for soft skills training, as well as on-the-job training.
Furthermore, in collaboration with the Marseille Center for Mediterranean Integration, a regional
governance program is being launched focusing on accountability institutions, the justice sector and
poverty to work with civil society in providing legal information and counseling to women related to
personal status issues (divorce, marriage, alimony, child support, inheritance), and with Family
Courts to set up a system of assistance to poor women. The WBG has also increased its outreach to
women and women-led enterprises to promote greater economic inclusion of women. For example,
IFC provided advice to BLC on launching the "Women Empowerment Initiative", which offers
Lebanese women and women-led businesses information, training, and networking opportunities, as
well as financial products to achieve commercial success. As part of a broader effort targeting SMEs,
IFC assistance included gender-sensitivity training, focus group-based research and products that met
the financial needs of women. Elsewhere, IFC is integrating women's empowerment into other
projects such as Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) and business training.
V. THE WAY FORWARD
46.
As identified in the CPS, Lebanon's complex political economy makes it difficult to
foresee where reforms are most likely to take place. Close policy dialogue, analytical and advisory
services, and targeted investments can help inform and build momentum around the reform agenda but the inherently difficult country context, exogenous economic shocks, and regional political
developments that impact Lebanon's political landscape, can suddenly derail or significantly slow
down the Government's ability to translate its reform commitments into action. The Country
Partnership Strategy Progress Report reconfirms the validity of the two-tiered approach. The first two
years of CPS implementation have seen traction in key economic reform areas, but the consensus
necessary to implement broad structural reforms has not been developed. Therefore, a Bank
engagement that focuses on support through the existing portfolio (in fiscal and financial
management, water, transport, and urban development, support to SMEs, social protection, and
education), to be complemented by selected operations targeting transformational sectors such as
energy, transport and water that show potential for progress, appears appropriate under the present
circumstances. The Bank will ensure that gender-sensitive approaches are adopted in the existing
portfolio, as well as in the new pipeline for the remaining CPS period. Moreover, the Bank will
consider supporting the Government to address the impacts of the Syrian refugee crisis on Lebanese
hosting communities, by addressing the developmental implications of the Syrian displacement.
47.
The Bank will continue to engage with agents of change in Government and civil
society, using its analytical work to promote a strategic approach and to strengthen momentum
for reform. These activities will continue to be complemented by active IFC investment and
advisory services targeting SMEs, investment climate reform, climate change initiatives, south-south
investments, and broadening access to financial services. A particular opportunity exists by
extending the Lebanon Trust Fund that would allow the Bank Group to respond further to current
economic stresses and uncertainties by scaling up its support to SMEs, benefiting from experience
gained previously and by leveraging other donor initiatives.
48.
New lending: To date, US$297 million have been committed in IBRD investment loans
during the CPS period. Two new projects, totaling US$36.4 million, are expected to be presented for
13

approval in the remainder of FY13, and the indicative lending pipeline for FY14 currently foresees
US$168 million IBRD with potential additional lending in FY14-15 of up to US$100 million. This is
in line with the upper end of the indicative lending envelope (US$375 - US$550 million) envisaged
when the CPS was prepared. For IFC, an additional bank is expected to be added to IFC's Global
Trade Finance Program in FY13, while targeted advisory projects related to risk management for a
partner bank and corporate governance in the education sector will be completed by fiscal year-end.
The FY14 pipeline currently includes 3 equity transactions and an advisory assignment related to
sustainable energy finance.
49.
The improvement of basic infrastructure services, along with the provision of social
services and the establishment of an efficient social protection system, have emerged as
Government priorities for Bank support. A social protection project will facilitate access to social
development services at the community level and improve the coverage and targeting of the National
Poverty Targeting Program. An ICT project will strengthen innovation and entrepreneurship in the
Lebanese Mobile Internet Ecosystem 7 . A project is under preparation to reduce industrial pollution in
industrial enterprises, strengthen Government's monitoring and enforcement capabilities, and
establish a financial mechanism for environmental investments (Lebanon Environmental Pollution
Abatement Project). A new investment operation in the Agricultural sector will increase the onfarm income of smallholder farmers in remote areas. The new Financial Management Reform 2
project will continue to support MOF's efforts to improve the allocation of public financial resources,
enhance the efficiency and transparency of financial management systems, and tighten the control
environment. Bank engagement will also continue in the Water sector, where a new investment
operation will be considered to increase water supply to the Greater Beirut area to address the causes
of water shortages. Given the importance of reforming the Energy sector in terms of fiscal impact
and service delivery, the Bank Group will look to deepen its engagement by providing financing to
support the Government's reform program and to work with other partners to leverage Government
resources. This support could target Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) development through a possible
Partial Risk Guarantee, development of renewable generation and energy efficiency, transmission
strengthening or support for enhanced performance of EdL and electricity distribution. In the
Transport sector, Government recently inquired about potential Bank support for the new Beirut
Peripherique and A2 Highway project serving as a future alternative road for the existing Coastal
Highway.
50.
Analytical and advisory services will continue to underpin the CPS. Discussions with
Government have confirmed the relevance of the World Bank's ongoing Technical Assistance and
AAA program, which cuts across the four CPS pillars and informs the policy dialogue around
reform, as well as the design of the Bank's program in Lebanon. The TA and AAA support for
macroeconomic management, public financial management, business environment reform, structural
reforms in electricity and water, education, employment and labor markets, and social safety nets
remain a priority. The Bank Group will strive to adapt its analytical work to GoL requirements in
terms of addressing the ongoing or new external shocks and crises, and will increase its
responsiveness to provide just-in-time technical assistance for specific policy issues.
51.
Through the State and Peace-building Fund, the Bank has mobilized US$1.2 million to
address some of the immediately apparent development needs in light of the escalating Syrian
displacement crisis: (i) US$900,000 has been granted for capacity building and support to local
communities hosting Syrians, implemented through Save the Children and other NGOs (the project is
expected to be implemented over 18 months and provide direct benefits to hosts, Syrians and several
7 The project includes specific tracking of gender on number of direct beneficiaries, as well as an activity to reinforce women
entrepreneurship.

14

local and central institutions); and (ii) an impact assessment to help inform the national policy
development process.

Table 3: World Bank Program for the period FY11-FY14
Approved Lending

- Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (IL)
- Second Education Development Project (IL)

Amount (USD
Million)
FY 11
200.0
40.0

AAA Program

- Broadband Policy for ICT (TA)
- Tourism & Growth Potential (TA)
- Using Lebanon's Large Capital Inflows to Foster
Long-Term Sustainable Growth (ESW)
- Country Environmental Analysis (ESW)

FY12
- Cultural Heritage Additional Financing (IL)
- National Volunteer Service Program (SPBF)
- Capacity Building to Implement Key Steps for the
Statistical Master Plan (TFSCB)

27.0
2.0
0.13

- Development of SMEs & Women SMEs (TA)
- Inventory & Removal POPS Materials (TA)
- Water Sector Strategy (ESW)
- Challenges of informality for women (TA)
- Broadband Strategy & Deployment (TA)
- Labor Markets & Migration (TA)
- Investment Environment Reform (TA)

- Supporting Innovation in SMEs Project (IL)
- Building CSO Capacity to Provide Legal Aid
Services (IDF Grant)
- Improve Capacity for Environmental Compliance
(IDF Grant)
- 5M: Displaced People in Lebanon (SPBF)

30.0
0.3

Proposed Lending

Amount (USD

FY13
- Best fit practices for reforestation to enhance climate
resilience (TA)

0.3
1.2

AAA Program

Million)
IBRD (for approval in May 2013)
- Social Promotion and Protection Project
- Mobile Internet Ecosystem Project

Proposed Lending

- Env. Pollution Abatement Project (IL)
- PCB Management (GEF)
- Financial Management Reform 2 (IL)
- Water Augmentation Project (IL)
- Sustainable Agriculture Livelihoods in Marginal
Areas (SALMA) (IL)
- Sustainability in Marginal Areas (GEF)
-

Beirut Peripherique and A2 Highway project (IL

-

LNG Development (PRG)

- Boosting Growth and Social Welfare in a Context of
Fiscal Consolidation (ESW)
- Measuring Financial Literacy (TA)
- Higher Education (TA)
- Environmental Pollution Abatement (TA)

30.0
6.4

Amount (USD
Million)
FY 14 Planned
15.0
2.54
4.0
125.0
24.0

AAA Program

Capacity Bldg. to Implement Statistical Master Plan
(TA)
-

WB Investment climate assessment (ESW)
Innovation and competitive industries policy

-

framework
FSAP on Capital Market and Insurance (ESW)

7.2

FY 14 Potential new Program
TBD
-Multi-Sectoral

Social / Poverty Assessment (ESW)

TBD

VI.

RiSKS

52.
In 2010, the CPS had emphasized risks related to sectarian interests obstructing the
implementation of the economic reform program, Lebanon's dependence on foreign capital
inflows, systemic corruption and weak governance, the fragile internal political environment

and the tense regional security environment. Unfortunately, the identification of these risks proved
to be prophetic. The necessary broad consensus around the reform program could not be built, and
the resulting lack of reform implementation and fiscal adjustment perpetuates the country's macrofiscal fragility. Lebanon's economy remains dependent on foreign capital inflows to absorb the
country's large sovereign debt, and sectarian interests continue to constrain political will to address
15

systemic corruption and governance issues. The unforeseen crisis that engulfed Syria as of March
2011 has further compounded these risks contributing to inter-sectarian tensions, leading to incidents
of violence across the country and resulting in an influx of displaced persons. The steady stream of
Syrians coming to Lebanon having been displaced by the conflict is straining the Government's
delivery of essential services in Lebanese host communities and may increase sectarian tensions even
further. Divisions within the Cabinet, exacerbated by the coalition's inability to reach agreement on a
policy response to the Syrian crisis, along with a stalemate in the executive and legislative branches
of the Government, impede the enactment of important bills, regulations and appointments which
remain pending. Political and sectarian spill-over effects of the Syrian crisis, especially if prolonged,
might turn out to be far reaching. Under these circumstances, the formation of a new Government
following the upcoming parliamentary elections will likely take considerable time and effort by
Lebanese political forces to negotiate coalition agreements. The delay in elections and its impact on
the Government will substantially affect Government's and Parliament's legitimacy and ability to act.
As such, this situation is likely to continue to affect successful implementation and performance of
the WBG program.

Over the remaining period of CPS implementation, the Bank Group's assistance
53.
program will be strongly challenged by the complex country environment and related risks.
The WBG recognizes that it has only limited tools to mitigate for political risks, and it is closely
monitoring the country and macroeconomic environment, as well as regional developments. The
Bank will continue to adjust to this situation by taking into account lessons learned in order to
mitigate some of the risks affecting the Bank's program: For example, efforts will be made to ensure
implementation readiness of all projects before Board approval so that even if there are delays in
parliamentary ratification, implementation can be jumpstarted as soon as effectiveness is achieved. In
addition, project design can incorporate contingencies to help address additional costs incurred as a
result of delays and increased risk premia associated with increased uncertainties in the environment.
Beyond these measures, the Bank will engage more broadly with different stakeholders across the
political spectrum to ensure a solid understanding of the Bank's work in the country and the
objectives of the specific Bank-financed operations. To this end, interactive sessions are being
planned with members of Parliament to review and discuss this CPS Progress Report and the
proposed pipeline of projects.

54.
The displacement of large numbers of Syrians is exacerbating Lebanon's existing socioeconomic challenges and is affecting the Bank's portfolio. It is foreseeable for the remaining CPS
period that this situation will challenge the strategic goal to "strengthen fiscal and public financial
management" as the large-scale influx of Syrians also has a budgetary impact on Lebanon that
already struggles with pre-existing fiscal problems. Moreover, the Syrian influx will affect
significantly our human development (HD) portfolio related to the provision of services (education,
health and social services), in particular in disadvantaged regions. Project development objectives of
the HD portfolio may be jeopardized as originally set targets may be difficult to achieve within the
originally planned timeframe8 . While continuing to support the authorities in improving effective
service delivery - as is the case with the proposed Social Promotion and Protection Project - and
providing support for prudent public financial management, the Bank team undertook and will
continue to seek flexible adjustments to the Bank program where warranted: as such the strategic
goals of the CPS as well as the outcomes have been revised. The Bank will also consider retrofitting
projects in the existing portfolio to address increased service delivery needs, livelihoods support and
safety nets in affected hosting communities.
For example, the Education Development Project II, which focuses on expanding early childhood education in disadvantaged
areas, will need to adopt a different approach as facilities are being overcrowded with new students or occupied by refugee
families. Necessary reforms such as reducing the number of contract teachers (most of whom had lower qualifications) are set
back as these new teachers would be retained to cope with additional demands for educational services.

16

ANNEX

I: CPS RESULTS MATRIX AND PROGRESS TO DATE

Country Development Goals

1.1 Fiscal Space: Debt and debt-servicing burden is reduced
1.2 Public Financial Management: Improve efficiency and quality of Public Expenditure

1.3 Statistical Capacity Building: Increased evidence-based policy making
Issues and Obstacles
* Fiscal and public debt positions create major risks to macro-fiscal sustainability and prospects for high growth
* Absence of a clear macro-framework, budget, MTEF, and alignment between expenditure and planning

* Absence of a planning tool for effective resource management
* Lack of resources and autonomy of the Central Administration for Statistics (CAS) results in a weak and fragmented statistical system
1.

is

Space

Create enabling conditions for

'

1.1 Better informed fiscal policy decisions

management of fiscal balance by:
* Improving macroeconomic
programming and policy analysis
to guide revenue and expenditure

Macro-fiscal analysis and modeling

A macro-fiscal department within the Budget

Ongoing or Complete

function further developed, fully
operational and periodically updated.

Directorate at MoF was established in March
2012 and work is ongoing.

Lending/AAA:
Emergency Fiscal

Partially Achieved

Management Reform
Project

1.1.1 Macro FiscalFrameworkadopted
BL: No (2010)
Target: Yes (2014)

choices and to facilitate integration
of planning and budgeting

A High Debt Committee (HDC) has
been established and the HDC has had

A Debt Committee has been established, as
well as a Public Debt Directorate at MoF.

Usig Lnons Lr

functions.

its first meeting.

HDC will meet in April 2013.

Captal InwTo

MOU between MoF and BdL has been
agreed.

MOU between MOF and BdL has been signed.
Achieved
Boosting Growth and
Social Welfare in a

* Publishing and implementing a
medium-term debt management
strategy

1.1.2 A medium-term debt management
strategy developed
BL: No (2010)
Target: Yes (2014)

* Establishing formal coordination
mechanism between MoF and BdL
to improve debt management.

1.1.3 Regularity of Cash Monitoring and
Reporting
BL: Intermittentreporting
Target: Daily with increasedscope

A Cash management Unit has been set up and
is producing daily cash briefs for the Minister.
Achieved

Context of Fiscal
Consolidation (AAA)
Planned Lending/AAA:

The study on "Using Lebanon's Large Capital Lebanon Financial
Inflows to Foster Long-Term Sustainable
Management Reform
Growth" has been completed and
Project 11
disseminated. The study on "Boosting Growth

and Social Welfare in a Context of Fiscal
Consolidation" is ongoing, and has led to the
formulation of policy notes on electricity,
telecom, and public sector wages, dealing with
key macro-fiscal sustainability and fiscal space
constraints. The policy notes are being

discussed with GoL counterparts.

17

P

Budgeta Ppartomroess isie
bette
Budgetaulinnwith
preparation government
process is

better aligned with government
policies and provides stronger basis
for expenditure control and strategic
resource allocation by:

" Introducing a multi-year budget

Pors

ucmsMlsoe

1.2 Improved transparency and control
environment in public financial
management

oDt

P

ntuet

The conceptual fr7amework and
implementation plan for the introduction
of the MTEF has been developed by the

While the conceptual framework for an MTEF Ongqjoin rComnpleted
has been developed, the actual MTEF could
Lending/AAA:
not be finalized in the absence of an approved Emergency Fiscal

MoF.

budget since 2005.
Partially Achieved

Management Reform

Planned LendimnYlAAA:

1.2.] Revision of the budget classiication
approved to bring it in line with GFS 2001

norms and increase transparency

Guidelines and basic procedures for

In the absence of a budget, efforts have been

planning process (MTEF)

BL: No (2010)

public investment programming of a

refocused on key elements to improve fiscal

(baseline: incremental annual

Target: Yes (2014)

periodicity equal to that of the aggregate

transparency and budget management, such as: Lebanon Financial

MTEF are defined.

*

budget planning) by end FY14

* Regularizing preparation of the
public investment program and
synchronizing it with that of the
budget cycle by end FY14

TA for the revision of the budget

1.2.2 Adoption of accountingprocedures
andguidelines

classification;
* Functional review and documentation of

BL: No (2010)
Target: Yes (2014)
e

*

1.2.3 Introduction of commitment numbers
and controls

Management Reform

Project 11

accounting procedures;
Design of commitment controls systems;
The revision of the public acconting law,
which is ready for Cabinet approval; and

* The development of a budget preparation

BL: No (2010)

Basic procedures for estimation of

circular, based on a macro-fiscal framework

Target: Yes (2014)

recurrent costs are developed,

and clear costing norms
Budget preparation manual has been revised.

1an

B

Achieved
public invimpelempntgameyngtofs

guidn es

Enhanced capacity of Central

1.3 Enhanced capacity of Central

Series of trainig programs for survey,

CAS completed a household survey with

Ongoing or Completed

Administration of Statistics (CAS)

Administration of Statistics (CAS)

data analysis and poverty assessment

technical support from the Bank for the

Lending/AAA:

and clarification of roles and
responsibilities to carry out and
analyze key surveys.

to carry out and analyze key surveys

completed.

purpose of the National Poverty Targeting
Program. Achieved

1.3. 1 Householdsurvey totally carriedout
by CAS according to international

On-the job support provided to at least 4
senior technical staff of CAS.

TA on Household
Budget Survey
(Completed)

Indicator: Household survey and

standards.

poverty work totally carried out by
CAS according to international

BL: No (2010)
Target: Yes (2014)

Questionnaire and household budget
survey designed by CAS

Capacit Blg
OntoimpMt
the

Government endorses the Statistical

SNIP was presented. All sectors will be

Master Plan (SMP).

examined to ensure comprehensive coverage
of the statistical system. Partially Achieved.

ted

(SMP) (AAA)
Capaement

euildfo

for the SMP (TFSCB)
Review of the statistical legal

Not Achieved.

Planned Lending/AAA:

faamework completed.

Poverty Assessment
_

_ _

_

_

_ _

__

_

_

_

_

_

_

__

18

_

_(AAA)

Country Development Goals

2.1 Business Environment: Streamline and simplify legal and regulatory framework for business
2.2 Access to Finance for SMEs and Women Entrepreneurs: Increase number of financial tools/schemes available to SMEs and women-owned SMEs and streamline business support services across

Lebanon
2.3 Trade and Regional Integration: Minimize trade related restrictions
2.4 Telecommunications: Introduce competition, improve capacity and quality of services, and reduce cost to consumers

Issues and Obstacles

and

*

Outdated commercial regulations and discretionary bureaucratic application of rules, particularly for SMEs

*
*

Outreach of finance and financial guarantees to SMEs (particularly outside Beirut) falls below potential and demand
Business Support Centers (BDCs) do not provide consistent level of support to SMEs across Lebanon (in addressing business regulatory constraints)

*

Trade finance for private sector firms is limited due to counter-party and country risks

*
*

Limited availability of ICT services; low quality of fixed line services; mobile penetration below potential
High prices of telecommunications services

Inictr

Improvement in some key aspects of

and

Inicator

2.1 Improved Business Environment

the legal and regulatory framework

Establishment of inter-miisterial

Commission established under Hariri

commission and its secretariat for

Government, with Office of Prime Minister

Lending/AAA:

monitoring reform process.

now acting as Secretariat to lead effort under
"Improving the Business Environment in

FSAP on Capital

to facilitate company creation,
operation, access to credit

2.1.1 Days to comply with business
regulation (number)

and/or exit (administrative

BL: 587 (2011)

Lebanon"program, developed with WBG

procedures, commercial and

Target: 337 (2014)

support. Partially Achieved

company law, commercial and/or
collateral registries, etc.)
Enhanced capacity of public
administration to implement
business environment reform.

Ongoing orCmpleted

Investment

Environment Reform
2.1.2 Days to settle a case
BL: 721 in courts (2012)
Target: 90 through mediation (2014)

Adoption of Action Plan with World
Bank Technical Assistance prioritized
list of reform projects.

This has been replaced by: "Establishment of
a Working Group on key private sector
development and innovation priority
initiatives led by the PCM Office".

2.1.3 Law on Secured transactionsdrafted

BL: No (2010)
Target: Yes (2014)

(AAA)
IFC Advisory Services:
- ICT Lebanon
- ADR Lebanon
-

Lebanon SL

Licensing procedures for tourism sector
mapped & recommendations formulated
(EhC). Project ongoing.

Plauned LendinniAAA:

Two new mediation centers established under

Investment Climate

Beimt Chamber of Commerce & Tripoli Bar

Assessment (AAA)

Association

-

one case settled (14 days).

(BnC). Project ongoing.

Wunovation and
Competitive Industries

Policy Framework
Initial draft of Secured Lending Law
completed (IFC). Project ongoing.

19

ad

Itoolstfor

of financi

22AcstoFnnefrSMEs
and tools
SMEs.enur
omen-we
Development of financial
for
SMEs and women-owned SMEs.

2.2. Improved access to finance among
SMEs and Women Entrepreneurs
2.2.]1 Increased SustainableEnergy Finance

Improved delivery of services by
BDCs (such as gender-targeted

(SEF) for Bank Libano Francaise(BLF)

One workshop to increase outreach by
financial institutions to women-owned
SMEs

Conducted regional workshop to increase
outreach to SMEs, including those owned by
women. SME & women's banking program

Onigqoioropleted
Lending/AAA:
Supporting Innovation

underway. SEF project with BLF is
underway. Achieved

in SMEs Project

workshops) in supporting capacity

Development of SMEs

of SMEs, particularly in business
management and processing/

2.2.2 Banks assisted to increase lending to
women-owned businesses:

navigation of regulatory processes.

A review of BDCs is completed
including a M&E framework to monitor

-

Assist Banque Libanisepour le Commerce
(BLC) to grow its SME portffolio with focus

graduting enterprises and women
entrepreneurs

step towards addressing the market gap in
early stage equity financing for SMEs by
sigmng a World Bank Project on Innovation
in SMEs

on loans to women entrepreneurs
BL: 1260 SME loans disbursed annually, of
which only 7o arefor women
entrepreneurs (20]])
Target: 1525 SME loans disbursed

A comprehensive assessment and a
M&E frework for financing outreach
and tools to SMEs is completed,

annually, of which 20%o will be for women

identifying underserved areas.

(2014)

&Women SMEs (TA)
The Government of Lebanon took a clear

Chalnge
inoAAi)

o
orWoe

MENA SEF Program
(IFC Advisory
Services)
BLC Bank/SMEWIN

(IFC Advisory

fiania instittionsuoiwome-owne

Services)

2.2.3 AMEEN microfinance institutions
assisted to scale up microinance lending
BL: $11,619,614 (2008)
Target: $15,410,000
l (2012)
sd u

Project CHF TAF (lFC
Advisory Services)

sustainale
fr thecscdor.gTeecommuncationsrector
fiscl base
dveloped
financing improved,

trade financing
2.3.1 Increase in tradefinance volume

trade finance volume provided by

o

Trade Finance Program (GTFP)
increases from 3 in 2010 to 6 in 2013.

with another expected to join Q3 FY13.
Achieved

iaeAdvisory

banks to the private sector.

BL: $92 million (2010)
Target: At least 100 (2014)

Development of a strategy for
reform of the Telecommunications
sector with complementary tools to
manage the fiscal transition, with a
view to establishing a long term

2.4 Improved capacity to develop
strategy for and regulate the
Telecommunication sector
241Alntemsregfreomofhe
2..1leomnctem stgfor reeformoted

Lendin/AAA:

Services

FY11 & FY12 average volume of trade
finance increased 232% over FY1 0.
Assessment of different policy options
to reform the telecoms sector, with an
eye to managing the resulting fiscal
transition, and establishing a
sustainable fiscal base for the sector,

utBL:
No (2010)

Technical assessment of actions resulted in
revisiting of options for sector reform.
Potential for sector liberalization still open
with a technical understanding of fiscal
impact. Achieved

Ongoing or Completed
Lending/AAA:
Broadband Policy for
ICT (TA)
Broadband Strategy

Satisfactory progress of deliverables

and Deployment (TA)

Enhanced capacity of the
Telecommunications Regulatory

Target: Yes (2014)
2.4.2 TRA regulatory technical capacity

indicators to date under the IDF grant to
build capacity of the TRA. Project ongoing.

Telecommunications
Regulatory Capacity

Authority (TRA).

improved as evidenced by adoption of new
regulatory approvalprocesses and new

Mobile inteet industry project under

Building (IDF grant)
Plauned LendinAAA:

spectrum regulations

preparation with Board delivery expected on

Mobile Internet

BL: No (2010)

May 17, 2013.

Ecosystem Project

Target: Yes (2014)

20

Sta

Gol
ic

Ipoe

Econi

Infatutr

Country Development Goals

3.1 Electricity: Increase supply of reliable electricity and reduce drain on government budget
3.2 Water: Increase reliability of water supply, develop comprehensive water resources management plan
3.3 Transport: Improve efficiency of existing urban transport infrastructure in the Greater Beirut Area
3.4 Environment and Waste Management: Municipal solid waste management

3.5 Local Development: Promote balanced and sustainable territorial development
Issues and Obstacles
*

Poor operational and financial performance of EdL

*

Outdated and inadequate water resource management strategy and planning

*
*
*

Unreliable and costly electricity services due to insufficient generation capacity
Large subsidies to sector from national budget due to insufficient revenues from tariff
Fragmentation and weak technical, financial and managerial capacity of Regional Water
Authorities (RWAs)

*
*
*
*

Severe traffic congestion as a result of limited road network capacity
Lack of parking management and shortage of parking spaces
Limited capacity and poor quality of public transport system services
Weak legal and institutional framework including lack of defining roles and responsibilities,

*

Inadequate water and wastewater planning supply, storage, treatment, and distribution
capacity

*

poor strategic planning and very modest managerial and technical capacities
Outdated municipal finance framework

Orgia

CPS

Oucoe

Improved operational performance
of EdL.
Indicator: Network losses reduced
from a baseline of 37% in 2010.

Reie

CPS

Oucoe

M

itoe

Prgrs

toDaeCP

3.1 Improved capacity to implement the
Preparation and approval of a plan for
Government's electricity sector reform
EdL performance improvement.
strategy
3.1.1 Roadmapfor EdL Restructuring /Partially
Corporatizationfinalized and agreed

Corporatization plan prepared but broad
Government consensus not yet achieved.
Implementation pending.
Achieved

BL: No (2010)

Improved demand management and

Restructuring underway with distribution

Target : Yes (2014)

distribution network performance

operations now under contract to Distribution

3.1.2 Satisfactory implementation of
Sector Program,as evidenced by i)
Sufficient
budget allocation;ii) commencement of
procurementof 50% ofprogramprojects

nsrmet

Ongoing or Complete
Lending/AAA:
Eecity
Sec
rSe E
er

p

cto

Capacy

through implementation of demand

Service Providers. Too early to tell if this

management and loss reduction
programs (Partof the Government's
sector reform strategy)

will result in improvements in demand
management, distribution sector performance
in terms of billings and collections, loss
reduction or service provision.
Partially Achieved

Sectoral Policy Paper

Expressions of Interest released for

E

development of an LNG re-gasification

Planned Lending/AAA:

Support to
Implementation of

BL: No (2010)
Target : Yes (2014)

to

3.1.4 FinalDecision to proceed with
development of alternatefuel supply (LNG)

facility. Project ongoing.

BL: No (2010)
TargetC: Yes (2014)

Incorporation of the Lebanese Centre for
Energy Conservation (LCEC), and budgetary

on LNG (TBD)

allocations made to Energy Efficiency
Programs (Partof the Government's sector
reform strategy). Project ongoing.

Policy Advice on
Natural Resource
Management, including

Partial Risk Guarantee

on Governance (e.g.

21

IFC support to EdL's outsourcing to

EITI)

distribution service providers (DSPs)
pending commitment through US$8 million
approved investment. Project ongoing.

Butec 11 (IFC

Investment)

Access to and reliability of potable

3.2 Increased access to and reliability of

Full-time Managing Director for Beka'a

Full-time Managing Director for the BRWA

Ongoior opleted

water is increased in the Greater
Beirut Region.

potable water in targeted project areas

Regional Water Authority (BRWA)
appointed by August 2011.

has been appointed. Achieved

Lending/AAA:
Greater Beirut Water

Beirut Mount Lebanon Water
Authority (BMLWA) and Beka'a

3.2.]Houseoldsnegallbconnctedaoter
improved water supply network in the West
Bekaa and Ba'albeck and neighboring

Business Plan developed by December
2011.

Business Plan has been developed by GIZ
and has been approved by the BRWA.

Supply Project
(ongoing)

Regional Water Authority (BRWA)

regions

Achieved

West Beka'a

have a strengthened management
capacity.
Indicators: Additional 250,000 m3/d
of potable water is provided to the

West Beka'a: BL: 13,589 (2007)
Target: 47,705 (2013)
Ba'albeck: BL: 15,714 (2001)(water) and
18,000 (wastewater)
Target: 73,640 (water) and 29,410

Ba'albeck Water and Wastewater Project
(closed): Over 134 kilometers of water
distribution and wastewater collection
network installed. laat wastewater treatment

Greater Beirut Region by end-2017;

(wastewater) (2013)

plant operational at design levels.

increased three-fold by end-2014.

3.2.2 WHO standardsforwater quality met

West Beka'a Emergency Water Supply

The GoL has a national water

West Beka 'a
Baseline: Nitrates: 100 mg/l .(2007)

Project (closed): 194 kilometer of water
supply network rehabilitated (over 85

CutyWtrSco

resource management strategy and

Coliform: 10/100 ml. (2007)

kilometers more than planned at project

Assistance Strategy

plan.

Target:Nitrates:l10 mg/l (2013)
Coliform: 1/100 ml (2013)

appraisal). Pumping stations deliver water

(AAA) (completed)

that meets World Health Organization quality

PandLnigAA

Emergency Water

Supply hours during lean season

Ba'albeck Water and
Wastetero

Indicator: The National Water

Sector Strategy has been adopted by
Government.

SupmplPet

standards.

3.2.3 Per capita per day delivery of water
within project area in West Bekaa
Baseline: 60 liters (2007)
Target: 100 liters (2013)
3.2.4 Volume ofwastewater collected and
treated (Ba'albeck)

Watwtrmngmn

lnNational

developed for Beka'a Valley by May
2011.

2012 and incorporates wastewater
management for the Beka'a Valley. The
Ministry of Environment also finalized the

Baseline: 0(2007)
Target: 5,992m/day (2013)
3.2.5 National Water Sector Strategy
finalized and approved by the Parliament
Baseline: No (20 10)
Target: Yes (2013)

Ministry of Energy and Water developed a
Wastewater Sector Strategy which
was approved by Parliament in December

Business Plan for Combating Pollution of
Lake Qaraoun in the Beka'a valley.
Achieved.
Acpalcomrilblngnd
acceptable commercialimbillingeand
andount stanrdstimpemented
by December 2012.

sudy
resurc
Wate mangemnt

3W2a2te esou
aof

c

emen study

y

Accounting software for the BMLWA, with
specifications acceptable to the World Bank,
has been purchased and is operational.

This milestone is replaced by "GoL National
Water Sector Strategy finalized by Ministry
Energy and Water." The Ministry of

Energy and Water the National Water Sector
Strategy which was approved by Parliament

March 2012. Achieved.

:in
22

Water Augmentation
Project

EffIicicyorxstn urbanicaor
3Transport
fatutr
n rfi
Efficiency of
ig
existing
t
urban
oor

3.3 Improved efficiency of existing urban

Traffic Management Organization

The Traffic Management Program has been

transport infr7astructure and traffic
management in the city of Beirut

trnnsport infrnstructure nnd trafflc
mnagement in Beirut city and GBA

(TMO) with Intelligent Transport
System (ITS) capabilities is established,

successfully implemented. Operation of the
traffic management system including the

and Greater Beirut Area is
improved.

3.3.] Percentageincrease of traffic
volumes diverted to new efficient urban

Lending/AAA:
Urban Transport

Traffic Management Center (TMC is
ongoing. Achieved

Development Project

The On-street Paid Parking of 730 pay-and-

Public Transport

been installed at 200 intersections along with
CCTV cameras connected to the equipped
and operational TMC. Achieved

Planned Lending/AAA:

A Public Transport Strategy to improve

A2 Highway project

transportinfrastructure
Indicators:
* Travel time on selected main

urban roads reduced by 25%
(baseline 2010) by end FY14.
* Increased regulation of on-

street parking in selected zones
by end FY14.
* Formulation of an integrated
urban transport strategy for the

Greater Beirut Area (GBA)

BL: 0 (2010)
Target: 25% (2014)

Installation of about 580 pay-anddisplay multi-space parking meters; TA

3.3.2 Regulated parking spaces in Beirut
BL:
6500 (2010)
3.3 Improveden
effcinc ofstexistigeurba
Target:8000 (2014)

and training to build capacity for
parking management.

3.3.3 Intersections with traffic lights

display parking meters has been
implemented. Traffic control lights have

Coopfeted

Strategy (AAA)

Beirut Peripherique and
(TBD)

BL: 182(2010)
Transport feasibility studies completed

Targt:
15 (214)been
3.3.4 An integratedurban transport

mobility within the GBA (TransBeirut) has

strategyfor the GreaterBeirut Area
BL: No (2010)

options for a public transport system in
Beimt which could include rail solutions

Target: Yes (2014)

finalized. The DG of Land Transport
and Maritime Transport is considering
and/or bus solutions. Achieved

Sector strategic objectives and

3.4 Improved environmental

National MSW Plan with quantitative

priority needs are well defined,
together with a framework and
implementation arrangements

mngement

targets in terms of service delivery and
quality prepared and initiated by 2012.

in place.

Partially achieved

Ongoing or Completed

3.4.1 EJA SEA and environmental

Development of an enviromental

Lendin/AAA:
- CEA (AAA)
- Best fit practices for

compliance certification system operational
BL: No (2010)

compliance certification system. Ongoing.

reforestation (AAA)
- Inventory & Removal

Target: Yes (2014)

Conducted 5 Green Building Audits. Trained

of POPs Matenals

12 local consuhtants to conduct Green

-

3.4.2 GHG emissions reduced (FC

Building Audits (WC). Achieved.

Abatement TA

BL: 0 (2010)
Target: 10,000 metric tons/year (2014)

Developed "ARZ" green building rating

GEF Reg. Gov. &
Knowledge Generation

system with 1 building rated through Feb
2013. (IFC). Achieved.

- CP Building Sec. (FC
Advisory Services)

Env. Pollution

-

Planned LendinW/AAA:
-Improve Capacity for

Env. Compliance (IDF)
- Env. Pollution
Abatement (IL)
-

PCB Management

Project (GEF)

SALMA Project
(IBRD)
- Sustainability in
Marginal Areas (GEF)
-

23

adIndctr

an

Indiator

Improved transparency and

3.5 Basic services restored and local

Use of the standard accounting and

Three studies designed to strengthen

Ongoior

predictability of inter-governmental

economic recovery and development

financial management practices is

municipal finances were developed

Lending/AAA:

fiscal transfers

supported

systematized in municipalities.

constituting an essential element of the new
mumicipal finance framework.

First Municipal

Indicator: Intergovernmental

3.5.] Infrastructurerebuilt

Achieved

Infrastructure

transfers are settled on a quarterly

BL: None (2010):

basis to all municipalities by June

Target (2014):
i.
18 municipal buildings repaired/

2014.
Transparency is increased in the
municipal sector due to the
implementation of a modern M&E
system.

Historic and cultural assets are

ii.
iii.
iv.

v.

adequately preserved and managed
with a view to create tourism
revenue opportunities for local

communities
ABL:

ARgoaDeeomnMatr

Plan is adopted by June 20149.

restored
183 road ko repaired/restored

(completed)
Functional Municipal Observatory is

The Municipal Observatory has been

established to collect data on local tax
revenues and transfers fr7om central
goverment.

established and is functional. Achieved

Cultural Heritage and
Urban Development
Project (CHUDP)

3 municipal units operating and managing
city core established. Achieved.

(ongoing)

50 retainingwall km repaired/
restored
4,684 street lightingpoles

Additional Financing to

repaired/restored
13 water drainkm repaired/

the CHUDP

restored

Tourism and Growth
Potential (TA)
595 new rehabilitation activities in historic

3.5.2 Estimated beneficiaries to 5

Increased rehabilitation activities in
historic urban cores in compliance with

urban cores in compliance with approved
regulations recognizing the centrality of their

(2010)

approved regulations recognizing the

cultural heritage to their economic and social

i.

centrality of their cultural heritage
to their economic and social
development

development; 150,000 sq. additional meters
of pedestrian public squares and spaces
rehabilitated; 182,000 additional sq. meters

historic city centers
ii.

pleted

325, 000 visitors
1, 196, 000 residents

facades of historic buildings rehabilitated; 80
new cafs and restaurants; 642 additional
individuals working in cafs and restaurants.
Partially achieved

Target: (2014)
375,000 visitors
i.
ii.
1, 294,000 residents,

5 new landmark conservation laws approved.
Not Applicable as not part of the IBRD
Project
In FY12, IFC invested US$2m in Tripolibased ICT firm, now surpassing 100 staff
which is more than double pre-IFC staff
numbers. Achieved.

A milestone on establishment of Regional Development Board was erroneously included
e in relation to this outcome, while there is no reference to it in the project documents.

24

MobiNetS (IFC
investment)

Country Development Goals

4.1 Education: Improve quality teaching and learning in general public education
4.2 Social Protection and Social Safety Nets:
*
*

Adequate social protection for the elderly, sick, and unemployed
Improve living standards of the poorest and most vulnerable parts of the Lebanese population

Issues and Obstacles
*
Children entering primary public schools are not ready cognitively due to low pre-school enrollment and
*
*

low quality pre-school education
Qualification of teachers is low and there are no incentives to participate in professional development
Management of the public education system is centralized with limited school level empowerment

*
*
*

*

4.

Educatio

Imroveda CShOtomeaiess amongPSOtoe
firs grdarsnddisadvantage

The National Social Security Fund (NSSF) is in financial deficit, and the quality
and efficiency of its services and operations
Labor market policies and programs are not
Impact of formal social safety net programs
Untargeted, weak, fragmented, social safety

Mlsoe

Pors

are low
functioning efficiently
on poverty is minimal
net programs

oaeCSIntuet

Improved school readiness among
first graders in disadvantaged

4.1 Increased availability of Education
data for decision making in Ministry of

110 renovated preschool facilities in
public schools in disadvantaged areas

Implementation under EDP 11 is delayed, as
the project has only been declared effective

Ongoing or Completed
Lending/AAA:

communities
Indicators:

Education and Higher Education

by end-2013.

in January 2013. Not achieved.

Higher Education TA

* Number of 3-5 year olds enrolled

4.].] EMIS is used to take decisions
related to the transfer of teachers in all

Training of at least 1000 KG teachers in

Not achieved

Project 11

suburban areas has increased by

cycles

public schools in new early childhood

10% between 2010 and June

BL: No (2010)

education curriculum by end-2013.

2014.

Target: Yes (2014)

in public preschools in rural and

* 20% improvement in scores of
participating schools in ECERS
(Early Childhood Environment
Rating Scale) by June 2014.

Education Development

In-time TA on

"University
Adoption by Parliament of System of
Professional Standards for Teachers.

System of Professional Standards for
Teachers has not yet been approved by
Parliament. Not achieved

Public School teachers have

Govre
Second Emergency

Social Protection

upgraded skills and performance

20% of schools with school

levels to meet national objectives.

improvement plans approved and under

Indicator: 40% of teachers have
received certification under the new

implementation

Implementation

Not achieved

Support Project
Measurin Financial

Teacher Career and Professional

16 Lebanese universities have participated in

Development Framework

the university governance screening card

by June 2014. Public Schools are

exercise National report was presented and

empowered to plan and manage their
improvement and development.
Indicator: At least 30% of schools
with active School Councils by June

discussed.

2014. Informing the policy dialogue

student learning assessment.

The QBS is: a) in place and operational; b)
providing increased levels of transparency in

on quality assurance in the sector,

Results from the analysis of international
learning assessment studies are being used to

and getting all higher education
institutions engaged in the process.

guide quality enhancement initiatives

25

g

Id

admi

t

dli

and

and
finacial
sustetinbltandcaaeyNt
Improved
administration,
delivery
and financial sustainability and
targeting of social services through

4.2 Improved administration, delivery
and financial sustainability and targeting
of social

implementation of new systems and
adoption of new policies in the
NSSF, MoL, MoPH, MoSA, PCM,
and MEHE.

services

CriteriaStandards by medical controllers

Government annually reduces its arrears

Indicators:

BL: 0 (2010)

with NSSF.

4.2.2 Youth that have successfully
completed a 75 hour training on life skills,
coaching andplacement trainingunder

Framework for active labor market
policies and programs adopted by
Ministry of Labor

NSSF Board approves plan for
equilibration of Maternity and Sickness
Fund.

4.2.] Increasedpercentage of hospital
admissions according to Admission

Dropped. i light of the fact that the planned
reforms in the National Social Security Fund
(NSSF) were not progressing, the

Ongig or Completed
Lending/AAA:
Emergency Social

Goverment requested the Bank to drop
activities related to NSSF reforms, and
reallocate to MOL reforms.

Protection

Dropped.

* Reduction in annual deficits of
the Maternity and Sickness
Fund and the Family
Allowance Fund by June 2014.
* An in-patient electronic
claiming system (NAPS)

* Is operating in all hospitals

Impemet
Suppo
et 2

(CmonnA2-eat
Lebanon MILES

NEWprogram
BL: 0 (2013)

Target: 650 (2014)
of which 500 women

nationwide.

Not Achieved. New Entrants to Work
(NEW) program with the objective to
increase the employability of first-time

Programmatic TA

job seekers in Lebanon, approved by Decree
by the Cabinet in December2011 and a 2-

I) National Volunteer
Service Program (SPF)

year budget allocated. NEW was officially
launched in September 2012 under the

National Poverty
Targeting Program

ESPISP 11 (Component

auspices of the Prime Ministry. The program

Facilitate employment through

4.2.3 People registeredin the National

effective active labor market
policies and programs, such as
development of more efficient
employment services (public or

Poverty Targeting Program (NPTP)
database
BL: 62,000 (2012)
Target: 90,000 (2014)

is expected to start implementation by March

(NT)TA

2013.

Labor Markets &

Establishment of a database on poor and
vulnerable populations using proxymeans testing targeting mechanism,

The NPTP has been adopted and used by the
Government to target social assistance to the
extreme poor. Achieved

National Volunteer
Service Program

Nation-wide public relations campaign

Achieved

Planned LendingAAA:

private).
Indicator: Necessary systems and

regulation needed for the effective
operation of employment offices in

4.2.4 Targetedpersons in HermelBa 'albeck reportingan increased

the private sector in place.

understandingof administrative and
udicialproceedings to obtain ID

An IDF Program is planned to support

Syrian Displaced

The National Poverty Targeting

documents, marriage and birth

targeted poor youth and women, mukhtars

People in Lebanon

Program (NPTP) for social safety

certiicates(number)

and legal apprentices in Hermel-Ba'albeck

(SPBF)

nets is implemented, operational and

BL: 0 (2013)

developed by CSOs to educate poor persons

in full use, based on a targeting
mechanism that uses transparent and
scientific criteria that assess
households' eligibility.

Target: 500 (2014)

on how to represent themselves in
administrative and judicial proceedings to
obtain ID documents and marriage and birth
certificates.

on the NPTP implemented.

Social Promotion and
Protection Project

IDF Grant for Building
CSO Capacity to
Provide Legal Aid
Services
Multi-Sectoral Social
Poverty Assessment

_

_

_

_

_ _

_

__

__

_

_

_

_

__

26

_

_(AAA)

ANNEX

II

DETAILED OVERVIEW ON PROGRESS TO DATE UNDER THE VARIOUS SECTORS

Some institutional reforms have progressed with strong World Bank TA and AAA support

*

Public Financial Management has been strengthened with the establishment in 2012 of a
macro-fiscal department within the Budget Directorate at the MoF, and the development of the
conceptual framework for a multi-year budget planning process (MTEF), but the actual MTEF
could not be finalized in the absence of an approved budget since 2005. Efforts have therefore
been refocused on key elements to improve fiscal transparency and budget management,
including the revision of the budget classification to bring it in line with GFS 2001 norms; the
revision of the public accounting law; the development of a budget preparation circular, which is
now based on a macro-fiscal framework and clear costing norms; the adoption of accounting
procedures and guidelines, and the introduction of commitment controls and payment forecasting
to avoid over-commitments and improve cash management. In addition, reforms in the debt
management area have moved forward with the establishment of a new Public Debt Directorate
that assumed both analytical and operational functions. In this regard, the Directorate has
engaged on: (i) the formulation of a new medium-term debt management strategy that aims to
inform senior policymakers of the high debt committee on cost-risk parameters and scenarios for
managing the debt in Lebanon; and (ii) the installation of DEMFAS 6 as to gradually assume the
recording and operational functions of debt issuances.

*

Statistical Capacity Building. The World Bank provided Technical Assistance to the Central
Administration for Statistics (CAS) on developing statistical technical capacity in poverty
monitoring, through poverty analysis and social statistics (TAPS), and the design of a Household
Budget Survey. Funding to the Government in revising the Statistical Law and designing an
implementation plan for the Statistical Master Plan is ongoing.

*

Business Environment. A Bank Development Grant Facility (DGF) regional partnership
program is ongoing in partnership with two leading regional incubators/accelerators to build the
capacity and technological skills of nascent entrepreneurs to start a business and make it grow.
This program, in which Lebanon participates, complements Bank private sector development and
financing operations in the region by providing strategic technical support such as skills training,
mentorship and networking, to create and build a critical mass of dynamic start-ups able to
benefit from Bank and other financing projects. In addition, the regional DGF program will also
include tools and materials that can have broader outreach and foster inclusion. The aim is to
bolster lasting cultural change in support of entrepreneurship and promote a sustainable
entrepreneurial ecosystem in the Middle East. A monthly Arabic entrepreneurship and earlystage investment newsletter will be produced in both print and online forms as well as Arabic
videos and TV skits featuring success stories, forums, educational articles, competitions and
entrepreneurship news and events. Success stories will feature successful female entrepreneurs
and diaspora entrepreneurs spotlighting those who are giving back to the region.

*

Infrastructure: In the Water sector, the technical, financial and managerial capacity of the
Beka'a Regional Water Establishment (BRWE) and the Beirut Mount Lebanon Water
Establishment (BMLWE) was strengthened through the appointment of the Managing Director
for the BRWE and the development of a business plan, as well as the implementation of several
important utility strengthening activities within the BMLWE. Moving forward, the Greater Beirut
Water Supply Project will continue to support utility strengthening of the BMLWE in general, as
27

well as the implementation of the Ministry of Energy and Water's National Water Sector
Strategy more broadly. Urban Transport and traffic management is being reformed through
the implementation of a new Traffic Management program and the operation of a traffic
management system, which has seen the establishment of a Traffic Management Center. Within
the framework of a new Public Transport Strategy, GoL is now launching the procurement for
the design of infrastructure, operational planning and contract preparation for the priority lines of
a Bus Rapid Transit system in the Greater Beirut Area, and is preparing the restructuring plan for
the Railway and Public Transport Authority. Although a roadmap for reform of EdL was
developed in the Electricity sector, which calls for its corporatization in accordance with
commercial principles, and builds its management capacity, this roadmap has still not garnered
political consensus and its implementation remains uncertain. To improve management capacity
of the Municipal sector at the central Government level, a Municipal Observatory was
established which is collecting data on local tax revenues and transfers from central Government.
Human Development: Following the establishment of a database on the poor and vulnerable
population using the proxy-means testing (PMT) targeting mechanism - which was supported
financially and technically by the World Bank through the Second Emergency Social Protection
Implementation Support Project and Bank technical assistance - the impact, efficiency and
effectiveness of Lebanon's social safety nets is being improved through the implementation of a
National Poverty Targeting Program (NPTP), which is now fully operational. For the first time in
its modern history, Lebanon today has a program whose sole objective is poverty reduction and
which has already reached thousands of Lebanese households through the distribution of
education and health benefits. The GoL intends to add electricity benefits to the program as well.
The program can be scaled up in times of economic difficulties acting like a true safety net
program and helping to build Lebanon's resilience to shocks. More importantly, the NPTP is
based on a transparent targeting methodology which only uses poverty (welfare) as the criterion
for eligibility (not confessional or political affiliation). Through the NPTP, institutional capacity
has been built in the Ministry of Social Affairs and the Prime Ministry.
Policy dialogue on reform informed by the Bank's knowledge services and Technical Assistance
*

Bank Technical Assistance (TA) and analytical and advisory services underpinned new
investments, and have been instrumental in helping the Government advance on reforms.
Bank TA on public financial management helped GoL improve the budget preparation process
and its comprehensiveness, by strengthening the integration of the current and capital budget,
placing the annual budget in a multi-year perspective, and strengthening budget execution with a
focus on the treasury management function. A study on Lebanon 's Capital Inflows helped
analyze the nature and drivers of these inflows, interactions with monetary and fiscal policies,
and the extent to which they can foster sustainable, broad-based growth in Lebanon. Another
study on Boosting Growth and Social Welfare in a Context of Fiscal Consolidation is focusing
on macro-fiscal sustainability and improving fiscal space. Several policy notes on electricity,
telecommunications, and public sector wages are helping to address the key macro-fiscal
sustainability and fiscal space constraints.

*

Procurement Law. Despite the Procurement Law not being yet adopted, there has been some
engagement including having active participation of teams from various Lebanese stakeholders in
Regional Conferences on Governance and Regional Public Procurement Reform Efforts
(Amman; July 2012), and Improving the Results of Public Procurement through Transparency,
Stakeholder Promotion and Capacity Building (Tunis; December 2012). Following these
conferences, a round table discussion on Procurement Reform in Lebanon took place in March
2013 to discuss with relevant stakeholders the ongoing reforms in the national public
28

procurement system, the challenges faced in implementing the reforms, and how the Bank can
provide support in the short and long term.
In the Electricity sector, the World Bank provided close support to MoEW in the development
of its Policy Paper on the Electricity Sector, through the Emergency Power Sector Reform
Capacity Reinforcement Project, and additional studies on LNG supply and fuel conversion.
Several Bank-executed technical assistance activities were also provided for the development of
an Energy Efficiency Framework, an action plan for promoting energy efficiency measures in
Lebanon, and for the development of a wind power market in Lebanon. To support the
Government in the identification of policy options to reform the Telecommunications sector
while addressing their fiscal impact, the Bank provided substantive advice in the development of
the Telecommunication Sector Strategy, including TA on Broadband Strategy and Deployment,
and financed capacity building to the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority. In the Water
sector, the Bank played an active role in supporting the development and implementation of the
Government's strategy for improving the sector's performance, through TA in the development
of a National Water Sector Strategy and the development of its own World Bank Country Water
Sector Assistance Strategy. Technical assistance and analytical and advisory services to the
Ministry of Public Works and Transport were instrumental in supporting the finalization of
GoL's public transport strategy to improve mobility within the Greater Beirut Area, through the
development of an integrated public transport system plan ("TransBeirut"). In the Environment
sector, the World Bank partnered with the GoL in the preparation of a Country Environmental
Analysis (CEA, June 2011), which aimed at providing the analytical underpinning for integrating
environment into the development process. One of the main recommendations of the CEA was
"Managing Environmental Risks", to assist the GoL in reducing environmental threats due to
pollution and natural resources degradation, and adapt to potential environmental perils due to
climate change. In July 2011, the GoL issued its Ministerial Declaration which included
"Managing Environmental Risks" as one of its priorities. The CEA also included a study on
municipal solid waste, as well as a set of options to upgrade municipal solid waste management
systems. A recently approved IDF grant for Environmental Compliance will help improve
environmental compliance in the industrial sector (particularly in small and medium enterprises)
in Lebanon.
*

In the Education sector, the Bank's support to the development of a National Education Sector
Strategy in 2010 through the first Education Development Project (EDP I), and institution
building of the Ministry of Education and Higher Education (MEHE), resulted in the adoption of
policies and programs focusing on early childhood development and teacher professional
development, which are supported through the recently effective Second Education Development
Project. As a result of persistent and consistent capacity building, the MEHE today is leading a
large and comprehensive, multi-donor supported education reform program. The Bank also
supported MEHE in analysis of the financial sustainability of its private teachers' pension fund.
In the area of higher education, the World Bank has provided in-time TA to MEHE focused on
university governance. 16 Lebanese universities have participated in the university governance
screening card exercise leading to two workshops where a national report was presented and
discussed. This work is not just informing the policy dialogue on quality assurance in the sector
but also helping MEHE in getting all higher education institutions engaged in the process.

*

Bank assistance was instrumental in helping GoL advance the social security, health insurance
and safety net agenda through TA support to the establishment of the NPTP, support to
modernization of the social insurance system, coupled with TA for drafting of new pension law;
and support to improving efficiency of Ministry of Public Health expenditures through creation
29

of a utilization management function and a modern hospital contracting system based on
performance indicators.
*

A multi-year technical cooperation program on labor markets entitled "MILES"
(Macroeconomy, Investment Climate, Labor, Education, Social Protection) assisted the GoL in
identifying constraints to the creation of quality jobs, presenting policy options in the areas of
social insurance and labor market programs and simulating their macroeconomic and labor
market impacts. The MILES program has resulted in the identification of an innovative active
labor market program for first-time job seekers (the New Entrants to Work Program) which aims
to address both demand and supply side constraints in the Lebanese labor market and, therefore
increase the employability of Lebanese school and university graduates. The MILES program
also resulted in the modeling of the Lebanese economy through the development of a
Computable General Equilibrium Model, which is being employed by the Government to
simulate the impact of proposed social policies such as increases in wages and salaries on
growth, investment, and employment levels. Finally, the Bank's programmatic TA in pension
reform has resulted in a revised proposal for private worker's pension, which is expected to be
submitted to Cabinet and Parliament in the coming months.

*

A grant has just been approved to build capacity of civil society in the Ba'albeck-Hermel area to
provide legal information, advice and counseling to poor communities in relation to securing IDs
and personal documents (birth and marriage certificates), thereby ensuring that the poor
communities affected will not be excluded from social benefits (health, education), employment
and political participation (voting). The program will also develop capacity of local officials to
advise poor persons on the proper procedures, and simplify procedures to ensure easier access.

IFC's Program
The IFC significantly scaled up its advisory services activities. Aiming to increase access to
finance, particularly for SMES, IFC is advising a major local bank - Banque Libanaise Pour Le
Commerce (BLC) - to establish a comprehensive offering targeting women and women-owned firms.
This is part of a holistic project that looks to increase the bank's outreach to SMEs in general and
improve its risk management practices. IFC is facilitating a South-South sharing of knowledge
between BLC and other banks in the region. In addition, IFC is working with another major
Lebanese bank - Banque Libano-Francaise(BLF) - to scale up its financing of sustainable energy
projects (i.e., those related to energy efficiency, renewables and cleaner production) to reduce
greenhouse gases and lessen the impact on the environment. Likewise, IFC also helped the Lebanese
Green Building Council to develop the green building rating system "ARZ", and conducted five
green building assessments in cooperation with local consulting firms to build capacity in the field.
To improve the investment climate, the Bank Group assisted the Government to develop its
"Improving the Business Environment in Lebanon" program, which is led by the Office of the
Presidency of the Council of Ministers as Secretariat. In this context, IFC launched a project to
simplify procedures for licensing in the tourism sector, which is currently under implementation.
Working with the Tripoli Bar Association and the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Beirut,
IFC is developing local capacity to offer mediation as a means to resolve business disputes, including
the training of local mediators and institutional capacity building for the mediation centers. Projects
to improve the commercial registry, strengthen the bankruptcy and insolvency regime, and draft a
modern law on secured transactions (which allows for greater use of movable property as collateral)
were signed with the Office of the Presidency of the Council of Ministers, with the draft secured
transactions law currently being finalized. The IFC and the Bank are working together to assess the
national payment system, under a project with the Central Bank of Lebanon.
30

Selected Results of the CPS
Water Sector
* Over 134 km of water distribution and wastewater collection network installed and about 194 km of water supply
network rehabilitated with all pumping stations meeting World Health Organization quality standards
* Over 134 km of water distribution and wastewater collection network installed
Municipal and Cultural Heritaze Sector
* Reconstruction of public infrastructure (17 municipal buildings, 175 km of roads rehabilitated and repaired,
4,684 streetlight poles erected, 48.7 km of retaining walls built
* 595 new rehabilitation activities in historic urban cores in compliance with approved regulations, 150,000 sq
meters of pedestrian public squares and spaces rehabilitated, 182 000 sq meters facades of historic buildings
rehabilitated, 80 new caf6s and restaurants, 642 additional individuals employed in caf6s and restaurants, leading
to 10% increase in private sector investments in tourism and heritage sector
* 5 new landmark conservation laws approved, 3 municipal units operating and managing city core established
* 10% increase in private sector investments in tourism and heritage sector
Social Protection (National Poverty Tarzetinm Prozram - NPTP)
* 275,000 individuals in NPTP Database today with 80,000 individuals beneficiaries in the first round
Private Sector
* Increased number of banks participating in IFC's Global Trade Finance Program from 4 to 6, with total of $676
million of guarantees issued

31

ANNEX A2: LEBANON AT A GLANCE

Lebanon at a glance

3/5/13

Key Development Indicators
Lebanon

M.East
& North
Africa

Upper
middle
income

Age distribution, 2010

(2011)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (%oftotal population)

4.3
10
0.7
89
39.2
9,200
14,090

GNI(Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI percapita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI percapita (PPP, international $)

331
8,775
1.7
58
1,283
3,874
8,068

2,452
59,328
0.7
57
14,429
5,884
9,970

75-7
60-64
45-49

15-19
0-4

01
5

10

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

Female

3.0
2.3

4.3
2.5

7.8
7.1

..

..

3
14
72
27
8

73
17
3

93
86

82
66

96
91

so
40

10

111

30

98
16
89
88

111
il
93
73

10

0

10

5

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2005-2011)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day(PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)

..
..

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
80
70
60

Adult literacy, male (%of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (%of ages 15 and older)

10
15
99

primary enrollment,
enrollment,
(%of age group)
Gross primary
male (%of age group)
Grossprimaryenrollment,female(%ofagegroup)
Access to an improved water source (%of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (%of population)

..

..

-

jmale

30
iwo

DLeb.on

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2010):
United States
France
European Union Institutions
Aid (%of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1990

1980

298
3
16
5
..

114

2000

286
12
26
29
2.6
90

200

1ws

0didle

20

&aNoIthNri.

2011 a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

200

449

32

84

so

31
36

60
53

40-

1.1
53

1.2
106

20
10

30

-10

Long-Term Economic Trends

05

95

Consumer prices (annual %change)
GDP implicit deflator(annual %change)

..

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

..

..

..

-99.7
97.4

-0.8
-2.1

5.7
4.9

695.1
91

1,507.5
100

1,507.5
79
1980-90 1990-2000

2000-11

(average annual growth %)
Population,mid-year(millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

2.6
..

3.2
4,690

3.8
17,260

4.3
40,094

1.9
..

1.7
8.8

1.1
5.0

(%ofGDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

Householdfinalconsumptionexpenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

..

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

..

..
..

..
..

7.3
25.5
14.4
67.2

7.1
22.8
13.0
70.1

5.9
20.6
8.2
73.5

..

124.5
14.0
29.3

84.1
17.3
20.4

74.1
13.8
29.8

..

12.5
79.9
-10.5

14.2
35.9
-1.2

32.2
50.0
17.7

..

..
..
..

..
..

..

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a.Aid data are for2010.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

32

7.0
5.2
6.4
6.4

0.9
5.1
1.2
5.0

8.0
14.7
9.9

3.8
3.3
10.4

24.1
11.8

9.6
7.2

Lebanon
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2011
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2010

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

1,050
5,988

5,318
20,158

-3,774

-7,116

Current account balance
asa%of GDP

-3,754
-21.7

-4,866
-12.1

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

2,544

7,558

Politkcal stability and
absence ofviolence
Regulatory quality
Rule of law

8,273

Reserves, including gold

Voice and accountablity

Control of corruption

45,216

25

0

Central Government Finance

22oCountrs

50

75

10O

percentle rank (-100)

higher values irrply better ratngs

(%oofGDP)
Current revenue (including grants)

Tax revenue
Current expenditure

18.6

23.5

14.6
38.9

18.5
28.0

-23.4

-6.4

source: worldwide Governance Indicator (www.govindicator.org)

Technology and Infrastructure
Overall surplus/deficit
Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

..

..

..

..

Paved roads (%of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 10 people)
High technology exports
(%of manufactured exports)

2000

2010

84.9
35

89

2.3

12.8

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, M DRI)
Total debt (%of GDP)
Total debt service (%of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity(net inflows)

29,137
812
-

87,493
1,084
-

168.8
29.4

218.2
6.3

Agricultural land (%of land area)
Forest area (%of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (%of land area)
Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)
C02 emissions per capita (mt)

..

GDP per unit of energyuse
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

58
0.5
1,241

67
0.5
1,144

4.1

4.1

6.6

7.5

Composition of total external debt, 2011
Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

thermrulti
Kd d27

1,311

1,580

irleBt8t9710S

World Bank Group portfolio

2000

2010

(US$ millions)

76,2 1
US$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (%of GN I per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(%of managers surveyed who agreed)
Access to/cost of financing
Electricity
Stock market capitalization (%of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2011

2000

9
75.0
25
2010

..
..

9.2
6.4

16.5
12.5
33.9
7.3

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

311
42
17
14

411
24
20
4

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Totaldebtservice

0
-

0
0
0

218
127
20

194
194
100

25

1)

-

-

IFC (fiscalyear)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
M IGA
Gross exposure
Newguarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. - indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

33

3/513

Millennium Development Goals

Lebanon

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, -- 2 years)

Lebanon

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $125 a day (PPP,%ofpopulation)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line(%of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (%of children under 5)

1990

1995

2000

2010

3.0

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primaryschool enrollment (net,%)
Primarycompletion rate (%of relevant age group)
Secondaryschool enrollment (gross,%)
Youth literacyrate (%ofpeopleages 15-24)

..
61

76
83
66

90
102
77

34
30
85

32
28
90

87
81

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio ofgirls to boys in primaryand secondary education (%)
Women employed inthe nonagricultural sector (%of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held bywomen in national parliament (%)
Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-yearolds immunized,%)

37
32
61

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (%of women ages 15-49)

150...

..

89

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIVIAIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (%of population ages 15-49)
0.1
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%,all forms)
91
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (%of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (%of population)
Forest area (%of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (%of land area)
0.5
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita)
3.1
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
8.7

..

Education indicators (%)

13.4
0.0
0.0

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)
100

10

75
50

6050

50.-

91

91

0.1
71

100

0.5
3.9
6.8

0.5
4.1
6.6

0.5
4.1
7.5

13.0
3.5
0.1

15.4
19.9
8.0

21.0
68.0
31.0

ICT indicators (per 100 people)
100
90
80
70

-i-

75--

0.2

..

..

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Computer users (per 100 people)

0.1

40

255

2

25

0-

2000

2010

2005

10
1990

Ram

comryduaon

fgrls

by

inpiay&)

Leb-o

15

2000

2010

0Middle.

ANothMIm

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

34

2000

OF-ed+mo.ulesus.iber

2010

2005

Mintemetu. rs

3/5/13

ANNEX

B2: SELECTED

INDICATORS OF BANK PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE & MANAGEMENT

As of March 31, 2013
Indicator

2010

2011

2012

2013

9
4.6
25.0
4.1
50.0
31.9
14.9

10
4.6
30.0
10.7
50.0
17.7
43.7

11
5.0
28.6
10.3
71.4
56.9
9.6

9
5.0
33.3
51.4
50.0
52.2
3.5

No
980
109

No
1031
103

No
1137
103

No
1037
115

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item

Since FY80 Last Five FYs

Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
*

18
781.0
50.0
35.1

2
117.9
50.0
36.1

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
A\erage age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on de\elopment objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Inmestment projects only.
All indicators are for projects acti\e in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all acti\e projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

35

ANNEX

B3: IFC INVESTMENT

OPERATIONS PROGRAM

FY11

FY12

1HFY13

88.8

370.5

220.5

88.8

370.5

220.5

finance)

98%

100%

99%

Telecommunications

2%

-

10%

100%

100%

100%

Commitments (US$m)
Gross
Net**

IFC Own Account (OA)
IFC Own Account +
Mobilization

OA Commitments by Sector (%)
Financial markets (trade

Total
OA Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)

2%

-

-

98%

100%

99%

Loan

-

-

1%

Total

100%

100%

100%

Equity
Guarantee

36

ANNEX

B5:

SOCIAL INDICATORS

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2005-11

2.9
1.7
79.4
3.6

3.5
1.9
85.0
2.7

4.3
1.0
89.3

..

M. East
& North
Africa

Uppermiddleincome

..

331.3
1.7
58.0
2.7

2,452.1
0.7
57.4
1.8

3,200
89

9,200
143

3,874
131

5,884
127

..

..

..

..

2.6

..

3.0
4.8

3.0
4.8

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

90
92
88

94
93
95

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

89
94
81

93
98
86

23
17

85
93

..

..

..

..

88
89
8

96
96
3

66
64
68

69
68
71

..

72
70
74

73
71
75

38
44

30
34

..

27
34

17
20

241
181

210
150

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

160
95
88
81

161
100
60
98

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)

175

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Low est quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles

DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff

(%)

..

..
..

..

..

CAS Annex B5. This table w as produced from the CMU LDB system.
03/05/13
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series betw een 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

37

B6: KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS

ANNEX

Tndicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)

Actual
2008
2009

2007

Gross domestic producta

100

Agriculture

100

Estimte
2010

100

Projected

2011

100

2012

100

2013

100

2014

100

2015

100

100

7

7

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

Industry

22

22

23

23

21

20

20

21

21

Services

71

71

70

71

74

73

73

73

73

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

97
27
3
24

99
29
2
27

93
33
2
31

94
34
2
32

88
29
2
26

91
28
2
26

90
29
3
26

89
30
4
27

89
30
4
26

Exports (GNFSb
Imports (GNFS)

23
48

24
53

21
48

22
50

32
50

29
49

29
49

29
50

30
50

Gross domestic savings

3

1

7

6

12

9

10

11

11

Gross nationalsavingsc

17

11

12

12

18

15

14

15

14

25057

30080

34651

37124

40094

42945

46050

49568

52887

6330

7020

7920

8740

9200

9490

10090

10780

11360

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 02 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
7.5
Gross Domestic Income
6.8

9.3
8.7

8.5
11.4

7.0
5.5

3.0
13.9

1.4
0.6

2.3
2.3

4.0
4.0

3.8
3.9

from 02 prices)
6.1
8.3
4.9
8.6
5.2
9.2

7.7
7.5
7.5

6.2
4.7
4.6

2.3
0.1
-0.3

0.7
3.9
2.8

1.5
1.4
0.7

3.2
2.7
3.0

3.0
0.2
-0.5

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB

6961
3526

9136
4410

8420
3964

8962
4708

12928
5318

12314
5632

13315
6226

14570
6903

15853
7563

Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

12075
11197
-5114
2769
-1605

16082
15018
-6947
2360
-4149

16760
14945
-8340
1827
-6741

18641
16386
-9679
2601
-7588

20044
17619
-7116
2429
-4866

21148
18552
-8834
3254
-6204

22717
19978
-9402
3410
-7247

24637
21718
-10068
3750
-8127

26320
23202
-10466
4041
-8924

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, inc. errors & ommissions)

2528
5294
1672
3622
-4180

3346
5760
543
5217
-1497

3678
10286
-115
10401
676

3793
1637
-98
1735
5482

2731
2797
-31
2828
1334

3312
959
-80
1040
3471

3560
69
-10
79
5239

3848
-64
-91
27
5975

4168
730
-96
827
4897

Change in reservesd

-2037

-3461

-7899

-3325

-1996

-1538

-1621

-1632

-871

-20.4

-23.1

-24.1

-26.1

-17.7

-20.6

-20.4

-20.3

-19.8

23.7
26.9
21.9
15.5

11.6
21.2
6.0
17.8

-6.0
-9.6
-3.6
19.8

16.3
10.4
20.0
2.9

9.5
38.8
-7.6
-4.3

3.8
6.3
1.6
2.3

7.5
-8.8
22.5
4.0

7.7
2.1
11.5
5.0

6.4
5.0
7.2
3.7

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YRO2 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

38

Lebanon - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Inidicator

2007

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
24.6
31.2
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
-6.6
2.7
Capital expenditure
5.5
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth ofM2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices(YR02 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (%change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f

Actual
2008
2009

2010

Fstimate
2011

2012

Projected
2013
2014

2015

24.1
31.1
-7.0
1.8
-1.0

24.7
31.8
-7.2
1.6
-0.3

22.8
29.2
-6.4
1.8
-0.3

23.5
28.0
-4.5
1.8
7.5

23.0
29.4
-6.5
2.4
2.2

23.2
29.1
-5.9
3.0
0.1

23.5
28.1
-4.7
3.6
-0.1

23.5
28.0
-4.5
3.8
1.4

277.1
10.9
62.4

266.5
15.5
72.1

284.7
23.1
50.9

298.0
12.1
91.1

295.5
7.1
80.8

292.8
6.1
51.2

294.9
8.0
52.4

301.4
10.0
65.5

310.7
10.0
74.0

109.4
114.3
95.7

122.5
130.2
94.1

117.2
112.4
104.3

119.7
121.3
98.7

123.5
142.2
86.9

126.0
127.9
98.5

129.6
132.5
97.8

133.4
137.1
97.3

137.4
141.3
97.3

191.6

185.9

191.8

196.8

201.0

205.9

210.8

215.9

221.0

4.7
3.9

10.2
9.9

0.1
6.2

2.9
0.1

5.7
4.9

5.7
5.6

4.9
4.8

3.7
3.5

3.0
2.8

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

39

ANNEX

Idicator
Total debt outstanding and

2007

B7: KEY EXPOSURE INDICATORS
Actual
200)8
2009

Estirrusted
2011

2010

2012

Projected
2014

2013

2015

63579

65582

73043

78956

87493

16057

16890

21040

19584

Net disbursements (US$m)a

6962

1998

7495

5937

8505

3575

2778

3339

753

Total debt service (TDS)

1558

1633

1142

974

1084

1193

890

1171

2098

TDO/XGSb

499.4

466.5

602.2

603.5

511.6

93.2

91.0

103.2

88.8

TDO/GDP

253.7

218.0

210.8

212.7

218.2

37.4

36.7

42.4

37.0

12.2

11.6

9.4

7.4

6.3

6.9

4.8

5.7

9.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

6.6

10.0

10.7

3.2

5.9

5.9

8.0

5.1

2.4

16.2

15.6

29.5

31.3

34.1

29.9

34.6

23.5

11.7

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
JBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d

0.5
529

1.0
458

0.7
408

0.2
411

0.4
521

0.4
481

0.3
445

0.3
429

0.2
230

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share oflBRDportfolio (%)

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

IDA TDO (US$m)d

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

JFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers'remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

40

ANNEX B8A:

IBRD OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO AND GRANTS
As of March 31, 2013

Closed Projects

25

IBRD/IDA*
Total Disbursed (Active)

139.09

of whtichhas been repaid
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)

542.81
514.41
591.60
323.39

Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active

48.80
375.32

Total Disbursed (Closed)

0.00
Closed)

323.39

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P050529
P118187
P111602
P111849
P034038
P127306
P103063
Overall Result

LB - Cultural Heritage and Urban Dev.
LB - Education Development Project II
LB-EmergencyFiscalManagementReform
LB - ESPISP 2
LB - Urban Transport Development Project
LB Supporting Innovation in SMEs Project
LB- Greater Beirut Water Supply

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

MS
MU
MS
MU
S
S
MU

MS
MU
MS
MS
S
S
MU

2003
2011
2009
2009
2002
2013
2011

41

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

58.5
40.0
4.0
6.0
134.7
30.0
200.0
463.2

10.0

Disbursementse
Cancel.

Undisb.
27.3
39.9
1.1
1.8
27.3
30.0
198.9
326.3

Orig. Frm ReVd
0.3
7.5
1.1
1.8
-42.4

0.3
0.2
1.8
27.3

48.9
17.2

29.6

ANNEX B8B: STATEMENT OF IFC's COMMITTED AND OUTSTANDING PORTFOLIO

Amounts in US Dollar Millions
Accounting Date as of: 03/31/2013
Region(s):Middle East and North Africa
Country(s) : Lebanon
Commitment

Institution

Fiscal Year

Short Name

'2007
2013
2013
2013
2007
2013
2013
'2008
2010
2013
2013
'2011
'2005

ADMIC
AMEEN
BBAC
BLC Bank
BLOM
Bank Beirut II
Banque Libano F
Butec Holdings
Byblos Bank
CL sal
Fransabank
MobiNetS
SIS Adma

Total Portfolio

ECommitted

Outstanding

LN

ET

QL + QIE

GT

Cmtd - IFC

Cmtd - IFC

Cmtd - IFC

Cmtd - IFC

R

ALL

Cmtd - IFC Cmtd - Part

LN

ET

QL + QE

GT

RM

ALL

Out - IFC

Out - IFC

Out - IFC

Out - IFC

Out - IFC

Out - Part

0
2.00
0
0
6.00
0
0
0
0
3.45
1.84
0
1.64

4.60
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
71.43
0
0
2.00
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15.00
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
4.59
4.50
0
21.32
16.50
0
0
6.12
42.86
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
6.00
0
0
0
0
3.45
1.84
0
1.64

4.60
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
71.43
0
0
2.00
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15.00
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
4.59
4.49
0
21.32
16.50
0
0
2.40
38.57
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

14.93

78.03

15.00

95.89

0

0

12.93

78.03

15.00

109.34

0

0.00

42

ANNEX

B8c: MIGA

OUTSTANDING EXPOSURE

Statement of MIGA'S Exposure
including this and other projects approved by the Board
in Lebanon as of March 31, 2013
1. MIGA'S EXPOSURE (CONTINGENT LIABILITY)
Transfer

Expropriation

Restriction

War & Civil

Breach of

Non Honoring of

Disturbance

Contract

Sovereign Financial

US$ million
Gross Exposure

Maximum

Obligations
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

CUP

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Current Amount*

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

% of total portfolio
Net Exposure
% of total portfolio

* On a gross basis
2. NET EXPOSURE BY SECTOR
Lebanon
US$ million

%

Middle East and North Africa
US$ million
%

MIGA Worldwide
US$ million
%

Agribusiness

0.0

0.0

2.5

0.4

163.3

2.6

Construction

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

5.8

0.1

Financial

33.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

2,074.4

Financial Services

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

14.1

0.2

General Banking

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

1,758.2

28.1

Investment Fund

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Leasing

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

181.7

2.9

Mortgage

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

120.4

1.9

Infrastructure

42.7

0.0

0.0

259.8

44.1

2,672.6

Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services

0.0

0.0

3.7

0.6

67.0

Power

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

808.3

12.9

Telecommunication

0.0

0.0

67.5

11.5

536.6

8.6

Transportation

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

609.0

9.7

Water Transportation

0.0

0.0

188.6

32.0

291.2

4.6

Water Supply

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

280.5

4.5

Other

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

80.0

1.3

Manufacturing

0.0

0.0

145.3

24.7

460.9

7.4

Mining

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

170.7

2.7

Oil and Gas

0.0

0.0

177.7

30.2

436.5

7.0

Retail

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

118.4

1.9

Services

0.0

0.0

3.4

0.6

157.6

2.5

Tourism

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

5.5

0.1

0.0

0.0

588.7

100.0

6,265.7

100.0

Total

43

1.1

IBRD 33433R
3530'E

3600'E

3630'E

TO

7O

TallKolokh

Al Hamiia



Hims

,

Qoubauyat

LBANN-

LENON-Halba
0

343 'N

3430'N

Al usa

MoFuna

TripoliAbou

Hermel

Zhgarta

NORT H

LEBANON

Chekka

i

Sib'ila
Mhin

Amioun

O

Bcharri
Doumnat

Al Labwah

Mediterranean

oB

3400'N

Badibeck

\Q

Jounie

3400'N

M OUNT
BEIRUT

R EAO

Baab a .rHammanarZah

e
AzZabadani

Damour
Beit
ed Dine

Al
en

NoSa

4Joub Jannine,'A'o

Jbeilo

IE ANTTWN

Aqurah

Jieh

fT7



I
N
y
N

ADra

Saida
JezzineQaraaoun
3330'N

El Zahrani

Rachaiya

. ....
B E,Ko

BEIRIJIntilyasn

m m a n ap

NaaiyhMar.ylayoun

SOAin H

Tyre

E

_AU
L

Tibnine
Naor

Hula

Ou
N e T 0

10

~ ~ ~

I E0

O o oa

30 Kilometers
20 M21es
60'

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

GOVERNORATE
(MOHAFAZAT)
CAPITALS

TO

adot ~

~

~

r

n

nooo

The

tus

330 'N

MAIN ROADS

in,

11

b.nde
3530'E

NATIONAL CAPITAL

nT'0IVR

, de~ntoan

on his map do not
o
the part of
Wo d Bank

Nahoriyyc



pd.d
Unpiwa
p of byIVR

-Pi

G

3330'N

LEBANON

-

Naqorq//Thi
.

20

10

smoae

Bent Jbail

Rmaid

a he h

,

A
0

o sc

-

RAlILROADS

............"..GOVERNORATE (MOHAFAZAT) BOUNDARIES

- --

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

3600'Ej
MAY 2011

