Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 76176-IN

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR INDIA
FOR THE PERIOD FY2013–2017

Public Disclosure Authorized

March 21, 2013

India Country Management Unit
South Asia Region
The International Finance Corporation
South Asia Department
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

The last Country Strategy (CAS) Report No. 46509 was discussed by the Board on November 14, 2008, and the last
CAS Progress Report (CASPR) Report No. 58433 was discussed by the Board on December 14, 2010.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
US$1 = Rupees (Rs.) 54.57 as of March 7, 2013
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
April 1 —March 31
WORLD BANK FISCAL YEAR
July 1 —June 30
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
BRICS
CAS
CPS
CTF
DFID
FDI
GAAP
GDP
GFATM
GSDP
GST
HIV/AIDS

IBRD

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South
Africa
Country Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy
Carbon Trust Fund
United Kingdom Department for
International Development
Foreign Direct Investment
Governance and Accountability Action
Plan
Gross Domestic Product
Global Fund to Fight Aids,
Tuberculosis, and Malaria
gross state domestic product
Goods and Service Tax
Human Immunodeficiency
Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development

ICDS
ICT
IDA
IFC
IT
LIS
M&E
MDG
OECD
PMGSY
PPP
PRI
RWSS
SBL
SPPB
SSA
UN
WBG

Integrated Child Development Services
information and communication
technologies
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
Information Technology
low-income state
monitoring and evaluation
Millennium Development Goal
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
public-private partnership
Panchayati Raj institution
rural water supply and sanitation
Single Borrower Limit
Special Placement Private Bonds
Sarva Shiksa Abhiyan
United Nations
World Bank Group

Dollar amounts ($) are U.S. dollars.

IBRD/IDA
Vice President: Isabel Guerrero
Country Director: Onno Ruhl
Task Team Leader: Dorota Nowak

MIGA
Vice President: Michel Wormser
Director: Kevin Lu
Task Team Leader: Paul Barbour

IFC
Vice President: Karin Finkelston
Regional Director: Thomas Davenport
Task Team Leader: Gunjan Gulati

Acknowledgments
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the close collaboration of the Indian authorities in the preparation of this
Country Partnership Strategy. The preparation of the document involved extensive discussions with government
representatives at the federal and state levels, as well as civil society. The strategy is the result of a team effort that
relied on knowledge, experience, and guidance from individuals across the World Bank Group. We thank them for
their contributions.

Contents
1. Executive Summary

5

1.1. Achievements and remaining challenges

5

1.2. A vision for India in 2030

6

1.3. Development challenges

7

1.4. The World Bank Group program

8

2. Introduction

11

3. Achievements

12

4. Vision: India in 2030

15

5. Challenges

17

5.1. Platform for growth

18

5.2. Spatial transformation

21

5.3. Human potential

24

6. World Bank Group India Country Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17)

26

6.1. Strategic engagement area 1: Integration

27

6.2. Strategic engagement area 2: Transformation

31

6.3. Strategic engagement area 3: Inclusion

36

7. Implementing the WBG Country Partnership Strategy

40

7.1. Guiding principles of engagement

40

7.2. CAS lessons and multistakeholder consultations

42

7.3. Current WBG portfolio

43

7.4. Collaboration and partnerships

45

8. Financing the strategy

46

9. Monitoring of results

49

10. Managing risks

50

List of tables
Table 7.1. Low-income and special category states

41

List of boxes
Box 3.1. India and the WBG: A unique relationship spanning six decades
Box 4.1. Government vision: India’s 12th Five-Year Plan
Box 5.1. India’s economic outlook
Box 6.1. Health in India
Box 6.2. Addressing gender issues

13
15
19
38
40

List of figures
Figure 4.1. Poverty and prosperity in India 2030
Figure 5.1. Correlates of fast economic growth: the rate of urbanization
Figure 5.2. Correlates of shared prosperity: off-farm employment

16
22
23

iii

Figure 6.1. India CPS results chain: engagement areas and outcomes
Figure 8.1. Impact of IDA Graduation on India, by IDA Replenishment, IDA15-19
Figure 8.2. Annual IDA and IBRD lending to India, FY09-24
Country strategy annexes
Annex 1: CPS results framework
Annex 2: India FY2009-12 Country Strategy Completion Report
Annex 3: Progress toward Millennium Development Goals
Annex 4: Poverty in India
Annex 5: IFC indicative non-lending activities
Annex 6: Overview of main trust funds
Annex 7: Country financing parameters
Annex 8: Government of India Project Screening Criteria
Annex 9: Consultations held to inform CPS Preparation
Annex 10: Indian statistical system
Standard annex tables
Annex A2: India at a glance
Annex B2: Selected indicators of Bank portfolio performance and management
Annex B3A: Indicative FY2013-14 IBRD/IDA lending program
Annex B3B: IFC investment operations program
Annex B4: Summary of World Bank non-lending services
Annex B5: Social indicators
Annex B6: Key economic indicators
Annex B7: Key exposure indicators
Annex 8A: Operations portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Annex 8B: Statement of IFC’s committed and disbursed outstanding investment portfolio

iv

27
47
48

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

1. Executive Summary
1.
India is uniquely placed to help reduce global poverty and boost prosperity. The country has the
largest number of poor people in the world, as well as the largest number of people who have recently
escaped poverty but are still vulnerable to falling back. India’s encouraging results in recent years on the
dual challenges of fighting poverty and boosting prosperity justify strong support for India as a key part
of the global effort to bend the arc of history by accelerating the decline in poverty. India’s per capita
income remains low, and its development challenges are deep and complex. As the country strives to
bring about quicker and deeper changes, this strategy lays out an approach for the World Bank Group to
support India in achieving even more ambitious results in the near future. Aware that World Bank Group
finances will always be modest compared to India’s challenges, that support can be a catalyst for change
at this crucial time. For that reason, this strategy makes the case for continued high levels of World Bank
Group financial support for India.

1.1. Achievements and remaining challenges
2.
India’s economic and human development is one of the most significant global achievements of
recent times. Between 2005 and 2010, India’s share of global GDP increased from 1.8 to 2.7 percent, and
53 million people were lifted out of poverty. Growth has steadily accelerated over time, showing
resilience even in the aftermath of the global crisis. In the last decade, India’s economy expanded at an
average annual rate of 7.6 percent, placing it in the top 10 of the world’s fastest growing nations. Exports
account for 21.5 percent of GDP, three times more than in 1990, and net inflows of foreign direct
investment (FDI) make up another 1.6 percent. India is home to globally recognized companies in
pharmaceuticals, steel, and space technologies, and the country is a leader in the use of information
technologies for e-government purposes and public service delivery. In line with these transformations,
India is now among the top 10 percentile of fast growing nations and has become a prominent global
voice. Progress on human development has been remarkable; life expectancy more than doubled from 31
years in 1947 to 65 years in 2012 and adult literacy more than quadrupled, from 18 percent in 1951 to 74
percent in 2011.
3.
While India has made significant progress in reducing absolute poverty, it remains home to onethird of the global poor. On the positive side, India has already achieved the first Millennium
Development Goal (MDG 1) by halving the proportion of people living on less than $1.25 a day. Most
notably, rural poverty has decreased by 14 percentage points, and the less well-off are increasingly
reaping the benefits of shared prosperity, with consumption growth of the bottom 40 percent rising to
catch up with average consumption growth. But with GDP per capita at $1,410 in 2011, India remains at
the bottom of the group of middle-income countries. More than 400 million people still live in poverty.
With population growth, the absolute number of poor people actually increased in some of India’s poorest
states between 2004–05 and 2009–10, with poverty rates three to four times higher than those of the most
advanced states—Haryana, Kerala, and Punjab.
4.
Despite rapid economic growth and positive human development, Indian society remains highly
segmented and income inequality is rising. Inequalities vis-à-vis disadvantaged groups such as so-called
scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, and women persist. Structural inequalities have kept entire groups
trapped, unable to take advantage of opportunities that economic growth has offered. While much
progress has been made in education, health, maternal mortality, and fertility, gender inequality remains
high. The ratio of girls to boys has decreased steadily over the last fifty years—a trend associated with the
“missing women” phenomenon; it is particularly low in some of India’s more advanced states.
5.
A middle class is emerging, but only a fifth of the population has firmly escaped vulnerability.
Even above the threshold for the World Bank Group’s global indicator of shared prosperity (defined as
5

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

consumption growth of the bottom 40 percent of the population), a large number of people have
consumption levels that are very close to the poverty line. Many of India’s newly non-poor, especially in
rural areas, remain vulnerable and minor shocks—illness, natural disasters, poor crop yields,
indebtedness—can easily push them below the poverty line. People who are no longer vulnerable are
defined as those living in households with an income that is at least twice the poverty line. India’s
continued progress is not only significant for its people, especially those still living in poverty, but also
for the global achievement of the MDGs. Helping India address its development challenges is central to
the World Bank Group’s goal of reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity.

1.2. A vision for India in 2030
6.
The overarching objective of the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the
period FY2013–17 is to support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in India. That objective is
closely aligned with the vision for development outlined in the country’s 12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013–
17), which calls for “faster, sustainable, and more inclusive growth” focusing on poverty reduction, group
equality, regional balance, empowerment, environmental management, and employment. It foresees
annual GDP growth of 8.2 percent, with all states growing faster than they did under the 11th Plan. It
envisions a reduction of the poverty rate by 10 percentage points, building on the generation of 50 million
new work opportunities in the non-farm sector and an increase in the average schooling of the population
to seven years. The Plan also targets the elimination of gender and social gaps in schooling, a decline in
the infant mortality, and a gradual improvement of the ratio of girls to boys.
7.
Continued rapid economic growth is a precondition for poverty reduction and shared prosperity.
Its role cannot be overstated. Before the industrial revolution India was one of world’s wealthiest
countries, accounting for more than a quarter of global GDP, but by the time of Independence in 1947 its
economy was universally stagnant. Since then the country has emerged out of the low “Hindu rate of
growth,” and has the potential to become a global economic powerhouse once again. But growth will also
have to be more inclusive than in the past. If growing numbers of people are to benefit from economic
growth, regardless of their gender, caste, or state of residence, more will be needed. Although India has
done better than most countries in terms of economic growth, the degree of poverty reduction associated
with one percentage point of GDP growth has been substantially less than in countries such as Brazil and
China.
8.
The diverse experience of Indian states is revealing of what could be accomplished—and what
would be realistic—in striving to attain the overarching objectives of the CPS. Some states have done
better than others in terms of economic growth; others have done better in terms of poverty reduction and
reducing vulnerability. Differences are to be expected in the short term, but these differences have
persisted over extended periods. The CPS scenarios to 2030 are predicated on the observed performance
between 2005-2010, a period of high growth and poverty reduction. Two scenarios are presented in the
CPS:
•

Base scenario. Under the base scenario, India’s GDP growth rate, as well as the speed at which the
numbers of poor and vulnerable people decline for every percentage point of growth, remain the same
as in 2005–2010. In this scenario, the GDP growth rate would be sustained at 8.2 percent. Income per
capita would reach $5,283 in 2030 at 2010 prices, compared with $1,375 in 2010, poverty would drop
from 29.8 to 12.3 percent, and the share of people above the vulnerability threshold would increase
from 19.1 to 33.6 percent.

•

Ambitious scenario. Under the ambitious scenario, India sustains rapid GDP growth in the base
scenario but improves its performance to that of the best-performing state at the 80th percentile of the
distribution in terms of poverty reduction and reduced vulnerability. Over the period 2005–2010 those

6

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

states were Rajasthan and Karnataka, respectively. Matching, at the national level, the performance of
these high-achievers would be an extraordinary accomplishment. Under the ambitious scenario, the
poverty rate would decline to 5.5 percent, and the share of people who are no longer vulnerable would
reach 41.3 percent.
9.
India has the potential of making a dramatic contribution to poverty reduction and shared
prosperity globally. In principle, the new global target to “bend the arc of history” could be attained
through a combination of successes across other countries. But it is unlikely that this will happen unless
India continues to make substantial inroads. The CPS scenarios to 2030 also reveal the implications of
India’s sustained, high growth on the number of people living below the poverty line and above two
poverty lines or the vulnerability line (those no longer vulnerable of falling into poverty). If the base
scenario were realized, the number of global poor would fall by 191 million and the number of people
above the vulnerability line would increase by 277 million. If the ambitious scenario were realized, the
corresponding figures would be 304 and 394 million. The former is comparable to China’s contribution to
global poverty reduction over the last two decades and the latter amounts to raising to prosperity the
equivalent of the combined present populations of France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the United
Kingdom.

1.3. Development challenges
10.
India’s recent development experience shows that achieving the ambitious vision by 2030 will
require addressing a wide range of challenges. With a young population and 8 million people entering the
labor force every year, India could reap a substantial demographic dividend, but there could also be
considerable stress if employment opportunities are not commensurate with expectations. At present only
16 percent of the workforce derives its income from regular wage employment, and more than 50 percent
are engaged in agriculture. The female labor force, already low as a proportion of the total labor force,
decreased from 34 to 29 percent between 2000 and 2010, with the drop being particularly marked for
women at higher levels of education. Constraints across three main areas could make India miss its
potential demographic dividend:
•

Platforms for growth. Infrastructure needs are massive. Only 20 percent of the national highway
network is four-lane, ports and airports have inadequate capacity, and trains move very slowly. Onethird of the rural population lacks access to an all-weather road. Road safety is a growing concern in a
country that is adding new drivers at a record pace. An estimated 300 million people are not
connected to the national electrical grid, and those who are face frequent disruptions. The
manufacturing sector remains underdeveloped and has grown at a pace that is below expectations.
The size distribution of firms in India is characterized by a “missing middle,” which is a source of
concern given that small and medium enterprises are typically an important source of wage
employment. Improving and maintaining a healthy investment and business climate is also crucial to
growth.

•

Managing spatial transformation. The number of urban centers has grown from about 5,000 in 2001
to 8,000 in 2011, and 53 cities already have a population in excess of one million. There is a need to
accommodate an additional 10 million urban dwellers every year and to provide them with adequate
basic services. Success at meeting this challenge has so far been partial. The number of slum dwellers
increased from 75 million in 2001 to 93 million in 2011—a quarter of the urban population. The rural
space is not well connected to cities, resulting in weak value chains for agricultural products and an
insufficient creation of off-farm employment. Although half of the Indian population derives its
income from agriculture-related activities, agricultural output has grown below government targets.

•

Human development potential. Health outcomes compare poorly with those of countries at similar
levels of development. At 65.4 years, life expectancy is more than 5 years lower than the world

7

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

average. Malnutrition rates remain high: 40 percent of the world’s malnourished children live in
India. Maternal and infant mortality as well as fertility rates remain high compared with those of other
growing economies in Asia. Out-of-pocket health expenditures are among the highest in the world
and make households, especially the very poor, highly vulnerable to health shocks. Primary education
has been largely universalized, but progress on learning outcomes has been limited. Secondary
education is the new bottleneck. At 4.4 years, educational attainment is low, and India still accounts
for one-third of all illiterate people worldwide. Enrolment rates for grades 9–12 are just 40 percent; of
those enrolled, approximately 15 percent drop out and one-third fail their examinations. Inequity in
all dimensions, including caste and gender, is a major concern.

1.4. The World Bank Group program
11.
To help India address these challenges, the CPS will contribute to three main engagement areas:
integration, transformation, and inclusion. Effective engagement will require actions at the national level,
at lower levels of government, and through partnerships with the private sector, civil society and
development partners.
•

Integration. The focus is on physical connectivity and the strengthening of market mechanisms.
India’s infrastructure needs cannot be addressed through public investments alone. A tested model for
private participation exists for highways and electricity generation, but elsewhere failures are many,
suggesting that more needs to be done to assess viability gaps and identify adequate risk-transfer
mechanisms. Reforms are needed in the power sector, where low energy prices, expensive coal
(central to producing electricity in India), and inefficiencies in transmission and distribution are
crippling the system. The development of a vibrant manufacturing sector requires reforming outdated
labor laws, improving access to land, removing pervasive red tape and increasing access to finance.
Greater regional and global integration is critical to open up market opportunities and foster
competition. Intraregional trade would increase from the current $5 billion to $20 billion if
restrictions to trading with neighbors were removed.

•

Transformation. The goal is to reap the benefits from agglomeration in parallel with raising
agricultural productivity. India’s urban development is hampered by the fragmentation of service
delivery across a range of uncoordinated agencies. Local bodies in urban areas need to become
institutionally stronger and increase their capacity to mobilize financial resources. In rural areas,
stressed natural resources, inadequate technology, underdeveloped extension services, and limited
access to credit contribute to the lackluster performance of the agricultural sector. At present, in urban
areas, poverty is highest in secondary cities, where the growth of wage employment has been
disappointing. But if they were properly developed, secondary cities could become the linchpin
between urban and rural areas. Spatial transformation also implies an efficient use of India’s limited
resources, in particular land, forests, and water, as well as a shift towards climate resilience.

•

Inclusion. The ambition of the program is to promote human development and strengthen social
programs, so that economic integration and spatial transformation generate inclusive growth. In
relation to health, this requires better accountability arrangements in service delivery, adequate
regulation and oversight of private health care providers, and expanded coverage of health insurance
among disadvantaged groups. In education, incentives and community participation are needed to
reduce absenteeism. A special effort should be made to ensure access to education for underprivileged
children, retain girls in secondary education, and open opportunities in higher education for all youth.
A focus on learning outcomes is warranted across all levels of education. Meanwhile, social programs
should be better targeted and delivered in ways that improve coverage and efficiency. Improving
access to finance and social protection can also help households, especially the poor, benefit from
economic growth.

8

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

Across all three areas of engagement, a focus on improved governance, environmental sustainability, and
gender equality is envisioned. IFC’s efforts to strengthen India’s private sector also cuts across all three
areas.
12.
The implementation of the CPS program will be guided by the Government’s approach to
working with multilateral institutions: "Innovation Impulse with Investment" (see Annex 8). The
approach lays out the Government’s vision of how best to use the financing and expertise from
multilateral institutions to address India’s development challenges and places significant importance on
the value-added of the World Bank’s program that goes well beyond financing. The Government wants
World Bank support for projects that have a systemic or transformational impact, those that help innovate
and pilot new approaches, and finally those that introduce innovative financing instruments and leverage
resources. The approach provides an impetus towards working together to shape a pipeline of projects that
takes advantage of the World Bank’s international expertise, while addressing financial sustainability and
overall funding for the CPS program. Adherence to these principles will result in greater country-led
program selectivity.
13.
Guided by this approach, the World Bank will rebalance its portfolio toward state-level activities
and, within that segment, toward low-income and special category states. Delivering on the overarching
goals of the CPS also requires a strong focus on low-income states, where a majority of the poor and the
vulnerable live. Other major economic powers, such as the United States and the European Union, have
experienced an unambiguous long-term convergence in living standards across their constituent parts. In
India, by contrast, divergence across the states has remained the norm. Convergence is supported by
economic integration, and this in turn requires policies at the national level. But it can also be supported
through a greater emphasis on policy reforms and investments in the low-income states themselves.
Moreover, India’s seven low-income states are now growing faster than the average. Investments in those
states thus have higher economic returns than investments elsewhere. The impact is even greater when
considering the payoffs in poverty reduction. IFC will continue to expand its investments and advisory
program in the low-income and northeast states. Engagement under the CPS will focus on extensive
capacity building, technical assistance, analytical work, and knowledge exchanges that underpin lending
operations.
14.
The World Bank Group can help India realize the CPS vision to 2030, building on a strong
partnership in development stretching back 60 years. Since the first IBRD loan to the Indian Railways in
1949, India has made extensive use of financing, knowledge, advisory services, and technical assistance
from the World Bank Group. Over these six decades, IBRD, IDA, and IFC financing to India reached
approximately $160 billion at 2010 prices—far more than any other country. But the World Bank Group
has also benefitted enormously from the partnership. India has been home to major innovations in
development, from the Green Revolution to the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
program to the promotion of the right to information. There is growing demand to learn from India’s
diverse development experience. India is emerging as a key provider of development experience in
South–South knowledge exchange and investment capital.
15.
Although the World Bank Group’s contributions to the government’s overall development
financing is small, its support can be catalytic and transformative when financing is combined with
knowledge and experience. To make a meaningful contribution on the assault on poverty, especially in
low-income states where over 200 million of India’s poor reside, the volume of support from the World
Bank Group should be about $5 billion per year. However, World Bank Group estimated financing levels
could average about $4 billion annually during the CPS period, when one includes India’s purchase of
Special Private Placement Bonds, IFC financing and assumes that India receives transitional IDA. At their
first IDA17 replenishment meeting in Paris, IDA Deputies broadly agreed with the proposal that India
receive transitional support after it graduates from IDA; a final decision will not be taken until the end of

9

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

2013, including on the volume and terms of transitional support. While transitional IDA support would
help boost World Bank Group financing, it still falls short of levels needed and net flows from IDA and
IBRD combined turn negative by FY2018.

10

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

2. Introduction
16.
The overarching goals of the World Bank Group India Country Partnership Strategy
(FY2013–17) are to help India accelerate poverty reduction and increase shared prosperity, so that
more and more people, regardless of gender, caste, or whether they live in villages or cities, or in lowincome or more advanced states, can enjoy the benefits of more balanced growth and development. With
one-third of the world’s poor people, India is central not only to the World Bank Group’s goal of reducing
poverty and boosting shared prosperity, but also to the world’s progress toward achieving the Millennium
Development Goals.
17.
India has made significant progress in reducing absolute poverty during the last two
decades. It has already achieved the first Millennium Development Goal by halving (to less than 30
percent) the proportion of people whose income is less than $1.25 a day. The less well-off are
increasingly reaping the benefits of shared prosperity, with a considerable narrowing of the gap between
average consumption growth and growth of the bottom 40 percent. Most notably, rural poverty has
decreased by 14.5 percentage points. Given that India is predominantly rural, however, a huge
concentration of the nation’s poor people (four out of every five) still live in rural areas.
18.
Poverty remains widespread. With population growth, it has proved difficult to reduce the
number of poor at a rapid pace; 400 million Indians still live in poverty. 1 Poverty rates also vary
significantly across and within states. Each of the seven low-income states 2 has poverty rates that are two
to three times higher than those of the more advanced states. Poverty reduction in the poorest states—
which are also the most populous—has been slow (Annex 4). Higher-income states also have pockets of
extreme poverty; Karnataka’s per capita income, for example, varies nearly five-fold across districts.
19.
India’s rapid growth in the last decade has not benefited everyone uniformly. India’s
consumption inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient is 0.34 and is on the rise, with widening
disparities between urban and rural areas. Despite accelerated social mobility and urbanization, Indian
society remains exclusionary, and income inequality alone does not reflect the depth and range of social
inequities. Structural and persistent inequalities by gender, caste, and tribe persist, and indicators of
poverty and human development for these groups lag behind those of the general population. Poverty
rates are especially high among scheduled tribes (46.1 percent in 2009–10), and scheduled castes (40.8
percent). Literacy rates for males and females from scheduled castes are 67 and 42 percent respectively,
compared to the all India average of 82 and 65 percent.
20.
On a range of human development indicators, India lags behind world averages. The
country ranks 134 out of 187 on the UN’s 2011 Human Development Index. At 65.4 years, life
expectancy is more than 5 years lower than the world average, and persistently high rates of malnutrition
contribute to other health problems and undermine productivity. At 4.4 years, educational attainment is
low, and India still accounts for one-third of the globe’s illiterate people. Gender inequality remains high
despite progress in education, health, maternal mortality, and fertility. The ratio of girls to boys has
decreased steadily over the last 50 years and is particularly low in some of the more advanced states and
urban areas.3
21.
Lifting people out of poverty is not enough. Even above the threshold for the World Bank’s
global indicator of shared prosperity (defined as consumption growth of the bottom 40 percent of the
1

World Bank estimate of people living on $1.25 or less per day in PPP terms.
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh.
3
The so-called child sex ratio measures the number of girls per 1,000 boys aged 0–6. In India the ratio has decreased steadily
over the last three decades from 962 in 1981 to 914 in the 2011 census.
2

11

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

population), a large number of people, especially in rural areas, have consumption levels that are very
close to the poverty line. These vulnerable people live on more than $1.25 and less than $2.50 per day or
between one and two official poverty lines. 4 Minor shocks—illness, poor crop yields, indebtedness, high
inflation—can easily push them below the poverty line. Poverty reduction efforts need to be accompanied
by social protection initiatives to protect people from falling back into poverty. The end goal is to increase
shared prosperity—that is, to increase the number of people who are not poor, who are socially included,
and who are reasonably secure.

3. Achievements
22.
Despite the large remaining challenges, India’s development is one of the most significant
global achievements of the 20th century. Over the last two decades, progress toward many of the
Millennium Development Goals has been creditable given the sheer scale of the challenge. In addition to
halving poverty (MDG1), India has universalized primary education (MDG2). By 2015, India is also
likely to halve the number of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and achieve gender
parity at all levels of education, while also making strong progress in fighting infectious diseases, such as
AIDS, tuberculosis, and polio and achieving environmental sustainability. India has been free of polio for
two years now. Life expectancy has more than doubled from 31 years in 1947 to 65 years in 2012 but
remains low compared with other countries. Adult literacy more than quadrupled from 18 percent in 1951
to 74 percent in 2011. Widespread famines are a thing of the past, even when the monsoon fails, although
chronic malnutrition remains pervasive. While maternal mortality has been reduced by 33 percent over
ten years, almost 20 percent of all maternal deaths worldwide still occur in India, and much faster
progress on the MDGs pertaining to child mortality and access to sanitation facilities (Annex 3).
23.
The WBG has contributed to India’s development achievements, contributing where and
when it was most needed. Since the first IBRD loan to the Indian Railways in 1949, India has made
extensive use of WBG financing, knowledge, advisory services, and technical assistance to tackle
fundamental developmental challenges and build a modern economy (box 3.1). Over 60 years, India has
benefited from approximately $160 billion IBRD/IDA/IFC financing at 2010 prices)—far more than any
other client country. In the process, the WBG has learned a lot. Many of its current policies, practices, and
thinking about development have been influenced by its experience in India.

4
The official poverty line for India (currently under revision) is set at the equivalent of $1.17 per person per day in PPP terms.
The unofficial lower bound of prosperity is set at two poverty lines. This choice is based on two independent but coincident local
criteria. The National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector classifies all population groups in five categories,
and those between one and two poverty lines are considered "vulnerable". The threshold to pay personal income tax is such that
a family of five, with one taxpayer, would also be close to two poverty lines.

12

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

Box 3.1. India and the World Bank Group: A unique relationship spanning six decades
The International Development Association (IDA) has contributed to improving outcomes in health, education, and
rural development, with cumulative assistance totaling close to $43.5 billion since 1961 (current prices). It supported
India’s efforts to tackle polio, tuberculosis, leprosy, river blindness, and HIV/AIDS, improving the lives of millions
of people and contributing immensely to global efforts to control these diseases.a WBG financing (particularly
credits from IDA) and technical assistance played a key role in the Green Revolution—a landmark in India’s
development that freed the country from dependency on food imports, turning it into a net food exporter and helping
millions escape poverty. And in education, IDA together with the European Union and United Kingdom’s
Department for International Development played an important role in universalizing primary education. Likewise,
both IBRD and IFC have contributed to the development of India’s financial sector. The Housing Development
Finance Corporation—India’s leading source of housing finance, has now mainstreamed long-term financial
instruments for the middle class. India is now one of the few developing countries where a middle-class family can
borrow long-term (up to 25 years) for housing without government subsidy. IBRD/IFC financing of more than $4
billion, coupled with capacity building, has helped PowerGrid evolve into the world’s third largest transmission
utility.
a. A Collaborative Partnership: India and IDA, Government of India (2013)

24.
Rapid economic growth over the past ten years has contributed to this substantial reduction
in poverty and progress on MDGs. In the last decade, India grew faster than 92 percent of the world’s
nations. Real GDP expanded at an average annual rate of 7.3 percent between FY2003 and FY2012,
helping the country reduce poverty (at the official poverty line) by 1.5 percentage points per year during
2005–10. India also weathered the 2008–09 global crises relatively well, with GDP growth slowing
somewhat to 6.7 percent in FY2008–09 and rebounding strongly to 8.4 percent in the two subsequent
years. Although growth in FY2011–12 slowed to a nine-year low of 6.5 percent, India remains one of the
fastest-growing economies in the world. Recent reforms of diesel pricing, foreign direct investment in the
retail sector, and public sector disinvestment plans have helped to improve the investment climate.
25.
Growth has been in double digits for some states—well above the all-India average. Under
the 11th Five-Year Plan, some of India’s low-income states grew at a record pace, with Bihar (one of the
poorest states) outperforming even the most advanced states. Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Uttar
Pradesh—all low-income and highly populous states—have also grown rapidly, with their gross state
domestic product growing significantly faster than India’s overall GDP.
26.
Recent Government policy reforms are intended to translate economic growth into palpable
improvements in living standards. The Government has promoted rights-based development policies
through the 2005 Right to Information Act, a 2005 right-to-work measure (part of the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act), and the 2009 Right to Education Act. The roll-out of the
Unique Identification Document will give a legal identity for all residents of India and improve the
delivery of social services. The Right to Public Service Act, which grants citizens recourse when the state
fails to deliver basic services in a timely fashion, has been enacted in several states, and similar legislation
is being prepared at the national level.
27.
More and more Indians participate in the democratic process. The 73rd Amendment Act of
1993 introduced wide-ranging reforms of panchayati raj institutions (local governing bodies) that play a
central role in India’s efforts at democratic decentralization and rural self-government. The measure
reserved seats in panchayati raj institutions for women and people from scheduled castes and tribes. More
recently, the Government empowered women politically by expanding to 50 percent the number of seats
for women in local governments and state assemblies. India’s civil society is vibrant and very active, with
aspirations to play a greater role in policy making and implementation. Each year the Right to
Information Act generates several million requests for information disclosure from ordinary citizens,

13

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

media, and research scholars; it has proved to be an effective instrument in fighting corruption and red
tape.
28.
The Government has pushed forward on the governance agenda, recently introducing a
series of reforms and programs. Corruption in India remains a concern, according to a draft national
anticorruption strategy released by the Central Vigilance Commission. 5 Since 2009, the Government has
rolled out a performance management system under which each ministry or department has to prepare and
disclose a results framework. The system has already been replicated in six states. The national egovernance program will improve the accessibility of government services for everyone and at affordable
costs. Corporate governance has been enhanced through the 2010 mandatory guidelines for central public
sector enterprises, and public financial management is being strengthened by the newly introduced
Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System—a real-time tracking system for plan expenditures, and by
initiating electronic transfer of funds for social protection programs. The Government has introduced a
national public procurement bill, and across India e-procurement is being rolled out aggressively.
Accountability institutions have become more assertive, as indicated by their active role in uncovering
instances of fraud and corruption. And the general public is increasingly vocal in demanding enhanced
accountability.
29.
India is an emerging global power and a prominent voice for development. India is an
important player in the global information-technology revolution, and is on the frontier of using IT for egovernment and for the delivery of services. It is home to globally recognized companies that have
become global industry leaders in pharmaceuticals, steel, and space technologies. India has become a
prominent voice in global forums, advocating for the establishment of a new “BRICS Bank,” as well as
increased capital to enable multilateral development banks to meet the infrastructure-financing needs of
the developing world. Recently, India has been one of the most vocal advocates for expanding the role of
multilateral institutions to help countries reach the MDGs, finance developing countries’ infrastructure
and the development of human resources, manage global financial crises, and ensure a balanced,
prosperous, and inclusive economy. With the ratification of the UN Convention on Anti-Corruption in
2011 and full membership in the OECD Financial Action Task Force on money laundering in 2010, India
is increasingly active in the global governance agenda.
30.
The world continues to learn from India’s remarkable development experience. India has
been an important source of learning and innovation for other countries (developing and industrialized
alike), for development practitioners and policymakers, and for multilateral institutions such as IDA.
Governments in developing countries have been keen to learn from India’s successful experience in
public policy, social and development programs, local governance for improved accountability and
services, and building an enabling framework for private sector–led growth. Rural livelihood projects, for
example, have been replicated in other parts of the world. There is growing demand to learn from India’s
thematically diverse and tested development practices, and India is emerging as one of the main providers
of development experience in exchange of South–South knowledge and investment capital. In the past
four years, India has shared its development experience in agriculture, education and skills development,
health care, information and communication technology, inclusive business models, and public-private
partnerships.

5

Central Vigilance Commission. Draft National Anti-Corruption Strategy (2010)

14

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

4. Vision: India in 2030
31.
Before the industrial revolution, India was one of world’s wealthiest countries, contributing
27 percent to global GDP. 6 On gaining independence after two centuries of colonization, however, India’s
economy was stagnant. During the ensuing 65 years it worked to escape from the low “Hindu rate of
growth,” to rebuild the foundation of a modern economy, and, in recent years, to become one of the
fastest-growing economies in the world.
32.
Today India is among the largest economic powers in the world. At market exchange rates, its
share of world GDP has increased by 50 percent in the past 30 years from 1.8 to 2.7 percent and is
expected to reach 11 percent by 2050. India is also a net contributor to global demand. India’s economic
growth over the past 30 years, at 6.2 percent, has been twice that of the world. Its ratio of exports to GDP
has tripled since 1990 to 21 percent, and its share of world imports has more than doubled over the past
decade. India is the fourth-largest destination for FDI among developing countries, with net FDI inflows
at 1.7 percent of GDP. Looking forward, the national vision for development is detailed in the 12th FiveYear Plan (FY2013–17) (box 4.1).

Box 4.1. Government vision: India’s 12th Five-Year Plan
Faster, sustainable, and more inclusive growth is the overarching objective of the Government’s development
strategy.
Faster growth. Topping the Government’s agenda is to remove domestic constraints to growth so as to spur
investment and reverse the recent downward trend. Under the 12th Plan, India aims to increase its GDP at an average
annual rate of 8.2 percent, while aspiring to return to its full growth potential of 9 percent per year by the end of the
Plan period. Annual growth rates of 4 percent in agriculture and 10 percent in manufacturing—both important
sources of employment and livelihood—are required to achieve the target. Productivity increases in the public and
private sector, in micro, small and medium enterprises, among farmers, and in large companies are expected to help
India realize its potential. Growth will also benefit from improvements in the business climate and in governance at
all levels, from a massive increase in infrastructure investment (power, telecommunications, roads, airports,
railways, ports), and from better use of technology for innovative solutions to the country’s most daunting
development challenges. All states are expected to contribute. It is envisioned that on average each state will grow at
a rate higher than that achieved under the 11th Plan. Urbanization is also central to India’s inclusive growth
objective, as it is an important source of economic efficiencies and employment. The urban development strategy
focuses on strengthening five “enablers of urbanization”: governance, planning, financing, capacity building, and
innovation.
Sustainable growth. Staying on a high growth trajectory will require more effective management of natural
resources, as rapid growth continues to put pressure on India’s water, land, and forests. Management of India’s
dwindling water resources is especially critical and requires measures to induce industry, farmers, and households to
use water more efficiently. Rational pricing, especially for commercial, industrial, and agricultural purposes, is
necessary, as are regulatory measures and their enforcement to limit water pollution. Effective land management and
acquisition is a major bottleneck for the development of industry and infrastructure. The Plan recognizes that
environmental sustainability is no longer a peripheral issue and must be mainstreamed and “addressed squarely.” A
land-management strategy will be developed to strengthen land acquisition and resettlement and rehabilitation
processes, rationalize land use in urban areas, and promote farmland titling and leasing. The Government is also
committed to reducing the intensity of greenhouse gas emissions by 20–25 percent by 2020 against a 2005 baseline,
and to adding 30,000 MW of renewable energy capacity.
Inclusive growth. Inclusiveness has many dimensions. It is as much about ensuring that growth benefits the very
poor and socially excluded groups (women, scheduled castes and tribes, and the disabled), as it is about morebalanced growth across the country to help low-income states catch up with their more advanced neighbors.
6

Angus Maddison, The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: OECD, 2004.

15

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

Inclusiveness also involves empowerment and participation. It means greater attention to inequality—both in
outcomes and opportunities—and ensuring access to good-quality education and healthcare. In education, the mean
years of schooling are targeted to increase to seven years, and higher education will be expanded and better aligned
to the skills needed in a fast-growing and fast-changing economy. Jobs are central to the inclusion story, and 50
million new work opportunities in the non-farm sector are envisioned under the 12th Plan. Efforts will be made to
eliminate gender and social gaps in school enrolment at all levels. On health, the infant mortality ratio is targeted to
decrease to 25 per 1,000 live births and the maternal mortality rate to 100 per 100,000 live births, while the ratio of
girls to boys is expected to rise 914 to 950. By the end of the Plan period, undernutrition of children up to three
years of age should decrease to 27 percent from the 2005–06 level of 40 percent.

33.
India has the potential to—once again—
while reducing poverty and vulnerability, by
increasing shared prosperity. The dependency
ratio will fall from 55 percent of the working-age
population in 2010 to 47 percent in 2030,
allowing for a higher output per capita even if
output per worker was to remain constant.
Savings rates are likely to rise as the relative
share of the working-age group expands,
allowing for faster capital accumulation. (Annex
B6, Figure B6.1) Even in the aftermath of the
global crisis, gross domestic capital formation
has been sturdy, never falling below 34 percent
of GDP. The average schooling of the population
aged 25 years and above is expected to increase
from 4.4 years in 2010 to 6.0 years in 2030.
Total factor productivity has grown by around
2.5 percent per year, and this rate could increase
as markets integrate further and workers shift
from low- to high-productivity jobs. While less
than 30 percent of the population lived in cities
in 2010, the ratio is expected to attain 40 percent
in 2030. Combining all these trends, an average
growth rate around 8.2 percent per year could in
principle be sustained over the next two decades.

become one of the largest economies in the world,
Figure 4.1. Poverty and prosperity in India in
2030
a. Base scenario
Non-vulnerable

b. Ambitious scenario

Poor

b. Ambitious scenario

Non-vulnerable

34.
The realization of this potential cannot
be taken for granted, however, as it will
critically depend on decisions to be made in
the coming years. Maintaining high rates of
growth will require continued efforts to remove
key structural constraints to growth and increase
public investment in infrastructure, education
and
health.
The
ongoing
structural
transformation of an economy from agriculture
to manufacturing, and from rural to urban
employment, has to be managed effectively;
product markets have to be further liberalized,
and flexible labor laws introduced. Ensuring that
growth benefits all Indians will require

Poor

16

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

strengthening the implementation of economic and social programs to better target the very poor and
excluded, pro-poor policies across a range of issues, and accelerated job creation. Finding an approach
that combines recent rapid growth and inclusiveness of Rajasthan and Karnataka may hold the key to
faster poverty reduction and increased prosperity.
What would it take for India to accelerate poverty reduction, decrease vulnerability, and increase
shared prosperity by 2030?
35.
In the base scenario7, India would continue on its trajectory of 2005 to 2010, during which it has
been one of the most rapidly growing economies in the world. Its economy would grow at 8.2 percent per
year, and by 2030 income per capita would reach $5,283 (at 2010 prices), more than triple the 2010 level
of $1,375. The impact on poverty of such a rate of growth would be significant: just one percentage point
increase in growth per capita would result in a 0.6 percentage-point decrease in poverty, and a 0.4
percentage-point increase in the share of the population not vulnerable to falling into poverty.
Approximately 12 percent of the population would live under the official poverty line, compared with 30
percent in 2009–10, and the percentage of people who were neither poor nor vulnerable would increase
from 19.1 percent to 33.6 percent (figure 4.1).
What would it take for India to “bend the curve”—to decrease poverty and increase shared
prosperity at a rate significantly above current averages?
36.
In the ambitious scenario, India would continue to grow rapidly at 8.2 percent per year. The
ambitious scenario would also aim to reduce poverty and vulnerability at a rate close to that of Rajasthan
and Karnataka between 2005 and 2010. Growth elasticity of reducing poverty would double to 1.2
percent, and elasticity of escaping vulnerability would rise to 0.6 percent. The India of 2030, therefore,
would have 5.5 percent of its people living in poverty and a significant increase in the share of the
population (41.3 percent) no longer vulnerable to falling into poverty.
37.
The implications for the rest of the world would be significant. India is central to global prospects
for “bending the arc of history” and rapidly reducing poverty and increasing shared prosperity. The global
benchmarking exercise estimates that poverty in India has fallen by 7.2 million people per year 8, placing
India in the 63rd percentile of the distribution of poverty reduction across countries. If India were to move
to the 70th percentile, poverty would decline by 9.2 million people per year. Under the base scenario, this
would mean that 191 million people would be lifted out of poverty and 277 million people would escape
vulnerability. Under the ambitious scenario, the corresponding figures would be 304 and 394 million,
raising to prosperity the equivalent of the combined population of France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and
United Kingdom today.

5. Challenges
38.
Achieving this vision of India in 2030 will require addressing a wide range of development
challenges. For India to realize its growth potential of $5,283 per capita GDP by 2030, it will be
7

The base and ambitious scenarios developed for the India CPS provide a numerical illustration to a long-term vision for India.
The objective of these scenarios is to provide some back-of-the-envelope estimates of the likely impact of the continuation of
India's recent performance on growth and poverty reduction through 2030. Because the scenarios seek to extend the historical
performance into the future, they are not driven by any explicit assumptions about the rest of the world, the types of policies
pursued by the authorities, or the specific pattern of growth. However, given that India's recent success in achieving high growth
and rapid poverty reduction demonstrated a clear break from history, the scenarios implicitly assume that the external and
internal enabling environment which was conducive to these developments in 2005-10 will continue to be equally stimulating in
the future.
8
World Bank staff calculations.

17

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

necessary to address even more forcefully than in the past key structural constraints such as inadequate
and poorly maintained infrastructure (especially transport and energy), an underperforming
manufacturing sector, below-target growth in agricultural productivity, and inefficient land use and
natural resource management. 9 With its declining dependency ratio and 8 million people entering the
workforce annually, India stands to benefit exponentially from a demographic dividend. To collect that
dividend, however, significant obstacles will have to be overcome. India’s rate of job creation is low. Half
of the population derives its income from agriculture and only 16 percent from wage employment. The
government estimates that 93 percent of Indian workers are informally employed, with limited or no job
security and no benefits. Female labor participation has decreased and, at 24 percent, remains low
compared with other emerging economies. To exploit its demographic advantages and attain the
ambitious vision of India 2030, three broad categories of challenges will have to be addressed: (i)
strengthening India’s platform for growth; (ii) managing the spatial transformation; and, (iii) realizing
human potential. A sluggish global economy and the domestic economic slowdown may hinder India’s
efforts to address some of these issues, but only in the short- and medium- term (box 5.1).

5.1. Platform for growth
39.
Creating a stronger platform for faster, socially and regionally inclusive, and sustained growth
will require India to tackle a range of constraints.
40.
India’s infrastructure gap remains massive and is one of the most significant impediments
to growth and poverty reduction. Although India’s transport network is one of the most extensive in the
world, accessibility and connectivity are limited. Only 20 percent of the national highway network (which
carries 40 percent of traffic) is four-lane, and one-third of the rural population lacks access to an allweather road. It is estimated that the transport sector alone will require an investment of nearly $500
billion (3.6 percent of GDP) over the next 10 years. 10 Ports and airports have inadequate capacity and
often poor transport connectivity. Trains move very slowly owing to poor maintenance, and the entire
railway system is grappling with issues of financial sustainability. Poor transport safety, especially road
safety (133,000 road fatalities recorded in 2010), is a growing concern in a country that is adding new
drivers at a record pace.
41.
Despite significant achievements in the energy sector, key challenges remain. Over the past
decade, India has nearly doubled installed generation capacity, become a global leader in renewable
energy, improved its transmission network, developed electricity exchanges, and enacted major energyrelated legislation. Despite these achievements, an estimated 300 million people do not have access to
electricity, while those who are connected to the grid must cope with unreliable supply. Sixty percent of
firms resort to costly backup power generation. The sector continues to be hobbled by a range of
problems—among them energy demand that far outstrips supply, below market pricing of electricity,
constraints in coal and gas supply that force generation stations to operate below capacity, and high rates
of loss (technical, commercial, and financial) in distribution. The continued unreliability and poor quality
of electricity supplied to firms and households sap investment and growth and reduce India’s
competitiveness.

9

$93 billion worth of investments was shelved during 2011–12, mainly due to difficulties in obtaining land (CMIE CapEx
database).
10
The National Transport Development Policy Committee.

18

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

Box 5.1. India’s economic outlook
Real GDP growth is likely to slow further in FY2012–13 to under 6 percent, significantly below the 9–10 percent
growth rates recorded just before the financial crisis. Given the continued weakness in high income economies,
India’s growth will increasingly have to come from domestic sources, which will require resolving key supply-side
bottlenecks—among them banks’ high exposure to delayed power projects, financially struggling utilities, delayed
mining projects, and the cancellation of telecom licenses. With a gradual improvement in the global economy and
progress on the domestic reform agenda, growth is expected to recover to close to 7.1 percent by FY2014–15.
Key Economic Indicators
2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17
Projections
Real Income and Prices (% change)
Real GDP (at factor cost)
Agriculture
Industry
Wholesale Price Index
Consumption and Investment (% of GDP)
Consumption
Public
Private
Investment
Public
Private
External Sector
Current Account Balance (% of GDP)
Foreign Exchange Reserves (US billion) 1/
General Government Finances (% of GDP)
Revenue 2/
Expenditure
Deficit 3/
Total Debt

9.6
4.2
12.2
6.6

9.3
5.8
9.7
4.7

6.7
0.1
4.4
8.1

8.6
0.8
9.2
3.8

9.3
7.9
9.2
9.6

6.2
3.6
3.5
8.9

5.4
1.0
3.0
7.4

6.4
2.0
5.2
7.0

7.1
2.0
7.0
6.5

7.3
2.0
7.5
6.0

7.5
2.0
8.0
5.5

72.6
10.3
62.3
31.3
7.9
23.4

72.4
10.3
62.1
32.9
8.0
24.9

71.8
10.9
60.9
32.3
8.5
23.8

73.7
11.9
61.8
31.7
8.4
23.3

72.5
11.4
61.0
31.7
7.8
24.0

72.8
11.6
61.2
30.6
7.4
23.2

75.3
13.8
61.5
32.0
7.4
24.6

73.1
13.0
60.1
33.1
8.4
24.7

72.2
12.8
59.4
33.3
8.5
24.8

72.9
12.8
60.0
32.1
8.5
23.6

72.9
13.0
59.9
31.2
8.5
22.6

-1.0
191.9

-1.3
299.2

-2.3
241.4

-2.8
254.7

-2.7
274.3

-4.2
260.1

-4.5
238.5

-4.0
255.9

-3.6
308.4

-3.2
340.5

-2.9
381.9

20.0
25.4
5.4
77.2

21.0
26.0
5.0
74.1

19.4
27.8
8.4
74.6

18.2
28.0
9.8
72.5

18.6
27.7
9.1
67.7

18.4
26.6
8.2
65.9

18.1
26.3
8.2
66.7

18.5
26.1
7.6
66.2

18.5
25.7
7.2
65.3

19.0
26.0
7.0
64.4

19.5
26.0
6.5
63.3

Notes: 1/ Excluding gold, SDR and IM F reserve position.
2/ Exlcudes receipts from 3G spectrum auctions
3/ General government deficit, including center and states
Sources : Central Statistical Organization, Reserve Bank of India, and World Bank Staff Estimates.

Although depreciation of the rupee and pressure from food and fuel prices could add to the inflation momentum in
the near term, inflation and the current account deficit are likely to moderate over the medium term. Owing to softer
import demand and improving export performance, the current account deficit is expected to decline to 3.6 percent
of GDP by FY2014–15.
Although the total subsidy bill exceeded the budgeted amount despite recent reductions in fuel subsidies, the
authorities were able to limit the central government deficit to 5.2 percent of GDP in FY2012-13, better than the
(revised) target of 5.3 percent. While the pace of fiscal consolidation remains behind the adjustment path
recommended by the 13th Finance Commission, the authorities are committed to bringing the deficit down further to
4.8 percent of GDP in FY2013-14 and 3.0 percent by FY2016-17. However, as deficits remain elevated, debt
sustainability could come under pressure. The debt-to-GDP ratio fell from nearly 80 percent in FY2002–03 to 66
percent in FY2011–12 owing to high nominal GDP growth, fiscal consolidation, and declining real interest rates on
government debt. Maintaining that ratio in an environment of slower growth and a possible uptick in real interest
rates will require sustained reductions in fiscal deficits.
India’s long-term prospects remain bright owing to favorable demographics, rising average educational attainments,
and high savings rates. However, near- and medium-term downside risks are high. During the global financial crisis,
higher public spending set in at exactly the right time, largely because of the implementation of recommendations of
the 6th Pay Commission, and the Reserve Bank of India was able to lower policy rates significantly when inflation
fell in line with international commodity prices. Should India face another global shock in the near future, room for
a similar policy response would be much more limited. Continued progress on the domestic reform agenda is critical
to supporting domestic drivers of growth and returning the economy to a high growth trajectory.

19

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

42.
Manufacturing remains underdeveloped and has grown more slowly than expected.
Accounting for just 15 percent of GDP, India’s manufacturing sector is small compared with that of the
other BRICS. China’s manufacturing, for example, accounts for 34 percent of that nation’s GDP. Under
the 11th Plan, annual manufacturing growth was only 7.7 percent, far below the target of 11 percent.
Inadequate infrastructure, which disproportionately penalizes small- and medium-scale enterprises, is one
of the main constraints to growth in the sector. The size distribution of firms in India is characterized by a
missing middle that, in most developing countries, accounts for a significant share of wage employment.
Whereas large firms can internalize the costs of dedicated infrastructure (e.g., captive power or water
treatment plants, or even rolling stock), small and medium-size firms have no access to the financing that
would make it possible to develop their own dedicated infrastructure and, in any case, the scale of their
operations does not make it economically feasible. Outdated labor laws, inadequate access to land, and a
dearth of skilled workers all have contributed to slow manufacturing growth. Those manufacturing
entities that are trapped in the informal sector have difficulty raising finance and are constrained in their
productivity. The plethora of necessary forms, licenses, inspections, and clearances especially hinders the
growth of small and medium-size enterprises—which, if unleashed, could be a key driver of India’s
economic growth and an important source of jobs.
43.
Improving and maintaining a healthy investment climate is crucial for India’s development.
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, India’s gross domestic savings rate declined significantly to
around 32 percent of GDP, constraining much-needed investment to address the infrastructure gap,
alleviate capacity constraints, and raise potential output. The reduced availability of domestic financing
sources, combined with the need to maintain high investment rates to support and accelerate economic
growth, highlights the importance of a healthy investment climate that creates opportunities for domestic
and foreign investors. Policies that distort key markets (e.g., agriculture, land, food retail, fuel, and so on)
have a significant impact on India’s investment climate. Net inflows, after peaking at 1.8 percent of GDP
in FY2008–09, have averaged about 1.0 percent of GDP since then and have further weakened by 22
percent (year-on-year) because of global uncertainties. Recent reforms to promote FDI (e.g., a relaxation
of limits on foreign ownership in airlines and media, clarification of rules for FDI in single-brand retail,
and allowing FDI in multi-brand retail in September 2012) are likely to raise investor appetites and could
lead to a strengthening of FDI inflows.
44.
India is a diverse country, with poorly integrated markets. To benefit from economies of
scale, sharpen India’s international competitiveness, and improve economic growth and income levels,
there is a need for better integration of markets in goods and services, labor, and finance. At present, the
efficient functioning of India’s domestic markets is impeded by physical and policy barriers. Poor
infrastructure—a limited national highway system, insufficient air and water transport—translates into
higher transport costs. A cumbersome and multilayered system of taxation across states further impedes
the flow of goods, as do state-specific restrictions on agriculture trade. A new goods and services tax,
proposed in 2010 but not yet approved, is a major Government effort to streamline the unwieldy tax
system. Experience among states in the United States and among countries in the European Union—the
ultimate “income convergence machine”—shows the strong link between economic integration among
confederated states and income convergence. 11 The more integrated the country, the more balanced the
growth.
45.
Faster economic growth has accelerated the degradation of the environment and the
depletion of scarce natural resources that are essential for sustaining growth and eliminating
11

Robert Barro and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (“Convergence,” Journal of Political Economy, 100:2, April 1992) find strong
convergence among states in the United States, while a 2012 World Bank study finds that economic integration has led to
convergence among countries in the European Union (see Golden Growth: Restoring the Luster of the European Growth Model,
Washington DC, World Bank, 2012).

20

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

poverty. India’s long-term growth is predicated on its ability to address environmental problems such as
soil erosion, water and air pollution, growing water scarcity, and the declining quality of forests. In
Northern India the aquifer is receding by an alarming 4 cm annually. The challenge is further exacerbated
by environmental stresses resulting from urbanization processes that are often chaotic, and from
development of the private sector. The cost of environmental degradation in India was estimated in 2009
to be 6.6 percent of GDP. 12
46.
India and its neighbors have not fully realized their potential for growth derivable from
further regional and global integration. Although some progress has been made, South Asia remains
one of the least integrated regions in the world with regard to policy, trade, and infrastructure. This lack
of integration directly affects India’s economic development and hampers management of shared natural
resources, such as cross-boundary river basins. It aggravates the isolation of the underdeveloped
northeastern states from trade and transit routes and limits access to necessary energy resources, such as
oil and power. Estimates show that intraregional trade would increase from the current $5 billion to $20
billion if restrictions on trading with neighbors were removed. India could also do more to tap into global
markets and better explore the potential for increased trade with East Asia and Africa.

5.2. Spatial transformation
47.
India is undergoing a massive rural-urban transformation—one of the largest of the 21st
century. For the first time since Independence, India has seen a greater absolute growth in urban
population. The number of towns increased from about 5,000 in 2001 to 8,000 in 2011, and some 53
cities now have a population exceeding 1 million. Today, 31.1 percent of the population lives in cities,
and the share is expected to rise to 50 percent in the next 20 years. Accelerating urbanization is central to
India’s growth, development, and poverty reduction (figure 5.1), but it cannot be done without an equally
pronounced focus on rural development. Rural areas are often poorly connected to cities, resulting in
weak value chains for agricultural products and slow rates of off-farm job creation. While agriculture
remains the main source of livelihoods for half the population, annual agricultural growth has been below
government targets.

12

World Bank estimates, 2009.

21

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

48.
Accommodating the needs of an
additional 10 million urban dwellers each year
will be a strategic policy issue for many years to Figure 5.1. Correlates of fast economic growth: the
come. Providing them with adequate services such rate of urbanization
as water, sewerage, drainage, and transportation,
and creating opportunities for further economic
development will be a challenge. The needs are
particularly dire in India’s growing slums. (The
population of slum dwellers swelled from 75
million in 2001 to 93 million in 2011,13 accounting
for a quarter of the urban population.)
Investments—both public and private—have not
kept up with demand. Weak urban planning,
ineffective
regulations
governing
land
management and use, and distorted land markets
hinder the development of vibrant, livable cities.
Urban governance is a major issue across all states
and cities. Local urban bodies are weak and
financially unsustainable, with limited capacity to
raise their own financial resources. Urban service
delivery institutions have limited autonomy,
accountability, and incentives or client orientation. Furthermore, the responsibility for financial
management and delivery of basic services is fragmented across a range of agencies that often are not
held accountable and have few incentives to perform on a sustainable basis. The linkages between
institutions at different levels of government—center, state, and local—are weak, resulting in duplication
and sometimes an inefficient division of labor. For example, investment decisions and implementation of
urban infrastructure projects are frequently made at the state level, while the liabilities (including debt
incurred) and responsibility for operations and maintenance are left to the local bodies.
49.
The rapid expansion of cities beyond current municipal boundaries is a particular concern.
The peri-urban areas of the larger Indian cities have grown at a faster pace than cities themselves—both
in terms of population and manufacturing. In addition to the challenges faced by most urbanizing areas,
the largely unplanned development of city outskirts involves changes in land use from agricultural to
residential and industrial/commercial, changes in the use of natural resources (deforestation, water
depletion and pollution), and land degradation. Urban sprawl has also had a negative impact on abutting
agricultural land and livelihoods. Prospects for a more systematic development of these areas are limited,
as many lie beyond urban administrative authority. Second-tier cities face a serious lack of basic
municipal infrastructure, such as adequate safe drinking water, drainage and sewerage, and paved roads.14

13

Committee on Slum Statistics, Planning Commission (2011).
Small and medium-size cities are home to 80 percent of India’s poor, and access to services tends to be far more limited than
that in India’s large cities. Perspectives on Poverty in India: Stylized facts from Survey Data, World Bank (2010).
14

22

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

50.
India’s spatial transformation is
likely to result in larger disparities in Figure 5.2. Correlates of shared prosperity: off-farm
welfare levels—between the rich and the employment in rural areas
poor, and between rural and urban
areas. Consumption inequality is on the
rise, with widening disparities between
urban and rural areas. Disparities in human
development indicators, especially as they
relate to socially excluded groups are also
pronounced.
While
urbanization
is
inevitable, the persistence of these gaps and
inequalities is not. The challenge for India
will be to develop policies and programs to
ensure that a large part of the population—
especially the most vulnerable—is not left
behind. India’s spatial transformation also
requires the effective development of the
rural economy through the expansion of
farm and non-farm employment and income
opportunities (figure 5.2). Despite the
injection of huge resources, mainly through centrally sponsored flagship schemes, such as the Mahatma
Gandhi National Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) and the National Rural Livelihoods Mission,
rural incomes have not grown apace with urban incomes, and job creation in the nonagricultural has been
slow.
51.
India is highly vulnerable to climate change because of high levels of poverty, high
population density, heavy reliance on natural resources, and an environment already under stress.
Under a moderate climate-change scenario (an increase in mean annual temperatures of 1.1 to 2.3º
Celsius), the risk of increased frequency and severity of natural hazards is likely to increase, and densely
populated cities will be at extreme risk. Kolkata is among the six fastest-growing cities worldwide that are
classified to be at extreme risk, whereas Mumbai, Delhi, and Chennai are among the ten that are classified
as high risk. Overall, India is ranked the second most vulnerable country in the world.15 Institutions and
mechanisms for enhanced disaster risk management and climate resilience, especially in agriculture and
water-intensive sectors, are either weak or nonexistent.
52.
While India has a relatively low-carbon economy today, greenhouse gas emissions are
projected to grow over the next decade. India’s GHG emissions proportional to GDP are on par with
the global average, and its per capita emissions are among the lowest in the world. However, due to the
size of its economy, India is the third-largest emitter in the world, and its GHG emissions are projected to
grow. Energy is key to India’s climate-change challenge, as well as its ambition to sustain high growth.
The demand for energy, however, far outstrips the domestic supply in a country with a poor natural
resource endowment and foreign sources are costly. To keep emissions from increasing at a fast rate,
India will have to maximize the use of clean energy and improve energy efficiency, taking into account
higher relative costs. Although densely populated areas are often associated with congestion, pollution,
and a high level of emissions, with potentially significant adverse impact on public health, greater
concentration of people and economic activity in and around India’s large cities can also have a positive
impact on the environment and climate change because cities are an important source of efficiencies. If
managed systematically and with long-term planning in place, cities can help hold down India’s
emissions and improve air quality.
15

Maplecroft’s Climate Change Risk Atlas, 2011. Available on www.maplecroft.com

23

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

53.
Agriculture has grown below Government targets. India remains predominantly rural, and
about half of its population derives its income from agriculture or related activities. Government steppedup efforts to develop agriculture are slowly yielding results; between 2000-01 and 2010-11 agriculture
grew at an average rate of 3.1 per annum. The target for the last two five-year plans was 4.0 percent.
Stressed natural resources, poor rural infrastructure, inadequate technology, limited access to credit,
underdeveloped extension and marketing services, and insufficient agricultural planning at the local level
contribute to the lackluster performance. Ongoing global food security concerns, pronounced food-price
volatility, and concerns about climate change all highlight the urgency of boosting India’s agriculture
productivity.

5.3. Human potential
54.
As a country with a population of 1.2 billion people (projected to increase to 1.5 billion by
2030), India has tremendous human potential—a source of immense creativity and innovation. To take
full advantage of its demographic dividend and to unlock the human potential of all its people, India
needs to overcome daunting challenges across a range of sectors, including health and nutrition,
education, social protection, and skills development. Poor access to water and sanitation puts a huge
burden on people (particularly women and children), who spend a good portion of each day securing
sufficient water for the household.
55.
Although India’s health indicators have continued to improve, progress has not matched
the country’s economic growth over the past decade. Despite increasing rates of decline, maternal and
child mortality rates remain on par with rates in much poorer countries, and malnutrition is among the
highest in the world. India faces an unfinished agenda of tackling childhood and infectious diseases and
malnutrition, as well as an emerging and rising burden of non-communicable and chronic diseases (India
and China vie for the largest number of diabetics in the world). Progress on tackling communicable
diseases such as AIDS, tuberculosis, and polio has been significant, but continued attention is needed to
secure the gains. Poor people are highly vulnerable to health shocks, with medical expenses contributing
to household poverty and compromising efforts to improve health outcomes.

56.

Despite the central government’s increased focus on and financial commitment to health
issues, a major challenge is to implement the funding effectively. Although public financing for health
is expected to double under the 12th Plan, increased public funding is not enough; it must be accompanied
by improved effectiveness of spending at all levels, greater access to quality health care, and more
effective delivery of health services. The many systemic constraints include weak accountability
arrangements and incentives for performance, weak quality assurance, a largely unregulated private health
care sector, limited mechanisms for financial protection, and weak information and surveillance systems,
combined with inadequate use of evidence-based planning, programming, and management. Out-ofpocket health expenses are high (on average accounting for 70 percent of total health spending) and affect
poor households disproportionately. New government-sponsored health-insurance schemes, especially
those aiming to reach people living below the poverty line, may make a difference.

57.
Improving the nutritional status of India’s children is particularly important. Child
malnutrition remains high, and widespread. India accounts for 40 percent (217 million) of the world’s
malnourished children. The variation across states is particularly striking: The percentage of
malnourished children under five years of age varies from 23 percent in the more advanced state of
Kerala to 60 percent in the low-income state of Madhya Pradesh. Despite India’s impressive economic
growth in the past decade, malnutrition has declined very little. Stunting rates in India are two to seven
times higher than those in other BRICS countries. While nutrition has recently received increased
attention with the restructuring of the Integrated Child Development Services scheme, there remain very

24

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

significant programmatic, institutional, technical, implementation, and capacity constraints. An effective
multisectoral response is critically important and has to go beyond the health sector to include agriculture,
education, industry, water, and sanitation.
58.
Access to adequate water and sanitation is critical to improving the quality of life and
economic potential of all Indians. Although the government at the national and state level spends $4
billion annually on improving access to rural water supply and sanitation, only one-third of rural
households have access to piped water and sanitation. 16 The economic impact of inadequate sanitation in
India is estimated at $54 billion or 6.4 percent of GDP in 2006. Most of that cost is attributed to
premature mortality and health-related costs. The opportunity cost for women and children who spend an
inordinate amount of time securing water for their household each day is huge and takes away from time
that could be spent on more productive economic activities or study.
59.
India’s efforts to improve access, equity, and quality of education at the primary,
secondary, and tertiary levels remains a work in progress. Now that access to primary education has
been largely universalized, the challenge ahead is to improve quality, learning outcomes, retention, and
access to education by underprivileged children, often in very remote areas. As the success of elementary
education has resulted in demand for education beyond elementary level, there is increasing focus on
improving access to secondary education. Of those children who finish primary education, 83 percent
transition to the next level. Enrolment rates for grades 9–12 are just 40 percent and of those enrolled,
approximately 15 percent drop out and one-third fail their examinations. While inequities are declining in
terms of access and participation at all levels of education for all socioeconomic and ethnic groups,
manifold inequities persist in the type of education facilities and exposure to and availability of modern
techniques of education. Girls make up 45.6 percent of secondary students.
60.
Jobs are an important component of poverty reduction and a cornerstone of development.
Over the last two decades, 8 million people annually entered the labor force in India. Job creation, which
has remained relatively flat over a long period, will continue to be a tremendous development challenge
as India grapples with how best to provide opportunities to its burgeoning young workforce. At present
only 16 percent of the workforce derives its income from regular wage employment, and more than half
are engaged in agriculture. The female labor force, decreased from an already small 34 to 29 percent of
the total labor force between 2000 and 2010. The drop was particularly pronounced among women with
higher levels of education.
61.
India’s continued economic growth demands more skilled workers across many sectors,
higher rates of employment, and higher wages. The country now faces a massive shortage of skilled
labor, which stymies productivity. Less than 10 percent of the working population has completed
secondary education or above, and too many secondary graduates have skills and knowledge that are
poorly matched with the needs of the labor market. The extent and quality of higher-education
opportunities need to be scaled up urgently to sustain high growth of the economy and make it inclusive.
Empowering youth, especially in rural areas, with skills that are better matched with the demands of the
labor market—informal or formal—will also help facilitate migration to city centers where wage jobs are
more readily available.

16

Indian National Census 2011.

25

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

6. World Bank Group India Country Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17)
62.
The World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17) will support the
Government’s development goal of growth that is faster, more socially and regionally inclusive, and
more sustainable as detailed in the 12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013–17). The strategy helps India lay the
foundation for a longer-term vision of India in 2030—a vision of the nation as a global economic
powerhouse where no more than 5.5 percent of the population lives in poverty and 41.3 percent of the
population are no longer vulnerable to falling into poverty. It sets out a program of engagement—and
makes key strategic shifts—that are designed to contribute to India’s transformation into the India of
2030. The strategy builds on India’s recent achievements, but also incorporates lessons learned from
WBG’s longstanding engagement in the country, to develop transformational and innovative solutions to
tackle India’s most pressing development challenges, especially in the poorest, least developed, and most
isolated states. It takes into account lessons learned under the previous CAS (FY2009–12) (Annex 2), and
is informed by findings from multistakeholder consultations, as well as a client-perception survey (Annex
9). And finally, the strategy is aligned with the WBG regional strategy for South Asia.
63.
The strategy’s overarching goal of rapid poverty reduction and increased shared prosperity
will be achieved by focusing on three broad engagement areas: (i) integration; (ii) transformation;
and (iii) inclusion (figure 6.1). A focus on improved governance, environmental sustainability, and
gender equality runs across all three engagement areas. On governance, many of the actions required to
foster economic integration concern public investments and government regulation. Institutional
development plays a key role in the case of spatial transformation, whereas strengthened accountability is
critical for social inclusion. More specifically, the World Bank will work with counterparts at the national
and state levels to scale up support in performance-based public management, e-governance, public
procurement and financial management, M&E, implementation of the right to service law, strengthening
India’s anti-corruption framework, and supporting social accountability mechanisms. On environmental
sustainability, economic integration has important implications for natural resource management, whereas
the priority in relation to spatial transformation is to minimize congestion, improve resource use
efficiency, and reduce pollution impacts, including greenhouse gas emissions. Efforts to improve disaster
risk management help households cope with natural disasters, reducing their chance of falling back or
deeper into poverty. Finally, economic integration and spatial transformation should lead to greater paid
employment opportunities for women, whereas social inclusion can be promoted by enhancing voice and
tackling discrimination
64.
A range of high-level intermediate development objectives provide both the rationale for the
content of the World Bank Group program as well as a clear line-of-site to higher order country
goals. Analytical work underpinning this CPS shows a strong correlation between select development
outcomes: human development (infant mortality), gender equity (female job participation), jobs (off-farm
employment), urban development, policies (business climate) and transfers (public spending) and the
three overarching goals. The rate of urbanization (as measured by population growth of secondary cities)
is correlated with economic growth, while creation of jobs (more specifically off-farm employment) is
correlated with increased shared prosperity. Both these aspects are addressed through activities under the
rural-urban transformation engagement area. Similarly, human development (education, health, nutrition
and especially, infant mortality) is strongly linked to rapid poverty reduction. Support under the third
engagement area of inclusion will aim to help the Government of India ensure inclusive growth by
improving human development outcomes as well as gender parity.

26

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

Figure 6.1. India CPS results chain: engagement areas and outcomes
Overarching goals:

Engagement area: 1

Integration

Engagement area: 2

Transformation

Engagement area: 3

Inclusion

• Increased population of
secondary cities
• Increased off-farm employment

• Improved access to services to
excluded segment of population
• Increase female labor force
participation
• Decreased infant mortality

Outcomes:
 Improved transport
connectivity
 Improved inter-regional
power transmission
 Improved market-driven
skills for productive
employment
 Strengthened regional
integration
 Enhanced private
investment in low-income
states

Outcomes:
 Strengthened institutional
capacity of urban
government
 Improved urban transport
services
 Improved access water
supply and sanitation
services
 Increased agricultural
productivity
 Improved environment
protection and biodiversity
conservation
 Reduced Greenhouse Gas
emissions through energy
efficiency and renewable
energy production

Outcomes:
 Improved access to
electricity
 Strengthened public &
private health-delivery
systems
 Improved child nutrition
delivery systems
 Improved access & quality of
education
 Increased coverage of social
protection programs
 Enhanced rural livelihood
opportunities
 Increased access to financial
services
 Enhanced disaster risk
management system

CPS Outcomes

• Increased GSDP growth in lowincome& special category
states
• Increased trade and
investments in the region

Country Long-Term Objectives*

Economic growth
Poverty reduction
Shared prosperity

*Analytical work completed as part of the CPS indicates strong correlation between these country long-term objectives and
economic integration, spatial transformation and social inclusion (see paragraph 64).

27

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

6.1. Strategic engagement area 1: Integration
65.
Enhanced efforts to increase India’s market integration can significantly boost India’s
economic growth. Better integration would result in more-balanced growth among Indian states, helping
low-income states converge more quickly with their faster-growing neighbors. To benefit from economies
of scale and increase competitiveness, there is a need to remove physical and policy barriers across states
(notably the multilayered system of taxation) that impede markets from functioning efficiently. India’s
massive infrastructure gap must be bridged so that people can get to jobs and goods to markets. Reforms
in the power sector are also needed to rationalize energy pricing and improve the capacity and reliability
of the generation, transmission, and distribution system. Efficient intermediation to channel household
savings into infrastructure finance is critical to achieving investment targets in infrastructure. Mobilizing
financing for public-private partnerships (PPPs) through innovative structures and appropriate
government support is needed to attract investors. The development of a vibrant manufacturing sector—
especially small and medium-size enterprises—will require reforming labor laws, improving land access
and management, cutting bureaucratic red tape, and better access to financing. As jobs are created, India’s
youth will need skills and knowledge that are better tailored to the needs of a fast-growing economy.
66.
As the largest and most-populous country in the region, India is central to many efforts
toward regional economic integration and cooperation. Despite steady and unprecedented progress,
South Asia remains one of the least economically integrated regions in the world. Further integration with
neighbors in South Asia and beyond can contribute exponentially to India realizing its 2030 growth
potential, while also greatly benefiting other countries in the region. 17 Possible areas for increased
regional collaboration include management of common natural resources (most importantly water),
transport, and power. Supporting the Government to help states converge and grow more evenly through
improved market integration is one of the main development objectives of the WBG strategy for India.
67.
Infrastructure remains a priority for the Government. The 12th Plan’s strategy is to develop a
more balanced multimodal transport network that links the northeast and special-category states to the rest
of the country. Where possible, public-private partnerships (PPPs) will be pursued to develop national
highways and rural roads. The capacity of India’s railways, especially for freight, will be expanded in an
effort to accommodate increasing demand and to promote the use of rail for freight transport, thereby
reducing India’s carbon footprint. The Government will strive to improve asset management and increase
efficiency by encouraging competition in the provision and maintenance of infrastructure and services.
Higher emphasis will be placed on safety (including making transport safer for women), energy
efficiency, environmental conservation, and social impacts. By the end of the 12th Plan, all villages will be
connected to an all-weather road, most national and state highways will be upgraded to a two-lane
standard or better, and the flagship projects—the eastern and western freight corridors—will have been
completed. On energy, the Government’s priority is to ensure energy availability, promote energy
efficiency, and significantly expand and strengthen the transmission network for electricity and oil and
gas. The Plan envisions increasing energy capacity by an additional 88,000 MW. To do this, sources of
energy will have to be expanded, notably through the exploration of renewable energy (wind and solar)
and the implementation of critical corrective policies to improve the financial sustainability and efficiency
of the system, promoting increased investment in domestic hydrocarbon production and the
implementation of critical corrective policies to improve the financial sustainability and efficiency of the
system.
68.
The Government’s regional economic integration goal is focused on seizing opportunities
for increased trade and investment in South Asia, but also in emerging East Asian economies. The
17

A World Bank study shows that both India and Bangladesh would gain from improve access. World Bank. 2012. Unlocking
Bangladesh-India Trade: Emerging Potential and the Way Forward

28

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

potential for India to reap returns of increased regional trade is great, as shown by recent export growth.
India’s exports to its South Asian neighbors increased from $4.6 billion in FY2005 to $11.7 billion in
FY2011. Progress has been incremental. For example, in 1996 India granted MFN status to Pakistan,
which was reciprocated in 2011, but still awaiting formalization and a September 2012 India-Pakistan
agreement to reduce tariffs to no more than 5 percent and to remove all nontariff barriers by 2020. In the
global arena, the Government aims to engage more proactively with the global community at the bilateral,
regional, and multilateral levels. The Plan notes that energy security and the need to develop long-term
and stable energy sources are key considerations of India’s engagement with the rest of the world.
Outcome 1.1 Improved transport connectivity
69.
The WBG’s support for the transport sector will focus on the reform and development of
railways, highways, and rural roads, and on improving road safety and ensuring asset sustainability.
Engagement will be informed by lessons learned from the Bank’s support of ongoing transformative
projects and in state-level interventions in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Punjab and Tamil Nadu. The
Bank’s contribution to rural connectivity will come mainly through its support for the Government’s
flagship roads program, the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), 18 which now focuses on six
low-income and special category states, as well as Punjab. Support is likely to evolve into a more broadbased engagement that aims to strengthen the overall rural road system for the expansion of all-season
rural roads. Strengthening institutions, enhancing accountability, and building capacities among the
various state and national highways agencies will be a strategic priority of the Bank. This will be
accomplished through ongoing state highway improvement projects and technical assistance to national
highway agencies. The WBG will also look for opportunities to support projects that focus on the
integration of low-income states, as well as those supporting shifts to more efficient modes of transport,
including ports.
Outcome 1.2 Improved inter-regional power transmission connectivity
70.
The WBG will support the Government in promoting financially sustainable access to
electricity by addressing bottlenecks in generation, transmission, and distribution at both the state
and national levels. It will support Government and private sector efforts to (i) increase access to modern
energy, particularly in low-income states; (ii) increase the availability of power to underpin growth while
balancing sustainability and climate change concerns; and (iii) strengthening institutions and financial
sustainability in the sector. Three ongoing projects (Rampur Hydropower, Haryana Power, and
Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydroelectric) support the provision of sustainable energy by strengthening
transmission and investing in clean energy. Through its proposed transmission investments in the lowincome states of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and through the Northeast Power Transmission Project, the
Bank will help improve overall electricity services in states and regions with the lowest access levels in
the country and significantly increase the power exchange between states and regions of the country.
Technical support for rural feeder segregation will inform Government efforts to design a centrally
sponsored scheme on improved rural power services. The WBG’s knowledge and advisory work will play
a prominent role, especially technical assistance to strengthen institutional capacity to manage the planned
five-fold increase in infrastructure investments, and improve service delivery.
Outcome 1.3 Improved demand-driven skills for productive employment
71.
The WBG will contribute to the 12th Plan target of providing vocational training to 500
million workers by 2022. The ongoing Vocational Training and Improvement Project—the largest
vocational training project in the world—will continue providing training to post-secondary and pre18

PMGSY highlights the importance that India’s Government gives to reducing disparities in physical access, encouraging
economic and social development in rural areas, and adequately funding rural road maintenance.

29

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

employment–level youth. Assistance for implementing reforms and development of the technical
vocational education and training sector in West Bengal will continue, with replication expected in other
states. The Technical Education and Quality Improvement Project II (TEQIP-II), is helping the
Government reform a large number of institutions. A multiyear programmatic analysis of skills will
explore new models for PPPs in technical and vocational education. This work will feed into a multisectoral engagement, including IFC, to help India scale up its work on building skills for the new
economy. Analytical work on financing, equity, quality, and governance in higher education at the
national and state level are also being undertaken. Bank-supported livelihood projects at the state and
national level focus on skills training for rural youth and connecting young people to jobs, often in small
and medium-sized cities. IFC is partnering with the National Institute of Entrepreneurship and Small
Business Development to develop and deliver a country-wide ‘training of trainers’ program to address the
pressing lack of quality trainers. The program will establish a new standard of excellence for
entrepreneurship and business skills training by improving skills and knowledge transfer from trainers to
MSMEs. IFC is also working with larger private sector firms to impart business skills to MSMEs in their
supply chain.
Outcome 1.4 Enhanced private investment in low-income states
72.
Enhancing private investment is important for WBG strategy and is at the center of IFC’s
engagement in India’s low-income states. IFC investments will leverage these states’ strong growth
rates, pent-up demand and natural resource advantages to address their many development challenges—
massive poverty, weak investment climate, low FDI, and inadequate infrastructure. Low-income states
have high economic potential, which makes them attractive to private sector investors, but often weak
business climate hinder significant levels of private investment. IFC's advisory service will help catalyze
growth in low-income states by improving investment climate such as those highlighted in the Doing
Business report, PPP regulatory frameworks and sector-specific policy reform. Two state-level
engagements--in Odisha and Rajasthan--support Government efforts to improve the investment climate to
increase private investment in the states. In terms of investments, IFC will invest from its own account
and mobilization, in areas such as innovative renewable and green projects, processed food, logistics and
infrastructure, agribusiness, and MSME finance and insurance. Support to the Government of Meghalaya
will help improve access to finance to households, farmers, and micro and small businesses. Ongoing
support to the Government of Bihar and local tourism investors will improve tourism in the Buddhist
Circuit, which includes major Buddhist sites and pilgrimage destinations in India and Nepal, and generate
increased revenue.
Outcome 1.5 Strengthened regional integration

73.
The WBG will promote regional integration, especially in (i) the integrated management of
natural resources and regional public goods (such as river basins, ecosystems, and wildlife preserves); (ii)
the pooling of power resources; (iii) trade and transport regional facilitation; and (iv) business dialogue.
In particular, the WBG will continue to support regional trade in power between India and Pakistan and
India and Nepal as well as inland water transport between Bangladesh and India. Analytical work will
underpin dialogue on critical regional issues. IFC will help facilitate trade between Bangladesh, India and
Nepal by strengthening chambers of commerce and associations of truckers and freight forwarders and
standardize and harmonize procedures and documentation, introduce risk management, automation, and
create opportunities for regional peer-to-peer exchanges (through the South Asia Regional Integration in
Trade and Investment Project). IFC will promote reforms to increase intra-regional and global FDI flows,
financial infrastructure, trade finance, and South–South investments by helping to build partnerships
between strong players in emerging economies. The Nepal-India Power Transmission and Trade Project
(financed by IDA and IFC) finances construction of a cross-border transmission line to increase the trade

30

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

of electricity between these two neighboring countries.
infrastructure investments.

MIGA may support critical cross-border

74.
Finally, the World Bank Group will focus on facilitating the exchange of knowledge and
experience in a more systematic manner, in the region and beyond, so that international good-practice
examples can inform India’s development while showcasing India’s development successes to the rest of
the world. The work will involve facilitating knowledge exchanges (particularly South–South) in which
India is increasingly the knowledge provider. Three regional pieces of analytical work—on overcoming
barriers to trade and cooperation, commodity price transmission, and manufacturing competitiveness—
will be instrumental in sharing knowledge across the countries in the region. IFC will provide sectorspecific knowledge to Indian companies in sectors such as infrastructure, banking, and microfinance to
help them better understand the opportunities and risks of investing in other emerging markets.
75.
Domestic market integration is a new area of focus under the CPS, and will expand to
include analytical and technical assistance as well as financing in three areas: taxation,
procurement, and labor markets. The successful implementation of the long-delayed Goods and
Services Tax (GST) is central to Government efforts to integrate the domestic market. Building on the
implementation of the GST, the WBG is ready to provide policy advice and facilitate knowledge
exchange with countries, such as Brazil, that have been successful in tackling the same issue. On the
fiscal front, the WBG will provide analytical support and non-lending technical assistance to state
governments and third-tier local governments, especially local urban bodies, to expand their revenue
bases. Labor laws that facilitate the movement of people to jobs, without discrimination based on location
or industry, are important. And, as workers move across state boundaries and from villages to cities, the
portability of social security benefits (made easier with the introduction of the unique identification
number) will assume great importance. A multiyear study on growth, inclusion and global
competitiveness will address issues related to the labor market, while parallel programs to support
implementation of the national manufacturing policy and improvements in the business climate will drill
deeper. Ongoing technical assistance to the planning commission on manufacturing competitiveness will
help inform the national manufacturing policy and underpin possible state-level operations in the future.
As the public sector is a major consumer of goods and services produced in the domestic economy,
reform and standardization of the procurement system at the national and state levels are key measures to
foster domestic market integration and competition. The World Bank will help develop public
procurement certification courses and procurement-related management information systems, facilitate
networking among public procurement resource institutions, and engagement with audit institutions to
undertake procurement audits.

6.2. Strategic engagement area 2: Transformation
76.
The faster a country urbanizes, the faster it grows—and, with the right policies in place, the
faster the same country can reduce poverty and increase shared prosperity. An acceleration of India’s
ongoing transformation from a largely agrarian economy to one that depends on an ever-expanding
manufacturing sector, and from a predominantly rural to an increasingly urban population, would
significantly boost India’s potential for growth and poverty reduction. Accomplishing that acceleration
will require a focus on both rural and urban development, on improving the livability of cities and
villages, on creating more jobs in manufacturing and more off-farm jobs in rural India, and on improving
agricultural productivity, especially among smallholders.
77.
Effective, flexible, and accommodating urban planning, land management, and land-use
regulations are essential to addressing the urbanization challenge. Improving the investment climate
to induce increased private sector investment (from domestic and foreign sources) and improving access
to credit will allow small and medium-size enterprises—an important growth engine in India—to flourish.
31

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

This transformation also calls for further empowering local governing bodies—Panchayat Raj institutions
in rural areas and local urban bodies in cities across India—so that they are able to identify and respond to
local needs and to plan long-term for a more systematic rural-urban transformation. If developed and
managed well, cities in India can be a source of greater efficiencies—resulting in more-efficient use of
natural resources and lower carbon intensity.
78.
By 2031, it is projected that 600 million people will live in India’s cities. Current and future
needs and challenges of India’s cities and their burgeoning populations, figure prominently in the 12th
Plan. Government priorities include increasing investment in new urban infrastructure (e.g., expanding
the metro rail network and the bus rapid transit system); strengthening urban governance; strengthening
human and organizational capacities; developing long-term, strategic urban planning capacities;
addressing the needs of the urban poor and improving slums; and raising environmental sustainability. On
urban transport, the Government’s goal is to increase the share of public transport to at least 50 percent of
all motorized trips. Private, and often very expensive, urban transportation exacts a huge cost on the urban
population, especially the very poor. Universalizing safe drinking water and sanitation remains a priority,
as is ensuring that all Indian cities are free of open defecation—a contributor to malnutrition, as well as a
major public health risk. The Government strives for 100 percent metering of water supply and 24-7
access where possible and feasible. The Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM)
remains the main vehicle for the Government’s urban development and reform. State governments also
have their own urban development plans. The 12th Plan calls for a series of reforms at the national and
state level, as well as interventions to strengthen the institutional framework.
79.
The Government recognizes the need for an equally strong focus on agricultural and rural
development. Under the 12th Plan, agricultural productivity is targeted to grow by 4 percent annually, and
irrigated areas are expected to increase from 90 million to 103 million hectares. Income opportunities in
agriculture, which includes horticulture, animal husbandry and fisheries, are expected to expand, while
simultaneously creating more off-farm employment. Strengthening the implementation of major centrally
sponsored schemes that cover everything from rural employment and social security to rural sanitation
and water supply is central to the Government’s rural development strategy. Environmental sustainability
and the sound management of natural resources—air, water, forests, and biodiversity—is rapidly
emerging as the next major development and policy challenge for India, and it is central to the 12th Plan.
The Government and organized citizens recognize that sustaining a high annual growth rate of 8.2 percent
under the 12th Plan and beyond will require placing environmental and resource management issues front
and center in India’s development.
80.
The WBG’s focus on the rural-urban transformation—and particularly on urbanization—
represents a significant shift in its strategy, and engagement in this area is expected to intensify over
the CPS period and beyond. The strategy will focus on supporting the efforts of national, state, and city
governments to improve the management and livability of second-tier (medium-sized) cities as well as
larger metropolises. As 85 percent of the urban poor live in small and medium-size cities across India,
efforts are likely to contribute to the ambitious scenario’s poverty reduction target. The multi-sectoral
engagement will focus on urban management and planning, infrastructure and service delivery, financing
systems and frameworks, and capacity building at the national, state and city levels. Analytical work to
inform urban sector policy and initiatives will supplement a growing operational engagement.
Outcome 2.1 Strengthened institutional capacity of urban government
81.
The WBG’s work will focus on (i) strengthening urban management, infrastructure, and servicedelivery systems across the urban hierarchy; (ii) in situ slum upgrading; and (iii) selective developments
in metropolitan cities. The Bank is currently developing with the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation an Informal Settlements Improvement Project that will incentivize in situ upgrading of slums

32

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

and thereby encourage private investment in the incremental improvement of the existing housing stock.
The project will aim to improve basic services (water, sanitation, sewage, electricity, paving, and street
lighting), connect neighborhoods to trunk infrastructure, and mobilize community support and
participation. IFC’s work on affordable housing—a relatively new focus of its engagement in India—
entails collaborating with regulators, financial institutions, and developers to explore business models that
will enable growth and profitability of the industry, including supporting governments with the
structuring of housing projects on a PPP basis particularly in low income states.
82.
Supporting PPPs will be central to IFC’s urban work, particularly to address the solid waste
management challenges faced across most cities, as well as to help government improve its energy
efficiency and climate change profiles through for example improved street lighting systems and
increased renewable energy generation. IFC will explore the use of new technologies to address
challenges in India’s cities through: (i) information technology applications for enhancing efficiency in
the power, water, solid waste, and gas sectors; (ii) e-governance software for public sector and SMEs; (iii)
mobile payment and e-payment solutions; (iv) smart metering; and (v) e-learning systems and improve
digital inclusion to benefit more people. In the telecom and information technology sectors, IFC will
extend selective support to companies offering solutions targeted at SMEs, banks, financial companies,
and educational institutions. Lastly, IFC will continue its dialogue with the Government on direct
financing for credit-worthy municipal entities through the WBG sub-national lending program. 19
Outcome 2.2 Improved urban transport services
83.
Public transport in Indian cities is predominantly run by public sector transport
monopolies and suffers from poor service quality, inefficient operations, deteriorating finances and
dramatically declining mode shares. Supporting the modernization of city bus services including
improved fuel efficiency, rehabilitation of infrastructure, use of new technology initiatives and technical
assistance for greater operational and financial viability, institutional and capacity development will be a
key aspect of the Bank’s urban transport strategy. The Global Environmental Facility’s Efficient and
Sustainable City Bus Services Project currently under preparation underlies these principles of improved
efficiency.
Outcome 2.3 Improved access to water supply and sanitation services

84.
Making India’s cities more livable will require improvements in the reliability, financial
and environmental sustainability, and affordability of water supply and sanitation services.
Although more than 90 percent of the urban population has access to drinking water and more than 60
percent to basic sanitation, piped water is only available for a few hours per day and raw sewage often
overflows into open drains. The already stressed water supply and sanitation delivery system will have to
be revamped to respond to the urbanization challenge—an additional 250 million people will migrate to
cities in the next 20 years. To improve service delivery, the WBG’s work will focus on strengthening
governance and institutional arrangements for water supply and sanitation services; piloting service
delivery models that are efficient, accountable, and customer-oriented (incorporating best practices from
well-run public companies); and improving financial sustainability of providers. A successful 24-7 water
supply pilot will be scaled up in three cities in Karnataka. IFC will help address efficiency and
conservation issues in municipal, agricultural and industrial water. For example, a new program will
focus on water-use efficiency in major water-intensive commodities such as rice, and will also help
private sector partners adopt water efficient technologies. Advisory and implementation programs plan to
support water audits, business systems diagnostics, footprint assessments, risk filters, cost-effective water
technology solutions and benchmarking with industry good practices. Investment opportunities in water19

Financial capacity of urban local bodies, however, is comparatively very weak, with total revenue amount to less than 1
percent of the GDP (as compared to 6 percent in South Africa and over 7 percent in Brazil).

33

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

saving, harvesting and treatment technologies, service delivery and improving operational efficiency will
be also explored. Lastly, MIGA stands ready to support investors into municipal services either
directly or through local and foreign financial intermediaries.
85.
Engagement in rural areas will include the Maharashtra Rural Water Supply and
Sanitation Project using the new performance for results instrument and a multistate Rural Water
Supply and Sanitation (RWSS) project focused on low-income states. In addition to supporting the
decentralization of programs and policies under ongoing RWSS projects, key strategic shifts under this
CPS include: (i) piloting an array of management models for large or multi-village schemes; (ii)
supporting sustainable RWSS programs by linking Gram Panchayats with higher levels of government
and strengthening the capacity of Panchayati Raj institutions; (iii) integrating water supply and sanitation
interventions into catchment-protection schemes, household and village environmental sanitation
programs, solid waste management, and health and hygiene awareness promotion; (iv) piloting the use of
PPP models for efficient and accountable service provision, and (v) institutionalizing and scaling up
proven policies and strategies demonstrated through various Bank-supported projects.
Outcome 2.4 Increased agricultural productivity

86.
The WBG will engage across five operational business lines: (i) inclusive agricultural and rural
growth; (ii) technology development and low-carbon and climate-resilient agriculture; (iii) food and
nutrition security; (iv) agricultural markets; and (v) water and natural resources management;
Engagement will be underpinned by increasingly deeper and broader analytical work, guided largely by
findings from the on-going India agriculture productivity study. The overall emphasis will be on
innovative approaches and systems strengthening. Strengthening collective action (especially among
women) to facilitate access to better economic opportunities, and key services will remain a hallmark of
Bank engagement in India’s rural development.
87.
With 65 percent of India’s agriculture relying solely on rainfall, improving the productivity
of country’s rain-fed agriculture remains a challenge. To this end, the Bank will support the National
Integrated Watershed Management Program in eight states. On irrigated water, the Bank’s strategy is to
focus on increasing agricultural water use efficiency through support to ongoing implementation of state
level efforts in Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. More emphasis will be
placed on strengthening water-related institutions, and building the state and national capacity for the
management of irrigation systems and decentralized management of irrigation tanks.
88.
Ongoing implementation of state-level agricultural competitiveness projects in Assam,
Rajasthan and Maharashtra are instrumental in translating increased demand for agriculture
products into improved farmers’ income. A new approach to develop the agriculture value chain using
a PPP mode will be explored as part of the Ministry of Agriculture’s Million Farmer Initiative. IFC
advisory services will work towards promoting sustainable and inclusive economic growth in the
agribusiness sector. To build farmers’ capacity, IFC will prioritize demonstration projects in the value
chains of private sector players in key commodities. IFC supported the government of Punjab in
pioneering the first grain silos infrastructure on a PPP basis and plans to further support the government’s
food security agenda through the scaling up of the Food Corporation of India’s silos PPP program across
eight to ten states. IFC will also provide patient capital to agribusinesses, strengthen agriculture products,
logistics infrastructure (e.g. warehousing), and promote best practices in sustainable farming.
89.
The WBG will help India develop and disseminate agricultural technology. New methods of
disseminating technology to the farming community, with a greater emphasis on women, will be
explored. This may require forms of farmer collective action as well as outsourcing of publicly funded
agricultural advisory services to private sector providers. Analytical work will be undertaken on the likely

34

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

impact of climate change on India agriculture. This will support India’s efforts at preparing and
implementing approaches towards achieving greater agriculture resilience towards climate change
(adaptation) as well as towards reducing the carbon growth intensity of agricultural growth (power
consumption and fertilizer use (mitigation)).
Outcome 2.5 Improved environmental protection and biodiversity conservation
90.
The WBG will focus on developing effective systems and institutions to enable more
efficient environment management and reduction of resource degradation. This would include
interventions in three key areas: (i) coastal management; (ii) industrial pollution management; and (iii)
natural resources (particularly water), ecosystems and biodiversity. Efforts to integrate sustainability
considerations and lower carbon approaches in project design across sectors, but especially in
infrastructure, will intensify. On coastal management, the Bank will support the simultaneous economic
development of India’s extensive coast line and preservation of its fragile ecosystems with pilots in
Gujarat, Odisha, and West Bengal. The new coastal disaster risk reduction project in Puducherry and
Tamil Nadu will also pilot improvements to marine fisheries, particularly in inshore coastal areas. On
pollution management, Bank’s ongoing Ganga Basin Project will help build the capacity of the National
Ganga River Basin Authority to pilot wastewater collection and treatment, and adopt river conservation
measures. The Capacity Building for Industrial Pollution project is helping deploy technologies and
management practices for cleaning up toxic legacy sites.
Outcome 2.6 Reduced Greenhouse Gas emissions through energy efficiency and renewable energy
production
91.
The WBG will continue to promote low-carbon growth. The Bank will support Himachal
Pradesh’s inclusive green growth strategy through a series of development policy loans—one of which is
expected to be funded through the Clean Technology Fund. In line with its Climate business strategic
priority, IFC investments will continue to support private companies to move to lower carbon growth
paths through renewable energy, and energy and resource efficiency In recent years, IFC’s innovative
PPP advisory work in India has supported India’s first solar roof-top project (Gujarat) and the first street
lighting energy efficiency project in the low income states of Rajasthan and Odisha. IFC has also
partnered with financial institutions to expand the availability of capital for renewable energy and energy
financing. Through its Clean Technology Innovation Fund, IFC will be able to invest in clean-tech
companies, including seed investments in higher risk sectors and locations. On the advisory front, IFC
will help financial institutions to expand their focus on clean energy financing by promoting improved
access to finance for low-income households, strengthening microfinance networks, and introducing
financial products that enable access to clean energy, water and sanitation products.
92.
Green cities can also be a source of efficiencies. A series of CTF-funded projects in India aim
to improve energy efficiency of equipment, buildings, and industry which improve cities. The proposed
projects aim to reduce the growth of emissions from energy consumption in the country. Carbon finance
operation as well as market-based energy efficiency projects such as the Super Energy-efficiency
Equipment Program (SEEP) support Government efforts to scale up energy efficient programs. The SEEP
will create implementation structures and undertake a pilot to introduce higher efficiency appliances,
using market-based approaches. The main aim of the project is to reduce energy consumption associated
with the rapidly growing number of consumer electrical appliances over the next decade. Under SEEP
sales-based incentives for manufacturers to introduce and promote appliances that are 50 percent more
efficient than currently available alternatives will be provided. The initial focus will be on ceiling fans—
the second-largest selling appliance in India, with annual sales of more than 30 million units, increasing at
6-9 percent per year. This program will help create the systems and structures that can be used for other
appliances and other applications, promoting private sector-led efficiency improvements. Based on an

35

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

ESCO (energy service company) model, IFC’s municipal level energy efficient street lighting projects in
two cities aims to deepen the market and demonstrate successful models designed city-wide.
93.
IFC’s support for the power sector will be guided by its overall strategic focus on climate
change and GHG emission reductions. To date, IFC has made its largest number of renewables
investments in India, including “first-of-their-type” investments in companies with limited renewable
energy experience. This will be done by providing them with targeted equity investments and debt lines,
sharing global expertise, developing suitable E&S standards, and advisory support. Future engagements
could support: (i) innovative clean technology investments with potential for demonstration impact and/or
scaling up; (ii) financial sustainability; (iii) cross-border and South-South investments (potentially
partnering with MIGA); (iv) renewable energy, new business models and new technologies; (v) gaspowered generation; and (vi) reduction of transmission and distribution losses through efficiency-linked
investments. The South Asia Infrastructure Facility, which helps governments design projects that attract
private sector participation and investments, will focus on renewable energy, as well as water, health and
agribusiness, especially in the low-income and Northeast states. In the oil and gas sector, IFC will
continue to provide support for the development of: (i) domestic hydrocarbon resources to help lower the
dependence on imports; (ii) gas transmission to facilitate end-user access to gas; and (iii) capacity
enhancement for domestic oil and gas companies.

6.3. Strategic engagement area 3: Inclusion
94.
Inclusive growth is a key priority for the Government, as detailed in the 12th Five-Year
Plan. Ensuring that everyone reaps the benefits of faster growth, regardless of social grouping, age,
gender, or place of residence will require significant improvements in education, health (notably progress
toward universal health coverage), access to water and electrical power, and the creation of meaningful
employment and livelihoods opportunities. The Government’s 13 large, centrally sponsored schemes for
inclusiveness—covering rural and agricultural development, health and nutrition, education, power,
water, and urban development—will have to be reformed to drastically improve implementation
performance, reduce duplication, create convergence, and most important, to improve development
outcomes. Economic integration and rural-urban transformation can benefit a large share of India’s
population, but only if there is a stronger focus on human development and on policies that help make
growth inclusive. For example, a growth strategy that focuses on labor-intensive sectors, rather than on
skill- and capital-intensive ones, and on the development of small and medium-size enterprises will help
create productive employment opportunities for India’s poor people and make growth more inclusive.
95.
India’s weak health system and poor nutritional outcomes undermine its competitiveness.
The growing burden of non-communicable diseases increases disability among the working-age
population; malnutrition reduces lifetime productivity; unmanaged health care costs displace moreproductive investments by the state and by households; and high fertility rates keep women out of the
workforce. The main health-related target of the 12th Five-Year Plan is greatly reduced rates of maternal
and child mortality. Other necessary changes include improving delivery systems by strengthening
accountability, providing regulation and oversight of private providers of health care, and ensuring
insurance coverage for more people, especially the very poor.
Outcome 3.1 Improved access to electricity
96.
Despite increasing dependency on commercial fuels, more than 60 percent of Indian
households depend on traditional sources of energy—fuel wood, crop residue, biomass, and animal
waste. Providing modern energy services for lighting and cooking is thus widely recognized as an
important step to ensure energy access, especially in the rural areas. Existing activities will support
replicable and sustainable business models for off-grid generation and supply models in lagging states.

36

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

The ongoing India Power Sector Diagnostic will review progress on access to power over the last decade,
including an assessment of why household electrification lags behind village electrification, and the
implementation and financial barriers to executing rural-electrification projects. The study will also
provide a detailed examination of the consumption subsidies given to India’s domestic consumers (who
represent 25 percent of total electricity consumption) through tariffs, and focus on subsidy targeting and
cost (in terms of fiscal burden). The potential for state-level engagements in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar to
develop business models of generation that connect very poor areas to off-grid power will be explored.
IFC is undertaking a partnership with the governments of US and Italy, the Lighting Asia’s India
program, which was launched in February 2012. This program is expected to provide safe, clean and
affordable off-grid lighting to two million people in rural India by December 2015. IFC is also supporting
SEWA to promote usage of solar lanterns and energy efficient cook stoves; these are key livelihood tools
for rural households and increase their productivity in their occupations, in addition to mitigating climate
change.
Outcome 3.2 Strengthened public and private health-delivery systems
97.
A larger share of interventions in the health sector will be at the state level and focus on
strengthening institutions and accountability, developing local systems and capacities, and addressing
government and market failures. The ongoing Uttar Pradesh Health System Project aims to strengthen
planning, human resource management, monitoring, supply chain management, quality enhancement, and
asset management to enable better service delivery for the entire population of Uttar Pradesh—one of the
poorest states in the country. The project demonstrates the potential for Bank support to raise the impact
of public and private health expenditures and defines a strategy for future state-level lending. A joint IFCBank initiative (Health in India, box 6.1) will focus on improving poor people’s access to quality health
care and reducing out-of-pocket expenditures in two low-income states. IFC is pursuing both investment
and advisory projects in the health-care industry, with investments supporting the expansion of private
hospital chains in the country. It focuses on niche areas such as medical instruments and devices,
vaccines, biotechnology products, and generic drugs.
98.
The objective of WBG engagement is to address issues constraining the development of
accessible and affordable health care facilities, including access to capital for healthcare organizations,
limited tertiary healthcare facilities outside of Tier I cities, a shortage of human resources with healthcare
skills, lesser access and awareness about medical insurance, limited adoption of quality programs and
standard protocols. An innovative IFC advisory project in Bihar is supporting automation of Governmentto-Person payments to enhance efficiency of health workers and doctors by 10-15 percent. Once
implemented, the project could be replicated across India. IFC is also assisting states to plan and prioritize
state-wide programmatic initiatives through PPPs in the health sector, particularly in the areas of payment
insurance, health networks by clubbing primary, secondary and tertiary services, and diagnostic platforms
for state-wide roll out.
Outcome 3.3 Improved child nutrition delivery systems
99.
The Bank will—through lending, analytical work and technical assistance—support the
national government and states in strengthening the nutrition policy framework as well as systems
and capacities to improve nutrition. Although restructuring and strengthening the ICDS will be a prime
focus, Bank efforts will also include support for multisectoral nutrition actions, both through Government
programs and through Bank operations in different sectors. Examples include the Bank’s ongoing support
for the National Rural Drinking Water Program and a series of state-level rural water supply and
sanitation projects, including a new operation in low-income states. Improved provision of drinkable
water and particularly sanitation in rural (as well as urban) areas is likely to have a large impact on health
and nutrition. The Bank-supported National Rural Livelihoods Mission aims to contribute to India’s

37

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

efforts to combat high rates of malnutrition by setting up a network of nutrition centers that cater to
pregnant women and children up to five years of age and by ensuring that households get access to food.
Box 6.1. Health in India
The WBG is working to increase poor people’s access to high-quality health care and to reduce out-of-pocket
expenditures in two low-income states. This effort, which exemplifies the approach recently adopted by the joint
IFC–World Bank management team, recognizes the critical role that the private sector plays in health care in India.
While the joint engagement began with exploring opportunities to work together, it has since evolved into a more
systematic approach that is identified upfront, planned and sequenced over a period of time, drawing on respective
advantages of each institution, with clear expected results. Examples of current engagement include supporting the
state of Meghalaya in implementing a health insurance scheme. The states selected for further action will be lowincome states in which the World Bank Group is already engaged.
The building blocks for influencing health outcomes include: service delivery; financing; governance; medical
products and technologies; the health workforce; and information systems and analytics. Working with the public
and private sectors, the intermediate outcomes of Health in India focus on improving access, affordability, equity,
and quality, with the overall goal of improving health-related outcomes.
The program’s joint business plan identifies priorities based on a three-dimensional framework: impact, feasibility,
and expected timelines. Its scope is driven by client delivery capacity and resources. The strengths of each
institution have been clearly identified and a list of proposed joint and complementary interventions drawn up, with
appropriate time horizons and results indicators (e.g., two pilot PPP transactions, accreditation of ten public and five
private hospitals, reductions in out-of-pocket expenditures by income and caste levels, and so on).

Outcome 3.4 Improved access and quality of education
100.
The Bank will support Government efforts to improve education mainly at the secondary
and tertiary levels, with a more pronounced focus on quality. Lessons learned from the Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan Education-for-All Program will inform this engagement. At the secondary level, the
implementation of the Rastriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan will support Government efforts to
universalize secondary education by 2017. With financial and managerial contributions, the Bank will
help expand access to, and strengthen delivery systems for, quality secondary education, with an eye to
improving on labor-market entry for young adults. Greater attention will be paid to teacher training,
performance, and accountability—a prime determinant of quality. Using new ICT technologies, the Bihar
Teacher Education Project will help pilot innovative approaches to teacher education and professional
development. A final round of support to the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan program from the Bank and its
development partners will help improve educational quality and student learning outcomes at the primary
level, incorporating greater involvement of the private sector. IFC’s education sector strategy supports the
“skills for competitiveness” agenda, especially education projects with strategic clients—predominantly
larger, for-profit providers with potential to grow and operate in several markets move down-market to
reach lower-income households, create centers of excellence, and provide employment opportunities for
skilled professionals. One of the innovations supported by IFC to open up new markets for the private
sector is the implementation of PPPs for a medical college—500 bed teaching and 100 seat medical—in
Meghalaya which also has a large replication potential.
Outcome 3.5 Increased coverage of social protection programs
101.
More than 90 percent of the labor force is in the informal sector, with inadequate
mechanisms to absorb and manage economic risks and shocks. The Bank will work to enhance social
protection coverage for this population, including for health and disability insurance, job transition
insurance, and protection in old age. Because many programs do not reach all of their intended
beneficiaries, with significant variation, particularly in low-income states, the Bank will work with states

38

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

to expand coverage. Increased use of ICTs in program delivery and management will form a cornerstone
of this work, together with capacity building and enhancement of human resources at local levels. An
example of this approach is the Bihar Integrated Social Protection Project, which aims to modernize
service standards and operational processes in order to deliver better services to more people, while also
reducing duplication, encouraging the development of harmonized procedures, and introducing
transparency. Ongoing NLTA supports the Government’s efforts to covert many in-kind subsidies and
support programs to cash assistance through it new Direct Benefits Transfer initiative.
Outcome 3.6 Enhanced rural-livelihood opportunities
102.
To accelerate India’s efforts toward inclusive rural growth, the Bank will assist national and state
authorities in implementing rural-livelihood projects across 16 states under the National Rural Livelihood
Project (NRLP) as well as ongoing state projects in Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, and
four Northeastern states. NRLP and state-level interventions (with some variation across states) entail a
three-pronged approach: (i) improving existing livelihoods (working with farmers to help them diversify
products, lower cost of production, and identify stable markets for their goods); (ii) identifying selfemployment opportunities and providing both access to credit and technical assistance for business
development; and (iii) developing skills that are better matched to the needs of the market. Women are the
main beneficiaries of the projects, a good example of the WBG’s emphasis on gender in India (box 6.2).
Livelihoods will continue to be a main source of off-farm job creation in rural India.
Outcome 3.7 Increased access to financial services
103.
The WBG will promote integrated approaches to financial inclusion by facilitating access to
credit and other financial services to farmers and households. Two ongoing lending operations (rural
credit coops and scaling up of sustainable and responsible microfinance) and two planned operations
(low-income housing finance and agriculture insurance) will be central to the Bank’s response in this
area. The low-income housing finance project will provide informal housing finance for people without
documented income and property rights, while the agricultural insurance project will ensure that a greater
number of farmers have crop insurance. The Bank will help microfinance institutions integrate
responsible microfinance principles into their work and develop new financial products for the poor such
as micro-pensions and micro-health insurance. The rural livelihood programs described in the previous
paragraph will continue their focus on expanding poor households’ access investment and savings. IFC’s
key objective will be to improve the depth and quality of financial services through: (i) financial product
diversification; (ii) responsible finance i.e. promoting financial awareness among clients and transparent
reporting by financial institutions; and (iii) supporting delivery channels using new technology and
agents. New approaches to delivery of financial services will be key in coming years to expand the last
mile reach. IFC has already begun work in this regard with Government-to-Person payments and will
continue to work on innovation in payments systems, alternative delivery channels, remittances, and
government payments
Outcome 3.8 Enhanced disaster-risk management system
104.
The Bank’s work in this area has two strands: (i) helping build institutional capacity to prepare
for and manage the impact of natural disasters and (ii) helping people protect themselves from natural
disasters and recover quickly from them. The National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project helps strengthen
the capacity of state disaster-management agencies to mitigate the impact of and respond to cyclones in
vulnerable coastal states. The second phase of the project will focus on Gujarat, Kerala, Maharashtra, and
West Bengal. Technical assistance helps build Government capacity to conduct risk assessments for
geophysical hazards and vulnerabilities, establish building and planning standards, and pilot innovative
approaches to risk mitigation. To mitigate risks of and vulnerability to natural disasters, especially in

39

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

coastal areas, the Bank focuses on access to emergency shelter and on evacuation and protection against
wind storms, flooding, and storm surges in high-risk areas.
Box 6.2. Addressing gender issues
Various social and economic indicators in India show significant and persistent gender inequalities. Beginning with
the child sex ratio and progressing through secondary schooling, labor market participation, marriage, fertility and
maternal mortality, Indian women and girls fare considerably worse than men and boys. The recent brutal gang rape
and death of a 23 year old student in Delhi has raised international attention to the pervasive and extreme nature of
gender-based violence in India.
The Bank Group continues to address gender issues across its lending, investment and knowledge activities. The
National Rural Livelihoods Project mostly targets women, and gender has been included in work on suburban
transport, adaptation to climate change, employment, and health. The design of the Coastal Zone Management
project, for example, was informed by an analysis of the issues faced by women and men in fishing communities
and other coastal dwellers. Knowledge work included a study on social exclusion, which examined the unique
disadvantages faced by tribal and scheduled caste women. Work on gender inequalities in labor outcomes, and
access to and use of infrastructure and services is also ongoing. The Bank will also strengthen its gender-based
M&E. IFC’s support to microfinance institutions predominantly benefits women, who account for 90 percent of
borrowers. IFC’s work on Government-to-Person (G2P) payment projects improve women’s access to healthcare
services and individualized payment services through direct money transfers to their accounts. IFC’s support to the
SEWA Bank – owned and operated by women for the welfare of self-employed women—enabled it to expand its
operations and new products. IFC also aims to work with private sector banks to develop and launch financial
schemes targeting women owned businesses. The World Bank Group is adding new gender initiatives to its
operations, including in the micro, small and medium enterprise sector
But much more can be done by the Bank to engender its investments and empower women economically, socially,
and in government. Under this CPS, more emphasis will be placed on two “inclusion” priorities: (i) reducing gender
disparities in labor force outcomes; and ii) strengthening women’s leadership in local government. On female labor
force participation much of the focus will be on skills development and higher education. Issues related to genderbased violence will be addressed through regional work as well as through collaboration with development partners
who have extensive experience and knowledge in this area. The Bank will expand its analytical work on gender
equality, most importantly by preparing the India Economic Development Report (InGender) in FY2013, as a follow
on to the 2012 World Development Report on Gender Equality and Development. Findings from this gender
analysis will be instrumental in strengthening the Bank’s work on gender issues during this CPS and beyond and .
will support the Government of India’s National Mission for the Empowerment of Women in its analysis of the
gender impacts of government programs.

7. Implementing the WBG Country Partnership Strategy
7.1. Guiding principles of engagement
105.
In addition to India’s 12th Five-Year Plan, the World Bank’s engagement is guided by the
Government’s “Innovation Impulse with Investment” approach, which lays out the Government’s
vision of how best to use the financing and expertise of multilateral institutions to address India’s
development challenges. Support should be focused on projects that transform and modernize policies and
institutions, leverage resources, and pilot new and innovative development approaches. Special emphasis
will be placed on multi-sectoral projects and programs, as well as on creating synergies with existing
Government programs across sectors. Although access to financing remains important to India’s
development, the services that come with that financing are particularly valued. Those services include
the transfer of knowledge and international good practices, guidance on reforming processes and systems,
and the building of capacity for improved service delivery. These principles will be applied jointly by the
Government and the World Bank to manage the program described in this CPS.

40

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

106.
The Government’s approach to working with multilaterals calls for a rebalancing of the
World Bank portfolio toward more state-level activities, particularly in low-income and special
category states (table 7.1). Overall, the aim of that rebalancing will be to raise the share of the Bank’s
commitments devoted to direct financing of state projects to 60 percent, of which half (30 percent of total
lending) will go to low-income and special category states. Under the previous CAS, 18 percent of the
Bank’s total lending went to these states.20 Under this CPS, the approach for engaging low-income and
special category states will build on lessons learned from successes and failures over the last four years.
Initial engagement will include holding high-level multi-sectoral discussions at the state level, together
with the IFC, to identify synergies among programs and the mix of instruments that best suits the
particular circumstances of each state. Specific activities will build on the successful approach already
adopted in Bihar, which combines extensive capacity building, technical assistance, and analytical work
that underpins lending operations. Past experience also shows the relevance of local knowledge,
particularly in the context of state-level political economy.
107.
IFC is also intensifying its program in low-incomes states. Its strategy aims to ensure that
people at the “base of the pyramid” gain greater access to finance, infrastructure, and markets, while
working to formalize the private sector in these states. IFC is in the process of expanding its program in
Bihar, Odisha, and Rajasthan by increasing investments and improving business-climate reforms (with a
special emphasis on small and medium-size enterprises), enhancing certainty and transparency, and
reducing business risks. Twenty-two percent of all investments and 31 percent of all projects in India
were in LISs in FY2009-13YTD. The share of IFC advisory services in LISs tripled from 21 percent in
FY2009 to 66 percent as of February FY2013. Currently, 44 out of 66 advisory projects in India involve
at least one low-income state. By the end of this CPS period, IFC aims to invest approximately $2.3
billion, and facilitate another $1.4 billion in private investment in low-income states.
Table 7.1: Low-income and special category states (US$)
Low-income States
Population
%
(mn)
Poor
Bihar
Chhattisgarh

103.8
25.5

53.5
48.7

GSDP
per
capita
294
695

Jharkhand
Madhya
Pradesh
Odisha
Rajasthan
Uttar Pradesh
Total

33.0
72.6

39.1
36.7

41.9
68.6
199.6
545.1

37
24.8
37.7
39.5

Special Category States
Population
%
(mn)
Poor
31.2
6.9

37.9
9.5

589
555

Assam
Himachal
Pradesh
Manipur
Meghalaya

GSDP
per
capita
536
1,267

2.7
3.0

47.1
17.1

569
866

676
666
436
494

Mizoram
Sikkim
Uttarakhand
Total

1.1
0.6
10.1
55.5

21.1
13.1
18
29.5

883
1,715
1,233
792

Notes: GSDP PC has been converted from INR to USD using the period average exchange rate. Total for population
weighted average of the group. Total % of poor is the HCR for the group. Special category states are mostly northern
mountainous states, sparsely populated, and those with high transport costs leading to high delivery cost of public
services (as defined in the 13th Finance Commission). IFC also includes West Bengal, but excludes Himachal
Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Sources: Census 2011, Planning Commission, poverty figures 2009-10, CSO GSDP, 2010-11,
MF-IFS exchange rate

20

Low-income states and special category states also benefit from IDA/IBRD support to multistate projects and centrally
sponsored schemes.

41

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

108.
Lending to more advanced states will predominantly focus on activities that are innovative
and transformative. Projects in more advanced states can test second-generation approaches, which then
can be applied to low-income states that often have limited capacity. For example, the pilot Beneficiary
Verification System for health services, which produces timely data, is serving more than 3,000
beneficiaries in Karnataka and may now be replicated in the low-income state of Uttar Pradesh. IFC,
having led many innovative renewable-energy investments in India, will promote the replication of its
solar rooftop pilot in Gandhinagar in five additional cities in Gujarat and develop solar policy
recommendations to engage other state governments.
109.
Support for centrally sponsored schemes and national projects will focus on capacity and
institution building. Sharing knowledge and international good practices can help leverage public
financing by improving design, implementation, and monitoring on a national scale. The core concept in
World Bank support for centrally sponsored schemes will be to support the Government in scaling up
successful state-level interventions into national programs. The World Bank has played an important role
in such efforts; in the process, it has learned that success is not always guaranteed. Support for the Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan Education-for-All Program, for example, has shown that successful scaling-up requires
significant upfront inputs into improving management and fiduciary systems, building national
institutions, careful supervision, and adjustments along the way. Increasingly, projects will focus on
helping states implement programs supported by central schemes. The complex challenges of bringing
development solutions to national scale in a large and diverse country like India require a learning
partnership.
110.
Given the size, diversity and magnitude of India’s development challenges, selectivity
principles are central to World Bank Group engagement under this CPS. Selectivity in the India
context is primarily about the “where” and “how” of WBG engagement, the former guided by the
Government’s "Innovation Impulse with Investment" approach and the latter by management and staff’s
understanding that better collaboration across the WBG and sectors is likely to result in improved
development outcomes. Unlike previous CAS periods, country-led selectivity principles are being
applied more systematically upstream by Government, and internally by the India management team.
Such a concerted effort is needed to intensify engagement in low- income and special category states.
Selectivity principles will also be applied to IFC’s engagement in low-income states. IFC will aim to
support projects/programs that offer scope for scalability. For example, alongside a growing number of
business and development partners, IFC is supporting inclusive business models to expand access to
goods, services, and livelihood opportunities for those at the “base of the pyramid” in commercially
viable and scalable ways. Such models have huge potential for scale up, and contribute to the goals of
reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity.

7.2. CAS lessons and multi-stakeholder consultations
111.
The FY2009–12 CAS Completion Report (CASCR) drew implications and highlighted
recommendations for this CPS (Annex 2). First, India’s complex and dynamic development
environment demands a full and integrated toolkit of the WBG’s analytic, advisory, convening, and
financial instruments. There is ample scope for proactive management of knowledge work, including
project-embedded knowledge and impact evaluations, to ensure continuous innovation and learning and
to fully integrate and build positive interactions between knowledge products and financing. This includes
not only bringing global best practices to India, but pollinating Indian expertise through South–South
knowledge exchange.
112.
Second, the synergy between state and national interventions can make significant
contributions to enhanced leverage and enhance the impact of Bank-supported activities. For
example, experience gained at the state level (e.g., in programs in education and rural livelihoods) can

42

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

provide valuable design inputs, increasing the relevance of national schemes to varying state
circumstances while helping to strengthen management systems at both the state and national levels.
However, the CASCR also found that direct lending to low-income and special category states requires
long-term support for capacity and institution building and underscores the importance of local
knowledge as well as analytic and advisory support. Moreover, replicating successful state projects at the
national level is more than just scaling up: Upgrading or creating new institutions and fiduciary systems
at the national level takes time as well as willingness to learn and adapt.
113.
Third, the CASCR identified two collaboration challenges that must be addressed in the
CPS. First, although the need for multi-sector approaches is increasingly important if the WBG is to help
India make inroads into key challenges (e.g., urban, nutrition, water resources), multi-sector activities fell
short under the FY2009–12 CAS. Second, despite recent improvements, collaboration between IBRD,
IDA, IFC, and MIGA will have to be deepened if the potential impact of WBG efforts is to be fully
realized. Such collaboration can yield most when all components of the WBG pursue common strategic
objectives (e.g., a joint approach in a low-income state or on a particular issue, such as increased
investment in climate-change adaptation). Effective collaboration should reflect each institution’s relative
operational strengths, thereby producing a result greater than what each institution could achieve
independently. PPPs are one area in which experience under the FY2009–12 CAS demonstrated clearly
differing institutional strengths, with IFC’s transaction and business climate experience complementing
the policy orientation of the World Bank. Given India’s own extensive experience with PPPs, this is a
promising area for enhanced collaboration.

7.3. Current WBG portfolio
114.
The CPS builds on a large current portfolio, which will be the main source of development
results under this CPS. The current IBRD/IDA portfolio includes net commitments of $23.7 billion
across 78 projects. Of that amount, $16.7 billion is undisbursed, reflecting a relatively young portfolio (38
percent of the total undisbursed amount is for projects approved by the Board in the last two years). At the
end of January 2013, IFC’s committed portfolio contained 219 projects amounting to $4.8 billion,
including $564 million syndications. MIGA has no existing exposure in India, but may support
investments into critical areas during the CPS period through the provision of credit enhancement.
Portfolio performance has varied. The growth of the portfolio in recent years is reflected in the portfolio
performance as measured by standard metrics. The average portfolio age has gone down with the
attendant impact on the portfolio disbursement ratio. The IDA/IBRD disbursement ratio 21 dropped in
FY2012 to 13 percent after peaking at 27.6 percent in FY2010, reflecting the retirement of welldisbursing projects and the inclusion of new projects into the portfolio. Disbursements are generally
expected to be low in the first two years, while project implementation is being launched. At the same
time—and in some cases—the World Bank may have underestimated the implementation challenges of
large national and multi-state projects.
115.
Lessons from implementation show that starting with smaller initial commitments to each
program might be better. Experience also suggests the wisdom of taking earlier action to readjust,
restructure, “right-size,” or cancel operations that are not performing well. Teams must be realistic, and
willing to change course early on in project implementation.
116.
During the last CAS period, IFC delivered a strong program. During FY2009–12, IFC
committed $4.5 billion in total financing (including its own account and mobilized funds), with nearly 34
21

The ratio of the amount of disbursements in a given fiscal year to the undisbursed balance at the beginning of the fiscal year.

43

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

percent supporting infrastructure. Through end February 2013, IFC has committed $822 million in total
financing. Thirty-four percent of IFC’s own account commitments were in equity and 63 percent were in
loans. IFC’s India portfolio is performing well. Investments in low-income states have grown from $60
million in FY2009 to $265 million in FY13 as of end of February 2013, an increase of 342 percent. The
advisory portfolio has grown from $30 million over 42 projects in FY2009 to $55 million in 66 projects
by end February 2013.
117.
The World Bank and the Government of India are working together to improve portfolio
management. To address the recent decline in portfolio performance parameters and accelerate
implementation, the Government of India and the World Bank have identified major bottlenecks and are
working with project authorities to remove them. Sector- and state-specific portfolio reviews, undertaken
in cooperation with relevant line ministries, as well as reviews of risky and slow-disbursing projects, are
held regularly, with time-bound action plans, agreed disbursement targets, and close follow up. Project
restructurings are being carried out more frequently, with around 30 restructurings, including partial
cancellations, completed in FY2012 alone. Discussions are ongoing to “right-size” a few national level
operations. New projects are being subjected to more-rigorous readiness criteria by the World Bank and
the Government to ensure improved implementation. In the short term, these measures have meant that
new lending has dropped to allow teams to focus on making the existing portfolio perform better.
Continued proactive portfolio management will be needed to turn the performance of the portfolio
around.
118.
A focus on governance and public financial management will also help improve the design
and implementation of Bank-supported projects. Under the CPS, efforts will be made to integrate
India’s public financial management systems and accountability mechanisms (budgeting, accounting,
public expenditure management, external auditing, corporate governance, right to information, and
redressal of citizens’ grievances) and tools (social audits, e-project management, and e-monitoring) into
Bank operations. The Bank’s technical support will aim to strengthen program-level budgeting and
implementation of a new chart of accounts to improve linkages between spending and performance. The
Bank will also help strengthen and scale up the government’s Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System
(CPSMS), monitoring of central plan funds by enabling real-time tracking of expenditures.
Procurement and financial management capacity building components in WBG-financed projects will aim
to strengthen and mainstream country systems. Governance and accountability action plans—required for
all Bank operations in India—will continue to help mitigate fiduciary risks while promoting institutional
effectiveness for better service delivery.
119.
The knowledge portfolio will complement and underpin lending operations, especially in
low-income and special category states, and in relatively new areas of engagement. In a country as
sophisticated and diverse as India, there is no dearth of knowledge providers. The WBG’s value lies in its
ability to focus on long-term, complex, multisectoral issues; to bring together experience from across the
world; and engage deeply in policy, program, and project implementation. Its knowledge is conveyed
through analytical and advisory services, impact evaluations, and research and embedded in operations
and lending. The World Bank Group also acts as a convener, bringing together Indian and foreign
policymakers on key policy issues, such as clean energy, job creation, and informality, and facilitating
exchanges of South-South knowledge. The Bank and the Indian Government regularly review the
knowledge portfolio to maximize the strategic relevance and timeliness of knowledge products.
120.
The World Bank Group’s knowledge agenda for FY2013–17 will be guided by (i) focusing indepth analytical work on a few key cross-sectoral questions (e.g., growth and inclusion, energy, and
urbanization), carried out in partnership with local and international institutions; (ii) informing design and
implementation of future interventions by drawing on impact evaluations (e.g., on rural livelihood
programs); (iii) responding quickly and flexibly with demand-driven technical assistance and just-in-time
44

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

knowledge support to help reform and implementation; (iv) brokering South-South and across-state
knowledge exchanges; (v) developing flexible programmatic approaches to develop analytic and advisory
activities; and (vi) scaling up training capacity. Under the CPS, dissemination of knowledge across
government and nongovernment stakeholders will be enhanced.
121.
At the heart of the World Bank Group knowledge agenda will be a series of stand-alone analytical
products that aim to inform public debate around key reforms critical to India’s continued high economic
growth, poverty reduction and increased prosperity. Topics for such work will be identified over time,
although work on PPPs, nutrition and acceleration poverty reduction and shared prosperity is likely to
commence at the beginning of the CPS period. Efforts will also be made to link country-specific work to
regional flagship reports in areas that support the CPS. The regional flagship on jobs (FY12) would
support economic integration, upcoming flagship on inequality (FY14) will likely feed into work that is
relevant to the inclusion engagement area, and finally the regional flagship on urbanization (FY15) could
inform country-specific analytical work on India’s rural-urban transformation.

7.4. Collaboration and partnerships
122.
Exploiting “synergies by design” versus “synergies by chance” will enhance the
development impact of the WBG’s program. Experience during the previous CAS period has shown
that effective and planned collaboration between the World Bank and IFC is possible in India. A notable
example of this is the joint financing of the $270 million loan/investment for the PowerGrid Corporation
of India, which supports PowerGrid’s access to international commercial banking markets and leverages
the IBRD’s 18-year partnership. Collaborative work is also underway in the health sector in two lowincome states (see box 6.2). Under this CPS, collaboration will increase significantly through closer
interactions at all staff levels and across all relevant sectors. As a first step, sessions on operationalizing
the CPS across the three engagement areas, as well as in focus low-income and special category states
will be organized. Using the model developed for expanded engagement in Uttar Pradesh—one of India’s
poorest states—efforts will be made to identify synergies early in the project identification and
preparation process, so that collaboration is better planned. The end goal is to deliver an integrated
package of support, especially to low-income and special category states that combines financing
instruments knowledge and advisory services best suited to the development needs of the each state, while
building on the comparative advantage of both the World Bank and IFC. The proposed state-level
infrastructure program—identified as one of the five programs for increased collaboration—will focus on
expanding infrastructure in two states.
123.
In addition to increased collaboration in focus states, two areas are likely to benefit from the
“synergies by design” approach: investment climate and public-private partnerships. The World Bank
and IFC will work together to help the Government to improve the investment climate, where joint
economic and sector work could be pursued. Similarly, on PPPs, where the World Bank (through its
economic and sector work and technical assistance) and IFC (through its advisory services) could help
government and quasi-governmental agencies carry out regulatory reforms in sectors where IFC’s
investments (and possibly MIGA credit enhancement) could significantly boost private participation.
Opportunities for increased collaboration with MIGA, the World Bank Institute, and the Water and
Sanitation Program will also be explored.
124.
The WBG will continue to work in partnership with many bilateral and multilateral donors
to help India address its most-pressing development challenges. Partnerships take many forms,
including the pooling of financial resources, knowledge creation and dissemination, capacity building,
and support for the supervision and implementation of Bank operations. Opportunities to take further

45

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

advantage of synergies between the Bank Group and other development partners will be pursued in areas
of mutual interest, such as regional integration, infrastructure financing, climate change, and governance.
Several Bank operations are co-funded by external donors: Primary and secondary education projects
have benefited from co-financing from the U.K. Department for International Development. The Japan
International Cooperation Agency has supported the Dedicated Freight Corridor Project and urban
development in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. For the Asian Development Bank, the Government of India
follows an essentially geographic approach to come to a division of labor. The objective is to maximize
the support from both major MDBs across a range of sectors but minimize transaction costs at State level.
This approach has worked well and given both institutions’ capital limitations, it is really the only viable
choice for now. Portfolio reviews of lending and AAA benefit from ADB participation.
125.
The WBG India program has benefited from trust funds. Trust funds focusing on global
partnerships and public goods have supported many activities in India, most prominently in health. The
Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria has disbursed almost $800 million in India since its
inception in 2003. Two donor trust funds—from DFID and AusAid—have supported analytical work and
capacity building efforts. In 2009, DFID renewed its support, with a contribution of £20 million,
increasing that by £6.5 million in 2012. Funding has helped leverage the World Bank’s support to
improve service delivery, address climate change, and promote inclusive growth and governance in lowincome states such as Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, and Odisha. AusAid is providing $3.4 million
through its South Asia Region Infrastructure for Growth trust fund to support project preparation. Sixty
percent of IFC’s advisory program in India is supported by donor trust funds. The US Department of
State and Government of Italy contributed a total of $4 million to the “Lighting Asia India Program. The
Netherlands and Japan are other major donors. In an effort to diversify funding sources, IFC advisory is
working to engage with new partners such as the Gates Foundation on improving health services and
promoting financial inclusion in Bihar.

8. Financing the strategy
126.
Financial support for this CPS should be commensurate with the scale of the challenge of
helping India to accelerate poverty reduction and boost prosperity. Although the World Bank
Group’s contribution to the government’s overall development is small, the government’s "Innovation
Impulse with Investment" approach means that World Bank Group’s involvement can be catalytic and
transformative when financing is combined with knowledge and experience. Supporting the
government’s objective of faster and more inclusive growth are three project selection filters: (i) systemic
or transformational impact; (ii) innovation and piloting of new approaches; and (iii) financial leveraging.
Government expects World Bank commitments to be distributed among low-income and special category
states (30 percent), other states (30 percent) and national programs and centrally sponsored schemes (40
percent). Making growth more inclusive also entails targeting pockets of poverty in more advanced states,
where innovative approaches can be piloted and later replicated in poorer states. National projects that
make substantial investments in energy and transport, for example, help generate more growth.
127.
To make a meaningful contribution to the assault on poverty, the Government of India is
seeking about $5 billion annually in support from the World Bank Group. However, the WBG’s
ability to provide such levels of financing is uncertain due to two main factors: India approaching its
Single Borrower Limit (SBL) for IBRD exposure, currently at $17.5 billion and India’s graduation from
IDA at the end of FY14. The SBL prevents IBRD from being able expand lending to make up for the
loss of IDA resources at graduation to IBRD-only status. Beginning in FY15, support to India would drop
precipitously to an annual average of about $600 million IBRD for FY15-FY17. Looking at the full CPS
period (FY13-17), annual levels of IDA/IBRD would average only $1.4 billion. Moreover, total net flows

46

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

from IBRD/IDA turn negative in FY18 due largely to India’s graduation from IDA. (Figure 8.1)
Graduation also triggers contractual accelerated credit repayments on a large share of outstanding IDA
debt. 22
Figure 8.1 Impact of IDA Graduation on India, by IDA Replenishment, IDA15-19
(in ‘000 US dollars)
(no SPPBs, no IDA transitional support)

Source: World Bank data (actuals); staff estimates for projections.

128.
To ease the hard constraint of the SBL, India has agreed to use its own resources to
purchase Special Private Placement Bonds (SPPBs). In 2012, the Board approved the use of SPPBs by
India of up to $4.3 billion. Beginning in FY14, this additional headroom would enable India to borrow an
annual average of $2.4 billion of IBRD/IDA over the CPS period, an additional billion per year.
129.
Although India will graduate from IDA at the end of FY14, it is being proposed as a
candidate to receive transitional IDA support for the IDA17 period. Transitional IDA support would
be used to tackle India’s unfinished poverty agenda as laid out in this CPS. The terms for transitional
IDA financing would be harder than those of IDA hard-term lending, but less than the fixed rate
equivalent of an IBRD loan. Although a final decision on the volumes and terms of transitional support

22

India’s graduation from IDA also has implications on net flows because of the contractual IDA credit acceleration
clause which would be triggered. Due to India’s high outstanding IDA credit balance ($26.4 billion as of December
2012) there will be a significant increase in principal repayments by $0.5 billion a year in FY2015-FY20 from $1.2
billion under the current repayment schedule to $1.7 billion. Although transitional IDA support would help offset
the overall reduction in net flows during the CPS period, they are estimated to become negative in FY18.

47

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

will not be reached until late 2013, IDA Deputies were broadly supportive of the proposal to provide
transitional IDA support to India presented at the first IDA17 replenishment meeting.
130.
With the combination of SPPBs and assuming transitional IDA support at the levels
proposed to Deputies in the March IDA17 replenishment meeting, annual commitments for
IBRD/IDA could average about $3 billion over the CPS period. (Figure 8.2). SPPBs would be
purchased in FY14 when India hits the SBL and be used to help finance the lending program laid out in
Annex B3. IDA levels in FY14 are low because of India’s frontloading of IDA and utilizing the
remainder of the IDA16 envelope. And, even with transitional IDA support, net flows turn negative in
FY18.

Figure 8.2: Annual IDA and IBRD lending to India, FY09-24

Source: Actuals through FY12 and Staff estimates for projections.

131.
IFC investments are expected to be around $1 billion annually. IFC will maintain its focus on
private sector development through multiple engagements focusing on inclusion and improving access,
enhancing regional and global integration, and mitigation of and adaptation to climate change. During the
CPS period, IFC expects to invest approximately $2.3 billion in the low-income states. IFC also expects
to invest around $350-400 million direct and mobilized financing per annum in infrastructure water,
transport, telecom and IT and IT-enabled sectors).
132.
Overall average annual WBG financing is estimated to be about $3 billion from IBRD and
IDA (assuming transitional support from IDA and use of SPPBs) and $1 billion from IFC. This is
still short of India’s expressed borrowing needs of about $5 billion. Although hypothetical, the impact of
additional IBRD headroom would help ease the hard constraints of the SBL. If management were to
recommend, and the Board were to approve, say a $1 billion increase in the SBL for India, additional
lending space of about $500 million a year for three years would be created. World Bank Group support
for an ambitious engagement in India would necessitate the development of innovative solutions to

48

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

leverage higher levels of financing consistent with India’s "Innovation Impulse with Investment"
approach.
133.
To maximize potential financing for India, the World Bank is also exploring ways of
restructuring poorly-performing projects in the portfolio. “Right sizing” or cancelling part and
restructuring the remainder of a poorly-performing operation can free up resources in the short-term,
allowing for the commitment of resources to higher impact activities. An example is the proposed
cancellation of the $1 billion IBRD-financed India Infrastructure Finance Company, Ltd. (IIFCL), and
using the tied up capital for a similarly-sized infrastructure project.
134.
The WBG can play an important catalytic role beyond its own resources to help India
mobilize long-term financing. To complement existing World Bank Group’s existing financial
instruments, innovative means to mobilize long-term financing can respond to India’s expressed need for
help to fill its infrastructure financing gap. Strengthening India’s capital markets, developing a long-term
corporate bond market and enabling securitization of assets are additional avenues to explore.

9. Monitoring of results
135.
The CPS results framework will be the key instrument for monitoring the implementation
of the WBG country program in India (Annex 1). The results matrix presents the priority outcomes of
the WBG in India, which are aligned with the objectives of the Government’s 12th Five-Year Plan. The
country program aims to support the Government in areas where the WBG has a clear comparative
advantage. It includes ongoing and indicative lending, advisory an analytical activities, technical
assistance, and key trust-funded activities for FY13-14. The matrix comprises 18 outcomes, expected to
be achieved through mostly ongoing WBG engagements at the national, state, and local levels. A total of
32 indicators—all linked to the ongoing lending and AAA portfolio—will be monitored throughout the
CPS period. The achievement of CPS results will depend to a large extent on ongoing activities and the
speed at which new programs are developed and implemented.
136.
The three overarching goals of the CPS: reduced poverty, increased shared prosperity and
rapid economic growth reflect the CPS vision for India in 2030 under the ambitious scenario, a
country gradually regaining the economic status it once had in history. As such, these are the long-term
goals, to which the WBG program will strive to contribute in the short term or over the next five-years.
Activities in three broad areas of WBG engagement: integration, transformation and inclusion will in turn
contribute to one or more of the overarching goals.
137.
While most activities in the current WBG portfolio contribute to one or more of the three
overarching goals, the main linkage is through the WBG’s increased support to India’s low-income
and special category states (see Table 7.1). Combined, these fourteen states account for about half of
India’s population, of which 38.6 percent are poor. The WBG financing, analytical work and advisory
services will therefore aim to contribute to two specific high-level country outcomes: increased economic
growth as measured by GSDP per capita (on average $512.5 in 2011), and decrease in poverty (in 2011
38.6 percent of the total population in 14 LIS and Special Category States were poor). Analytical work
underpinning this CPS also clearly indicates that economic integration across states and countries leads to
per capita income convergence. Guided by the Government’s "Innovation Impulse with Investment"
approach, the CPS therefore, focuses on India’s low-income and special category states in an effort to
contribute to a more balanced growth across the country.
138.
The results framework will mainly monitor outcomes and indicators at the program level.
Directly mapped to the WBG program, these outcomes (18 in all) and indicators will be tracked and used
49

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

mid-and end-CPS period to assess WBG performance. Each outcome supports relevant Government
goals as defined in the Government’s 12th Plan. A significant departure from past practice and reflection
of continued efforts at improved collaboration across the WBG is the inclusion of common indicators that
aggregate IDA, IBRD and IFC contributions and program toward program level outcomes.
139.
CPS program implementation will be tracked and reviewed on a regular basis. The CPS
results framework will also be reviewed in the context of periodic country portfolio reviews, where
progress on—as well as risks to—achieving CPS outcomes will be assessed. The Results Integration and
Monitoring System, a web-based application recently improved and re-launched, will be used to monitor
progress towards achieving CPS outcomes. The system will be updated every six month, and updates
will be shared with Government counterparts. A CPS progress report will be prepared at midterm in
FY15 to evaluate progress, assess relevance of CPS outcomes to longer-term objectives. The matrix will
be adjusted as needed, and new activities will be added in response to Government’s demand throughout
the CPS period, but especially for FY15 and FY16 activities.

10. Managing risks
140.
Achieving the ambitious vision of India in 2030 entails mitigating significant potential
economic and political country level risks. Although India’s GDP growth is forecast to strengthen
modestly to 6.4 percent in the 2013 fiscal year, and rise to 7.3 percent in 2015,23 elevated inflation and
large fiscal and current account deficits will remain concerns. Continued sluggishness of the global
economy is likely to affect India’s growth prospects in the short-term. Although recent policy
announcements have helped improve investors’ confidence, the Government will need to break the
current policy logjam and push through deeper and more difficult reforms needed to improve the business
climate, increase tax efficiency, and improve the efficiency of public expenditures. While general
elections will be held in 2014, it will be important to recognize that continued progress on the reform
agenda will be critical to the country’s progress toward the vision of India in 2030—a country that triples
its per capita income in just one generation, reduces poverty to 5.5 percent, and increased shared
prosperity.
141.
By focusing on economic integration, spatial transformation and social inclusion, the CPS
mitigates the risk that growth will slow down and progress on poverty reduction and human
development will be stalled. Realizing India’s economic potential requires seizing the demographic
dividend and this in turn will critically depend on job creation. New entrants to the labor force need to
find gainful employment for lower dependency ratios to actually lead to higher output per capita. Greater
economic integration, through physical connectivity and the removal of inefficient regulations, is key to
boost the creation of jobs by the private sector. A successful spatial transformation, including agricultural
modernization and rapid urbanization, is needed for jobs to become more productive. Progress in social
inclusion, providing opportunities for everyone to live a healthy life, acquire new skills, and access
gainful employment, is a pre-requisite for shared prosperity. The choice of areas of engagement in the
CPS is thus well geared towards helping India realize its potential.
142.
At the same time, by shifting the focus to low-income and special category states, the CPS
assumes a higher operational risk. The CPS assumes a much higher level of operational risk did the
previous CAS. But higher risks often entail greater payoffs, as reflected in the ambitious India 2030
scenario outlined here, one of rapid inclusive growth and equally rapid poverty reduction. A more
pronounced shift to working in low-income and special category states—states that often have weak,
systems, capacities and institutions; difficulties in adequately staffing project units; poor data collection—
23

Global Economic Prospects, 2013.

50

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR INDIA: FY2013–17

may have the effect of delaying project preparation and implementation. However, many low-income
states are now growing faster despite having lower levels of capital than more advanced states. This in
turn translates into higher marginal returns to investment over time. Low-income states also have the
highest poverty rates, and some of the lowest human development indicators, so that poverty reduction
payoffs from successful interventions will be high. The "Innovation Impulse with Investment" principles
of working on transformational, innovative projects and those with high potential for leverage are also
inherently risky. Compounding that risk, a few areas where the Bank Group has been asked to
contribute—nutrition, urban development, higher education, and education quality—have proven difficult
in the past. As the CPS is implemented, it will be important to build on the lessons learned from both past
successes and failures so as to better respond to India’s challenges. Better and planned collaboration
across WBG and with development partners will help us better identify areas where the WBG can add
value and put together a mix of instruments that is suited to the needs of India.
143.
Improving portfolio performance will be a key challenge under the CPS and of utmost
important for overall discussion on India’s financing needs. Efforts will be made to raise portfolio
indicators to levels closer to Bankwide averages. Of particular concern is the IBRD disbursement rate,
which remains low. Throughout the CPS, more emphasis will be placed on accurately identifying risks
using existing tools (e.g., Governance and Accountability Action Plans and the Operational RiskAssessment Framework), proposing mitigating measures, and jointly monitoring the portfolio to address
problems proactively as they arise. An effort to customize solutions (in the form of integrated packages of
support) to better meet the needs of each borrower will help in the management of a riskier portfolio.
Ongoing Government-WBG efforts to strengthen portfolio performance will have to be sustained
throughout the CPS period to ensure results of the WBG program and its contribution to accelerating
poverty reduction and boosting shared prosperity across India.

51

ANNEX 1

INDIA CPS Results Framework
Overarching Goals
Economic Growth * Poverty Reduction * Shared Prosperity

High level Country Outcomes
Low-income States + Special Category States (Total population: 600 million)
Baseline (2011): GSDP per Capita: US $ 512.5; Percent Poor: 38.6%
Government
Strategic
Objectives (12th
Plan Goals)

Issues and
Obstacles

CPS Outcomes and Indicators

Indicative Milestones

World Bank Group Program
(Ongoing and Indicative)

Engagement Area 1: Integration
Upgrade national
and state highways
to the minimum
two-lane standard

Most national
highways need
upgrading and
maintenance work

Complete Eastern
and Western
Freight Corridors

Low freight train
capacity;
inadequate asset
maintenance

Strengthen India's
electricity supply
and transmission
system in order to
increase
availability and
reliability of power
for economic
development

1

Electricity
transmission
capacity between
regions and states
is low
Generation stations
operate below
capacity (60% of
firms rely on costly
back-up
generation)

1.1 Improved transport
connectivity in targeted States
. 9000 Km of additional State
highways upgraded and maintained
in good condition in targeted states
by 2017
. Rail transport capacity on Eastern
Freight Corridor increased from 20
(in 2011) to 22 (NTKM bn ton-km)
by 2017
1.2 Improved inter-regional
power transmission
connectivity
. Power exchange between regions
and States increased from 46,027
Gwh in 2009 to 60,000 Gwh by
2017

Generation of at least US$300
million in new private sector
capital for Core Road Network
improvement and management
340 km of the Eastern rail
corridor (Khurja and Kanpur
section) completed

At least 5,000 circuit kilometers
of transmission capacity added
by 2015
At least 412 MW of hydro
power generation capacity
constructed by 2017
630 MW of Coal-Fired
generation plant rehabilitated

Ongoing financing: Assam State Roads;
Odisha State Roads; Punjab State
Roads; Karnataka State Highway
Improvement II; Eastern Dedicated
Freight Corridor
Indicative financing: Rajasthan Rural
Road Connectivity; Tamil Nadu Roads
II; Kerala Transport II; National
Highways Interconnectivity; Gujarat
Highways II; Eastern Dedicated Freight
Corridor II
Knowledge activities1: Transport
Policies and Reform Activities
Ongoing financing: Coal-Fired
Generation Rehabilitation; Vishnugad
Pipalkoti Hydroelectric; Haryana Power
Sector Improvement; Rampur
Hydropower; Power Sector
Development IV&V; IFC investment in
the transmission sector (Nepal-India
Power Transmission Project)
Indicative financing: Northeast Power
Transmission; Luhri Hydropower
Knowledge activities: Concentration
Solar Power; Program for Market
Readiness; Rural Feeder Segregation;

Knowledge activities include advisory services, technical assistance, impact evaluations, and economic and sector work.

ANNEX 1

Develop demand
driven, skilled
workforce by
providing increased
opportunities skills
training

INDIA CPS Results Framework

Skills mismatch in
the job market.
Poorly trained
labor force (29%
not literate and
another 24% with
primary education).
Low female labor
force participation
(29% of total).

Increase private
sector investment
in lagging regions

Low private sector
investment in Lowincome States

1.3 Improved demand-driven
skills for productive
employment

5 Institutes of training of trainers
(ITOT) established by 2014

. Graduates of Industrial Training
Institutes employed within 1st year
of completing training increased
from 60% (Female 38%) in 2012
to 70% (Female 50%) by 2015

At least 3000 new and current
instructors given entry-level or
refresher/specialized instructors
courses annually by 2015

. At least 17,000 youth (including
more than 50% women) from the
supported SHGs and CDOs are
placed in appropriate jobs

At least 33,000 SHGs are
provided with job placement
training

1.4 Enhanced private investment
in low income States

IFC’s technical assistance and
PPP advisory projects in lowincome states, which include

. Additional US$ 2.3 billion private
investment facilitated in LIS States
by 2017

Integrate regional
market in trade,
infrastructure
(power and
transport), and
investment

Below potential
levels of regional
trade and
investment; poor
connectivity
between India and

1.5 Strengthened regional trade
and infrastructure
integration
. 150 MW of electricity traded
between India and Nepal by 2017

-

8 IFC led technical advisory
and/or PPP projects in by
2015

-

23 IFC led investment
projects by 2015

Construction of Indo-Nepal
transmission line has
commenced in accordance with
the tender package awarded by
2014

Private Sector Participation in
Hydropower
Ongoing financing: Vocational
Training Improvement; Second
Technical Engineering Education
Quality; National Rural Livelihoods;
State Livelihood Projects (Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu, and Northeast)
Indicative financing: Andhra Pradesh
Rural Inclusive Growth; IFC investments
in competitive, employment generating
industries
Knowledge activities: Migration and
Remittances; Higher Education; Small
and Medium Enterprise Capacity
Building; IFC Farmer Training/GAP
Program, India Sugar Program and
Farm Forestry Project; TVET; West
Bengal Skills Development
Ongoing financing: IFC investment to
support enabling environment and
mobilize private sector resources for
investments and PPP projects in Bihar,
Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, and
West Bengal
Indicative financing: IFC investment to
support enabling environment and
mobilize private sector resources for
investments in Uttar Pradesh
Knowledge activities: IFC’s programs
on Health for All, Buddhist Circuit,
Rajasthan IC
Indicative operations: Nepal-India
Trade and Transport Facilitation Project;
IFC South-South investments
Knowledge activities: Bangladesh-India
Inland Water Transport; TA for
knowledge exchange across SAR

ANNEX 1

INDIA CPS Results Framework
neighboring
countries

. Border crossing time between
India and Nepal reduced by 20 %
by 2017 (3-4 days in 2012)

Trade information portal and
single window system developed
by 2015

countries on performance management

Narayanghat-mugling road
upgraded by 2016
Engagement Area 2: Transformation
Improve long-term
planning for
sustainable and
inclusive urban
development;
strengthen
governance and
financial
sustainability of
urban local bodies
(ULBs)

Low urban
planning capacity,
weak governance,
and financially
unsustainable
ULBs, with limited
capacity to raise
own resources

2.1 Strengthened institutional
capacity of urban government in
targeted states

Increase public
transport; expand
metro rail and bus
system; and
improve road safety

Poor or nonexistent urban
transport planning

2.2 Improved urban transport
services

Improve access to
water and
sanitation services
in rural and urban
areas

Supply of public
transport has not
kept up with
demand
Limited access to
piped water supply
services and
sanitation systems
in rural and urban
areas

. At least 220 cities (ULBs) with
new/updated urban management
systems (in planning, financial
management, citizen-interface, etc. )
to improve service delivery in
targeted states by 2017

. Modal share by public
transport in targeted cities
increased from 4 % in 2010 to 8%
by 2017
2.3 Improved access to water
supply and sanitation services
. Additional 34 million people
provided with access to improved
water sources by 2017
. Additional 12 million people
provided with access to improved

At least 20 cities with
new/revised city development
plan in targeted States by 2015

230 cities with new egovernance and/or GIS mapping
system in Karnataka State by
2016 (0 in 2012)

6 Cities developed urban
transport investment plans by
2016

Ongoing financing: Capacity Building
for Urban Development; Andhra Pradesh
Municipal Development ; Third Tamil
Nadu Urban Development; Karnataka
Municipal Reform
Indicative financing: Informal
Settlements; West Bengal Secondary
Cities
Knowledge activities: Social
Dimensions of Urbanization; National
Land Records Modernization
Implementation Support; Inclusive
Heritage Based City Development
Planning; IFC’s advisory assistance to
governments to structure PPP
Ongoing financing: Mumbai Urban
Transport; Sustainable Urban Transport
Indicative financing: Efficient and
Sustainable City Bus Service

7 additional electric EMU train
(12-car train) added in targeted
cities by 2017

Additional 18,000 water supply
systems rehabilitated or
extended across states by 2017
Additional 10,000 sanitation
systems rehabilitated or
extended across states by 2017

Ongoing financing: Tamil Nadu Urban
III; Andhra Pradesh Municipal
Development; Karnataka Municipal
Reform; Karnataka RWSS II; Punjab
RWSS; Uttaranchal RWSS; Andhra
Pradesh RWSS; Kerala RWSSP II; IFC's
Waste to Energy Investment Project;
IFC investment in water treating utilities
Indicative financing: Karnataka Urban

ANNEX 1

INDIA CPS Results Framework
sanitation system by 2017 (Urban:
1.2 million; Rural: 10.8 million)

Raise agricultural
productivity to 4%
per annum
Strengthen irrigated
water resource
management

Low agricultural
productivity

2.4 Increased agricultural
productivity in targeted areas

Outdated
agriculture
technology and
practices

. Cereal yield for beneficiaries
farmers (tons/hectares)
- Paddy increased from 2.9 in
2012 to 3.5 by 2017
- Wheat increased from 2.8 in
2012 to 3.5 by 2017
- Sugarcane increased from 55
in 2012 to 63 by 2017

Inefficient and
unsustainable use
of water resources
in irrigated
agriculture

. Milk production (kg/day/animal)
for beneficiaries farmers increased
from 4 kg in 2012 to 4.4 kg by 2017

Improve
management of
natural resources
by introducing
regulation to limit
water pollution,
improving
sewerage treatment
system, and

Deteriorating
environmental
quality due to
water pollution
Unsustainable
exploitation of
natural resources

2.5 Improved environment
protection and biodiversity
conservation
. 160 million liter per day of
untreated municipal and industrial
wastewater prevented from entering
the National Ganga River by 2017

Additional 1.1 million hectares
of improved irrigation in
targeted areas by 2017
At least 1 million farmers
adopting improved crop
production techniques and
practices in targeted areas by
2017
At least 500,000 farmers
adopting improved livestock
production techniques and
practices in targeted areas by
2017

Environmental Compliance
Assistance Center to promote
measures for voluntary industrial
compliance established by 2015
Additional 200 million liter day
of wastewater treatment capacity
created in the National Ganga

Water Modernization; Maharashtra
Rural Water and Sanitation III; Rural
Water Supply in Low-income States
Knowledge activities: IFC's India EWaste Advisory
Ongoing financing: National
Agriculture Innovation; Maharashtra
Agriculture Competitiveness; Assam
Competitiveness; National Dairy
Support; Andhra Pradesh Community
Tank Management; Tamil Nadu Irrigated
Agriculture; Uttar Pradesh Sodic Land
Reclamation; Water Sector Restructuring
(Andhra Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh);
Odisha Community Tank Management;
Rajasthan Water Sector; West Bengal
Minor Irrigation; IFC’s investments in
diary/oilseed/poultry sector and in
fertilizers and pesticides production
Indicative financing: Uttar Pradesh
Water Sector Restructuring II; Northeast
Water Resources; National Watersheds;
Uttarkhand Watersheds II; Himachal
Pradesh Mid-Himalayan WatershedsAF; Northeast Water Resources
Knowledge activities: Enhancing
Agriculture Productivity: Policy and
Investment Priorities; Capacity
Development for Integrated Water
Resource Development; IFC India
Sugar Program & Farmer Training/GAP
Ongoing financing: National Ganga
River Basin; Capacity Building for
Industrial Pollution Management;
Integrated Coastal Zone Management;
Biodiversity Conservation and Rural
Livelihood Improvement; Sustainable
Land Management
Indicative financing Himachal Pradesh
Watershed-AF; Karnataka Watershed;

ANNEX 1
protecting
biodiversity

INDIA CPS Results Framework
and degradation of
biodiversity.

River basin by 2017
. Additional 500,000 hectares
brought under enhanced
biodiversity protected area
management

Institutional and methodological
framework and guidelines for
landscape conservation
approaches developed in high
biodiversity landscapes

Sustainable Livelihoods and Adaptation
to Climate Change; Sundarbans
Biodiversity Conservation Integrated
Coastal Zone Management II
Knowledge activities: Green Growth in
Himachal Pradesh; IFC Agri-water
efficiency program and industrial water
reuse project

Additional 500 million liter of
water saved or harvested as a
result of IFC’s engagement
Reduce the
intensity of
greenhouse gas
emissions

Lack of awareness
about energy
saving technologies
and measures to
reduce Ozone
Depleting
Substances

2.6 Reduced Greenhouse Gas
Emissions through energy
efficiency and renewable
energy production

Additional 4,000 MW of energy
saved via supported energy
efficiency measures by 2017

. Additional 1.5 million (tCO2e)
GHG emissions reduced per year by
2016

Additional 3000 Gwh of
renewable energy capacity
developed by 2017
80 CFC-based centrifugal
chillers replaced by the CEEP
Construction and operation of 13
solar and wind stations by 2017

Ongoing Financing: Coal-Fired
Generation Rehabilitation; Vishnugad
Pipalkoti Hydroelectric; IFC Renewable
Energy and Energy Efficiency PPP;
IFC’s Equity/Debt Investment in
Renewables, Energy Efficiency projects
in Manufacturing Sector, and
wholesaling through financial
institutions
Indicative: Himachal Pradesh DPL II;
CTF-Energy Efficiency Partial Risk
Sharing Facility; CTF-Super Efficient
Equipment Program
Knowledge activities: IFC Lighting
Asia: India Program

Engagement Area 3: Inclusion
Universalize access
to electricity,
focusing on
electrification of all
villages
Increase household
access to clean and
environmentally
sustainable energy

30% of rural
households lack
access to
electricity;
High reliance on
traditional sources
of fuel in rural
households, with
deleterious health
impact

3.1 Improved access to electricity
in targeted states
. Additional 300,000 of connections
to Below Poverty Line households
by 2017 in North Eastern Region
. Additional 220,000 households
with off-grid connections

At least 10,000 circuit
kilometers of transmission
capacity added by 2015
At least 412 MW of hydro
power generation capacity
constructed by 2017
630 MW of Coal-Fired
generation plant rehabilitated

Ongoing financing: Power System
Development IV; Coal-Fired Generation
Rehab; Rampur Hydro Power; Haryana
Power System Improvement;
PowerGridV;Vishnugad Pipalkoti; IFC
Investment in private sector generation,
transmission and distribution; IFC
supported direct lines with
banks/infrastructure finance companies
to support renewable energy;
Indicative financing: Northeast Power
Transmission

ANNEX 1

Improve efficiency
of health delivery
systems by
converging health
programs under the
National Rural
Health Mission

Reduce undernutrition among
children aged 0-3
from 40% (200506) to 27%

Universalize access
to secondary
education by 2017

INDIA CPS Results Framework

Limited capacity of
state-level health
institutions (low
accountability,
inadequate
financial
management, poor
quality assurance,
poorly trained
health workers),
resulting in
inefficiency
delivery of health
services

Inadequate
systems/institutions
to address high
levels of child
malnutrition (40%
of the world’s
malnourished
children live in
India)

Poor quality of
education at all
levels

3.2 Strengthened public and
private health delivery systems
. Below Poverty Line (BPL) and
other vulnerable households
covered under Government
Sponsored Health Insurance
Schemes increased from 180 million
in 2011 to 350 million by 2017
. Additional 9.4 million patients
reached in supported private health
facilities by 2017
. Public sector hospitals that have
achieved entry level-preaccreditation in the three sates (UP,
Tamil Nadu, and Karnataka)
increased from 6 in 2011 to 50 by
2017
3.3 Improved child nutrition
delivery systems in targeted States
. 246,000 Anganwadi Centers
conducting inter-personal
counseling to improve Infant and
Young Child Feeding practices
. 400,000 additional Below Poverty
Line (BPL) households with access
to community management nutrition
centers

3.4 Improved access and quality
of education

At least 40 health facilities
assessments completed and
action plan developed in the
targeted states by 2017
At least 50 PPPs performancebased contracts in health
facilities in targeted states by
2017
Additional 21 private health
facilities strengthened through
IFC engagements

Multi-sectoral nutrition action
plans developed and
implemented in targeted districts
in 6 states
Inter-personal counseling
guidelines and tools material for
promoting positive IYCF
behaviors developed and
adopted by 8 states

Knowledge activities: IFC Lighting
Asia: India Program and Rooftop Solar
Program.
Ongoing financing: Uttar Pradesh
Health System Strengthening; Karnataka
Health System – AF; IFC’s Investment
in private health facilities; IFC’s
Jharkhand Hospital PPP
Indicative financing: National AIDS
Control Support Project
Knowledge activities: Service Delivery
and Public Spending on Health;
Government-sponsored Health Insurance
Schemes; IFC’s Meghalaya Health for
All; IFC’s Shillong Medical; Karnataka
RBF Hospital Care

Ongoing financing: ICDS Systems
Strengthening and Nutrition
Improvement
Knowledge activities: Multisectoral
Nutrition Action in Bihar; Social
Observatory for Rural Food & Nutrition
Security in National Rural Livelihoods
Mission; Community Food and Nutrition
Initiatives in High Poverty States

10,000 additional community
service delivery centers
organized by 2017
New system of National
Assessment of Student

Ongoing financing: RMSA Secondary
Education; IFC Investment in education
infrastructure

ANNEX 1

Improve quality at
all Education levels
and align programs
to market needs

Implement direct
cash transfer for
major subsidies and
welfare-related
beneficiary
payments

Create economic
opportunities to
improve rural
livelihood of poor
households

Improve financial
Services

INDIA CPS Results Framework

Low learning
outcomes,
Low retention rates
and enrollment at
the secondary level
Limited access to
education by
underprivileged
children/youth
Limited state-level
institutional
capacity and
systems to
implement social
protection
programs
(including
beneficiary
awareness,
enrollment,
benefits payments
and tracking and
accountability)
Limited livelihood
opportunities (farm
and non-farm) for
rural poor,
especially women

40% of households
do not avail any
banking services

. Enrolment of students in
Secondary (Grade IX and X)
increased from 28 million in 2012 to
40 million by 2017
. Gross Graduation rate increased
from 78% in 2010 to 88% by 2017
. Gender Parity Index (GPI) in
secondary schools increased from
94% in 2010 to 98% by 2017
3.5 Increased coverage of social
protection programs in targeted
States
. Coverage of program
beneficiaries in targeted districts
increased from 18% in 2012 to 25%
by 2017

Performance developed and
implemented (for grade X) by
2014
Proportion of schools with all
core subject specific teachers
available increased from 20 % in
2010 to 40% by 2017

IT application to track benefit
payments established in at least
one state by 2015
State disability and older persons
policies developed for at least
one state by 2015

Indicative financing: Bihar Teacher
Education and Training; SSA—
Education for All
Knowledge activities: Teachers
Education; Secondary Education;
Teacher's Education and Professional
Development- International Best
Practice; IFC’s Gujarat University PPP
and Meghalaya College PPPs

Indicative financing: Bihar Integrated
Social Protection Strengthening Project
Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth
Knowledge activities: Social Pensions;
Jharkhand Social Protection;
Chhattisgarh RSBY/PDS Evaluation

At least 50 social protection
service centers established by
2017

3.6 Enhanced rural livelihood
opportunities in targeted States
. Additional 500,000 supported
poor households report a minimum
of 20% increase in income by 2017

3.7 Increased access to financial
services in targeted states

. A least 50,000 additional Self
Help Groups (SHGs) have been
formed, including poor women
SHGs

Ongoing financing: National Rural
Livelihood Project; State Rural
Livelihood Projects (Bihar, Odisha,
Rajasthan, and Northeast states);
Scaling-up Sustainable and Responsible
Micro-Finance
Indicative financing: Andhra Pradesh
Rural Inclusive Growth Andhra Pradesh:
Rural Poverty Impact Evaluation Food
Security in Tribal and Conflict Affected
Areas Strengthening Implementation of
Rural Livelihood Program
Ongoing financing: National Rural
Livelihood Project; State Livelihood
Projects (Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil

ANNEX 1
Provide access to
banking services to
90% of Indian
households

INDIA CPS Results Framework

Organized financial
sector does not
reach out to a large
segment of the
population

. Additional one million households
with access to formal financial
services by 2017.

10 additional number of lenders
for low-income housing finance
created in target States by 2017

. Additional 20 million loans
provided to micro-, small-, and
medium-enterprises in targeted
states by 2017 (including 0.5 million
to female-owned microenterprises)

27 MFIs supported through
IFC’s engagement

. Additional 750,000 payment
accounts opened by 2017

Strengthen natural
disaster
management/
resilience

Weak or nonexistent institutions
and mechanisms
for enhanced
disaster risk
management and
climate resilience,
especially in
agriculture and
water-intensive
sectors

3.8 Enhanced disaster risk
management system
. At least 3 states have installed an
operational Early Warning
dissemination Systems (EWDS)in
targeted vulnerable communities by
2017

Master plan for Flood
Management prepared for Kosi
river basin by 2015
Multi-hazard risk and
vulnerability assessment
prepared for India’s coastal areas
by 2015
400 Cyclone shelters completed
in targeted coastal areas by 2017
900 Remote Public Alert
Communication System installed
by 2015

Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, and states
in the Northeast); IFC investments in
MFIs; IFC equity in banks and long-term
finance institutions; IFC’s short-term
trade finance and liquidity to banks.
Indicative Financing: IFC Low-income
Housing Finance
Knowledge activities: Rural Credit
Cooperatives; Financial Literacy and
Education; IFC Micro-and small and
medium enterprise access to finance:
Capacity Building Programs with Banks
and NBFCs; IFC work to facilitate G2P
for health services
Ongoing financing: National Cyclone
Risk Mitigation I; Bihar Kosi I; Global
Fund for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery
Indicative financing: Bihar Flood
Rehabilitation II; Tamil Nadu and
Puducherry Disaster Risk Reduction;
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Phase
II & III
Knowledge activities: Bihar Kosi Flood
and Climate Adaptation; Support to
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation
Program

Annex 2: India: FY09-12 Country Strategy Completion Report
I. Introduction, Background and Summary Findings
1.
This Completion Report is a self-assessment of the FY09-12 India Country
Strategy (referred to as the CAS) discussed by the Executive Directors in December
20081 and the Country Strategy Progress Report discussed by the Executive Directors in
December 2010. The self-assessment focuses on two summary evaluations: (i) CAS
performance, which assesses the relative success of the activities supported by the World
Bank Group2 (WBG) to help India achieve those development goals identified as CAS
“pillars”; and (ii) WB performance, which assesses the WB’s contribution to the CAS’s
design and implementation. It is important to note that these are not assessments of
India’s progress toward its development goals, but rather of achievements directly linked
to WB-supported activities and to the WB’s engagement. This distinction matters if only
because the WBG financial role in India is a very small input into India’s development
finance (both public and private) and WBG knowledge inputs are one of many voices in
the “polylogue” that constitutes India’s policy discourse.
2.
The India Country Strategy (CAS) coincided with the final four years of India’s
XIth Five Year Plan (2007-12). National elections in 2009 returned to power the ruling
UPA coalition led by the Indian National Congress. But recent legislative elections at the
state level have confirmed the rise of regional political parties and leaders within and
outside of the ruling coalition, with a delicate balance of power impacting the
government's reform agenda. The XIth Plan significantly scaled up programs to reduce
poverty and social exclusion, including 13 “Flagship Development Programs” on which
almost $150 billion was spent during the Plan period. High aggregate growth over the past
decade and an acceleration of agricultural growth during the XIth Plan contributed to a
rapid fall of the official poverty rate.
3.
The CAS is aligned closely to the priorities of the XIth Plan through its three
pillars: (i) rapid, inclusive growth; (ii) sustainable development; and (iii) enhanced service
delivery. It emphasized a differentiated approach across India’s highly diverse socioeconomic environments. In low-income states (LISs)3 and in lagging regions of more
advanced states, the CAS foresaw a focus on poverty reduction, achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), and improving the investment climate. Recognizing that
previous efforts to engage more with LISs, including increased lending, had fallen short,
the CAS ambitiously targeted 30% of new WB lending to LISs and Special Category
States4. Increasing LIS engagement was also an IFC priority. In the middle- and highincome states and at the national level, the CAS aimed to remove constraints to sustained
high growth particularly in infrastructure and skills and to build institutions to help cope
with emerging middle-income challenges. On the analytical side, the program included a
small number of multi-year, cross-sectoral analytical pieces on important issues
confronting India, including poverty, social exclusion, and urbanization, complemented
by on-demand policy and implementation advice (such as on land acquisition,
resettlement, and rehabilitation) and due-diligence reviews (such as on strengthening

1

R2008-0242 IBRD/IDA/IFC Country Strategy for the Republic of India FY2009-2021, Thursday
December 11, 2008
2 In this report, the World Bank Group (WBG) constitutes the World Bank (WB) and the
International Finance Corporation (IFC). The WB lending windows are the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International Development Association (IDA).
3 LISs include Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, and Uttar
Pradesh.
4
Special Category States are states in mountainous and border regions.

1

procurement in the health sector and periodic macroeconomic updates). The CAS called
for stronger collaboration between the WB and IFC.
4.
The CAS adopted a cautious approach to projected lending volumes, especially
for IBRD, given that headroom was emerging as a major constraint as India approached
the single borrower limit – which was increased to $16.5 billion in 2009 and again to
$17.5 billion in 2010. Accordingly, the CAS IBRD lending program was initially
projected to average $2.9 billion annually with a limit of 10% in fast-disbursing
instruments. As reported in the CAS progress Report, actual lending levels were
significantly higher, averaging $ 5 billion annually, due to the WB’s response to the 2008
financial crisis. India received about 11% of IDA resources, in line with India’s IDA cap.
5.
The Completion Report deems performance of the CAS in achieving its intended
outcomes as satisfactory. The three pillars of the CAS results framework included 12
outcome clusters and over 45 individual outcomes (the Self-Evaluation Matrix is attached
as Annex 1). The overall assessment draws on the following key findings under each
pillar: (i) rapid, inclusive growth – the WBG significantly and successfully ramped up its
support to India in response to the financial crisis, supporting the banking sector, SMEs,
and infrastructure, while continuing to respond to strong demand for support to national
programs on rural livelihoods, rural roads, and education; (ii) sustainable development –
the WBG's engagement on environmental sustainability, clean energy, and climate change
was catalytic in advancing key programs and the institutions managing them (such as
industrial pollution, coastal zone management, Ganga clean-up, disaster management, and
solar energy) and in mobilizing climate finance (including from the CTF); (iii) enhanced
service delivery – WBG support through large Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs)
strengthened delivery systems, improved effectiveness of public finance, and piloted
innovative approaches. Overall, direct lending to LISs was 9% ($2.13 billion) of new
commitments (well below the 30% targeted in the CAS). Significant Bank support to
LISs, however, was also channeled through multi-state projects and national programs,
mainly CSSs, amounting to another 18% ($6.28 billion) of total commitments. Direct
lending to LISs remained at about the same level as during the previous CAS in spite of
initiatives to strengthen state implementation capacity (such as the Bihar Capacity
Building NLTA). The CAS envisioned engagement in Special Category States (SCSs) that
focused mainly on analytical work, capacity building and possibly some lending. Actual
lending amounts far exceeded this expectation with a 9% commitment of total lending
over the CAS period. The country team also assessed achievements in water management,
urban services and water supply and sanitation as falling short of expectations. Work on
skill development also lagged.
6.
The Completion Report considers WBG performance under the CAS as
satisfactory. On design, the CAS pillars have remained highly relevant, and the inclusion
of a separate pillar on sustainable development was timely, well aligned with
developments in India, and generated a significant increase of related activities in the
portfolio. The CAS framework attempted greater realism in setting expectations regarding
results, selectivity, and governance. As previous CASs had made only limited headway in
promoting a significant “scaling up” of results, the CAS tried to link expected CAS
outcomes more closely to WB activities, moving down the results chain toward more
intermediate outcomes and milestones for qualitative outcomes (although the
identification of indicators and baselines continued to fall short in several areas). The CAS
anticipated that the riskiness of the project portfolio would likely increase in line with
more lending to LISs and noted the potentially higher costs associated with greater
emphasis on improving country systems and pro-active management of portfolio risks. On
implementation, the CAS demonstrated that the WBG could be a valued partner to a
middle-income India. The process of ramping up lending and increasing selectivity was
implemented in a way that considerably strengthened dialogue and partnership with

2

stakeholders, particularly key government agencies. The Government of India (GoI) and
WB management team jointly developed criteria for more effective activity selection and
design (innovation, transformation, and leveraging) and agreed on actions to help manage
India’s IBRD headroom. IFC exposure requirements were also eased.

II. Progress Toward Key Development Goals
7.
India recovered rapidly from the global financial crisis but growth slowed in
2011-12. In September 2008, the global crisis hit India through confidence, trade, and
capital flow channels. Despite a rapid increase in government spending – with the general
government deficit expanding by 3.5 percentage points of GDP during the crisis – the
slowdown in private investment and consumption led to a drop in GDP from 9.6 percent
in 2007-08 to 6.8 percent in 2008-09. Growth accelerated to almost 8.5% in the next two
years, but slowed again in 2011-12 to 6.5% as both domestic investment and export
demand weakened. The policy mix adopted during the 2008-12 period balanced measures
to curb inflation, in particular monetary restraint, with continued fiscal stimulus to
maintain a conducive environment for high growth.
8.
Concerns about sustainable development took root and were mainstreamed
with new institutions and stronger enforcement. As part of its priorities, the
Government sought to focus on reforms to ensure that sound environmental management
and a broader sharing of the benefits of growth were at the core of development planning.
It also took steps – by introducing bills in Parliament – to strengthen the legal framework
for mining activities and land acquisition, and resettlement and rehabilitation (R&R). The
most dramatic change in environmental management was the more rigorous application of
existing
legislation
on
environmental
impact
assessments
and
forest
conservation. Adverse political and economic reaction led to some rollback, particularly
with rulings affecting coal development; but a momentum toward stronger environmental
institutions and governance was clearly established.
9.
Service delivery challenges persisted despite increased allocations and
innovations under flagship programs. Perhaps the most difficult challenge and the one
with the highest cost in terms of long-term development continues to be the widespread
incidence of malnutrition. Half of the world’s underweight children live in India, and it is
estimated that one-third of Indian women are under-nourished. Access to sanitation
facilities and reliable in-house piped water still elude the majority of India’s rural
population (two-thirds for sanitation) and a significant portion of urban dwellers (more
than one-quarter for sanitation). While India has achieved near-universal enrollment in
primary education, good progress in gender equity, and a marked expansion in secondary
education, girls’ access to secondary education still lags significantly, and attendance
(children’s and teachers’) and the quality of education remain low. One-quarter of the
rural settlements still lack access to an all-weather road and only one-sixth have direct
access to financial services. Enhancing service delivery in India is a problem of closing
gaps between the relatively high standards achieved in many states, regions, and districts,
and the persisting shortfalls in others.
10.
In India’s federal system, states are responsible for education, health, rural
development, water supply and sanitation, and connectivity, but in each of these areas,
Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) accounted for the bulk of additional resources for
service expansion. These schemes are administered at the state level but mostly funded
by the center (ranging from 25 - 100%) under a set of centrally designed guidelines and
administrative arrangements.
The Government had earlier recognized that the
proliferation of such schemes “has led to poor implementation, duplication, lack of
convergence and sub-optimal results.” During the XIth Plan, efforts accelerated to unify

3

and improve CSS administrative systems, including financial management and
procurement, and to introduce innovative measures such as direct payments into
beneficiary bank accounts and the use of IT tools such as the Unique Identification
Number. While the management of CSSs did improve, the Government’s Approach
Paper to the XIIth Plan points to the need for continued systems improvement, especially
at the state level, and greater flexibility to accommodate local conditions and cross-state
variations in both financial and developmental capacity.
III. Performance of the CAS
11.
A series of sector consultations and country team meetings resulted in the
attached Self-evaluation Matrix (Annex 1). The CAS performance rating weighted the
three pillars equally, but under each pillar some outcome clusters received greater
emphasis. The rating process was complicated by a lack of quantifiable indicators for
some outcomes and missing baselines for others. While the shortcomings cannot be
minimized and points to the need to further improve the results framework, they did not,
in the country team’s view, undermine a reasonably robust overall assessment. Overall the
CAS matrix showed good progress in linking CAS activities to measurable outcomes.
12.
Pillar I – Achieving Rapid, Inclusive Growth. Outcomes under this pillar were
considered achieved based on progress in WBG activities in three clusters: making
growth inclusive, removing structural constraints to growth, and supporting sound
macroeconomic and financial management and structural reforms. While lending was the
predominant instrument, several analytical and advisory activities also contributed
significantly.
13.
Inclusion was increasingly mainstreamed across the country program and
“scaling up” beyond WBG operations was targeted through support to the GoI’s
flagship programs. The first cluster of outcomes under the first pillar focused on the
WBG’s support to livelihoods, road and power connectivity, and financial inclusion.
Overall, the country team concluded that low-income and marginal groups received
significant attention in WB projects and analytic work and considered that this cluster of
outcomes was achieved. In all cases, targets for project areas were either exceeded or
expanded significantly. This was especially notable for Rural Livelihoods projects, which
built on the implementation experience of on-going projects in such diverse states as
Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. During the CAS period the number of beneficiaries
(95% of whom are women) grew from a baseline of 8 million to over 30 million as the
WB’s engagement moved from the state level to supporting the National Rural
Livelihoods Mission. Support to PMGSY, a national scheme, will cover over 24,000 km
of roads, significantly improving rural road connectivity. This scaling up also built on a
succession of state projects, five of which were still under implementation at the
beginning of the CAS period. As for microfinance, the WB and IFC – partly in response
to the 2010 crisis – helped bridge public-private perspectives and promote a favorable
environment for further growth of private microfinance institutions (MFIs) by promoting
responsible microfinance, with a focus on borrowers’ financial literacy and awareness and
credit bureaus. The WB’s Scaling-up Sustainable and Responsible Microfinance project
directly supported over 460,000 clients (predominantly women), 80% in underserved
areas, and leveraged $3 billion from partner institutions to underserved clients. The WB
also provided support for small and medium enterprises (SMEs), strengthened rural credit
cooperatives, and the modified agricultural insurance scheme. IFC invested in non-bank
finance companies, dedicated providers of equity capital to SMEs, and advisory
partnerships with housing finance companies and microfinance institutions. IFC Advisory
partnered with credit bureaus; supported e-banking initiatives; helped build a secured
transaction registry for SMEs; and promoted product diversification (to remittances,
payments, deposits, pensions, and insurance) and expansion to underserved geographic

4

regions. In terms of gender, about one-third of WB projects have gender disaggregated
indicators. However, the country team considered that gender issues affecting a broad
range of WB activities (from livelihoods to service delivery) could have been better
mainstreamed throughout the program. Flagship AAA reports on poverty, social
exclusion, and social protection supported a wider and better-informed policy dialogue.
14.
Infrastructure support was ramped up to tackle growth constraints,
amounting to 45% of WBG commitments. The second cluster of outcomes under the
first pillar focused on removing structural constraints to growth in three areas:
infrastructure, skills, and agricultural productivity. Transformational support to closing
infrastructure gaps and diversified agricultural interventions contributed significantly to
the “achieved” rating for this cluster. The country team considers that progress in
infrastructure, in terms of both financial support and project management capacity,
constituted a notable achievement under the CAS, and helped alleviate key structural
bottlenecks, besides providing expanded resources during the global financial crisis. The
WB committed close to $7 billion in energy and transport during the FY09-12 CAS period,
up from less than $3 billion during the previous CAS. IFC likewise ramped up its lending
and equity investments in infrastructure to $676 million over the CAS period. This
substantial increase in WBG support to India’s infrastructure provided a key test of the
degree to which the new selectivity criteria of transforming, innovating, and leveraging
could be usefully applied. Examples include the Dedicated Freight Corridor, which
represents a transformational shift in India’s rail management, and PowerGrid, which
made the transition from government-guaranteed IBRD lending to an IFC syndicated loan.
The long-term partnership between the WB and PowerGrid with two previous loans under
implementation at the beginning of the CAS period has helped establish a strong
transmission system and supported PowerGrid in its institutional strengthening through
safeguards and fiduciary dialogue, helping it to become one of the best transmission
utilities in the world. IFC cumulatively invested $309 million in private sector power
generation, transmission, and distribution in 19 projects during the CAS period. The WB’s
long involvement in the transport sector also contributed to improved project and asset
management (through maintenance contracting), along with the incorporation of safety
objectives (in seven states and the national PMGSY scheme). Important collaborative
benchmarks included the joint WB-IFC advisory service for the Chennai metro, and
support to the Maharashtra State Electricity Transmission Company (through the subnational lending program).
Responding to requests from government agencies and
committees, the WB provided NLTA on various infrastructure issues (including the
national transport strategy, energy, PPPs, and urban infrastructure).
15.
WBG engagement on PPPs expanded but procedures to support PPPs need
review, and the experience during the CAS was mixed. The CAS outcome matrix
rightly identified PPPs as a key challenge and a crucial area of WBG engagement in
infrastructure (and other sectors). On the positive side, IFC Advisory provided significant
assistance on the investment climate at the state level and for specific PPP transactions –
in a broad range of sectors from solar power, street lighting, irrigation, roads, hospitals,
and health services 5 (including in LISs), and through support from the South Asia
Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund – while the WB focused NLTA on the broader policy
environment for PPPs at the national level. Several projects supported developing PPP
approaches, notably in transport, though in some cases PPPs could have been introduced
more effectively at an earlier stage in project development. The main instrument
conceived to provide financing for PPPs, the Financial Intermediary Loan to India
Infrastructure Finance Company (IIFCL), encountered major difficulties. IIFCL was set
up to help fill financing gaps in PPPs as a junior partner one to two years after initial
5

These included transactions in the low-income states (LIS) of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh,
and Odisha. The LISs are a priority focus for IFC.

5

project partnerships had been identified and agreed. But confirming ex post that such
projects met WB fiduciary and social/environmental safeguards proved much more
difficult than anticipated. Disbursements have been negligible leading to the possibility of
restructuring the loan to IIFCL. Moreover, India’s own experience with PPPs grew so
rapidly during this period that some Government stakeholders perceived the WB as
having lost its cutting edge with respect to PPP policy advice and implementation support.
In their view, delays and procedural complexities compounded a lack of engagement at
the level of policy development. The country team considers that recent changes in WB
policy regarding the application of safeguard guidelines in PPPs and possible changes in
procurement policies could open the way for further developing PPPs during the new CPS
period – but this will require additional WB flexibility in adapting to and learning from
India’s experience.
16.
Limited progress was made in WB support to addressing skills gaps but
important lessons were learned. The demand-driven approach under implementation in
the earlier, on-going Technical/Engineering Quality Improvement project demonstrated
that greater autonomy for tertiary level skills development institutions can deliver better
results through stronger linkages with the private sector, an approach endorsed through a
follow-on project during the CAS. At the grassroots level livelihoods projects
successfully piloted skills training and job fairs. But at the broader national policy level,
the multiplicity of agencies and stakeholders underscored a complicated political economy,
which constrained WB support to national initiatives.
17.
A diverse portfolio supported agricultural productivity growth. In line with
the priority attached to increasing agricultural productivity by the XIth Plan, the WB
doubled its lending support to agriculture and rural development during the CAS period to
a total exceeding $3.7 billion or 30% of IDA (compared to 20% worldwide). WB support
to agriculture covered agricultural competitiveness, sodic land reclamation, watershed
development and water sector reforms, support to marginal and small farmers under rural
livelihoods at the state level, and re-engagement in research and innovation and dairy
development at the national level. In on-going activities under implementation during this
CAS period, such as watershed projects in Karnataka, Uttarakhand, and Himachal Pradesh,
productivity and efficiency improvements in the range of 35-50% have been recorded.
IEG’s in-depth evaluation confirmed the positive impact on agricultural productivity.
The Karnataka watershed project showcased an important innovation in the use of GPS
technology to increase production impacts and improve equity, an approach already being
replicated in other states. IFC also helped in financing private sector investments in dairy,
oilseeds, sugar, poultry, tea, and irrigation, and assisted projects to improve access to agrifinance through co-operatives and availability of fertilizers and pesticides. IFC Advisory
helped to improve the productivity of sugarcane farmers in Uttar Pradesh, assisted farmers
in Assam, Odisha, and the Vidarbha region of Maharashtra to diversify, and helped build
the capacity of onion and mango farmers in Maharashtra to achieve better compliance to
Good Agriculture Practices (GAP) standards, customized to the Indian context. On the
downside, no WB analytical work on key agriculture policy issues (such as subsidies to
agriculture and the food grains procurement system) was undertaken, owing in part to a
lack of demand from the WB counterparts. This may hinder the WB being sufficiently
well informed to contribute to policy discussion and dialogue as important issues arise
(for example, agricultural trade or food security).
18.
Support to macroeconomic and financial management contributed to India’s
resilience. Under the growth pillar’s cluster of macroeconomic outcomes, developments
during the CAS period were dominated by responding to and recovering from the global
crisis and managing challenges resulting from inflationary pressures, expanded budget
deficits, and external account risks. Timely WBG support helped ensure liquidity in
India’s banking system and longer-term finance to SMEs, infrastructure, environmental

6

management and climate change mitigation. Targeted WB and IFC support to financial
institutions and IFC support to trade finance and investment in equity funds supporting
SMEs, infrastructure, and greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction clearly responded to
India’s financial needs as an emerging economy and laid the groundwork for further
engagement in the next CPS period. At the state level, the dialogue on better managing
public financial resources continued with follow-up to previous DPLs in AP, Bihar and
Odisha, a new DPL under preparation in HP and a major capacity building initiative
(NLTA) in Bihar, supported by the DFID Trust Fund. As LISs grapple with difficult
second-generation reforms focusing on policy-based budgeting, public sector performance,
and program monitoring and evaluation, capacity building and implementation support
became an increasingly important part of CAS implementation,, whether bundled with
other instruments or through stand-alone activities. The increasing level of resources
transferred by the central government to LISs through CSSs and Finance Commission
grants reduced the financial leverage of DPLs during this CAS period. Government
authorities suggested that the DPL’s effectiveness be evaluated based on the evolving
CAS experience. DPL ICRs as well as IEG’s evaluation of state-level engagement6 also
suggest strengthening linkages across investment lending, analytical work, NLTA, and
DPLs, recognizing that governance and public sector management issues require
institution building over the long term. Trust fund support, notably from DFID, has been
instrumental to providing long-term implementation support in LISs such as Bihar.
19.
Pillar II – Promoting Sustainable Development. While previous CASs did give
attention to sustainable development, the FY09 CAS elevated it to a top priority with three
output clusters: (i) water resource management; (ii) environmental degradation; and (iii)
environmental management and resilience to climate change. Based on ramping up
successful engagement under clusters (ii) and (iii), and partial success under cluster (i),
the Completion Report finds that outcomes under this pillar have been partially achieved.
20.
Water management activities made headway but institutional challenges are
complex and require long-term engagement. At the state level, water management
activities focused on institutional development by establishing state management and
regulatory authorities and empowering water users associations to establish stakeholder
participation in irrigation system management. But not all states with management
agencies have empowered them with the necessary regulatory authority. And despite long
experience with water users associations, results, as confirmed by IEG, indicate that
progress in closing capacity gaps was not fast enough and the pay-off in terms of better
water systems management did not reach its potential.7 A major report on groundwater
highlighted possible approaches to address the growing groundwater depletion crisis
affecting large parts of the country. The development of hydrological and economic
models of the Gangetic plain and work under way on regional hydromet and forecasting
systems has also enhanced discussions on basin-wide and regional water issues –
promising initiatives that should be followed up in the next CPS period. IFC financed
private operators in water-saving, harvesting, treatment technologies, service delivery, and
improving operational efficiency, and it provided advisory and implementation support to
existing and prospective IFC clients on water audits, water business systems diagnostics,
water footprint assessments, water risk filters, cost-effective water technology solutions,
and benchmarking with industry best practices.
21.
A new emphasis on low-carbon growth drove energy efficiency results. The
WBG’s support to developing a low carbon growth strategy for India began with a
flagship WB AAA report which then expanded to a diverse set of operations and NLTA
6

IEG Report, World Bank Engagement at the State Level, 2010
IEG PPAR India – A Cluster Assessment of Forestry and Watershed Development Activities,
2011
7

7

based on a strengthened partnership with counterpart institutions, especially the MoEF
and MNRE. This expanded set of activities and partnership exceeded expectations and
represents a key CAS achievement. As a result of a long dialogue, India became the first
BRIC country to present an investment plan to the Clean Technology Fund, for which the
WB provided NLTA. IFC also developed a range of climate-friendly investments and
mobilized innovative financial products (such as monetization of Carbon Emission
Credits) to support its priority to increase private sector participation in renewable energy
and energy efficiency with quantified results in carbon dioxide (CO2) reductions and
GHG emissions avoided. IFC has made its largest number of investments in renewables in
India, with 65% of its investments in power focused on renewable energy. Through direct
targeted debt lines, sharing global expertise, and developing suitable environmental &
social standards, and targeted advisory support, IFC is helping to increase the comfort
levels of banks and infrastructure finance companies that lead in the broader infrastructure
finance area, but have a limited exposure and experience in renewable energy. Projects
like Husk Power in Bihar, Gujarat Solar Rooftop PPP Program, and Rajasthan Solar
Manufacturing have enabled development of renewable energy practices by
demonstrating viable, innovative business models – notably, IFC is replicating the
Gandhinagar roof-top solar project in five other cities in Gujarat. IFC is also working on
sustainable energy/water finance through microfinance institutions to help promote
energy/water efficient products for households. IFC has focused on developing renewable
energy opportunities across the spectrum of technologies: it undertook its first equity
investment in the wind sector in Techno Green.
22.
Support to environment management was significantly scaled up. During the
CAS period, the WB invested in (i) Integrated Coastal Zone Management, (ii) Capacity
Building for Industrial Pollution Management, (iii) the National Ganga River Basin
Authority, and (iv) Biodiversity Conservation. The number of pilot projects introducing
innovations or new business models greatly exceeded targets, and institutions for
managing legacy contaminated sites and future mitigation activities were strengthened. A
large share of WBG projects also had a climate change co-benefit – that is, they either
contributed to the lower GHG emissions against baseline conditions, or built resilient
infrastructure or livelihoods, which are important elements of mitigation and adaptation
strategies. In FY11, 35% of the WB portfolio had GHG mitigation co-benefits and 31%
adaptation co-benefits, up from 10% and 0%, respectively, in FY09. WB knowledge
contributions laid the groundwork for continued engagement through studies on adapting
to climate variability and long-term climatic changes in Andhra Pradesh and Kolkata, and
sustainable development in the Sundarbans, a unique, highly vulnerable ecosystem. A
significant contribution to disaster risk management was made through NLTA (notably
Bihar Flood Management), the implementation of the on-going Tsunami Emergency
project and the initiation of the National Cyclone project. In FY2011, 21% of IFC’s
portfolio was climate positive. IFC has actively invested in early-stage clean-tech
companies to extend its footprint in high-priority climate change sectors (like renewable
energy, waste recycling, smart grid, energy efficiency, water, and green buildings).
23.
Pillar III – Increasing Effectiveness of Service Delivery. Service delivery has
been a target of successive WB country strategies, focusing primarily on the human
development sectors and water supply and sanitation. IFC has also had a continuing focus
on improving access to health and education services. The previous Completion Report
(covering the CAS for 2005-08) documented improvements in access, but also highlighted
shortfalls in quality and scope for significant improvements in fiduciary management at
the state level as central support was ramped up through CSSs (implemented at the state
level but designed and mostly funded by the national Government). Under this CAS, the
WB increasingly shifted its focus from individual state-level interventions to supporting
flagship CSSs. This approach offered greater leverage both financially and, even more
important, in terms of knowledge and management. In many cases, the WB channeled its

8

CSS support to LISs which indeed accounted for the bulk of the increase in financing to
LISs under the CAS. The importance of this earmarking was less in terms of financial
support (given fungibility of CSSs resources and fixed GOI budget allocations) than in
terms of focusing WB implementation support to capacity building and management
strengthening to help LISs fully take advantage of CSS resources. Based on the
milestones achieved in enhancing development effectiveness through improved
accountability, fiduciary management, and citizen partnerships – along with cluster
outcomes achieved (i) across states and in (ii) education, (iii) health and nutrition, and (iv)
social protection, and partially achieved in (v) urban services and (vi) water supply and
sanitation, the country team considers outcomes under this pillar achieved. This
assessment acknowledges that neither access nor service quality are by any means
satisfactory across those sectors supported by the WB, but it rates highly the increased
prominence accorded to improved management at both state and national levels and the
progress made in tackling these issues during this CAS period.
24.
Improved governance provisions were mainstreamed as a means to enhance
development effectiveness in service delivery. Indian accountability policies and
institutions have become stronger over time, and an important thrust of the WB strategy
was to support implementation and strengthening through WB operations. Strengthened
accountability mechanisms – including better financial management through tracking of
expenditures, greater transparency, stronger grievance redress, and vigilance structures –
have been mainstreamed across projects through Governance and Accountability Action
Plans (GAAP). The overall dialogue on fiduciary controls and the use of national systems
has made some progress in procurement, performance management, and auditing, after a
period of primary focus on fraud and corruption. Business processes have been
streamlined and controls strengthened, notably through internal and external audits,
including at the community level. Even more significant has been the support for the
adoption of stronger accountability mechanisms in flagship CSSs (such as SSA, PMGSY,
NRLM, and RMSA) and in state-level programs (public health programs in UP and
Karnataka) and systems (decentralized service delivery in Karnataka, Kerala, and West
Bengal; innovative computerized operations for financial management, tax administration,
and service delivery for urban authorities in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu). The WB
engaged its counterparts on the performance management system rolled out by GoI from
2009. The scope of these initiatives significantly exceeded previous WB engagement on
development effectiveness through better project- and program-level management.
25.
The WB also supported steps to operationalize the Right to Information Act and
e-governance initiatives. The RWSS project under implementation in Uttarakhand helped
local authorities process RTI applications and was awarded an RTI citation by the state
government. IT-based governance schemes were embedded in about one-third of WB
projects and the WB helped the National e-Governance Program (through a DPL) improve
service delivery across its 27 mission mode projects, focusing on LISs. Efforts have
begun in some projects to leverage the UID e-identity scheme (already involving more
than 200 million people in India) to promote better access for the poor to services and
reduce financial leakages. The WBI-supported Asian Network of Social Accountability
supported two communities of practice in India on RTI and Accountability Tools, leading
to 12 pilots on strengthening social accountability, third party monitoring, and NGO
capacity building. The WB’s social development team identified capacity building as a
key element in strengthening citizen participation and social accountability in India. WB
NLTA to the Department of Public Enterprises and project-linked TA to key public
entities (such as the National Highways Agency of India, PowerGrid, and the Maharashtra
State Electricity Transmission Corporation) supported better corporate governance in the
public sector. NLTA to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs helped lay the groundwork for a
broad initiative on corporate social responsibility in India, which has significant potential
to leverage private sector funds and expertise for improved service deliver.

9

26.
Land acquisition emerged as a major issue because of concerns over the equitable
distribution of gains in land values owing to urban development and growth in mineral
exploitation, manufacturing, and infrastructure.. Implementation of policies on R&R and
indigenous peoples still fell well short of the standards that India itself has set.8 The WB
helped India’s strategic shift toward a “rights-based” approach to social inclusion by
supporting capacity for implementation in projects and centrally sponsored schemes, and
by promoting social accountability mechanisms. International and India project
experience contributed to the national dialogue on land acquisition and R&R, with further
support from case studies and capacity strengthening. The Urbanization Review and
PPIAF grant-supported work identified international and Indian experiences relevant to
urban land issues.
27.
Sector-specific service delivery achievements were consistent with the
emphasis on improved management systems. Individual sectors' achievements in
relation to targets and objectives are reported in detail in the Self-evaluation Matrix.
Selected factors that significantly influenced the rating of achievements under Pillar III
are as follows:
Education. Continued involvement in primary education (through earlier support to SSA
followed up in this CAS by SSAII) and a first operation in secondary education
(supporting the national program, RMSA) allowed increased attention to quality issues at
both national and state levels. India's first-ever participation in the international PISA
secondary education assessment program confirmed India’s intention to engage on quality
issues as secondary enrollment expands. The success of the WB’s long-term partnership
with SSA confirmed the traction of the SWAp instrument for scaling up systemic
improvements and underscored the payoff to long-term engagement in systems
improvement and capacity building. The technical education project is piloting systems
for the whole subsector.
Health and nutrition. The negative impact of the DIR on counterpart relationships,
which carried over from the previous CAS period, constituted a major challenge to which
the WB responded with analytic engagement and support to better health systems
management, initially at the state level. Following a major step-up in GOI’s financial
support for health through the National Rural Health Mission (a CSS equivalent to
approximately 0.4 % of GDP, an increase of almost 50% over the very low levels of
health expenditure that have contributed to India’s lagging performance in meeting health
MDGs), the WB focused on systemic improvements at the state level through AAA and
the implementation of four earlier state projects (two in LISs) that would help better spend
the increased resources available. WB support, initiated during the previous CAS, to
national programs on TB and HIV/AIDS contributed to their marked success in
exceeding targets and managing a successful response to these potential pandemics, a
notable achievement for India. Given that a preponderance of health care in India is
financed and delivered by the private sector, IFC launched a "Health in India" initiative to
address a number of issues constraining the private sector contribution to accessible and
affordable health care facilities, especially in underserved areas. IFC is also working on a
Government—to—Person G2P initiative in Bihar by helping to build payment platforms
to improve access to health services through more efficient payments to health workers
and beneficiaries. On nutrition, the WB has engaged through the preparation of an
operation to support system strengthening and piloting new approaches in the longrunning, but as yet marginally effective, national Integrated Childs Development Services
8

India’s national standards relevant to indigenous peoples are at the cutting edge of global
standards, but implementation lags. Policies on resettlement and rehabilitation vary widely across
states and public entities.

10

(ICDS) scheme. This has helped maintain a dialogue in this crucial area for India’s longterm human development; but it is too early to assess results. The ICDS System
Strengthening and Nutrition Improvement Project was approved in September 2012.
Social protection. Following a flagship report, WB support successfully helped
strengthen systems for the Government's health insurance scheme for the poor, RSBY,
which has expanded rapidly (support was initiated as project preparation but shifted to
NLTA). The engagement in Bihar initiated under the umbrella capacity building NLTA,
supported by a DFID Trust Fund, led to a rigorous evaluation of the impact of NREGA,
flagship rural employment guarantee scheme, and is evolving into a project to support
social welfare delivery system reforms in Bihar.
Urban services. While there were notable contributions to innovative responses in areas
such as transport, PPPs in sewerage treatment, 24/7 water delivery, and municipal
financial management in some cities and states, as well as some important analytical work,
the overall WBG engagement in the urban sector fell short of meeting the CAS objectives.
The institutional challenges facing urban development will need to be a key focus in the
next CPS.
Water supply and sanitation. As a result of a more than 20-year engagement, the WB
helped develop an approach to delivering rural water that is now being scaled up through
state and central programs. In urban water, a successful pilot to provide water 24/7 in
three city neighborhoods in Karnataka is now being scaled up in the state; nationally,
urban water supply and sanitation needs remain woefully underserved. Detailed targets
for access and operations and maintenance were met in most cases in RWSS WBsupported projects and in relevant components of WB-supported urban projects; but urban
coverage remained very limited. IFC financed a private provider of water services across
175 villages in Andhra Pradesh and a private water infrastructure company to develop
first-of-their-kind water projects in two midsize Indian towns. IFC engagements in PPPs
and BOTs confirmed the need for continuing government grant support (in lieu of
commercial tariffs) and the importance of government monitoring to ensure
implementation of contractual conditions. WBG support continued to be more effective
in water supply than in sanitation.

IV. Performance of the World Bank Group
28.
Overall, the Completion Report rates both CAS design and WBG implementation
performance as satisfactory based especially on the strong response to evolving
circumstances during the CAS period, which significantly enhanced dialogue with key
stakeholders and demonstrated the important role of the WBG to India in making the
transition to MIC status.
29.
The design of the FY09-12 CAS was relevant and well aligned with India’s
development priorities, the key factors contributing to its satisfactory rating. The
FY09-12 CAS incorporated well lessons from the previous CASs and from India’s own
development experience during the Xth Plan period (2005-2009). This was reflected in
new CAS pillars, which departed from the previous two CASs. The FY09-12 CAS
broadened the focus on growth (reflecting the Government’s key role in supporting and
regulating financial and physical infrastructure and ensuring inclusive growth in addition
to the continuing emphasis on private sector growth), deepened engagement on
governance issues, and added a separate pillar to support sustainable development, which
clearly anticipated the role that environment policies and programs would play in India in
the run-up to the Copenhagen summit and beyond. The increased engagement on
governance issues clearly stressed the importance of strengthening country systems in

11

addition to WB procedures and safeguards (especially important in the context of rapidly
expanding CSSs). The CAS acknowledged the shortcomings of previous efforts to
increase selectivity; and instead highlighted the transformational nature of engagements
and the application of additional project selection criteria of innovation and leveraging.
The CAS also acknowledged the challenges involved in increasing lending to SC/LISs;
but reiterated the importance of the SC/LIS focus for poverty reduction and set a “stretch”
target of 30 percent new lending to SC/LISs.
30.
The CAS acknowledged but under-estimated the significant challenges to the
rapid expansion of lending in response to the looming global financial crisis.
Although the CAS contained a clear and perceptive analysis of the incipient crisis and its
potential impact on India, it did not provide a corresponding analysis of the implications
of a stepped-up response on lending space. While these would have been difficult to
foresee fully at the time,9 the CAS could have recognized more explicitly that the existing
lending envelope (and by implication, the single borrower limit applicable to India given
the WB’s capital base) would come under strain sooner than expected and potentially
limit the ability of the WB to respond to India's long-term capital needs. While the CAS
correctly noted that India’s emerging MIC status would require a different approach by
the WB, it anticipated that this would largely comprise institution building. The challenge
of remaining relevant with a constrained lending envelope as India emerged rapidly as an
important player in the world economy was not fully appreciated. The CAS outcomes and
results framework were more clearly specified than in previous CASs; but outcomes
remained unevenly elaborated upon across sectors with still insufficient attention to
indicators and baselines generally. Milestones for qualitative outcomes were uneven,
relying on simple output measures in some major areas. The Progress Report effectively
updated the CAS particularly with respect to the global crisis response and its implications
for the WB lending program, both in terms of size and composition.
31.
Implementation of the CAS addressed the challenge of meeting a growing
demand despite a constrained lending envelope and is rated as satisfactory. CAS
implementation began with a comprehensive review of the pipeline, with strong sectoral
inputs and in close collaboration with government counterparts, to ensure the relevance of
projects under preparation. Several projects were redesigned to focus on more innovative
approaches or dropped altogether. In addition, the WB significantly stepped up lending,
doubling the volume anticipated under the CAS, including a significant increase in fastdisbursing support to financial sector liquidity (overall fast-disbursing assistance was well
above the indicative target set in the CAS). The WB team evolved a close working
relationship with the Indian authorities to ensure the relevance of future WB operations.
The identification of flagship projects that combined significant lending amounts with an
emphasis on transformation, innovation, and leveraging, constituted an important step
toward increasing the relevance of the WB engagement and its ability to leverage. The
WB’s state-level implementation experience in education, rural roads, and livelihoods was
leveraged through significantly larger engagements with CSSs at the national level. In
infrastructure the WB stepped up its involvement with core institutions such as Indian
Railways and Powergrid. The country team credits this approach with transforming the
relationship between India and the WB during the CAS period. The Indian authorities
have further reinforced the collaborative application of selectivity criteria through their
new “finance plus” approach to external assistance from the WB and the ADB (See
Annex 18) and their development of a medium-term engagement strategy. This is a
landmark step in the partnership with India that provides a significant platform for
enhanced collaboration with all stakeholders to ensure continued relevance for the WB
under the next CPS.
9

GOI’s request for financial assistance in the wake of the global crisis came after the CAS was
discussed by the Executive Directors.

12

32.
WB-IFC collaboration improved markedly during this CAS period with strong
and explicit support from both WB and IFC management. In particular IFC’s
commitment to increase its business in LISs and its priority to climate change contributed
significantly to key achievements in the overall WBG strategy. Collaboration was most
successful when each agency was able to draw on its comparative institutional strengths.
For example, IFC advisory services combined well with WB NLTA in fleshing out
specific measures to improve the investment climate in sectors as health in Karnataka or
implement tax reform for SMEs in Bihar. IFC’s transaction focus gave it a natural role in
developing PPPs and in supporting WB advice on appropriate regulatory environments.
Specific operational collaboration remained limited but there were notable examples such
as joint support to Powergrid as it transitioned to international commercial banking
markets to source its external financing. Although many activities remained parallel
undertakings in the same sectors, even these benefitted from greater communication and
mutual awareness. In sum, CAS implementation effectively laid the groundwork to
continue deepening operational collaboration in the new CPS
33.
The expansion of lending in the CAS period resulted in India approaching the
single borrower limit (SBL) faster than anticipated in the CAS. As a result, the SBL was
increased twice for India during the period and the Indian authorities, working closely
with WB senior management, opted to purchase $4.3 billion in IBRD special private
placement bonds. In parallel, IFC requirements were also modified to allow expanded
exposure. These measures provided additional lending space during the CAS period; but
as India approaches IDA graduation and the SBL , the issue of lending space will need
revisiting in the upcoming CSP. The implementation of the CAS clearly demonstrated the
effectiveness of IDA in supporting India’s own poverty and human development agenda
aimed at achieving the MDGs. GOI programs supporting this agenda expanded
significantly during the CAS period with IDA providing key inputs to improve
management and fiduciary systems at a program-wide level. IDA support to these
programs also provided IDA with learning and experience to increase results in IDA
programs globally, as exemplified by the fast expansion of knowledge exchanges
involving India. The new CPS will need to tackle the pressing challenge of finding ways
to respond to increased demand in India for WBG lending and non-lending services at
levels which can continue the traction created during the CAS period.
34.
Portfolio management and risk mitigation efforts also received significant
attention during CAS implementation.10 The CAS had documented an increasing risk
profile for the India portfolio. The risk-averse atmosphere that followed the DIR was
tackled through open discussion and teamwork starting at the project level as well as other
risk management and capacity building initiatives under the Improving Program
Effectiveness effort, which paid off in reducing the portfolio’s risk profile while
enhancing the team’s ability to take appropriate risks. Measures such as enhanced
portfolio reviews, mainstreaming risk assessment, and building on country fiduciary
systems lowered the risk profile to 10%, well below the 18% at the initiation of the CAS.
These efforts to mainstream governance and fiduciary issues, both at the project level and
more broadly as contributors to development impact, have had cost implications, with
project preparation costs in India among the highest Bank-wide – a risk that the CAS
anticipated. Bringing costs down will pose an implementation challenge for the new CPS,
particularly for countrywide or multistate operations in support of the GoI’s main CSSs.
The rapid growth in lending, $19 billion in new commitments since FY0911, has also had
10

Annex 4 provides a detailed summary of portfolio performance during the CAS period.
This included a substantial $4.2 billion in lending to support India’s response to the 2008
financial crisis.
11

13

implications for disbursements. During the first half of the CAS period the disbursement
ratio reached a record 27.6%, but as large, new commitments have added to undisbursed
balances, the ratio has fallen back significantly to 13% in FY12. Support to some of the
new large multi-state schemes requires creating new institutions and systems at the
national level, which takes time. Difficulty in setting up such schemes should not be
underestimated. Tackling lagging disbursements, as was successfully accomplished at the
beginning of the CAS period, will also be a top priority for the new CPS. The joint WBGOI portfolio monitoring mechanisms established during this CAS period will be well
suited for this task.
35.
The CAS cited the risk that support to LISs would again fall short owing to
capacity and institutional constraints. This risk materialized in terms of direct lending to
LISs, which at 9% of total commitments barely exceeded the proportion achieved during
the previous CAS.12 More broadly, however, WB support to national programs such as
CSSs grew dramatically under the CAS and much of this (18% of total lending) was
directly earmarked to LISs. Overall support to LISs as a proportion of new
commitments—through direct, multi-state, and national projects—increased to 27%, still
shy of the 30% targeted in the CAS, but a significant achievement in the context of the
rapid growth in lending. IFC’s total of 35% committed to LISs was consistent with its
objective of mainstreaming activities in LISs. The LIS footprint of IFC advisory services
rose from 21% of India portfolio in FY09 to 63% in FY12. WB NLTA proved a flexible
and demand-driven means to support capacity and institution building in LISs and
received substantially more support during this CAS period through explicit earmarking
of trust fund resources (such as the US$ 5 million DFID-supported capacity building
support to Bihar). However, even tapping available trust funds, capacity and institution
building needs greatly exceeded available resources, so the challenge of institution and
capacity building support in LISs carries over into the next CPS. WB engagement in LISs
will need to combine capacity and institution building, analytic and advisory support and
direct lending sustained over a long period to achieve results. The challenge for the new
CPS will be to lay out such a strategy in a sustainable manner.
36.
Knowledge-based activities focused on a few flagship studies, demand-driven
NLTA, and knowledge generation and exchange in projects. A small number of
multi-year, cross-sectoral analytical pieces on important issues confronting India’s policy
makers formed the core of the knowledge program. Topics included poverty and social
exclusion, social protection, low-carbon growth, enhancing agricultural productivity and
urbanization. These studies were complemented by on-demand policy and implementation
advice (such as on land acquisition and R&R) and due-diligence reviews (such as work on
strengthening procurement in the health sector and periodic macroeconomic updates).
The WB AAA program benefited from a new management approach under which selected
flagship products received high-profile attention and resources. Demand-driven NLTA,
which grew significantly during the CAS period (with support of trust funds such as the
strategic partnership with DFID), was systematically integrated into the AAA framework
and pro-actively managed for the first time with explicit outputs, annual reviews and
dissemination efforts. Other capacity building activities and knowledge generation and
exchange related to projects were also explicitly acknowledged as important components
of the program. A series of publications dedicated to publicizing innovations that had
emerged during project implementation was launched. Management of AAA activities
also benefited from periodic joint AAA reviews with the authorities. This overall
approach laid the emphasis on knowledge throughout the program, rather than just in
activities identified as "AAA" in Bank systems. Trust funds (See Annex 15 on TF
activities) played a significant role in funding AAA, accounting for 55% of the total
12

In absolute terms, however, there was a substantial increase in line with the overall
increase in lending volume to India.

14

funding over the CAS period. While this represents significant leveraging and strong
collaborative partnership for the WB’s analytical and capacity building program, such a
high dependence on TFs does increase the risk of disrupting the continuous stakeholder
relationships that capacity and institution building require.as TF’s expire or donor
priorities change. TFs also complemented lending operations (notably in sustainable
development, sanitation and the health sector). Overall their management was more
aligned with the country program – for example activities funded by the DFID trust fund
were fully integrated with regular AAA management procedures. IFCs advisory services
grew by over 50% during the CAS period helping to build a stronger developmental focus
and strengthening complementarities across the WBG, especially in areas such as PPPs
where IFC’s transaction-based approach meshed better with Indian needs. The WB also
helped connect India to other countries both to gain from their experience as well as share
India's experience. There is a growing demand for Indian expertise through South-South
knowledge exchanges. India received $1.7 million in funding, both as recipient and
provider of knowledge, through the South-South Facility, managed by WBI (to which
India is a donor as well).
V. Lessons, Learning and Recommendations
37.
Detailed lessons arising from the specific output clusters of the CAS are reported
in the results matrix (Annex 1). Several implications and recommendations for the new
CPS have already been noted in relevant sections of the Completion Report (in particular
paragraphs 31-35). In addition, the following summary lessons can be drawn from the
FY09-12 CAS:
(1)
In India’s complex and dynamic development environment, deriving and applying
a value proposition for WBG activities demands the full toolkit of analytic, advisory and
financial instruments. Successful activities in India during this CAS period, such as
support to climate change, rural livelihoods, or primary education, not only drew (in
varying degrees) on all these instruments, they pushed the envelope of the WBG’s
resources to bring to bear a critical mass of expertise and financial support. This process
was facilitated by the flexible application of selectivity criteria focusing on transformation,
innovation and leverage that were then enshrined in DEA’s Finance Plus framework
underscoring a stronger collaborative approach between GOI and the WBG. The
importance of a collaborative and receptive partnership extended as well to executing
agencies; recognizing and cultivating such opportunities (as for example with the Ministry
of Environment or Rural Development) helped ensure that there was effective demand for
WB inputs at a level of quality appropriate to India’s sophisticated needs.
(2)
IDA’s continuing contribution to poverty reduction and human development in
India has been important not only for India but also for IDA as the lessons learned in India
inform IDA operations globally. Examples during this CAS period include strengthening
the relationship between access to primary education and learning outcomes (SSA2), the
importance of financial literacy concomitant with the development of microfinance (rural
livelihoods), the importance of management systems, including effective payment systems,
for safety net effectiveness (social pension reforms in Bihar). As India looks to
consolidate its progress toward the MDGs, accelerating in lagging areas and moving
beyond those already achieved, IDA has generated a body of experience that should
continue to be built on.
(3)
Synergy between state and national (CSSs) interventions contributed significantly
to enhanced leverage and impact during this CAS period. The SSA model (in which the
experience of long series of state level education projects led to significantly scaled up
support to a national program) was applied to several sectors (rural roads, livelihoods,
secondary education, water supply). The experience gained at the state level allowed the

15

WB to contribute valuable design inputs increasing the relevance of the national schemes
to varying state circumstances while helping to strengthen management systems at both
state and national levels. However, the limited success in increasing direct lending to
SCS/LISs underscored the importance of long-term support to capacity and institution
building, the relevance of local knowledge particularly in the context of state-level
political economy, and the difficulty of finding the right mix of instruments for particular
state circumstances. The experience in Bihar, which benefited from a US$5 million DFID
trust fund contribution, also underscored the value of achieving a critical mass of NLTA,
analytic and lending support. Start-up delays in WB support to PMGSY, NRLM also
suggested that replicating the SSA experience involves more than just scaling up from
state projects the national level. WB support to SSA succeeded in using a sector-wide
approach as a result of extensive interaction with MHRD in upgrading management and
fiduciary systems. WB support to other CSSs will need to follow a similar approach.
(4)

Two collaboration challenges emerged from this CAS experience:
 Multi-sector activities continued to lag. As a result WB achievements in sectors
that demand a multi-sector approach such as urban, nutrition, and water resources
also fell short. To a degree these shortcomings are also reflected in the lagging
performance of these sectors in India generally. The WB, with its limited
resources, cannot compensate for coordination gaps in India; but the importance
of these sectors, as widely acknowledged in India, suggests that the WBG should
put more effort into defining the contribution that it could make and ensuring that
it organizes itself across sectors to make that contribution. The lack of
substantial progress during this CAS period needs to be explicitly addressed in
the new CPS.
 While WB-IFC collaboration did improve markedly, it still fell well short of
potential and of the expectations of key stakeholders, not least the Indian
authorities. Experience under the CAS suggests that “retrofitting” operations
originating with either the WB or IFC to accommodate the other partner does not
yield good results. In contrast, when both organizations are aligned to common
strategic objectives (e.g. capacity building in LISs, increased investment in
climate change adaptation) and collaboration follows each institution’s relative
operational strengths, achievements exceed what each agency could achieve
independently. PPPs are one area in which experience during the CAS
demonstrated clearly differing institutional strengths with IFC’s transaction and
business climate experience complementing the policy orientation of the WB.
Given India’s own extensive experience with PPPs, this experience suggests that
IFC’s role will be critical for the WBG to remains engaged with PPPs.

(5)
Learning has benefited from the more pro-active management of AAA, especially
the increased attention to on-demand NLTA and to project-embedded knowledge, which
have helped to integrate knowledge generation and management more fully into the
WBG’s set of development solutions and build positive interactions between knowledge
products and lending. Nevertheless learning from WBG experience still falls short of
potential due largely to persistently weak monitoring and evaluation across the WBG
program. This is reinforced by continuing weaknesses in the results framework for the
CAS, which remains too complex for effective monitoring and highly variable across
sectors in terms of setting baselines, specifying monitorable indicators and identifying
outcomes. Benefits from strengthening M&E can be gauged from project experience.
Those projects which have put in place working M&E systems have not only
demonstrated stronger links to sustainable results but have become vehicles for
innovation and knowledge sharing in India and beyond (e.g. Karnataka Watershed). The
positive experience with project risk management may suggest approaches that could be
applied to M&E and related learning.

16

(6)
Design shortcomings and long start-up delays, especially in the context of
major projects (PGMSY, Ganga, IIFCL) can impose significant costs on the WB's
program – in terms of reputational risk, disbursement lags, increased opportunity costs
(other lending foregone) and, of course, results postponed or foregone. These situations
demonstrate that successful implementation goes beyond the application of standard
readiness filters. In the case of transformational, innovative projects with high leverage
potential, the risk reward calculus may well justify moving ahead even when some
potential implementation obstacles are unresolved. But experience during the current
CAS suggests that mitigation strategies for the downside risks or scenarios in such
situations need to be made more explicit and triggered much more pro-actively.
Restructuring options, in particular, need to be a more explicit part of the approval process
so that they can be discussed and agreed among stakeholders while there is still scope for
building in the necessary flexibility.
(7)
Effective fiduciary risk mitigation implies further strengthening of country
accountability systems and institutions. Experience during the CAS underscored the
wealth of increasingly assertive and effective accountability institutions in India, both at
the central and state levels, such as the supreme auditing institution or state vigilance
commissions. Accountability mechanisms (such as right to information, grievance
redressal, right to service delivery, and performance management) are also becoming
increasingly effective. These institutions and mechanisms allow for effective fiduciary
risks mitigation well beyond the limited scope and jurisdiction of the WB’s own fiduciary
controls. Building on them is the way forward.

17

Annexes to the Country Strategy Completion Report (2009-12)
1. Annex 1: Summary of India CAS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
2. Annex 2: Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY09-12)
3. Annex 3: Planned Non lending Services and Actual Deliveries (FY 09-12)
4. Annex 4 : Portfolio Management (FY09-12)

18

Annex 1. Summary of India CAS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CAS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary

CAS Objective 1: ACHIEVING RAPID, INCLUSIVE GROWTH

Lessons
and Suggestions for the new CAS

Lending and Non-lending Activities that
contributed to the outcome
(RATING: ACHIEVED)

A. Making Growth Inclusive (RATING: ACHIEVED )

Improved economic well being and
opportunities for sustained income and
employment in rural areas, particularly for
poor households, in areas covered by Banksupported livelihoods projects.
 Self-managed institutions of the poor
households covering most poor people and
particularly women and expanded access
to financial services including savings and
credit for poor households in areas
covered by livelihoods projects (baseline:
8 mn poor households)

 30 million poor households from 90,000
villages organized into 1.2 million self-help
groups (95% of participants are women).
 10 million women organized into self-help
groups (SHGs) and their federations under the
AP Rural Livelihoods program with 115%
increase in incomes of poor women.
 Local level value addition and direct market
linkages have provided 30-40% higher prices,
tilting the terms of the trade in favor of the poor
in India.

Portfolio and Lending
 AP Rural Poverty Reduction (FY04) and
Additional Financing (FY10)
 Chattisgarh District Rural Poverty (FY04)
 Tamil Nadu Rural Empowerment (FY06) and
Additional Financing (FY11)
 Bihar Rural Livelihoods (FY 08)
 Orissa Rural Livelihoods (FY09)
 MP District Poverty Initiatives II (FY09)
 National Rural Livelihoods (FY12)
 Rajasthan Rural Livelihoods (FY12)
 North East Rural Livelihoods (FY12)
 Scaling up Sustainable and Responsible
Microfinance Project (FY10)
AAA
 National Rural Livelihoods Mission NLTA
(FY13)13
 Procurement and Service Delivery in
Community-Driven Interventions NLTA
 Rural Livelihoods Impact Evaluations (AP,

 Consensus was achieved on best practices
for successful community mobilization
associated with Self-Help Groups (SHG),
which is now being scaled up at national
level. Innovative forms of service delivery
were developed, for example on nutrition.
More emphasis could be placed on
multisectoral approaches.
 Building human capital and skills
including bookkeeping, financial
management, livelihood enhancement,
market information and access to ICT
(information communication technology)
helps increase the extent of
entrepreneurship and self employment
among the poor and enables them to
access new job opportunities in the
services sector in both rural and urban
areas leading to higher social mobility
among households.
 Enhancing economic capital enables

13In some cases, projects under preparation and ongoing AAA have been listed because substantial work was done during the CAS period. The planned delivery year is indicated.

19

Orissa, Bihar) (FY14)

households to produce and earn more
from agriculture, dairy and other key
livelihoods through access to productivityenhancing technologies and development
of more inclusive value chains. This also
results in increased food security and
livelihood diversification.

Recipient-executed (RE) TFs
 JSDF grants for Linking the Poor with Global
markets (JiYo, Asian Heritage Foundation) and
Economic Empowerment of Women (SEWA)

Sustained improvements in road
connectivity in areas covered by Banksupported rural roads projects
 % of rural road network in fair or better
condition in areas covered by rural roads
projects

Improved access to modern energy
(electricity) by the rural population







WBI
 DM2011 is supporting 15 social enterprises to
replicate/scale-up tested business models for
provision of public services and supporting
income generation, specifically targeted for
the poor in low income states of Bihar, Orissa
and Rajasthan. DM2012 to expand initiative
to four more low-income states (LISs).



World Bank-supported Rural Roads projects
cover 24,200 km of roads in the seven
participating states; the participating states
have currently connected 60 percent of their
PMGSY eligible habitations.
Currently only three participating states under
Bank project (Rajasthan, HP and UP) have
established road management systems to
measure the condition of the roads. In these
states, between 12% and 80% of the roads
have Pavement Condition Index 14 levels
greater than two which measures the
percentage of roads in the network at in a fair
condition.

Portfolio and Lending
 Rural Roads (FY08)
 PMGSY Rural Roads (FY12)
AAA
 Papers by Clive Bell on Evaluating the Benefits
of India's Rural Roads Programme

 It is important to ensure maintenance is
adequately funded and carried out.
 Accountability mechanisms, such as third
party monitoring and social audits by
communities, help ensure improved
construction and maintenance
performance.

The investments in transmission
strengthening through Powergrid projects
and other state projects are crucial for

AAA
 Report on Improved Rural Electrification
Services through Renewable Energy-Based

 With 350 million people still without
access to power, there is a need to develop
innovative models of delivering access

Creating capacity among the poor and
particularly women to enable them to
exert voice and increase their
participation in local governance creates a
demand-side stimulus for improvement in
public services, particularly last-mile
service delivery for health, nutrition and
education outcomes.

14 The Pavement Condition Index (PCI) is a numerical index used to indicate the condition of a pavement, lower the value, better the condition.

20

 Increase in the number of rural households
with access to electricity in areas covered
by WB projects



Greater access by poor households to the
formal financial system






Increase in the percentage of poor
households who access credit from a
formal sources and insurance services






Increase in investment by commercial
banks and other public and private
agencies in poorer areas and households
(baseline: 40% of Self Help Institutions
receive funding from banks (2008))




supporting electricity service delivery to the
households connected under the RGGVY. It is
estimated that during the 11th Five Year Plan
(1st April 2007 to 31st March 2012), more
than 43 million individuals in about 9.7
million households received new electricity
access the RGGVY, all over India. It is
estimated that close to 203 million individuals
in 45 million households have received new
connections in the decade from 2001 to 2011
IFC’s investment in Husk Power Systems in
FY11 has since then has (i) helped provide
power to approx 22,500 households; and (ii)
supported in generation of approx 14MWh of
renewable energy per month.
200% increase in credit accessed by poor
people in AP (2000-09) to $5.8 bn
Group members have savings in excess of $ 1.1
billion (2011)
60% of Self Help Group Federations receive
funding from banks.
Over 460,000 clients directly supported
through the microfinance project, 83% in
underserved areas, and over 95% women
clients. Leverage of Bank funding with over
US$3 billion disbursed by six microfinance
project partner institutions to under-served
clients in 2011
24 IFC advisory services in microfinance, SME
and low-income housing to improve access by
the poor
IFC’s investments helped increase the number
of MFI clients from 0.4 million in FY09 to 19.7
million in FY11; cumulative of 33.8 million
clients during the period. Access to finance
improved through IFC’s investments in (i) four
MFIs aggregating $35milion; (ii) four SME

Distributed Generation and Supply in India
RE TFs
 Village Energy Security (PHRD)
 Scaling up deployment of RE technologies for
promoting innovative business models
targeted in the low-access states of Bihar,
West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh (DFID)
(FY13)IFC’s $350,000 quasi equity
investment in Husk Power Systems in FY11

Portfolio and Lending

Rural Livelihoods projects

Strengthening Rural Credit Cooperatives
(FY08)

Scaling up Sustainable and Responsible
Microfinance Project (FY10)

Low Income Housing Finance (FY13)
AAA

Deepening Outreach of Financial
Services/Crop Insurance NLTA

Remittance Market Study

Rural Credit Cooperatives Impact
Evaluation
IFC

Promotion of rural businesses,
development of market linkages

Engagement with microfinance institutions
through direct investments, indirect
investments through microfinance
investment vehicles, structured finance

that also exploit the potential of
renewable energy sources.
 Entrepreneur-driven business models
have proven to be more successful and
financially sustainable than purely
community-managed projects. For
sustainability of the individual projects
and the enterprises, it has been seen that
community involvement and livelihood
generation are critical. Also, it has been
seen that entrepreneurs have
demonstrated greater success than the
public sector in mobilizing local
communities.
 Social and economic mobilization through
promotion of savings among the rural
poor, particularly women, builds up their
financial capital and enables them to
become clients of formal financial
institutions including commercial banks,
microfinance institutions, and insurance
companies. But it is essential to focus on
financial literacy and borrower awareness,
especially among the poor, to avoid over
indebtedness, and support responsible
microfinance lending practices. Increased
collaboration between IFC and Bank could
be explored further,
 Responsible finance is an important part
of market infrastructure development.
 Improving agriculture insurance is not
only important to provide better risk
mitigation and faster claim settlement for
farmers, but also because banks can lend
more safely to farmers with the protection
from crop insurance. Agriculture

21





focused NBFCs (US$90 million) and one
dedicated provider of equity capital to SMEs
(US$15 million); (iii)five advisory
partnerships developed with housing finance
companies and microfinance institutions.
8,500 small and medium enterprises financed
through SIDBI
340,000 farmers covered by the new crop
insurance scheme (modified National
Agricultural Insurance Scheme) in 2010







Deleted: Sharing of lessons across Bankfinanced and GoI-financed projects in
livelihoods and rural roads15
Better, more widely used data on poverty
and growth and enhanced understanding
of social exclusion

products and/or technical assistance.
Responsible finance and risk management
key advisory focus in response to ongoing
microfinance crisis
Active partnership with microfinance
networks and credit bureaus to build
reliable credit reporting system.
Support to SMEs and finance for lowincome housing.
Support to e-banking initiatives (FINO)
providing financial access to millions of
unbanked. E-payments platform being built
to improve efficiency in health sector in
Bihar.
Advisory assistance for building secured
transaction registry for enabling greater
reach of SME and housing finance

productivity enhancements can also be
supported through an improved insurance
program.
 Supporting SMEs through refinancing and
cluster development has contributed to
growth and job creation. Post-crisis
support was particularly useful in
mitigating adverse impacts of the crisis
and supporting those SMEs that had the
potential to stay in business. Going
forward, there is a need to look at new
instruments that are currently missing in
the SME market, and which are
constraining growth and employment
possibilities, such as risk capital for SMEs.






Better reporting and disclosure of data
and standards on 20 core statistical
indicators in at least 15 states
Better integration of gender issues in AAA
and operations







25 states participating in the India Statistical
Strengthening Project committed to improving
data quality in line with national standards
Central Statistical Organization published
standards for 8 key activities
Most states established statistical websites,
which disseminate data, substantially reducing
delays in the dissemination of statistics
32% of projects in portfolio include genderdisaggregated indicators
Issues of social exclusion have been better
understood and addressed in Bank operations
in education, health, rural livelihoods, and

Portfolio and Lending

Statistical Strengthening Loan (FY10)

Elementary Education (FY09) and
Additional Financing (FY10)

State Health Projects

National AIDS Control Program (FY08)
AAA

Preparation of State Statistical Master plans
NLTA (State Cap TF)

Poverty Assessment

Poverty and Social Exclusion Report

Poverty Mapping Note (methodology

 Analytical work on poverty and inclusion
from an external source such as WB can
contribute to the national debate, for
example on the national poverty line.
 Further work is needed to better
understand the poverty, gender, and social
impacts of India's recent growth path (and
recent trends on child sex ratios and
female labor force participation), as well
as the implications of planned policies in
key sectors (e.g., land, mining) and states
(e.g. Orissa).

15 This and a few other outcomes were deleted when the CAS Progress Report was prepared, as part of an effort to focus the results matrix only on the key outcomes. Sharing of

lessons across projects takes place regularly.

22

local government projects (e.g. innovations to
improve health services for tribal population
in Karnataka, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu)

Studies on social exclusion, stigma and
discrimination affecting specific highrisk/vulnerable groups including sexual
minorities, tribal’s, migrants, and women
carried out under the AIDS project (NACP III).
Project ensured formulation of a policy on
greater participation of people living with
HIV/AIDS (GIPA) in implementation.
Implementation of tribal action plans
supported by Rajasthan and Karnataka health
projects.
 Social assessments carried out for all
operations
B. Removing Structural Constraints to Growth (RATING: ACHIEVED)
B. 1- Bridging the infrastructure gap
Expanding and improving the quality of

Infrastructure extended though Bankinfrastructure service delivery, including
supported projects in roads, railways, power
through PPPs.
and urban.

Asset management systems strengthened
Strengthened institutional capacities in the
through the introduction of innovative
power sector, with deployment of
contracting structures for better maintenance
innovative PPP business models
of assets (medium- to long-term
performance-based contracts in AP , Punjab,
and Karnataka)

Greater emphasis on provision of funds for
 Improvements in the level and quality of
capital expenditures and maintenance of
provision of infrastructure services:
critical highway and rural road assets
o Improved asset management

Institutions strengthened: strategic planning
practices, including improved
and budgeting, financial accountability,
planning and budgeting of
governance for road systems, transmission,
maintenance, adoption of
urban transport, water
commercial practices in

Road safety as a central and integral part of
maintenance, and greater road safety
projects, e.g., TNRSP, KSTP, APSHP, KSHIP II
for national highways, state roads in
and introduction of safe, greener pilots in







piloted and adopted by GoI)
Moving Out of Poverty Report
Orissa Poverty and Social Impact
Assessment
Gender Assessments for Haryana State
Road Project, SUTP and MUTP
Gender Development Report (FY14)
Tribal Health Innovations in State Health
Projects Innovation Note

Portfolio and Lending:
Road Transport
 Lucknow-Muzaffarpur Ntl Hwys (FY05)
 NHAI TA Loan (FY11)
 Kerala State Transport (FY02)
 Mizoram State Roads (FY02)
 UP Roads (FY03)
 Tamil Nadu Roads (FY04) & AF (FY10)
 Punjab State Roads (FY07)
 HP State Roads (FY07) and AF (FY12)
 Orissa Roads (FY09)
 Andhra Pradesh Roads (FY09)
 Karnataka State Highways (FY11)
 Assam State Roads (FY12)
Urban Transport
 Sustainable Urban Transport Project (FY10)
 GEF- Sustainable Urban Transport Project
(FY10)
 Mumbai Urban Transport (FY02)

 Analysis of governance institutions in
tribal areas is important to understand
policy impacts and mitigation measures.

 Demand from counterpart governments to
support improvements in the level and
quality of infrastructure services–through
harnessing private sector efficiencies and
investments–is expected to continue to be
very strong. Bank lending and advisory
support will need to keep up with these
increasing demands.
Transport
 One of the key lessons from the current
CAS period is the importance of close
working relationship with the clients and
structuring solutions that effectively
addresses the plans and priorities of the
client governments. Key priorities will be:
(i) meeting the transport demand
generated by GDP growth; (ii)
development of medium- and long-term

23

states covered by Bank projects









Increased share of railways in transport
on the Eastern Corridor
Improved access to clean and affordable
urban transport systems in cities covered
by Bank projects
Improved availability of power supply
Strengthened institutions in electricity
service delivery as measured by
additional transmission and
transformation capacity
Increase in the number of states and
sectors wherein PPPs emerge as an
integral part of the governments’
planning and strategy for delivering
infrastructure services
Established PPP model for sustainable
delivery of electricity services in various
segments of the power sector –
transmission, distribution, energy
efficiency and distributed generation.











KSHIP, KSTP, LMNHP.
Engagement in hydropower introducing good
practices in technical, environment, social,
contract management and communication
aspects of project development
Strengthened institutions in electricity service
delivery as measured by additional
transmission capacity ( target: 13,553 ckm s
achieved: 18,456 ckm till Jan 2012) and
additional transformation capacity (target:
8,478 MVA | achieved: 22,613 MVA till Jan
2012)
The investments in transmission
strengthening through Powergrid projects and
other state projects are crucial for supporting
electricity service delivery to the households
connected.
The long-term partnership between the Bank
and POWERGRID has not only contributed to
the improvement in technical standards and
implementation of state-of-the-art technology
but also supported POWERGRID in its
institutional strengthening through safeguards
and fiduciary dialog, enabling it to become one
of the globally recognized transmission
utilities in the world.
Strong capacity building support initiated in
urban transport planning and implementation
at the national, state and city level through
GEF Grant facility for preparation of Toolkits
and Guidelines, assistance with reform
implementation, and launch of training
programs. Introduction of best practice
sustainable urban transport solutions
including Bus Rapid Transit Systems,
Intelligent Transport Systems, Non motorized
transport etc. with demonstration potential in

 MUTP 2 (FY10)
Railways
 Mumbai Urban Transport (FY02)
 MUTP 2 (FY10)
 Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor I (FY11)
Power
 POWERGRID III. IV, V (FY01, FY04, FY10)
 Maharashtra State Transmission Company IFC
Sub-National Loan (FY10)
 Rampur Hydropower (FY08)
 Coal-Fired Rehabilitation Project (FY09)
 Haryana Power System Improvement (FY10)
 Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro (FY11)





Urban
Karnataka Municipal Reform (FY06)
Tamil Nadu Urban III (FY06)
Andhra Pradesh Municipal Devt (FY10)
Capacity Building for Urban Development
(FY12)

Infra Financing
 IIFCL (FY10)
AAA
Transport
 National Transport Development Policy
Committee NLTA
 Construction Industry Study
 Review of Highway Agencies in South Asia
 Tamil Nadu Road Safety System Innovation
Note
 AusAid TA for Preparation and
Implementation of the Sustainable Urban
Transport Program
Power
 Restructuring Exp of West Bengal Power

financing and investment strategy,
covering higher generation of internal
resources and increased private sector
participation in financing infrastructure
and providing transport services; (iii)
ensuring transport development is
spatially balanced; (iv) technology up
gradation; (v) higher maintenance
standards; (vi) increased efficiency
through greater competition where
possible; (vii) higher emphasis on safety,
energy efficiency, environmental
conservation and social impacts; and (ix)
development of a better inter-modal mix.
Energy
 Key current challenges are supply
expansion, the financial sustainability of
distribution companies and measurement,
monitoring and subsidy delivery in
agricultural power supply. These
challenges will be addressed through a
combination of AAA, TA and investment
activities.
 Energy efficient investments are critical in
a rapidly expanding country like India
with low urbanization, since significant
new construction will occur in the country
in the next few decades. To prevent lock-in
of emissions growth from new
infrastructure that will be built in the
coming decade, the Bank’s support would
come in the form of innovative financial
instruments, technical assistance and
facilitation of collaboration between
industries, academia and the regulatory
bodies. This support should cover the

24









SUTP cities ongoing.
Capacity for PPPs strengthened at the center
through NLTA support to the PPP Cell of DEA
(Infrastructure) and in the states through IFC
advisory services (i) advisory assistance to
Gujarat government in introducing PPP in
solar rooftop based power generation; (ii) TA
for hospitals in Andhra Pradesh; (iii)
Irrigation in Rajasthan; (iv)investment in
private water infrastructure company in
Madhya Pradesh; waste management and
street lighting in Odhisha, roads and health
services in Andhra Pradesh; ports in Kerala.
IFC transaction advisory services in PPP
projects provided improved access to
infrastructure services for 3.2 million people
so far.
Improvement in urban services achieved as
part of ongoing urban development projects.
About 48,000 HH provided with new sewerage
connections and 889 km of city roads
rehabilitated
Ongoing urban development projects have
provided capacity building/training support,
helped improve financial sustainability and
pilot innovative PPP/contractual practices: (i)
Over 30,900 urban officials/city elected
representatives have been trained; (ii) In TN,
about 24 ULBs are constructing Sewerage
Treatment Plants using Design-Build-OperateTransfer (DBOT) contracts and participating
ULBs/TNUDF have also leveraged US$35
million in market sources of financing






NLTA
Coal Fired Generation Study
Org Trans & PPPs in MH Transmission
Indian Power Sector Diagnostic Report (FY13)
Rural Feeder Load Segregation Study

Urban
 High Powered Expert Committee on Urban
Development NLTA
 Municipal Borrowing Report
 Mumbai Urban Business Plan
 Urbanization Review
PPPs
 Review of Experience with PPPs (FY13)
 NLTA on PPPs to DEA, Railways, and various
states (covering highways and state roads,
railways)
 Maharashtra PPP Management NLTA
 Land Acquisition, Resettlement and
Rehabilitation NLTA
 Facilitating PPPs for Urban Infrastructure
Study
 Private Sector Participation in Solid Waste
Management
Cross-cutting
 Project Implementation Constraints in
Lagging States NLTA
 Bihar Enterprise Regulation NLTA
RE TFs
 Bihar Road Construction Dept TA (FY13)
 Assam Computerization TA (DFID) (FY13)
WBI
 Knowledge exchanges on PPPs, training

several sectors of the Indian economy,
with customized solutions for each
sector’s needs.
 Innovative PPP approaches in T&D need to
be further explored, to leverage private
capital in infrastructure.
 It will be crucial to leverage the World
Bank’s value proposition in organizational
scale-up to manage multi-fold increases in
volume of power handled by the state
utilities.
 Working with GoI and the states towards
development of technically-,
environmentally-, and socially-sustainable
hydropower projects by incorporating
international good practices through
capacity-building of institutions and
developers engaged in this area will be
emphasized.
 A two decade long partnership with
POWERGRID demonstrates that the
programmatic approach for sector
investments that are structurally linked
could be used as an effective assistance
instrument while benefitting from lessons
and achievement of each project.
PPPs
 On PPPs, at the policy level the focus of
WBG support should continue to be on
strengthening policy, legal, regulatory and
enabling institutions. This, in turn, would
include supporting client governments’
efforts to: (i) build internal WBG capacities
for better identification, structuring,
appraisal, procurement and monitoring of
PPP projects and programs (delivered
through cross-sectoral PPP facilitation

25

program, and workshops on emerging issues
for scaling up PPPs. Inputs for GOI’s National
PPP Capacity Development Program.
 Centre of excellence for Urban Transport
 training and capacity building support for
solid waste management in cities, peer-topeer experience exchange under governmentsupported PEARL Network
IFC
 Investments in private infrastructure projects
across water and transport sub-sectors
 Support to oil/gas projects upstream and
comprehensive sustainable resource
development support including community
development/outreach/linkage programs
IFC Advisory
 South Asia Infrastructure Facility to Support
for transaction advisory services for
highways on PPP basis in TN AP and Orissa
(b) Strategic Options Study and Road Sector
Financing and Road Fund structuring and
operationalization (Karnataka, Gujarat)
 Transaction advisory assistance to
governments to structure specific PPP
projects
 IFC’s investment climate programs on
streamlining government to business services
and facilitating private sector investment in
LIS.

Study on Market for affordable housing
finance, developing toolkits and partnering
with housing finance and microfinance
companies for improved access.

Advisory assistance for building secured
transaction registry for enabling greater
reach of SME and housing finance.

units at the central and state level); and
(ii) enhance the availability/flow of equity
and debt finance for PPP projects. While
WBG is expected to and would continue to
the rapid growth of PPPs, both WBG and
GoI are also keen to review the PPP
experience to date with a focus on getting
a better understanding of what has
worked, why and the apparent and latent
risks, if any, and draw lessons for the
future.
 At the sector level it will be important to
enhance the WBG's capabilities to: (i)
better identify PPP opportunities; (ii)
identify appropriate instruments to
support the preparation and
implementation of PPPs. The Bank will
need to pay particular attention to the
challenge of tailoring social,
environmental and procurement
safeguards to PPPs.
 Support for knowledge exchange with
other countries with large PPP programs
would be continued, focusing on emerging
issues, i.e. post-contract management,
monitoring results, governance and
transparency in PPP contracts, value for
money etc., and new sectors such as urban
health and education.
 Financial reporting at the aggregate level
(including on contingent liabilities) and
enhanced oversight of PPPs by
accountability institutions in regard to use
of public funds (like CAG, CVC, PAC) would
also need attention.

26

Deleted: Improving the investment
climate16
B. 2 Addressing skill shortages
Deepen understanding of opportunities
and challenges of skills development and
help fill skill shortages in the public sector
Increase number, employment and
earnings of skilled workers for more
inclusive growth
Pilot at least 2 Sector Skills Councils
created among 21 high growth sectors.
 Percentage of participants that found
WBI training programs in the health
sector useful. (Baseline: 87-90%)
 Increase in proportion of students in ITIs
supported by Bank projects who:

graduate with National Council of
Vocational Training certificate
(baseline: 61%; target: 73%)

find employment within one year of
completion (baseline: 32%; target:
50%)

experience an increase in real
monthly earnings if employed
(baseline: INR 2,421 (2006); target:
INR 3,206)
B. 3 Expanding agricultural productivity
Acceleration in agricultural productivity
and in long-term agricultural growth in
areas covered by Bank-supported projects


Increased productivity of irrigation water

 2 Sector Skills Councils created under the

Vocational Training and Education project
 Preliminary findings from a national tracer
study commissioned to assess improvement in
employment rates and monthly earnings is as
follows- 57% and 73% of the pass-outs from
project ITIs exit from the CTS system (BBBT
course and AM course) with a NCVT certificate,
60% of project ITI pass-outs find employment
within one year of finishing training and real
monthly earnings of employed pass-outs from
project ITIs is INR 5330, measured one year
after completing training.
 The share of engineering colleges that became
autonomous under TEQIP increased from 42%
in 2008-09 to 60% in 2011-12.
 The share of TEQIP-supported institutions from
states lagging in technical education increased
from 14% in 2008-09 to 31% in 2011-12.

 Yield increases vary; but increases of 35- 50%
have been measured due to (i) better rainwater
harvesting associated with watershed and
water tank management (ii) improved
irrigation water deliveries (iii) involvement of

Portfolio and Lending:
 Tech/Eng Quality Improvement (FY03) and
Tech Engr Educ Quality Imp II (FY10)
 Vocational Training (FY07)
AAA
 TVET reform in West Bengal NLTA (FY13)
 National Vocational Qualification Framework
NLTA
 Skills and Employability NLTA (FY13)
IFC
 Investments in competitive, labor-intensive,
employment-generating industries

 Providing skills that are in demand and
ensure trainees find jobs requires greater
autonomy by vocational and training
institutes and higher education
institutions and stronger linkages with
the private sector.
 Livelihoods projects successfully piloted
skills training and job fairs in rural areas.
 The political economy of reforms in skills
provision is difficult, as there are many
government agencies involved and strong
vested interests.

IFC Advisory Services
 Capacity building to SEWA Barefoot managers
school and Business Management skills for
SMEs through ‘Business Edge’
 New higher education strategy for Madhya
Pradesh Gujarat University PPP; Linkages
projects

Portfolio and lending
Agriculture/Watershed
 Karnataka Watershed (FY01)
 AP Community Forestry (FY03)
 Uttaranchal Watershed (FY04)

 It is important to develop end-to-end
solutions from water resources to
production to marketing and support
value chain development in collaboration

16 This is not an outcome that we can attribute to Bank interventions and no relevant/ corresponding indicators were included.

27

in selected irrigation schemes, in at least
three states.




Improved yields, greater diversification,
higher farm incomes in areas covered by
Bank-supported agricultural
competitiveness and irrigation projects
(at least 20% increase in average crop
yields per unit of water received in
irrigation schemes after completion of
rehabilitation and modernization works)
Increase in private sector participation in
dairy and food processing sectors and in
number of farmers who have
formal/informal affiliations with
corporates for sourcing of produce/
outgrower arrangements












water users groups in the distribution of
irrigation water for efficient and productive use
of water and required number of irrigations for
crops per season
Significant yield increases observed through
conversion of the infertile sodic soils available
to marginal and smallholder farmers.
Crop diversification from rice to higher-value
crops has been observed in areas where
irrigation system rehabilitation has been
completed and marketing opportunities created
Agriculture Competitiveness Project in Assam).
Improved rain fed agriculture & watershed
management introduced (Himachal Pradesh,
Karnataka and Uttarakhand Watershed
Development Projects)
Farmer-to-market approaches under a series of
agricultural competitiveness projects were
launched in Assam, Maharashtra and Orissa.
Low-input, low-risk agricultural practices have
been promoted with marginal and smallholder
farmers across all rural livelihood projects.
180 research consortia involving private R&D
efforts were created under the National
Agricultural Innovation Project.
Reengagement at a national scale in supporting
further development of the dairy sector through
the National Dairy Support Project
IFC’s advisory services intervention helped
enhance productivity of sugarcane farmers in
central Uttar Pradesh from 45 tonnes per
hectare in 2009 to 54 in 2010.







Assam Ag Competitiveness (FY05)
Mid-Himalayan (HP) Watersheds (FY06)
National Ag Innovation (FY06)
UP Sodic Lands III (FY09)
Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness
(FY11)
 Rajasthan Ag Competitiveness (FY12)
Irrigation and Water
 Rajasthan Water Sector (FY02) and AF (FY10)
 UP Water Sector Restructuring (FY02)
 Karnataka Tanks (FY02)
 Maharashtra Water Sector (FY05)
 MP Water Sector Restructuring (FY05)
 Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agri (FY07)
 AP Community Tank Management (FY07)
 Orissa Community Tank Mgmt (FY08)
 AP Water Sector Improvement (FY09)
 WB Minor Irrigation Project (FY12)
Dairy
 National Dairy Project (FY12)

with private sector agribusiness
enterprises.
 Key future challenges require less
physical investments and more
institutional capacity (for example to
better manage national programs such as
on watershed management).
 Scaling up approaches demonstrated in
Bank-supported projects into self-funded
stand-alone state or national programs
remains a challenge.
 AAA has been a challenge as many key
agriculture policy issues (trade, MSP,
marketing, water and power tariffs)
involve difficult political choices.

AAA
 Livestock Sector Report
 Enhancing Agricultural Productivity Report
(FY13)
 Land Records Modernization NLTA (FY13)
 Karnataka Watershed Innovation Note
 Assam Agricultural Competitiveness
Innovation Note
IFC
 Financing for private sector players in
dairy/oilseeds/sugar/poultry/tea/irrigatio
n sectors and for projects to improve
fertilizers and pesticides

28

IFC Advisory Services
 Sugarcane and dairy productivity
improvement
 Introducing traceability systems in the
agricultural supply chain
 Improving access to agri finance through
cooperatives.
 Training and capacity building of onion and
mango farmers in Maharashtra on better
compliance to Good Agriculture Practices
(GAP) standards, customized to the Indian
context
 Projects in Assam, Orissa and Vidarbha
region of Maharashtra to help farmers
diversify to supplement farm incomes
C. Supporting Sound Macro and Financial Management and Structural Reforms (RATING: ACHIEVED)
C. 1
Macro management and structural reforms
Improved macroeconomic management in
Portfolio and Lending

India weathered the Global Financial Crisis
DPL states
relatively well, in part because of adequate
 AP DPL III (FY07)
supportive monetary and fiscal policies.
 Bihar DPL (FY08)
Informed public discussion and debate on
Growth recovered to trend in FY2009-10 and
 HP DPL (FY08)
next stages of structural reform, especially
FY2010-11, but slowed in FY2011-12. The
 Orissa DPL III (dropped), Bihar DPL II
in the lagging states
fiscal deficit increased and FRBM targets
(dropped), HP DPL II under preparation
relaxed.
 Continuing improvements in meeting Fiscal 
Original targets of FRBM were met in Bihar
AAA
Responsibility Budget Management (FRBM)
and Orissa, but there were slippages in HP and  Global Financial Crisis Report
targets in DPL states (targets: zero revenue
AP due to slower growth, lower tax in-take as
 Quarterly India Economic Updates
deficits and overall fiscal deficits not to
a result of the crisis and the 6th Pay
 13th FC Notes and Assessment
exceed 3% of GSDP)
Commission wage revision. AP met revised
 Uttarakhand Economic Report
 Medium-term fiscal planning tools
fiscal deficit target of 4% of GSDP
 Bihar Public Expenditure Management NLTA
implemented in at least four DPL states
recommended by GoI for 2008-09 and 2009 Capacity Building NLTA in Bihar and Orissa
10. Revenue deficit eliminated in AP, Bihar,
(FY13)
and Orissa but not in HP.
 Diagnostic work by NIPFP on public financial
 Most states enacted Fiscal Responsibility
management and India PEFA self-assessment
Legislations during the CAS period.
report by NIPFP
 Medium-term fiscal planning tools not yet
 Stern Workshops 2010 and 2011

 The crisis and 13 Finance Commission
transfers changed considerably the fiscal
sitution of several LISs.
 PFM issues in LISs often require long-term
capacity building, which should
complement policy reforms under DPLs.
So it is important to engage in LISs over
the long term with a variety of
instruments.
 States are keen to see greater analytical
work on PFM issues to help implement
their own public sector reform strategies.
Integrated PFM support at state level
covering both upstream (budget
formulation, allocative efficiency) and
downstream (budget execution,
monitoring and oversight is effective.
 Demonstration effects from successful
state efforts provide positive impetus to
the pace of reforms.

29

C. 2 Financial Sector and Capital Markets
Financing (especially long-term) for
infrastructure investment expanded in the
aftermath of the 2008 global financial
crisis, as needed to counter the cyclical
downturn




Bridging financing gaps caused by the
global financial crisis

 WB infrastructure commitments increased
over trend level (baseline: US$ 2.14 billion
over previous CAS period (FY05-08) and
IFC long-term finance and equity
commitments increased (baseline: US$704
in FY08; US$305 in FY08)
 Increase in the amount of local currency
private capital (including long-term debt
and equity) invested in infrastructure
projects

embedded in budget. 13th Finance Commission
recommended integration of Medium-Term
Fiscal Policy projections in budget, requiring
states to project cost of current/new policies.
Most states now have computerized
treasuries, enabling better expenditure
monitoring, control and management.

 Growth and Inclusion Workshop 2012
 Visiting Scholars Program

The Indian financial system proved resilient
during the Global Financial Crisis. Public
sector banks benefited from a capital infusion
from the government and were able to support
credit growth.
Long-term financing in FY09-10 increased by
46% (4 billion in FY09-10), of which US$2.2
billion was in response to financial crisis
(IIFCL and Powergrid).
During FY09-10, IFC provided over US$1
billion in India in the form of long-term debt
(US$426 million in FY09 and US$654 million
(including US$667 billion for mobilization) in
FY10. IFC invested US$452 million in equity
and quasi-equity in FY09, and US$121 million
in FY10.

Portfolio and Lending

Banking Sector Loan (FY10)

IIFCL (FY10)

Powergrid V (FY10)

Capital Market TA (dropped)

RE TFs
 IDF Grants for PFM capacity building to
Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka

AAA

Umbrella Capital Markets NLTA

Financial Sector Assessment Program
(FY13)
RE TFs:

IIFCL (IDF, PPIAF, and DFID TF)
IFC

Direct equity support in strategic banks and
long-term finance institutions which are
leading in infra finance; short-term trade
finance and liquidity support to banks

IFC investments in private equity funds
with a specific focus on SME, Infrastructure
and Climate Change

Support private sector investments in
water, urban, power, renewable, and
transport
IFC Advisory Services

Assisting SEBI / NISM in improving
corporate governance practices and

 NIPFP's PEFA-type assessment led to
conclusions owned by country authorities
and constitutes a model of collaborative
AAA.

 The pre-emptive and market-signaling
response to the crisis facilitated by BSSL
was effective in strengthening the banking
system. Further banking system
strengthening initiatives would need to
combine reforms, institution building and
capital.
 The Government estimates that under the
12th Five-Year Plan $1 trillion will be
needed to bridge India’s infrastructure
gap. Financing, including from external
sources, and capacity need to be mobilized
on a large scale and the WBG can play an
important catalytic role.
 Given the massive infrastructure funding
needs of India, constraints on availability
of longer-term funding from the banking
sector and the desire of GoI to bring in
new sources of long-term domestic and
foreign institutional investor money, the
IIFCL project objective of providing longterm financing for infrastructure PPPs is
highly relevant. But the project has not
been able to disburse due various issues.
The key challenge that needs to be addressed
for FILs is balancing the requirements of

30



developing securities market
IFC’s US$1m annual contribution to South
Asia Infrastructure Facility- a funding
vehicle for implementation of PPP vehicles

eligibility as applied for traditional
infrastructure projects to more later-stage
financial sector interventions for financing
infrastructure PPPs while addressing
reputational risks.
 The WB approach to financing
infrastructure PPPs is being reviewed.
Efforts are ongoing to: (i) build on the
experience of financial intermediation
projects for infrastructure PPPs, (ii)
further harmonize MDB policies
supporting PPP financing particularly on
issues related to procurement, and (iii)
support setting up mechanisms to
mobilize local currency financing through
infrastructure debt funds, co-financing,
leveraging and innovative financial
solutions involving guarantees.
 A TA project on capital markets as
dropped after three years of preparation,
supported by a PPF. A key constraint
observed in implementing the PPF was the
limited flexibility and speed that a TA loan
provides to the Bank and client teams on
knowledge-based services. More
responsive, less process-intensive and
flexibile, but sufficiently large funding
mechanisms should be explored to
provide the knowledge services that India
requests (for example on financial market
development and financial inclusion). The
Global Knowledge Platforms may provide
an example.

31

CPS Objective 2: PROMOTING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
A. Improving Water Resources Management (RATING: PARTIALLY ACHIEVED)
Strengthened water resources

In the states of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh
management (WRM) including quantity
and Uttar Pradesh, Water Resources
and quality and development at national,
Regulatory Authorities are being established,
inter-state, state and local levels
and the process is ongoing in Rajasthan. In
 Support capacity building in key states
addition, Maharashtra is also in the process of
for WRM, including resource regulation
establishing river basin agencies for multiand allocation, and multi-purpose
sectoral water resources planning and
infrastructure development and
development in a basin context.
management

Legally empowered water users organizations
 Support capacity building in the central
(WUOs) to promote stake holders
government to address national and
participation in irrigation system management
inter-jurisdictional WRM
have been established in Bank-financed
 Improved stakeholder participation in
irrigation sector projects. For example: (i) in
water management (e.g. water user
Maharashtra Water Sector Improvement
associations)
project about 1673 WUOs in 236 irrigation
 Modernization/rehabilitation of
schemes, (ii) in AP Water Sector Improvement
traditional water bodies (tanks)
Project about 754 WUOs in Nagarajuna Sagar
 Improved tools for planning and
Scheme and (iii) in Rajasthan water sector
management of water resources
restructuring project about 573 WUOs in 87
(information, analysis, stakeholder
irrigation schemes are involved in irrigation
participation)
water distribution, collection of water charges
 Evidence of inter-jurisdictional
and O&M.
management, including workshops, pilot

Hydrological data have been placed in the
projects and basin agencies
public domain, and data processing and
 Mobilization of private capital into the
analysis are ongoing
sector

IFC’s long tenor debt to private company for
distributed water services through its retail
outlets spread across approximately 175
villages in Andhra Pradesh

IFC’s financing and TA to a private water
infrastructure company, to develop first-oftheir-kind water projects in two midsize
Indian towns in Madhya Pradesh

Strengthened regional cooperation on

(RATING:PARTIALLY ACHIEVED )
Portfolio and Lending
 Rajasthan Water Sector (FY02) and AF (FY10)
 UP Water Sector Restructuring (FY02)
 Karnataka Tanks (FY02)
 MP Water Sector Restructuring (FY05)
 Tamil Nadu Irrigation Agri (FY07)
 AP Community Tank Management (FY07)
 Orissa Community Tank Mgmt (FY08)
 AP Water Sector Improvement (FY09)
 WB Minor Irrigation Project (FY12)
AAA

Groundwater Report

Capacity Development for Integrated WRM
for MoWR NLTA (FY13)
IFC Advisory Services

Options study to consider PPP options in
the irrigation sector in Maharashtra

Strategic PPP projects are being identified
and designed with community
consultations as a core component.

Engaging with different operators/
aggregators like private vendor water kiosk
operators, technology providers, MFIs, and
decentralized piped systems operators to
develop and deliver effective solutions to
communities

Developing a comprehensive programme to
improve the water use efficiency in
agriculture.

AAA

 Further support is needed to improve
irrigation infrastructure, supply of
irrigation water to water users, and
effective involvement of legally
empowered water users organizations in
irrigation water distribution and O&M of
irrigation systems.
 The ongoing reform initiatives under the
Bank financed projects need to be
continued and further strengthened, in
particular with respect to strengthening
the capacity of the institution of the
WUOs.
 Given the centrality of institutions for
improved water management, more
investments in capacity building and less
in physical infrastructure may be
considered.
 PPP approaches for irrigated agriculture
will need to be further exxplored.



Economic and hydrological basin models

32

water

The "Abu Dhabi Dialogue" on regional water
 Active dialogue and collaborative
cooperation brings together the seven riparian
research across riparian countries in
countries of the rivers of the Greater
shared river basins
Himalayas. A small grants program for
 Improved public knowledge base on
collaborative research has been launched.
economic and hydrologic dynamics of

Economic and hydrological models of the
shared river basins
Ganges River basin have been developed.
 Ganges Basin regional flood management
information system developed
 Regional investment supported in
response to riparian requests
B. Reducing the Burden of Environmental Degradation (RATING: ACHIEVED)
B. 1 Clean technology and energy efficiency
Enhanced efficiency in power sector in

The Low Carbon Development highlighted the
select states
potential gains in energy generation from
energy efficiency investments in several
 Reduction in power transmission losses,
sectors including power, industry, residential
using cutting-edge technology as measured
and non-residential buildings
against business as usual

The Bank was successful in improving
efficiency (i) through the provision of
subsidies in the Chiller Energy Efficiency
Project and (ii) through incentivizing financial
intermediaries in the Financing of Energy
Efficiency in Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises (iii) and direct investments in the
Coal Rehabilitation Project, all financed by the
GEF. Lessons learned will be widely
distributed

A PPP-based Strategic Alliance model
developed and implemented for Maharashtra
State Electricity Transmission Company Ltd
(MSETCL)

IFC investments in solar lanterns and efficient
cook stores with SEWA ($5million)

65 percent of IFC’s power sector investment
(US$201 million) during FY09 to FY12 (till
date) in renewable projects



Ganges Basin Strategic Assessment


Portfolio and Lending
 Maharashtra State Transmission Company
IFC Sub-National Loan (FY10)
 Rampur Hydropower (FY08)
 Coal-Fired Rehabilitation Project (FY09)
 Haryana Power System Improvement
(FY10)
 Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro (FY11)
AAA

Maharashtra State Transmission Company
on Organizational Transformation NLTA

Coal-Fired Generation Report

Renewable Energy Investment Climate
Report
RE TFs

Scaling up deployment of RE technologies
for promoting innovative business models
targeted in the low-access states of Bihar,
West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh (DFID)
(FY13)



can be a very useful tool to assess policy
and investments on the basis of available
evidence.
Further study and other activities to
strengthen regional hydromet and
forecasting systems would be desirable
and would help expand knowledge and
cooperation.

Importance of marketing and awareness
building efforts for success of energy
efficiency investments. Technical
assistance for implementation support
and capacity building is also crucial for a
project’s success. The assistance needs
to be well planned and sustained, in
order to create a momentum in the
client’s agencies.

IFC

Development of private sector renewable
energy, grid solar power projects; Cleaner

33

Increased investments in low-carbon
growth using domestic and concessional
sources of funding
 Contribution of WB portfolio to increased
investments in low-carbon growth over
trend line (FY05-08)
 Reduction in CO2 emissions/kwh (tons of
CO2)
 % of portfolio with climate change cobenefits
 Megawatts of grid-connected solar power
generation facilitated through pilot
projects (baseline: zero; target: 1,000 MW)

 In FY11, 35% of the portfolio had GHG
mitigation co-benefits, up from 10% in FY09
 IFC’s climate friendly investments increased
from $125 million in FY09 to $155million in
FY11.
 CTF: India’s Investment Plan endorsed by the
Clean Technology Fund Trust Fund Committee
in May 2012.
 Carbon Finance: CO2 emissions: Targeted
reduction of 600,000 tons of CO2 achieved
(Karnataka Wind Power, Fal-G Bricks, others).
 Expected GHG emission avoided by IFC’s
investments increased from 0.4 million tCO2e
per year in FY09 to 2 million tCO2e per year in
FY11
 Four GEF projects are expected to reduce 12 Mt
over their lifetime.17
 WB NLTA supported the National Solar Power
Mission.
 IFC advisory and pilot projects facilitated
installation of 45.5MW as of July 2011
 Two pilots on carbon foot printing were

Production Assessments and Sustainable
Energy Market Development projects; early
stage clean tech investments, off grid
renewable, water, carbon finance and green
buildings
IFC Advisory Services

Support for efficiency improvements in
energy and water sector through audits and
programs, new initiatives in waste-toenergy, water, solar offgrid and solar
rooftops being developed
Portfolio and Lending

Rampur Hydro power project (FY08)

Energy efficiency in SMEs (GEF FY10)

Carbon Finance projects: BBMB Hydro,
Power Rehab Carbon Offset (FY10),
Karnataka Wind, Fal-G Bricks
AAA

Low-Carbon Growth Study

Unleashing the Potential of Renewable
Energy in India Report

Solar Power NLTA (ESMAP) (FY13)

NLTA to MoF on Climate Change

NLTA on the CIF Action Plan
IFC

Development of IFC’s climate risk
measurement tools; South Asia piloted
IDG6 (GHG avoidance) in FY11 and FY12
before rolling out to other regions

Successfully deployed value-add products
like carbon finance, cleaner production,
cleantech and concessional finance
IFC Advisory Services





New and additional sources of
concessional finance including CTF, GEF
and carbon finance are helpful to
promote investments in lower carbon
growth.
Increasingly, investments in various
sectors also consider lower carbon
growth objectives to lower energy
consumption and diversify energy mix,
without additional sources of
concessional finance: e.g. the Dedicated
Freight Corridor Project is 55 % more
efficient in transporting goods than the
baseline scenario (road freight);
investments in hydro contribute to
improving energy mix and lower GHG
emissions.

17 Coal-Fired Generation, Chiller Energy Efficiency, Financing Energy Efficiency at SMEs and Sustainable Urban Transport

34

conducted, indicating that the Dedicated Freight 
Facilitating improved access to sustainable
Corridor would result in 2.25 times less GHG
and renewable energy resources by helping
emissions by 2030 for freight than baseline and
banks and microfinance institutions
the AP Community Forestry Project has an
develop suitable financial products.
incremental mitigation potential per hectare per 
Two advisory projects ongoing in
year ranging from 14 to 26 CO2 by 2030.
sustainable energy finance (SF Manveeya
 IFC debt investment of US$195 million through
and SEF Microfinance KM).
dedicated climate change facilities to one large
bank and two specialized infrastructure finance
companies
 IFC equity investments and risk sharing of US$5
million to promote financial intermediaries and
projects focused on climate change including at
BoP
 IFC mobilized investments worth US$130
million from other private investors during
FY09-11
C. Environmental Management and Resilience to Climate Change and Disasters (RATING: ACHIEVED )
Enhanced investments in environmental
Portfolio and Lending
 32 pilots (25 on integrated coastal zone
management, addressing key
management and 7 on industrial pollution
 ODS III (CFC Production Sector Closure
environmental issues related to large-scale
management) introduce new investments and
FY01)
infrastructure development, hazardous
business models in environmental management
 ODS IV (CTC Sector Phase-out FY05)
waste management, coastal zone
 Workshops and dissemination activities held for
 Capacity Building for Industrial Pollution
management, ozone-depleting substances,
three knowledge products on issues related to
Management (FY10)
biomass-based rural electrification and
environmental degradation
 Integrated Coastal Zone Management
integration of sustainability in project
 Remediation plans to address legacy
(FY10)
design
contaminated sites under preparation for four
 Ganga River Basin Management (FY11)
sites in two states (Andhra Pradesh and West
 Sustainable land and eco-systems
Enhanced capacity of central government
Bengal)
management (GEF) (FY11)
and states to manage environmental
 The Environmental Challenges of Rapid Growth
degradation
estimates the cost of environmental degradation AAA
to be in the order of 6.6 % of GDP (2009)
 Sundarbans Biodiversity and Development
 Introduce new investments and business
Report
models in environmental management
 Environmental Challenges of Rapid Growth
(Baseline: 0; target: 7)
Studies
 Bioengineering in Mizoram Roads Project
Innovation Note

35

Increased investments in climate-resilient
infrastructure and livelihoods using
domestic and concessional sources of
funding
Deleted: Enhanced knowledge of sectoral
vulnerabilities to climate change and possible
adaptation measures18

Strengthen policy, institutional, technical,
and financial capacity for managing natural
disaster risks at central and state level
 Increased investments in assets maintained
and new infrastructure built to improve
productivity and reduce vulnerability to
hydrologic extremes

 In FY11, 31% of the portfolio had adaptation cobenefits, up from 0% in FY09
 Indian policymakers are already incorporating
issues of climate variability and climate change
in development, and showing significant
innovation; examples include: the mapping of a
hazard line and integrated planning approach of
the India Coastal Zone Management Project, the
community based approaches of Watershed
Management Projects and National Rural
Livelihoods Mission Project, and strengthening
disaster management preparedness
 25,000 houses completed under ETRP and
100,000 (under construction) through BKFRP
 300 multi-purpose cyclone shelters (under
construction) through NCRMP
 90 bridges (under construction) through
BKFRP and NCRMP
 Approx. 500 km of access and evacuation
roads (under construction) through BKFRP
and NCRMP)
 15 on-line courses on Disaster Risk
management through Capacity Building NLTA

Portfolio and Lending
 Mainstreamed climate change adaptation in
Rajasthan Rural Livelihoods (FY11)
Rajasthan Agriculture Competitiveness
Projects (FY12) and NRLM (FY12)

 The livelihoods of the poorest
communities are most vulnerable to
climate change impacts and adaptation
strategies for the poorest need to be
incorporated in project design and
implementation.

AAA
 AP Drought Adaptation Initiative NLTA
 Adaptation and Climate Change
Vulnerability of Kolkata Report
Portfolio and Lending
 Emergency Tsunami (FY05)
 National Cyclone Risk Mitigation (FY10)
 Bihar Kosi Flood Recovery Project (FY11)
and Bihar Kosi II (FY13)
AAA

Capacity Building for Disater Risk
Reduction NLTA (GFDRR)

Disaster Risk Mitigation NLTA (GFDRR)

Bihar Immediate Relief NLTA (GFDRR)
RE TFs

Bihar Flood Management Information
(DFID) (FY13)
WBI
 NIDM capacity building on disaster risk
management issues

 One of the most important aspects of
disaster risk reduction in coastal areas is
multi hazard resistant housing. Creation of
emergency shelters, evacuation routes and
early warning are key to disaster
reduction. This needs to be coupled with
community based disaster risk
management where communities are
empowered and trained in risk
assessment and response mechanisms.
 Multi sector DRM risk reduction or
disaster response projects are complex
and difficult to manage. Need intense
capacity building in implementing
agencies therefore creation and capacity
building of specialized agencies such as
state disaster management agency is
important.
 Better integration of DRM and CC
Adaptation projects
 Introduction of "zero-cost" contingent
emergency response financing component

18 "Enhanced knowledge” is difficult to measure.

36

into all infrastructure projects
CPS Objective III. INCREASING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF SERVICE DELIVERY (RATING: ACHIEVED PARTIALLY ACHIEVED NOT ACHIEVED)
A. Enhancing development effectiveness -- Across sectors (RATING: ACHIEVED)
Strengthening accountability institutions
 Continuous FM implementation support and
Portfolio and Lending
and mechanisms at the union, state and
capacity building resulting in lower FM risk
 Fiduciary engagements in all projects
local levels (e-governance, citizens’
levels across portfolio during the CAS period.
 State-level DPLs
oversight, citizens’ scorecards, fiduciary
CGFA approach in SOE-related operations
 e-Delivery of Public Services DPL I (FY11)
controls on financial management and
resulting in several improvements.
 Decentralization projects: Karnataka
procurement (e-procurement))
Innovations in projects: framework approach
Pachayat Strengthening (FY06), West
to assessment of FM arrangements across
Bengal PRI (FY10), Kerala Local
Strengthened citizens’ partnerships with
multiple states in NRLM; innovative design of
Government Service Delivery (FY11), Bihar
government for improved service delivery
fund flows in National Ganga project.
Panchayat Strengthening (FY13).
 Improved quality and timeliness of audits in
 Municipal reform projects: Karnataka
 Strengthened fiduciary mechanisms
75% of WB-financed projects. Enhanced TORs
Municipal Reform (FY06), Tamil Nadu
(financial management, procurement and
with CAG on audit of WB-financed projects
Urban III (FY06)
vigilance)
adopted and disseminated across India
 Mainstreamed social accountability
 Public procurement reforms: draft bill in AP
AAA
mechanisms (e-government, public
and HP; piloting of e-procurement through

Strengthening Institutions for Service
information, disclosure compliance with
state DPLs in AP, Bihar and Orissa; discussion
Delivery Report
RTI, social audits, grievance redressal,
of draft Public Procurement Bill.

Corporate Governance for SOEs Report
decentralization)

PFM Performance Measurement
Framework NLTA
 Better governance of State-owned enterprises
 Increased involvement of citizens and
Accrual Accounting Pilots NLTA
(SOEs), with a focus on better internal controls 
CSOs in tracking service delivery through

Enhancing Local-Level Accountability NLTA
and improvement in governance
social accountability mechanisms in
arrangements.
Bank-supported projects
WBI
 Increase in number of social audits
 Policy and institutional framework for

WBI supporting development of Associated
conducted in at least one state
implementing national e-governance plan
Network of Social Accountability (ANSA) to
 Increased availability, dissemination and
(NeGP) introduced; enactment of Electronic
facilitate mainstreaming and knowledge
use of public information in BankService Delivery Act (ESDA)
exchange on SA across the region.
supported projects
 Enhanced discretionary and performancebased fiscal resources for local governments to
incentivize improvements in service delivery,
Deleted: Enhanced public financial
transparency and accountability.
accountability and public service delivery in
 Computerized municipal operations (i.e.

 Governance and Accountability Action
Plans (GAAP) for all new projects have
helped mainstream the governance
agenda and accountability mechanisms in
operations. The strengthening of Bank
fiduciary controls has helped mitigate
risks of fraud and corruption in Bank
operations.
 Going forward, the governance agenda
should be increasingly pursued as a
development objective (promoting
institutional effectiveness for the
implementation of development
programs, building on the country’s own
governance framework) and not
exclusively as a fiduciary requirement
(mitigating risks of fraud and corruption
in Bank projects). Policy dialogue should
now focus on country systems. Lessons
from India on accountability institutions
and mechanisms are relevant for other
countries in the region and elsewhere.
 Enhanced responsiveness of established
accountability mechanisms leads to
improved levels of client satisfaction and
quality of governance.
 Capacity building and sensitization of
government agencies helps achieve good
governance and meet the expectations of
citizens.
 Sustained engagement is critical in
supporting institutional building and
better service delivery systems in urban

37

selected states and Expanded e-government
services in DPL states 19

websites, online citizen grievance redressal
systems, etc.) operational in all 149 Urban
Local Bodies (ULBs) in TN under TNUDP-III;
similar ULB E-governance initiatives
completed for about 160 ULBs in Karnataka
under KMRP.
 Successful roll out of accrual-based accounting
in ULBs under Karnataka Municipal Reform
Project
 RTI being operationalized across Banksupported projects. RTI award granted to
Uttarakhand RWSS Project for good
governance and accountability.
 Social accountability mechanisms
mainstreamed in all projects through
Governance and Accountability Action Plans
(GAAP).
 12 pilots on strengthening social
accountability, third party monitoring and
capacity development of NGOs are being
supported by ANSA in India. Two ANSA
Community of Practice (COPs) are anchored in
India on Tools and RTI.
 Citizens’ help desks in hospitals supported by
Rajasthan and Karnataka health projects.

and rural local governments. Capacity
building of local government needs to go
beyond generic management capacity and
focus on building capacity in delivering
development results. e-governance
components should continue to be an
important part of local government
development projects.
 Improving corporate governance and
financial accountability in SOEs is useful
not only for existing enterprises (which
still dominate many sectors) but also for
new public entities created for projects
and program management at central and
state levels.

 Independent Grievance Redress mechanisms
and monitoring panels/Ombudsman
established in high-risk projects involving
significant resettlement activities such as
MUTP and DFC.
 Engagement with country law enforcement
19

Three original outcomes merged into one overall outcome.

38

and anti-corruption agencies on strengthening
of vigilance functions in Bank-funded projects
Strengthened land acquisition,
resettlement and rehabilitation (LARR)
systems and capacity at the level of GoI and
selected states following the National
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy
(NRRP) 2007
National Level
 Consistency between LARR rules at central
and state levels
 LARR monitoring system and capacity at
central and state levels
State level
Gujarat & Himachal Pradesh:
 State policy reflecting NRRP 2007
introduced across sectors
 Institutional arrangements,
implementation guidelines, and capacity
exist for management of LARR
Andhra Pradesh:
 Two AP-financed projects with Bank advice
incorporate improved management of
LARR

 LARR Bill 2011 submitted to Parliament.
Capacity building and implementation at
national level awaiting passage. Inputs have
been provided at various stages.
 State-level engagement in AP, Gujarat and HP
(studies, e tools , training). Supported GoAP in
establishing R&R Commissioner’s Office; helped
create regular budget head for LA/R&R
activities; created R&R Society to implement
R&R programs; e-tool developed for
monitoring.
 Successful implementation of major RR
components in MUTP (100,000 people
resettled), innovative LA procures in road
projects; benefit sharing arrangements
developed for hydro projects.

Enhancing development effectiveness – Education (RATING: ACHIEVED)
Help GoI achieve universal elementary

Enrollment shares in public elementary
education of satisfactory quality
education of girls (48.44% in FY10/11), SC
and ST children equal their shares in the
 Number of out-of-school children (baseline:
population
13 million in 2005)

Retention rate has increased to 73.4% in
 Enrollment shares of girls (baseline 47.8%
FY10/11
in 2005-06 for primary and 46% for upper

Transition rate from primary to upper primary
primary; target: 48%),
has remained stagnant (85.2% in FY10/11)

Portfolio and Lending

LARR components in projects
AAA

Land Acquisition, Resettlement and
Rehabilitation NLTA

Urban Land Acquisition--Good Practices
NLTA

Doing Business--Management of Industrial
Land Note

Mumbai Urban Transport Project R&R
Innovation Note

Portfolio and Lending

SSA II (FY 08) and AF (FY11)
AAA

Impact evaluations of Integrated Child
Development program, Teacher
accountability mechanisms, and AP
Education Initiatives

Reform of laws and regulations on LARR is a
complex and highly political process.
Facilitating knowledge exchange, including
sharing international best practices, will help
inform public debate and policy formulation.
LARR issues pose important challenges to
project implementation and strong readiness
filters on this help strengthen preparation
and speed up implementation.

 SWAp approach enables a holistic
approach to the sector and leverages
systemic change. Engagement with a
national Centrally Sponsored Scheme
(CSS) builds strong government systems.
 CSS support needs to be complemented
by engagement of the DPs at the State
level.

39

 Increase in retention rate at primary level
(baseline 71% in FY05/06)
 Increase in transition rate from primary to
upper primary (baseline: 83% in FY05/06;
target 89% in 2012)
 Improvement in quality of education
(improved level of achievement relative to
2007 baseline in language and mathematics
of the 2007/8 cohort by the time they reach
grade 3 in 2010)



2-3% increase in primary school achievements
across grades observed from first to second
round of national achievement test. Third
round completed in 2011, and analysis done
with improved and more sophisticated Item
Response Theory techniques. Using old
classical theory analysis, in grade V, Math and
EVS scores improved in 24 states out of 35 and
Language scores in 14 states.





Support GoI’s effort to improve access,
equity and quality of secondary education.
 Lower secondary GER increases (baseline:
52% in FY05/06; target: 65% by 2015)



Too early to assess results to WB-supported
secondary education project
Two Indian States participated in OECD’s
Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA)for the first time, thus
establishing a baseline

Portfolio and Lending
 Secondary Education Project (FY12)
AAA
 Secondary Education Report
IFC Advisory Services

PPP in a medical college in Shillong and
University of Gujarat; Linkages projects



B. Enhancing development effectiveness -- Health and Nutrition (RATING: ACHIEVED)
Enhanced coverage, quality and equity in

Improvements in most of the outcomes
the delivery of essential health services in
(DLHS-3 survey in 2007-08 and the Coverage
programs/ states supported by the WB
Evaluation Survey 2009). Deliveries conducted
by skilled birth attendants have increased
Improved monitoring and impact
from 48% (DLHS-2) to 52.6% (DLHS-3) to
evaluation of health interventions
76.2% in 2009 (CES-2009); full immunization
of children has improved from 45.9% (DLHSStrengthened accountability for resource
2) to 54.1% (DLHS-3) to 61% (CES-2009).
allocation and use.
Improvements are seen in 8 lagging EAG
states, vulnerable groups and the poorest.
Improved performance of local fiduciary

MMR in India has declined from 301 (2002) to

Public-Private Education Study
Teachers Education NLTA (FY13)
Foundation for Corporate Social
Responsibility (FY13)

Portfolio and Lending
State Health Projects
 UP/Uttaranchal Health (FY00)
 Rajasthan Health (FY04)
 Tamil Nadu Health (FY05) and AF (FY09)
 Karnataka Health (FY07) and AF (FY12)
 UP Health II (FY12)
Central Programs
 Disease Surveillance (FY05) and National
Vector Borne Diseases Control (FY09)
 Reproductive & Child Health II (FY07)

 Bringing other CSSs together adds to
sector coherence, either formally under
one umbrella scheme (as in SSA) or
through additional engagements by the
Bank (as in teacher education).
 Important to have a good-quality results
monitoring matrix with strong focus on
final outcomes (even if disbursements are
not linked to it) and robust M&E system
to collect periodic data and to initiate
research and evaluation which helps not
only for monitoring, and mid-course
correction.
 Private sector is a major provider and
hence need to help states work with
private providers and set up robust
frameworks.

 Increased funding will need to translate
into greater access to health care and
more effective delivery of health services.
 To address these, the Bank’s health
portfolio is increasingly oriented to
strengthening systems (planning, human
resource management, results-based
financing, monitoring, supply chain
management, quality enhancement,
contracting, PPPs) as a means to create an

40

systems, including supply chain
management
 At least 80% of household vaccinated
against polio
 50 districts in WB projects with ACT
available covered under WB project
(Baseline: 0% in 2008; target: 100%).
 Quality assurance systems for HIV test kits
TB and Integrated Disease Surveillance
Programs
 Quality assessment and accreditation
system for primary care developed and
piloted
 Impact evaluations performed on policy
relevant interventions supported by WB
 PPP in service delivery established in
partnership with IFC and under one state in
WB project.
 Establish institutional arrangements to
support PPPs in two states.
 Agency for undertaking decentralized
procurement, applying assessment tool
developed by Bank.
 Performance-based financing mechanism
with districts, municipalities, or municipal
corporations, linking service indicators to
funding in at least in a state.













212 (2008). In the 8 EAG states and Assam,
MMR has declined from 438 (2002) to 308
(2008). IMR in India has declined from 58
(2004) to 50 (2009) and in the 8 EAG states
IMR has declined from 68 (2004) to 59 (2009).
During the 2010-11 national and sub-national
immunization days more than 80% of
households with eligible children in 100% of
high-risk districts were vaccinated against
polio. There has been no case of polio since
January 2011.
ACTs are now available in more 75% of the
PHCs in the WB project supported districts. TB
indicators: National targets have been reached
(exceeding 70% case detection and 85%
treatment success). In 139 low-income
districts, the TB cure rate is 88%.
The National AIDS program has reached to
date about 81% of female sex workers (FSW),
66% of men having sex with men (MSM) and
71% of injecting drug users (IDU), with
targeted interventions.
By January 2012, IDSP achieved 95% average
weekly reporting from districts in the web
portal-based reporting system for the nine
Bank-supported states.
The National Accreditation Board for Hospitals
and Healthcare Organizations (NABH)
prepared a draft accreditation system for
primary care and is implementing a new
multi-stage accreditation system allowing
progressive achievements on quality. The
Bank is supporting a multi-stakeholder group
working on this front. Quality assurance and
accreditation are also being supported by the
Karnataka health project.
Impact Assessment of Targeted Interventions




Tuberculosis II (FY07) and AF (FY12)
Third National HIV/AIDS Control (FY07)

AAA

Health Policy Notes

Data Quality and Utilization in Health Note

Human Resource Needs in Health Notes

Service Delivery and Public Spending in
Health Notes (FY13)

Govt-sponsored Health Insurance Schemes

Contribution to development of National
Strategic Plan for TB control 2012-17

Impact Evaluation of Malaria Control
Interventions

Karnataka Health Insurance Impact
Evaluation (FY14)

Decentralization of Health Expenditures in
West Bengal Note

Certification System for Health
Procurement Note

Pharma Market Survey

effective institutional environment for
improving service delivery. Progress
indicators for the next CPS period should
focus on the technical and reform aspects
of Bank lending and AAA, and move away
from national and state-level outcomes
(e.g. mortality) and service utilization
indicators that are determined by broader
government systems and spending.

WBI
 Series of training events on issues of health
sector reforms, human resources for health,
quality of care, and PPPs.
 Training to 120 journalists on responsible
reporting on HIV and other health and
social issues, with support from NACO.
IFC

IFC’s healthcare investments supported
expansion of hospital chains, standalone
hospitals. IFC also focused in niche areas
like medical instruments & devices,
vaccines, biotechnology related products
and generic drug manufacture

41








Reformed and strengthened national ICDS
program that prioritizes evidence-based
nutrition
Effective multi-sectoral nutrition service
delivery models tested for subsequent
scale-up.
Local government (Panchayats) facilitate
improved nutrition service delivery and
utilization in districts of Bihar





for the Prevention of HIV in India, evaluations
of Chiranjeevi Program (Gujarat), maternal
voucher scheme (Thaya Bhagya) and health
insurance scheme (Karnataka) ongoing;
malaria program evaluation completed.
42 contracts with NGOs for public health
activities and 61 mobile health clinics
contracted out to NGOs in Karnataka.
IFC PPP successfully closed the Andhra
Pradesh Diagnostic Facilities project in FY11
and services have been operational at the four
diagnostic center. AP diagnostic service PPP
fully implemented in the state medical college
by IFC.
IFC PPP team support to Meghalaya in the
PPP-based development of a 100-seat medical
college and 500-bed teaching hospital.
Cumulative of 6.3million patients reached by
way of IFC’s investments during FY09 to FY11
Assessment tool for health procurement
agency developed, piloted, and shared with
counterparts. Survey of pharmaceutical
markets conducted to understand competition
in procurement.
The reform of ICDS is under discussion within
government. Dialogue informed through
project preparation and analytical work.
Various pilots on service delivery mechanisms
to improve nutrition implemented under rural
livelihoods projects
Linkages with local government institutions
explored in Bihar.

IFC Advisory Services

Support to state and central governments
on design and implementation of PPP
projects (Health Care Project in 2nd Tier
Cities and Villages and AIDS advisory for
private sector corporations).

IFC PPP advising the Government of Andhra
Pradesh on a second, and associated,
project – Andhra Pradesh Diagnostic
Facilities II.

Healthy pipeline of health sector PPP
mandates in Jharkhand and Bihar

IFC launched a Health in India initiative,
including a mapping of health services in
low income states to identify areas of
intervention and support.

Advising Bihar state government on
building electronic payments systems for
improving efficiency and effectiveness in
health care provision (government to
person (G2P) payments project).

Portfolio and lending
 ICDS Systems Strengthening and Nutrition
Improvement Project (ISSNIP) (FY13)
 Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project
(FY13)
 AP Rural Poverty Reduction Project AF
(FY11) and other rural livelihoods projects
AAA
 Repositioning Nutrition NLTA
 Institutional Arrangements for Nutrition
Report (FY13)
 SAFANSI TF activities linked to NRLM, Bihar

 The urgency of focusing on reducing
malnutrition has been recognized at the
highest levels of government, but
translating this into program reform and
successful implementation is a challenge.
 Bank support has focused on both the
large government program for nutrition,
ICDS, and alternative institutional and
service delivery mechanisms.
 Analytical work on the contribution of
various multisectoral factors to

42

Panchayats, and social protection schemes in
urban areas (FY13)
 Poverty Update Knowledge Note (FY13)
 AP Nutrition Innovation Note
C. Enhancing development effectiveness -- Social Protection (RATING: ACHIEVED)
Improved impact of social protection

69% increase in the coverage of RSBY (health
programs and services for the poor,
insurance schemes) to 16 million Below
assisting them to cope with
Poverty Line households in 26 states
extreme/chronic poverty and manage the

Extensive analytical work and project
impacts of household shocks on their
preparation to strengthen design, targeting,
welfare
and implementation of social programs at the
 Baseline: 5,000 BPL households covered
center and in Bihar
by health insurance in 2008; target: 16.5
million in 2012

D. Enhancing development effectiveness -- Urban Services (RATING: PARTIALLY ACHIEVED)
Help develop appropriate approaches to

In 2008, AP repealed the Urban Land Ceiling
land market reform that can be replicated
Act, which helped improve functioning of land
 Effective approach piloted in at least one
markets in major urban areas of AP, including
city (possibly Mumbai, Delhi, or a city in
Hyderabad.
Gujarat) and documented

On-going urban development projects have
also provided capacity building / training
support, helped improve financial
sustainability and pilot innovative PPP /
contractual practices: (i) Over 30,900 urban
officials / city elected representatives have
been provided training; (ii) In TN, about 24
ULBs are constructing Sewerage Treatment
Plants using Design-Build-Operate-Transfer
(DBOT) contracts and participating ULBs /
TNUDF have also leveraged US$ 35 million
market sources of financing. Discussion of

malnutrition (environmental, health, and
child care factors) could help prioritize
interventions.

Portfolio and lending

RSBY (dropped)

Social Security in Bihar (FY13)



AAA
 Social Protection Report
 Social Security for the Unorganized Sector
NLTA
 Social Protection programmatic NLTA
 IE Health Insurance in Karnataka
 National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme Impact Evaluation in Bihar (Report)
 Unique identification Scheme NLTA
 Social Pensions NLTA (FY14)
 Urban Social Protection Report (FY13)



Portfolio and Lending
 Andhra Pradesh Municipal Devt (FY10)
 Cap Bldg for Urban Development (FY11)



AAA
 India Urbanization Review
 Support to Mumbai Transformation Support
Unit – Completion of Phase II (NLTA)
 Unlocking Land Values NLTA (PPIAF)
(FY13)



WBI
 Partnership with urban capacity building
institutes (ASCI, YASHDA), including
training and exchange program.



Evidence on targeting and
implementation performance helps
inform discussions on the design and
reform of schemes
Reforms linked to use of ICT hold
promise to reduce leakage and improve
targeting
Long-term engagement through different
instruments makes it possible to help
implement reforms (as in Bihar)

Land market reform is a complex and
highly political process. Good analytical
work can help inform the policy and
institutional debate.
A portfolio of state-level urban services
improvement projects with clear
strategies for the constitution of
professional and accountable service
providers / capable institutions / PPPs /
innovative contractual arrangements
can help improve services over the long
term and learn lessons across states.

43

pilots to resume in FY11.
E. Enhancing development effectiveness -- Water Supply and Sanitation (RATING: PARTIALLY ACHIEVED)
Increased access to improved and
In the RWSS Bank-financed projects in the states of Portfolio and lending
sustainable drinking water and sanitation
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Uttarakhand and Punjab
 Rural Water Supply and Sanitation: Kerala
services in rural areas
the following results have been achieved:
(FY01 and FY12); Karnataka (FY02) and AF

About 4,892 GPs involved in RWSS delivery
(FY08); Maharashtra (FY04 and FY13);
Improved water supply and sanitation

About 2 million households with access to
Punjab (FY07); Uttaranchal (FY07); AP
services in urban and peri-urban areas
improved drinking water and sanitation, i.e.
(FY10)
90% of the target
 Karnataka Urban Water (F07)
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation

12,020 habitations with 100% Operations and
 National Ganga River Basin Authority

Number of Gram Panchayats (GP)
Maintenance (OM) cost recovery, i.e. 90% of
(NGRBA) (FY11)
involved in RWSS delivery
the target (except Karnataka)

Number of households with access to

2 million households with improved sanitation AAA
improved drinking water and sanitation
( 95% of the target)

Urban Water Reform Strategies

100% Operations and Maintenance cost

Significant improvement in decentralized

A review of 20 Years of Engagement in
recovery under Bank-sponsored projects
service delivery responsibilities
RWSS
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation

Number of Urban Local Bodies
responsible for delivery of Water and
Sanitation Services

Access to improved water supply and
sanitation services

Aat least one contractual arrangement
between ULBs and public and private
service providers

Improvement in urban services achieved as part of
on-going urban development projects:

About 272,000 households (HH) covered with
improved water supply services; 48,000 HH
provided with new sewerage connections

With private sector participation, the UWSS
Karnataka project is delivering 24/7 water
supply to approximately 180,000 people with
improved O&M cost recovery in 3 city
neighborhoods in Karnataka.

Under Ganga project, wastewater (both
municipal and industrial) and solid waste
treatment infrastructure will be created and
the institutions responsible strengthened

IFC financing and TA to a private water
infrastructure company was provided to
develop innovative water projects in two
midsize towns, one in Madhya Pradesh and
other in Maharashtra

WSP

Economics of Sanitation

Scaling Up Rural Sanitation Evaluation
IFC

PPP project development in urban water
and solid waste management sectors.
Financing for innovative water delivery
business models such as micro utilities

IFC PPP is replicating its first successfully
closed Sold Waste Management project in
Bhubaneswar. Project is expected to reach
closure in FY13.

Two BOT Projects in the urban water
supply area financed by IFC in FY11 –
Khandwa Water Supply Project and
Kolhapur Sewage Treatment Plant. Project
implementation underway.

 Three generations of World Bank-assisted
RWSS projects over twenty years
developed structured processes and
procedures to decentralize service
delivery systems, thereby making PRIs
and communities responsible for
planning, designing, implementing and
maintaining schemes. Community-led
procurement can reduce the capital costs
of the schemes significantly, while
community management can enhance
sustainability. The community-managed,
demand-responsive approach, integrated
into the responsibilities of the PRIs, has
proven successful and has been received
in GoI guidelines.
 Large single- and multi-village water
supply systems are difficult to operate and
maintain solely by community groups.
Generally, these types of water supply
systems require a small utility to operate
and maintain them properly,
complemented by a separate oversight
group to supervise the operator and to
plan future expansion.
 Investments in urban WSS need to be
accompanied by governance actions to
enhance autonomy and accountability of
service providers, improve incentives and
support professionalization.
 24/7 water supply continuity in urban
areas can be achieved, but not without

44

significant change in the current
governance arrangements.
 Improved contractual frameworks along
with Central Government grants have
helped attract private interest in
challenging sectors such as water supply
and sanitation. Until commercial tariffs
are allowed Government grants will
continue to be needed;
 Government monitoring and fulfillment of
contractual conditions are essential for
success of these PPP projects. Enhancing
WSS capital efficiency is a priority to
maximize use of investment funds, given
the significant investment requirements.

45

Annex 2: Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY09-12)
CAS Plans for FY09-10 (as of November14, 2008)
Fiscal
Year

FY09

FY10

Project
SME (additional financing)
Infrastructure (PPP) IIFCL
Vector-borne Disease Control (under IDA XIV)
Orissa Community Tank Management
Orissa Rural Livelihoods (under IDA XIV)
Madhya Pradesh Livelihood II
National Agriculture Innovations GEF (AF)
Uttarakhand Decentralization Watershed (AF)
Maharashtra Agric Competitiveness
Power Systems Dev IV (Additional Financing)
Coal Fired Power Station Rehab
Medium Sized Project Institutional Coordination GEF
Chiller Efficiency GEF
JNNURM TA - Cap Bldg for ULBs & Urban PA
Rural Roads II
Orissa State Roads

Subtotal
Bihar DPL II
Orissa DPL III
Capital Markets & Pension Reform I
Tech Eng Education Quality Improvement II
Andhra Pradesh Water Sector Improvement
UP Sodic Lands Reclamation III
Haryana State Power

STATUS

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA Other
200
595
5
521
56
56
82
180
10
7
400
118
46
1
6
250
-

1,619
125

844
125

435
400

300
200
-

70
-

Actual
Forwarded to FY10
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY10
Forwarded to FY10
Forwarded to FY11
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY12
Forwarded to FY11
Actual
Advanced from FY10
UP Sodic III
Subtotal
Dropped
Forwarded to FY11/12 & then Dropped
Forwarded to FY11/12 & then Dropped
Actual
Actual
Approved in FY09
Actual

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA
Other
400

56

521
56
82
100

400
180

45
1
6

250
197
1,286

956

52

300
451
330

46

CAS Plans for FY09-10 (as of November14, 2008)
Fiscal
Year

Project
Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydroelectric
Financing Energy Efficiency in SMEs
Railways Freight Corridor
Mumbai Suburban Rail (MUPT II)
Sustainable Urban Transport

Sub total

STATUS

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA Other
17
500
200
20

37

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA
Other
Forwarded to FY11
Actual
Forwarded to FY11
Actual
Actual
Slipped from FY 09
India Infra Finance Co Ltd Project
National Agric Innov GEF SLEM
Uttarakhand Wtrshed GEF SLEM
Additional Projects
Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement
West Bengal PRI
Power Grid V
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation
CBldg for Indus Poll Mgt
Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt
Microfinance-Scaling Up
Banking Sector Loan
Statistical Strengthening Loan
AP Rural Water Supply & Sanitation
AP State Roads
AP Municipal Reforms
SSA II(Additional Financing)
Rajasthan Water (Additional Financing)
Tamil Nadu Health(Additional Financing )
Tamil Nadu Roads (Additional Financing )
AP Rural Poverty Red (Add Financing)
Karnataka RWSS (Additional Financing )

11
430
105

20

1195
7
7
175

175
200

1000
25
200
2000
107

255
39
222
100

150
320
300
750
19
118
51

6,689

100
150
2,578

45

47

CAS Plans for FY09-10 (as of November14, 2008)
Fiscal
Year

Project

STATUS

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA Other
1,660
625

Subtotal: CAS Plans for FY09-10
3,279
1,469
PROGRESS REPORT PLANS for FY11-12 (as of December 2010)
CAS Progress Report did not distinguish projects between FY 11 and FY12
Kosi River Reconstruction I
220
Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro-electric
616
Luhri Hydro-electric
650
Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor
900
National Highways Inter-connectivity
1,000
TA for National Highway Authority of India
45
Rural Roads II
1,500
Mizoram Roads Add'l Financing II
13
Karnataka State Highways
300
Assam State Roads
200
Capacity Bldg for Urban Development TA
60
National Urban Support
1,000
Gujarat Urban
130
West Bengal Secondary Cities
300
Maharashtra Agric Competitiveness
100
Rajasthan Agriculture
100
National Dairy Program
400
600
TN Empowerment Add'l Fin
154
National Rural Livelihoods
1,000
Northeast Livelihoods
120
Rajasthan Livelihood
150
Karnataka Watersheds II
80
Ganga River Basin Authority
1,000

107

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA
Other

Subtotal: FY09-10 Actual
STATUS
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY11)
Forwarded to FY14
Actual (FY11)
Forwarded to FY13
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY12)
Dropped
Dropped
Forwarded to FY14
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY11)
Forwarded to FY13
Actual (FY11)

7,975

3,534

97

220
648
975
45
500

1000
13

350
320
60

100
109
352
154
1000
130
163
801

199

48

CAS Plans for FY09-10 (as of November14, 2008)
Fiscal
Year

Project
West Bengal Minor Irrigation
UP Water Sector II
Kerala Rural Water Supply
Rajasthan Water
Secondary Education
UP Health II
National Nutrition APL
Social Security for Unorganized Sector
Capital Markets & Pension Reform TA
Low-Income Housing
Banking Sector Support II
Kerala Panchayati Raj Institutional Support
Bihar Panchayati Raj Institutional Support
E-Delivery of Public Services
Orissa DPL III

Subtotal: FY11-12 CAS Progress Report Plans

TOTAL (FY09-12 CAS/CAS PR Plans)20
20

STATUS

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA Other
125
125
645
190
180
600
85
100
20
18
125
375
1,200
200
120
150
200
100

7,359

7,837

-

10,638

9,306

107

Actual (FY12)
Forwarded to FY13
Actual (FY12)
Forwarded to FY14
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY12)
Forwarded to FY13
Dropped
Dropped
Forwarded to FY13
Dropped
Actual (FY11)
Forwarded to FY13
Actual (FY11)
Dropped
Additional Projects in FY 11
Biodiversity Consv. & Rural Livelihood
Uttarakhand Watershed (AF)
Additional Projects in FY 12
Assam Ag comp (Additional Financing)
Bihar Rural Livelihoods (Additional
Financing)
Subtotal: FY11-12 Actual

TOTAL (FY09-12 Actual)

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA
Other
125
125
155
500
152

200
150

15
8

8

50
100
4,414
3,914
11238
9
11,889

4,712
4,805
8,243
8,339

8

105

As of March 2012

49

CAS Plans for FY09-10 (as of November14, 2008)
Fiscal
Year

Project
SME (additional financing)
Infrastructure (PPP) IIFCL
Vector-borne Disease Control (under IDA XIV)
Orissa Community Tank Management
Orissa Rural Livelihoods (under IDA XIV)
Madhya Pradesh Livelihood II
National Agriculture Innovations GEF (AF)
Uttarakhand Decentralization Watershed (AF)
Maharashtra Agric Competitiveness
Power Systems Dev IV (Additional Financing)
Coal Fired Power Station Rehab
Medium Sized Project Institutional Coordination GEF
Chiller Efficiency GEF
JNNURM TA - Cap Bldg for ULBs & Urban PA
Rural Roads II
Orissa State Roads

FY09

FY10

Subtotal
Bihar DPL II
Orissa DPL III
Capital Markets & Pension Reform I
Tech Eng Education Quality Improvement II
Andhra Pradesh Water Sector Improvement
UP Sodic Lands Reclamation III
Haryana State Power
Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydroelectric
Financing Energy Efficiency in SMEs

STATUS

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA
Other
200
595
5
521
56
56
82
180
10
7
400
118
46
1
6
250
-

1,619
125

435
400
-

844
125
300
200
-

70
17

Actual
Forwarded to FY10
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY10
Forwarded to FY10
Forwarded to FY11
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY12
Forwarded to FY11
Actual
Advanced from FY10
UP Sodic III
Subtotal
Dropped
Forwarded to FY11/12 & then Dropped
Forwarded to FY11/12 & then Dropped
Actual
Actual
Approved in FY09
Actual
Forwarded to FY11
Actual

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA
Other
400

56

521
56
82
100

400
180

45
1
6

250
197
1286

956

52

300
451
330
11

50

CAS Plans for FY09-10 (as of November14, 2008)
Fiscal
Year

Project
Railways Freight Corridor
Mumbai Suburban Rail (MUPT II)
Sustainable Urban Transport

Sub total
Subtotal: CAS Plans for FY09-10

STATUS

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA Other
500
200
20

1,660

625

37
107

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA
Other
Forwarded to FY11
Actual
Actual
Slipped from FY 09
India Infra Finance Co Ltd Project
National Agric Innov GEF SLEM
Uttarakhand Wtrshed GEF SLEM
Additional Projects
Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement
West Bengal PRI
Power Grid V
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation
CBldg for Indus Poll Mgt
Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt
Microfinance-Scaling Up
Banking Sector Loan
Statistical Strengthening Loan
AP Rural Water Supply & Sanitation
AP State Roads
AP Municipal Reforms
SSA II(Additional Financing)
Rajasthan Water (Additional Financing)
Tamil Nadu Health(Additional Financing )
Tamil Nadu Roads (Additional Financing )
AP Rural Poverty Red (Add Financing)
Karnataka RWSS (Additional Financing )

Subtotal: FY09-10 Actual

430
105

20

1195
7
7
175

175
200

1000
25
200
2000
107

255
39
222
100

150
320
300
750
19
118
51
100
150
6,689
7,975

2,578

45

51

CAS Plans for FY09-10 (as of November14, 2008)
US ($millions)
Project
IBRD
IDA Other
3,279 1,469
PROGRESS REPORT PLANS for FY11-12 (as of December 2010)
CAS Progress Report did not distinguish projects between FY 11 and FY12
Kosi River Reconstruction I
220
Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro-electric
616
Luhri Hydro-electric
650
Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor
900
National Highways Inter-connectivity
1,000
TA for National Highway Authority of India
45
Rural Roads II
1,500
Mizoram Roads Add'l Financing II
13
Karnataka State Highways
300
Assam State Roads
200
Capacity Bldg for Urban Development TA
60
National Urban Support
1,000
Gujarat Urban
130
West Bengal Secondary Cities
300
Maharashtra Agric Competitiveness
100
Rajasthan Agriculture
100
National Dairy Program
400
600
TN Empowerment Add'l Fin
154
National Rural Livelihoods
1,000
Northeast Livelihoods
120
Rajasthan Livelihood
150
Karnataka Watersheds II
80
Ganga River Basin Authority
1,000
West Bengal Minor Irrigation
125
125
UP Water Sector II
645
Kerala Rural Water Supply
190

STATUS
US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA
Other
3,534
97

Fiscal
Year

STATUS
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY11)
Forwarded to FY14
Actual (FY11)
Forwarded to FY13
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY12)
Dropped
Dropped
Forwarded to FY14
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY11)
Forwarded to FY13
Actual (FY11)
Actual (FY12)
Forwarded to FY13
Actual (FY12)

220
648
975
45
500

1000
13

350
320
60

100
109
352
154
1000
130
163
801
125

199
125
155

52

CAS Plans for FY09-10 (as of November14, 2008)
Fiscal
Year

Project
Rajasthan Water
Secondary Education
UP Health II
National Nutrition APL
Social Security for Unorganized Sector
Capital Markets & Pension Reform TA
Low-Income Housing
Banking Sector Support II
Kerala Panchayati Raj Institutional Support
Bihar Panchayati Raj Institutional Support
E-Delivery of Public Services
Orissa DPL III

Subtotal: FY11-12 CAS Progress Report Plans
TOTAL (FY09-12 CAS/CAS PR Plans)21

21

STATUS

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA Other
180
600
85
100
20
18
125
375
1,200
200
120
150
200
100

7,359

7,837

-

10,638

9,306

107

US ($millions)
IBRD
IDA
Other
Forwarded to FY14
Actual (FY12)
Actual (FY12)
Forwarded to FY13
Dropped
Dropped
Forwarded to FY13
Dropped
Actual (FY11)
Forwarded to FY13
Actual (FY11)
Dropped
Additional Projects in FY 11
Biodiversity Consv. & Rural Livelihood
Uttarakhand Watershed (AF)
Additional Projects in FY 12
Assam Ag comp (Additional Financing)
Bihar Rural Livelihoods (Additional
Financing)
Subtotal: FY11-12 Actual
TOTAL (FY09-12 Actual)

500
152

200
150

15
8

8

50
100
3,914

4,805

8

11,889

8,339

105

As of November 2012

53

Annex 3. Planned Non lending Services and Actual Deliveries (FY 09-12)
CAS Plans (November14, 2008)
Fiscal
Year

Type

Name of the Activity

NLTA
NLTA
Policy Note
Policy Note
Policy Note
Policy Note
Policy Note
Policy Note
Report
Report
Report
Report
Report

Social Security for Unorganized Sector
Social Protection Programmatic AAA
Quarterly Macro-Financial Update
Tracking Results for Better Performance of India's Health Sector (TF Stat. Cap. Build.)
Developing Certification System for Health Procurement
Programmatic Poverty Assessment
Poverty Mapping
Doing Business Initiatives (ICA follow-up, DB Indicators, manufacturing, competition)
Groundwater
Low-Carbon Growth
Social Dimensions of Urbanization
MP-Pilot on Integrated Child Development (EPDF TF)
Teacher Accountability Study (EPDF TF)

NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
Policy Note
Policy Note
Report
Report
Report
Report
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA

TA for Low-Income States
Strengthening the PPP framework
Adaptation in the Sundarbans
Orissa Institutionalizing PSIA Capacity

FY 09

FY10

Status
Completed (FY10)
Completed (FY11)
Completed (FY09)
Completed (FY09)
Completed (FY09)
Completed (FY10)
Completed (FY10)
Completed (FY11)
Completed (FY09)
Completed (FY10)
Completed (FY11)
Completed (FY12)
Completed (FY12)
Additional Products Completed in FY 09
Bihar Enterprise Regulation
Bihar Public Expenditure Management
Modification of Procurement Documents
PFM Performance Measurement Framework
Restructuring Exp of West Bengal Power
Umbrella Capital Markets
Urban Land Acquisition--Good Practices
On Demand Policy Notes—Thirteen Finance Commission
Public-Private Education
Coal Fired Generation
Corporate Governance for State-Owned Enterprises
Livestock Sector
Moving Out of Poverty
Completed (FY10)
Completed (FY11)
Completed (FY12)
Completed (FY12)

54

NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
Policy Note
Policy Note
Report
Report
Report
Report
Report

Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation (LA/R&R)
HR Capacity for Effective Health System
AP State Education Strategy (DFID TF)
Skills
Quarterly Macro-Financial Update
Strengthening Institutions for Service Delivery
Poverty & Social Exclusion
Capacity building in hydro, renewable
Environmental Challenges of India's Rapid Growth
Impact Evaluation of Rural Credit Cooperatives
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme Evaluation
Development Policy Review
Irrigation and Drainage Sector Review

NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
Policy Note
Policy Note
Policy Note
Report
Report
Report

Completed (FY12)
Completed (FY12)
Completed (FY12)
Ongoing (Expected FY13)
Completed (FY10)
Completed (FY10)
Completed (FY11)
Completed (FY11)
Completed (FY12)
Completed (FY12)
Completed (FY12)
Dropped
Dropped
Additional Products Completed in FY 10
Accrual Accounting Pilots
AP Drought Adaptation Initiative
Deepening Outreach of Financial Services
High Powered Expert Committee on Urban Infrastructure
Repositioning Nutrition
Village Energy Security Program
Human Resource Capacity Needs for Effective Health System
Study on Remittances
West Bengal Health Decentralization
Climate Change & Coastal Adaptation-Kolkata
Global financial crisis
Pharma Market Survey

PROGRESS REPORT PLANS (December 2010)
CAS and the CAS Progress report did not specify AAA program for FY11-12

FY11

NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA

Products Completed in FY 11
Economic Policy Network-Stern Workshop 2010
State Economy/Fiscal Work(FC13 Analysis)
Preparation of Stat Master Plans
Urban Water Reform Strategies
Org Trans & PPPs in Maharashtra Transmission
Ministry of Finance Climate Change
Enhancing Local-Level Accountability
Mumbai Urban Business Plan
Municipal Borrowing

55

NLTA
NLTA
Policy Note
Report

FY12

NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
NLTA
Report
Report
Report
TE

Maharashtra PPP
Distributed Generation Study
Govt Sponsored Health Insurance Schemes
Uttarakhand Econ Report
Products Completed in FY 12
Bihar Immediate Relief
Disaster Risk Mitigation
Capacity Building in Disaster Risk
Urban Institutional Strengthening
Constraints to Project Preparation and Implementation
Consultations on Human Development
Waste Watershed Management
Ports & Airports
Strengthening School Policy Workshop
Facilitating PPPs for Urban Development
Climate Investment Fund
Visiting Fellows Program
Transport Policies & Reforms Activities
Urbanization Review
Bihar Growth Assessment
Impact Evaluation on Health Insurance
Inclusive Cities Workshop

56

Annex 4 : Portfolio Management (FY09-12)
Portfolio status:
1. From the FY08 baseline of around $14 billion, total commitments in the India portfolio have been
on the rise – to $15 billion in FY09, $21 billion in FY10, peaking at close to $26 billion in FY11
and stabilizing at $23.5 billion in FY12. During the same period, the number of projects in the
portfolio has also increased from 60 projects in FY08 to 78 at end-October 2012. Overall, around
$20 billion worth new commitments have been added to the portfolio since FY09.
2. The bulk of new lending was for infrastructure development, with total lending commitments in
the portfolio increasing from around $6 billion in FY08 to $9.7 billion at end-October 2012. At
$5.4 billion each (or 23% of the portfolio), Agriculture & Rural Development and Transport hold
the lion’s share, followed by Energy (15%), Finance & Private Development (11%), Urban (10%),
Health (5%) & Education (5%). Forty percent of the portfolio supports centrally-sponsored
schemes, public undertakings, and financial intermediaries.
3. Portfolio riskiness has steadily decreased from 23% in FY08 to 15% in FY09 to around 11% now.
On the other hand, the disbursement ratio22 went up from 18.3% in FY08 to 24.8% in FY09,
peaking at a historic high of 27.6% in FY10, before dropping to 16.9% in FY11 and dipping to
13% in FY12. Slow disbursement was a particular cause of concern in the Irrigation, Health and
Urban Development subsectors; and in Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, and Karnataka among major
borrowing States. To a large extent, this dynamic reflects the entry into the portfolio of a number
of large projects for which disbursements have been low in the first two years of implementation,
while procurement and other project-related organizational actions are carried out.
4. As of end FY12, Bank’s portfolio of $23.5 billion presents a relatively limited level of risk. The
portfolio is young with an average age of 3.6 years and the undisbursed amount constitutes around
70% at this time. The distribution of projects age wise and the summary disbursement
performance is illustrated below. This shows that around $11 billion funds have to be disbursed
by projects that are less than 3 years old.
Age-wise Disbtribution(in $US bn)
5.9

6.0

US $ bn

5.0
4.0
3.0

3.1

2.7

2.0

1.6
0.8 0.8 1.2

2.0
1.0

0.6

0.3

0.0

0.5

1.4
0.6
0.4
0.4

0.2

6-7

8-9

0.3

0.1 0.3

0.0
0-1

1-2

2-3

3-4

4-5

5-6

7-8

9-10

Age
Total Undisb Bal

Total Disb

5. The portfolio performance during the FY08-12 period (up to June 2012) is shown below:
22

The ratio of amount disbursed in a year over the undisbursed balance at the beginning of the year.
57

DisbRatio,Commitment at Risk and Project at
Risk(%)

India:Summary Portfolio Performance Indicators
30%
27.6%
25%

23%

24.6%

23%

20%
18.3%
15%

16.9%

15%
12%

15%
10%

11%

12%

13%
13.0%
11%

10%

5%
0%
June-2008
Disb. Ratio

June-2009

June-2010

Projects at Risk(%)

June-2011

June-2012

Commitment at Risk(%)

Portfolio Management Improvement: Measures were introduced during the CAS period to effectively
monitor and manage the portfolio:
6. Regular tripartite portfolio reviews involving the Bank, the Government of India (Department of
Economic Affairs (DEA)) and Implementing Agencies were organized more systematically in
order to review each project at least once a year, and more frequently to review projects that
disburse slowly or have several risks flags. The objective was to strengthen portfolio performance
and thereby enhance the development impact of Bank-assisted projects through: (a) learning from
implementation experience to improve both the implementation of the existing portfolio and the
quality of projects entering the portfolio; (b) reinforcing borrower ownership of Bank-financed
projects; (c) promoting cross learning; and (d) ensuring the continued relevance of projects in the
portfolio for sector strategies. This system of tripartite reviews has evolved to also include
reviews for states, cluster of sectors or ministries (PRIs, Agriculture, Rural Development,
Finance) and review of AAAs. Some reviews have included sessions to foster cross-learning on
specific issues (e.g. local governance, infrastructure, and infrastructure finance). Of late, efforts
have been made to encourage participation of ADB or IFC to facilitate synergies between the
MDBs. Moving forward, there will be an endeavor to better integrate AAA reviews with these
portfolio reviews.
7. To facilitate cross-learning between government agencies and projects, innovations and good
practices have been identified during the portfolio reviews, and several innovation notes have
been prepared jointly by the client and task teams.
8. The DIR triggered specific efforts to improve governance within project implementing agencies
and prevention of Fraud & Corruption. Governance & Accountability Action Plans (GAAP) and
Operational Risks Assessment Frameworks (ORAF) were mainstreamed for each project, and a
Governance Adviser was posted in Delhi for India portfolio. COSO workshops were also used to
help address risks in specific complex or risky setups.
9. There has been an active engagement with India towards modernizing World Bank
procurement practice: e-procurement has been initiated in several projects or agencies;
new procurement methods have been piloted (annuity contract for civil works)
58

10. A management tool has been developed to assist monitoring the progress of the portfolio, taking
into account its large size and complex structure. Other management systems have been put in
place to monitor the response time of the Bank team, and this effort should be pursued and
strengthened going forward.
11. Successful implementation of projects in the context of a highly democratized country with an
active civil society requires a great deal of dialogue with civil society organizations and
appropriate communication through media. Consultations have been organized, and
communication specialists have been associated with preparation and supervision of selected
projects.
12. The quality of the portfolio is also dependent upon the quality of the project preparation. Country
Sectors Coordinators, primarily posted in Delhi, and hence in closer contact with the Borrower,
have taken a more active role. The systematization of CMU-CSC reviews for proposed projects
soon after having received DEA’s request has facilitated this. The CMU-CSC Meetings also
discuss selected projects as required, specifically those requesting an extension and/or Additional
Financing.
13. During this CAS period, the Bank and GOI prepared and launched several large transformational
projects. The programmatic approach followed for them led to a slow rate of disbursement (Ganga,
PMGSY). Multi-state projects have also proven to be difficult to implement (SUTP, Coal
Rehabilitation). The long preparation time required by certain innovative and complex projects,
particularly infrastructure ones, has challenged the application of the readiness filters, leading also
to slow start of implementation. Moving ahead there is a need to consider the appropriate balance
between the ambition of the developmental challenge that the project wants to address and the
readiness of the institution to implement it.

59

Annex 3
India’s Progress towards the Millennium Development Goals1
India has or is on track to achieve some of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by
2015. Extreme poverty—the proportion of people living on less than $1.25 a day—has been
halved (MDG1) to under 30 percent, and halve the number of people without sustainable access
to safe drinking water (MDG7). In addition, 96 percent of Indian school children—boys and
girls alike—will complete a full course of primary education (MDG2) and India will likely
eliminating gender disparity in primary and secondary education (MDG3).
At least three MDGs are off track in India. Although much progress has been made since
1990, under-five and infant mortality rates remain high. According to 2010 data, 63 children
under age five out of 1,000 and 48 infants out of 1,000 live births die. Although both rates have
been halved, it is unlikely that India will meet the target of reducing them by two-thirds.
Reducing the target on maternal mortality (MDG5) by three-fourths is also likely to be missed,
even though it has decreased from 570 out of 100,000 live births in 1990 to 230 in 2010.
Although India has almost doubled the share of the population with access to improved
sanitation facilities (MDG7)—from 18 percent in 1990 to 34 percent in 2010, it is unlikely to
achieve the target of halving it by 2015 (table 1).
Table 1: India’s Performance on MDGs
MDG
1 Extreme poverty
2 Primary education completion rate
3 Gender parity in primary and secondary education
4 Child mortality
5 Maternal mortality
7a Access to improved water source
7b Access to improved sanitation facilities

Performance
Achieved
On track
On track
Off track
Off track
Achieved
Off track

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the World Development Indicators database.

From a global perspective and for most MDGs, India is making more progress than the
rest of the developing world (figure 1). For primary education completion, India has already
achieved 96 percent of the required target, whereas developing countries, as a group, have
achieved 87 percent. This is also the case for health-related MDGs, even though more progress is
needed, and particularly relevant for maternal mortality. Recent estimates indicate that although
the country may not reduce by three-quarters the maternal mortality ratio between 1990 and
2015, it has already achieved 75 percent of the target, far above the 46 percent reduction
observed in developing countries as a whole. Increased efforts are nonetheless required in terms
of access to improved sanitation facilities, where progress is significantly lower (62 percent of
the target) than the 72 percent achieved in the rest of the developing world.
Figure 1: India’s MDG performance in the global context

1

Based on Global Monitoring Report 2012: Food Prices, Nutrition, and the Millennium Development Goals.

100%
90%

Developing countries

100%

96%
87%

96%

100%

92%

80%

Progress toward 2015

India

75%

70%

62%

59%

60%

72%

52%

50%

46%

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
MDG 1a.
MDG 2a.
Extreme
Primary
poverty (% of completion rate,
population
total (% of
below $1.25 a
relevant age
day in 2005 PPP)
group)

MDG 3a. Ratio
MDG 4a.
MDG 5a.
MDG 7c.
MDG 7c.
of girls to boys Mortality rate,
Maternal
Improved water
Improved
in primary and under-5 (per mortality ratio source (% of
sanitation
secondary
1,000 live
(modeled
population
facilities (% of
education (%)
births)
estimate, per without access)
population
100,000 live
without access)
births)

Note: a value of 100% means that respective MDG has been reached. Values denote present progress as illustrated by most recent
available data: Extreme poverty-Global: 2010, India: 2008; Primary completion rate-Global: 2009, India: 2008; Ratio of girls to
boys in primary and secondary-Global: 2009, India: 2007; Mortality rate, under 5-2010, Global: 2010, India: 2009; Maternal
mortality ratio-2010; Improved water source-2010; Improved sanitation facilities-Global: 2008, India: 2010.
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the World Development Indicators database.

India’s contribution to meeting global MDGs is significant, especially for MDGs that are
furthest away from meeting global targets (table 2). India’s contribution to lowering the
maternal mortality ratio (MDG5) was 33 percent between 2005-2010 while for the mortality rate
of children under five (MDG4) it was 28 percent. For Improved Sanitation (MDG7), not only
does India still have a way to go (currently at 62 percent of the target), but progress is much
slower as shown by the ratio of India’s performance relative to global performance (83 percent).
(figure 2) For many other MDGs, India was one of the leaders. For example, India’s primary
education completion rate improved by more than 3 times with respect to all developing
countries between 1990 and 2009. Given India’s track record and its continued and focused
attention to addressing the MDG challenge, India has the potential to contribute even more to
global targets. Without India making further and faster progress in on child and maternal
mortality and sanitation, global MDGs are unlikely to be achieved.

Table 2: India’s contribution to improvement in selected MDGs, 2005-2010 (%)

India
South Asia excluding
India
East Asia & Pacific
Middle East & North
Africa
Latin America &
Caribbean
Sub-Saharan Africa
Europe & Central Asia
Total Improvement

Access to
Sanitation
15%

Access to
Water
46%

Maternal
Mortality
33%

Infant
Mortality
32%

Under-5
Mortality
28%

17%
52%

7%
16%

12%
8%

13%
18%

10%
19%

6%

4%

2%

3%

3%

2%
12%
-5%
100%

4%
29%
-7%
100%

2%
43%
0%
100%

7%
25%
2%
100%

4%
35%
2%
100%

Figure 2: Improvement in MDG indicators relative to global performance, 1990-2009

MDG 7c. Improved sanitation facilities (% of population
without access)

0.83

MDG 7c. Improved water source (% of population
without access)

1.52

MDG 5a. Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate,
per 100,000 live births)

2.00

1.44

MDG 4a. Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000 live births)

MDG 3a. Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary
education (%)

2.11

MDG 2a. Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant
age group)

3.17

MDG 1a. Extreme poverty (% of population below
$1.25 a day in 2005 PPP)

0.00

1.47
0.50

1.00

1.50

2.00

2.50

3.00

3.50

improvement in India / improvement at the Global level
Note: Chart depicts the ratio of absolute regional improvement to global improvement by MDG. Improvement is measured as the
difference between latest available value (see note figure 1) and starting value circa 1990.
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the World Development Indicators database.

Millennium Development Goals

India

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

India

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990

1995

2000

2010

53.6
..
8.8
59.5

49.4
45.3
9.1
41.1

..
..
..
44.4

32.7
37.2
8.6
43.5

..
64
37
62

..
74
46
..

79
71
45
76

92
96
60
81

68
13
5

75
14
7

79
17
9

92
18
11

115
81
56

100
72
72

86
63
55

63
48
74

570
..
45

470
34
41

390
43
47

230
53
54

0.1
216
80

0.3
216
58

0.4
216
49

0.3
185
59

69
18
21.5
4.7
0.8
3.3

75
21
..
4.9
1.0
3.5

81
25
22.0
5.0
1.1
3.9

92
34
23.0
5.0
1.5
5.1

0.6
0.0
0.0
..

1.2
0.0
0.0
..

3.1
0.3
0.5
..

2.9
61.4
7.5
..

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)
Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major
diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Computer users (per 100 people)

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

100

100

ICT indicators (per 100 people)
70
60

75

75

50

50

40
50

30

25

20

25
0
2000

2005

10

2010

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2010

2000

2005

2010

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

India

South Asia

Fixed + mobile subscribers

Internet users

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available. Development Economics, Development Data Group
(DECDG).

Annex 4

Poverty in India
India has made significant progress in reducing absolute poverty in the last two decades: it has already
achieved MDG1 in halving the proportion of people whose income is less than $1.25 a day, to under 30
percent. The percentage of people living below Government of India’s official poverty line has declined
from 45 percent in the early 1990s to 30 percent in 2009-10 (table 1). 1 Most notably rural poverty has
decreased by 16.3 percentage points. Given that India is predominantly rural, however, a huge
concentration of the poor people (four out of every five) still live in rural areas.
The pace of poverty reduction picked up significantly in the latter half of the 2000s, reflecting faster
economic growth and greater inclusiveness of growth during this period. The poverty rate declined by 1.5
percentage points a year between 2004-05 and 2009-10, relative to 0.8 percentage points a year in the
previous two decades. Shared prosperity – defined as the growth rate of the bottom 40 percent of the
population – improved, with the gap between growth rates of the less well-off and average growth
narrowing considerably between 2005 and 2010.
However, comparisons with other fast growing countries such as China, Vietnam and Thailand suggest
that India is not reaping comparable benefits for its poor from growth. Even with recent improvements, at
the $2 a day poverty line, the pace of poverty reduction is still about 2 percentage points per year below
what a model based on international cross-country regressions would predict for India.2
But poverty remains widespread. With population growth, it has proved difficult to reduce the number of
poor at a rapid pace; 400 million people still live in poverty. 3 India and poverty in India remain
predominantly rural: nearly four out of every five poor persons live in rural areas. Wide disparity in
poverty rates across the states is a key feature of poverty in India. For example, poverty reduction in some
of the poorest—and most populous States—has been slow. Each of the seven of the low-income states4
have poverty rates that are two to three times higher than those of the more advanced States. Accelerating
progress in the poorest states is important as they are the states where fertility rates are particularly high.
Higher-income States also have pockets of extreme poverty; Karnataka’s per capita income, for example,
varies nearly five-fold across districts.

Table 1. All-India Poverty Rates
Rural
Urban
Total
1993-94 50.1
31.8
45.3
2004-05 41.8
25.7
37.2
2009-10 33.8
20.9
29.8
Source: Government of India, 2012

1

India revised its poverty line upwards in real terms in 2011 based on recommendations of the Tendulkar
Committee. Results reported in this annex are based on the revised official poverty lines, or based on the World
Bank’s international ($1.25 per day and $2 per day) lines.
2
A large and (until recently) growing gap between mean consumption per person from the National Sample Surveys
(NSS) and the private consumption component of the National Accounts Statistics (NAS) confound efforts to
provide a definitive assessment of the responsiveness of poverty reduction to growth in India.
3
World Bank estimate of people living on US$1.25 or less per day.
4
Rajasthan, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, and Uttar Pradesh.

Given such intra-India disparities, an obvious but important fact is that where people live is important:
location-specific features are important parts of the overall experience of poverty. States matter. India’s
states are so different in their poverty levels that they range from the best in the developing world to the
worst. As shown in figure 1, India’s poorest states have poverty rates that are at the high end of the
distribution of all countries, while the poverty rates of Goa and Himachal Pradesh are considerably better
– towards the low end of the distribution. When urban and rural rates are analyzed, the contrast between
the low and high poverty areas is even more striking.
Figure 1: Poverty rates in Indian States span a wide range of the distribution across all countries

India’s high growth in the last decade has not benefited everyone uniformly. India’s consumption
inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient is 0.37. Inequality is on the rise, with widening disparities
between urban and rural areas. Further, income inequality does not reflect the depth and range of social
inequities. Structural inequalities by gender, caste, and tribe persist, and indicators of poverty and human
development for these groups lag behind those of the general population. Poverty rates are especially high
among Scheduled Tribes (46.1 percent), and Scheduled Castes (40.8 percent) in 2009-10. Female
disadvantage in India continues, despite high rates of growth, and women die both in infancy and in
motherhood, with poorer outcomes for women from scheduled castes and tribes. Economic and social
outcomes for women are underpinned by low levels of security within and outside their home. Caste
remains a potent indicator of labor market outcomes and social status, but positive signs of dynamism are
also appearing within the caste hierarchy. Indicators that India’s educational expansion is leaving
scheduled tribes behind, especially at the secondary school and higher levels, are worrying. Scheduled

tribes have shown the least improvement in intergenerational mobility in education and also display the
worst indicators of child nutrition and mortality.
Lifting people out of poverty is not enough. Even above the threshold for the World Bank Group’s
indicator of shared prosperity (defined as consumption growth of the bottom 40 percent of the
population), a large number of people have consumption levels that are precariously close to the poverty
line. These “vulnerable” people live between one and two official poverty lines.5 In 2009-10, half of
India’s people (51 percent) lived on consumption levels in this vulnerability band. Minor shocks—
illness, poor weather and poor crop yields, indebtedness, high inflation—can easily push them below the
poverty line. Although the number of poor has been declining, the number of vulnerable people has
steadily risen to 600 million people. The end goal is to reduce extreme poverty and reduce vulnerability:
the number of people that are not poor, socially included and reasonably secure.

5

The official poverty line for India is set at the equivalent of US$1.17 per person per day in PPP terms. For the
purposes of the India CPS, the vulnerable are defined as those living between one and two poverty lines. This choice
is based on two independent but coincident local criteria. The National Commission for Enterprises in the
Unorganized Sector classifies all population groups in five categories, and those between one and two poverty lines
are considered "vulnerable". The threshold to pay personal income tax is such that a family of five, with one
taxpayer, would also be close to two poverty lines.

Annex 5
IFC Indicative Non-Lending Activites
Business Line
Access to Finance
Sustainable Business Advisory
Investment Climate
Public Private Partnerships*
Total Non Lending Activities
Project Name

No of projects

Funds Managed by
IFC ($ mn)

31
12
3
17
63

21
16
6
8
52

Project Description

Expected End Date

Access to Finance
Microfinance Knowledge
Management

E-Banking South Asia Link to
Global Initiatives
Belstar Investment and Finance
Private Limited

Project focusing on: (i) LIS focus to expand access to finance; (ii)
Microfinance (MF) product diversification beyond microdebt; (iii) epayments linked to bank and MFI accounts; (iv) sustainable energy
finance linked to MF; (v) micro insurance

FY13

FY13
Working towards improving access to banking services for low-income
households by using innovative business models for payments services
Phase I: Working to determine how Hand-in-Hand (HiH), an NGO
working with SHGs in S.India, can successfully promote a commercially
run microfinance institution.
Phase II: Provide assistance to Belstar to strengthen operations and
monitoring systems

FY13

Intellecash Micro Finance

Support start-up MFIs to establish and grow their operations in
underserved areas and LIS through the Intellecash Network Program
franchising model.

FY13

Capacity Building of Utkarsh

To support Utkarsh to develop and grow its operations through improved
product diversification, development of sound internal systems and
processes, and the introduction of a Social Performance Management
System

FY13

India SME Banking Knowledge
Management

To design an SME Banking program through gathering of market
information, holding discussions with internal and external stakeholders,
and conducting studies and workshops

FY13

Microfinance Risk Management
India
Technical Assistance to FINO
Phase II
Sustainable Energy Finance Micro Energy Credits

Capacity Building of Ananya

FY14
To contribute to strengthening risk management systems and practices in
the MF sector in India by providing a framework for risk assessment
To enhance the access to financial services of low income population
through technology platform, by supporting FINO to scale up and become
sustainable.

FY14

FY14
To provide technical assistance to Regional Rural Banks for developing a
clean energy lending portfolio and serve the demonstration effect of
successful clean energy interventions for low income population.
To support Ananya to expand outreach, build capacity and diversify the
product base offered to lower income population

FY14

Microfinance Credit Reporting
Phase II

FY14
To take forward and build upon the achievements of Phase I by including
outreach to MFIs currently not members of CIB and enabling them to
integrate with CIBs. The project design also incorporates awareness
raising of end borrowers as well as a study of the impact of credit bureaus
on MFI borrowers' behaviour and dissemination of results.

Sustainable Energy Finance - Dia
To build the capacity of MFIs to undertake sustainable finance in a way
Vikas
Sustainable Finance - Maanaveeya that helps them manage their own risks and contribute to climate
mitigation.

FY14

Responsible Finance Sectoral

FY15

SEWA Livelihood Finance

To contribute to strengthening of the MF sector in India by promoting
initiatives aimed at bringing greater customer centricity to the sector, and
raising awareness among decision makers to better address the issues
facing the sector.
To assist SEWA in launching a Livelihood Finance Business by
evaluating the feasibility, preparing the business plan and providing
handholding support.

Technical Assistance to Swadhaar To enhance access to finance for the urban population by supporting
SFPL through TA jointly with Accion International.
Axis Bank Alternative Delivery
To enhance the access to financial services for low income population in
Channels
India (such as migrants), using alternative delivery channels. The project
will use remittance as an entry product to increase access to other banking
services using this channel. It will support Axis Bank to pilot a new agent
banking channel to prove the commercial viability of this model and help
them scale it up.
Aadhar Responsible Finance
To support the partner organisation in launching new housing finance
Equitas Housing Microfinance
products, capacity building and development of sound internal systems
and processes and introduction of a Responsible Finance framework.
Janalakshmi Financial Services
Health Payment

FY15

FY15

FY15
FY15

FY15
FY15
FY15
FY15

To launch an automated G2P payment system in Bihar, linking payments
made to health workers and program participants to bank accounts
The Andhra Pradesh State
Coooperative Bank

To assist AP Coop Bank to reach an expanded customer base of farmers,
to build an expanded product base of both credit and non-credit offerings,
to improve its overall systems and to engage in responsible finance
practices

FY15

Ujjivan Microfinance

To support Ujjivan in launching new products and scale-up of operations,
reducing operating costs through process improvements and incorporating
Responsible Finance principles in operations.

FY15

Equitas Microfinance

MicroInsurance - VimoSEWA
Responsible Finance Accion

Sustainable Energy Finance Grassroots Trading Network

FY15
To support Equitas in scaling up its operations in under-banked areas and
LIS, and incorporating Responsible Finance principles in their operations.
To develop a new microinsurance product for Self Help Groups (SHGs)
to be piloted among selected financial institutions.
To assist the MF sector in India to refocus on a client- centric approach
by organizing responsible finance programs at client, institutional, and
sectoral levels leveraging on existing industry, lender and investor, and

FY15
FY16

FY16
To build capacity of GTN to undertake sustainable finance in a way that
helps it to manage risk and contribute to climate change mitigation.

Housing Regional

To conduct market assesment, develop tools for capacity building, raise
stakeholder awareness and pilot innovative business models in the
mortgage and housing markets across SA

FY16

Grameen Koota Housing
Microfinance

To assist Grameen Koota in introduction of new products, capacity
building to scale up and development of Responsible Finance
Management Framework.

FY16

Technical Assistance to Collateral To increase access to credit for MSMEs in India by providing support to
Registry in India
CERSAI in developing a sustainable business model and expanding its
remit to include movables.
Arohan Pensions
To support Arohan, an MFI working in West Bengal, Bihar and Assam to

FY15

FY16

offer pension product to the low income segments by leveraging their
brand and branch network.
Investment Climate
India Rajasthan Investment
Climate Reform

To assist the Government of Rajasthan (GoR) in increasing the level of
private investments in the State through (i) proactive investor targetting
and investment generation, including increased investments by IFC; and
(ii) improving its business environment with a focus on easing the the
regulatory and non-regulatory constraints
Bihar Tax Simplification Program To increase regulatory compliance by reducing compliance costs and
increased formalization of businesses in Bihar.
Buddhist Circuit Tourism:
Facilitating Growth Corridors in
A two-phase project that aims to facilitate the upgrading of tourism
UP and Bihar
services in the Buddhist Circuit
Green Power for Telecom

Sustainable Business Advisory
To facilitate two mobile operators / telecom tower companies / energy
service providers to implement two viable business models (pilot
projects) using RE / hybrid to reduce GHG emissions and increase RE.

FY13

FY13
FY15

FY13

CTI TurboTech

To catalyze growth in TurboTech by increasing the Company's
manufacturing capabilities and address the market barrier of access to
financing for early-stage cleantech companies.

FY13

Agribusiness - APPL

To scale-up dairy and aquaculture in APPL's tea estates and its
surrounding areas and to strengthen the supply chain and market linkage
for dairy, aquaculture and other agro-produce.

FY13

2011 India Development
Marketplace

To monitor and document the evolution of the 13 winning social
entrepreneur and to oversee the management of a grant pool and award a
portion to each of the 13 social enterprises that want to scale or replicate
their inclusive business models in the states of Bihar, Orissa, and
Rajasthan

FY13

Tata Water Sustainability Program To support 11 Tata facilities in developing a set of detailed water
response strategies and build awareness within the broader community for
water sustainability and water footprinting

FY14

Cleaner Production Technical
Advisory Services

FY14

To support CP assessments with IFC pipeline and portfolio clients and
specifically target large energy intensive companies, to reduce
manufacturing costs and potentially lead to additional CP related
investments.

SME Management Solutions India To scale up the Business Edge model in India by customizing for the local
market and building capacity of local service providers to deliver
Business Edge

FY14

India Farm Forestry Advisory
Program Phase II

FY14

To increase tangible benefits from sustainable forestry and productive
land use to rural landowners

Lighting India

To focus on addressing systemic market failures in the off-grid renewable
energy market in India by working at the company/sector level with the
objective to provide renewable energy lighting access. LI will seek to
replicate the Lighting Africa program.

FY15

South Asia Farmer Training/GAP

To facilitate development/application of farmer training tools and
techniques and uptake of improved good agricultural practices (GAP)
To design, implement and scale-up pilot projects (which can be taken to
scale) with leading sugar mills in India. These pilot projects will focus on
sustainable sugarcane and work predominantly with small and marginal
landholders

FY15

To demonstrate a sustainable business model of integrating and
formalizing the informal sector players in the E-waste supply chain of
Attero.

FY16

India Sugar Advisory

India E-Waste Advisory

FY15

PPP
Gujarat University PPP
Universal Health Insurance,
Meghalaya Project 1

FY13
FY13

Shillong Medical College &
Teaching Hospital PPP

FY13

Kerala Port, Vizhinjam
Chennai Metro
Vadodra Rooftop Solar
Orissa SWM PPP - Berhampur
Surat Rooftop Solar
Rajkot Rooftop Solar
Mehsana Rooftop Solar
Bhavnagar Rooftop Solar
FCI Silos
Jharkhand Diagnostics
Rajasthan Public Street Lighting
Bhubaneswar Public Street
Lighting

FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14

The PPP business line provides assistance to governments in structuring
and implementing public-private partnerships (PPPs) to improve
infrastructure and public services, with the benefit of private-sector
expertise, management, and finance. We are currently advising various
state government on the following projects across sectors:

* For PPP, currently 15 projects but two of the projects (Jharkhand diagnostics and FCI Silos) are split into two projects each
making the total project count as 17.

Annex 6
Overview of Main Trust Funds Activities
Trust Funds are a diverse instrument used mainly for two purposes: (a) to implement global conventions
and support global partnerships/global public goods, and (b) to support activities in country programs that
implement country, regional, and sector priorities.
Global Partnership Trust Funds: Trust Funds in support of global partnerships/public goods with
significant activities in India are mostly focused on the environment, and include the following
programs:1





The Ozone Trust Fund, which assists countries in phasing out Ozone Depleting Substances as agreed
under the Montreal Protocol for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, with funding from the Multilateral
Fund of the Montreal Protocol;
The Global Environmental Facility, which provides funding for projects that improve the global
environment;
The Carbon Finance Program, which uses money contributed by governments and companies in
OECD countries to purchase project-based greenhouse gas emission reductions in developing
countries, within the framework of the Kyoto Protocol's Clean Development Mechanism (CDM);
IDA grants, which help low-income countries to restore or maintain their external debt sustainability;
while India is not eligible for IDA grants, one such grant was approved in the aftermath of the Indian
Ocean Tsunami.

These Trust Funds often complement IBRD/IDA project funding and are normally executed by recipient
agencies.2 Disbursements over the last CAS period were $41.7 million (equivalent to 0.4 percent of
IBRD/IDA disbursements over the period) (see table 1).
Table 1: Global Partnership Trust Funds in India, FY2009-12
Trust Fund

Disbursements (US$, mn)*

Ozone Trust Fund

22,425,798

Global Environmental Facility

13,632,004

Carbon Finance

3,327,801

IDA Grant--Tsunami

2,300,000

Total

41,685,604

* FY12 data up to April 2012.

In some respects the use of funds from global programs in India is different than that in other countries.
For example, the Ozone Depletion Program is larger in East Asian countries, and Carbon Finance is
significantly larger in China.3
1

This note covers only trust funds administered by the World Bank. The World Bank also operates as the Trustee
for other global institutions such as the Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria (GFATM), but these are
not covered here, although the GFATM has disbursed $788 million in India since its inception in 2003.
2
Both Ozone and Carbon Finance projects are often free-standing—not linked to a World Bank-supported project.

Looking forward, while some programs such as Ozone are phasing out, others are expected to play an
increasingly important role. Most notably, the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) Trust Fund Committee
agreed in May 2012 to provide an initial allocation of around $263 million to India to fund its Climate
Investment Plan. Lending constraints in the next four years call for the leveraging of significantly higher
amounts of trust resources, including through global partnerships. Phase II of the Himachal Pradesh
Green Growth Development Policy Loan is expected to be financed by the CTF.
Country, Region, and Sector Trust Funds: Trust funds also support activities in country programs that
help implement country, regional, and sector priorities. During FY2009-12, 51 such TF programs4 were
active in India, of which the 15 largest accounted for more than 80 percent of total disbursements ($44.8
million) (see table 2). In all 394 activities were funded in India, with an average disbursed amount of
about $100,000. More than two-thirds ($32.6 million out of $44.8 million) of the activities were World
Bank executed. The remainder ($12.2 million) was recipient-executed.
Table 2: Country, region, sector Trust Funds, FY2009-12
Program

Name

DFIDIN
INFGRW
PHRD
PPIAF
SPTF
JSDF
ESMAP
TFESSD
FTIE
CITIES
GPOBA
FS-SP
SA-DSD
GFDRR
BNPPRF
OTHER

DFID India III
AusAid Infra
PHRD
PPIAF
DFID TF II
JSDF
ESMAP
TFESSD
Education for All
Cities Alliance
GPOBA
Swedish Social Development
South Asia Decentralization
GFDRR
BNPPRF
Other TFs
Total

Total
7,326,037
4,578,265
3,195,235
3,152,994
2,867,551
2,549,884
2,254,167
2,055,138
1,802,713
1,419,605
1,411,650
1,326,520
1,063,634
1,021,023
1,019,145
7,832,515
44,876,076

Cum share
(%)

No.
Activities

16
27
34
41
47
53
58
62
66
70
73
76
78
80
83
100

33
29
20
30
37
8
13
19
8
13
7
10
24
9
16
118
394

Ave.
size
222,001
157,871
159,762
105,100
77,501
318,736
173,398
108,165
225,339
109,200
201,664
132,652
44,318
113,447
63,697
66,377

Some trust funds are only or primarily recipient-executed (Policy and Human Resource Development
(PHRD), Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF), Cities Alliance, the Development Marketplace,
Institutional Development Fund (IDF), Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest (CGAP), the Statistical
Capacity Building Trust Fund, and Independent Evaluation Group's CLEAR initiative). In cases, where
World Bank-executed funds are provided alongside recipient-executed funds, the former supports
supervision and implementation activities of recipient agencies. Certain trust fund programs can be
executed by the Bank or by the Recipient depending on the objective of the activity. This is the case for
(DFID, Output-Based Partnership, Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF), Global
Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), and South Asia Food and Nutrition Security
3

For example, over FY2010 to the first half of FY2012, the Carbon Fund disbursed $408 million, GEF $96 million,
and Ozone $28 million in China.
4
All programs excluding the Water and Sanitation Program and global programs such as Ozone Trust Fund,
GEFIA, Carbon Finance Program, CDCFTA, and TRF

Initiative (SAFANSI) (see table 4).
Government of India.

All Recipient-executed trust funds require approval by the

Table 3: Trust Funds with recipient-executed activities, FY2009-12 (US$)
Trust Fund

Recipientexecuted
Disbursement

Bankexecuted
Disbursement

Total
Disbursement

PHRD

2,927,082

268,153

3,195,234

92

Mostly RE

JSDF

2,403,691

146,192

2,549,884

94

Mostly RE

Cities Alliance

1,202,933

216,672

1,419,605

85

Mostly RE

DFID TF II

1,188,859

1,678,691

2,867,551

41

Both

DFID TF III

1,043,294

6,282,743

7,326,037

14

Both

GPOBA

977,663

433,987

1,411,650

69

Both

Dev. Marketplace

586,491

0

586,491

100

Only RE

IDF

463,561

0

463,561

100

Only RE

CGAP-T

333,639

44,840

378,479

88

Mostly RE

PPIAF

317,078

2,835,916

3,152,994

10

Both

StatCap

307,313

0

307,313

100

Only RE

GFDRR

234,610

786,413

1,021,023

23

Both

SAFANSI

200,000

23,636

223,636

89

Both

54,304

0

54,304

100

Only RE

IEG's CLEAR Init.

Share
RE/Total
Disbursement (%)

Type

All other trust fund programs are only World Bank-executed (see table 4 for the 11 largest). These trust
funds are linked to activities in the India program, which have been requested by the Government of India
(as are projects under preparation or implementation and knowledge activities), and are in line with the
country strategy, South Asia Regional (SAR) Strategy, and sectoral priorities that are endorsed by the
Board of Executive Directors. For example, the SAR strategy stresses the importance of reducing
malnutrition in the region; accordingly, a large the South Asia Food and Nutrition Security Initiative or
SAFANSI trust fund has been mobilized with contributions from DFID and other donors to support
initiatives to reduce malnutrition.
Table 4: World Bank-executed (BE) trust funds cumulative
disbursements above $500,000, FY2009-12
Program

Name

INFGRW
ESMAP
TFESSD
FTIE
FS-SP
SA-DSD
BNPPRF
WPP
SIEF
SAWI
GENTF

AusAid Infrastructure
ESMAP
TFESSD
Education for All
Swedish Social Development
South Asia Decentralization
BNPPRF
Water Partnership Program
Spanish IE TF
SAWI
Gender TF

BE
Disbursements
4,578,265
2,254,167
2,055,138
1,802,713
1,326,520
1,063,634
1,019,145
756,951
753,097
584,387
520,827

Another way to look at trust fund programs is by the level at which they are managed: country, region
(South Asia), sectoral anchors or global. Trust funds managed at the level of the country program (the
second and third DFID Trust Funds, for example) disbursed about a fourth of the total; regionallymanaged trust funds, another fourth ; and sector/global ones accounted for the remainder.5
Table 5: Trust Funds by Level of Management, FY2009-12 (US$)
Level of
management
Country
Region
Sector or global
Total

Disbursement
10,193,588
10,345,827
24,390,127
44,876,076

Disbursement
Share (%)
23
23
54
100

Over time, the World Bank, donors, and recipients have striven to manage trust funds in a more strategic
and less fragmented way, with the 2009 Trust Fund Reform representing an important step forward in this
direction. For the trust funds managed by the India program, the DFID-World Bank Partnership Trust
Funds for India II and III, a tripartite structure in which the Government of India (Department of
Economic Affairs), DFID, and the World Bank jointly endorse activities has been put in place to ensure
greater client ownership. For trust funds managed at the regional or sectoral level, government approval
is needed for all recipient-executed activities, in line with Government of India procedures.
Other Trust Funds: In addition to the two categories of TFs discussed so far, both the Water and
Sanitation Program (WSP) and IFC manage large trust fund resources. WSP-managed trust funds
disbursed $12.3 million and IFC-managed trust funds disbursed $31.8 million over FY2009-12. IFC
mobilized significant amounts of trust fund resources for its advisory services, from less than $1 million
in FY2008 to $9.5 million in FY2011.
The Government of India as a Trust Fund Donor: An important development over the past CAS period
has been India's increasing role as a donor in various trust funds. India is now a member of ten trust
funds and contributes to six of them (the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, Africa Cooperation
Building, Avian and Human Influenza, GEF, GFATM, South-South Experience Exchange Facility
(SSEEF), Cultural Heritage) and the Government of India envisages contributing to a few additional ones.
India is a contributor and provider of experience to the SEETF, and SEETF resources will continue to be
mobilized to foster experience sharing regionally and beyond on various development issues including
decentralization and delivery of public services.
Government of India's Concerns on Trust Funds: The Government of India has taken a strategic stance
on trust funds as a whole and expressed a major concern about the overall increase of trust fund funding
in World Bank Group activities, stating that trust fund donors’ contributions do not have any leveraging
impact financially, contrary to what would happen if the same funds were provided as IBRD or IFC
capital increase.

5

Excluding WSP $12,300,658 and Global Partnerships (OTF, GEFIA, Carbon, CDCFTA, and TRF)

Annex 7
INDIA
COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
Date: March 24, 2005
The country financing parameters for India set out below have been approved by the Regional
Vice President, South Asia Region and are being posted on the Bank’s internal website. These
parameters would be applied within the overall framework of the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy for
FY05-08 (see India: Country Assistance Strategy, R2004-0170/3, IDA/R-2004-0208/3, September 17,
2004).
Item
Cost sharing. Limit on the
proportion of individual project
costs that the Bank may
finance

Parameter
Up to 100%

Recurrent cost financing. Any
limits that would apply to the
overall amount of recurrent
expenditures that the Bank may
finance

No country
level limit on
recurrent cost
financing.

Local cost financing. Are the
requirements for Bank
financing of local expenditures
met, namely that: (i) financing
requirements for the country’s
development program would
exceed the public sector’s own
resources (e.g., from taxation
and other revenues) and
expected domestic borrowing;
and (ii) the financing of foreign
expenditures alone would not
enable the Bank to assist in the
financing of individual projects
Taxes and duties. Are there
any taxes and duties that the
Bank would not finance?

Yes.

No.

Remarks/Explanation
Cost sharing arrangements in individual projects would be
managed to stay within the aggregate lending envelope; the
Bank’s overall financing share is not expected to change
significantly. The Bank’s financing percentage in each project
may vary from project to project, depending upon project type,
sector etc. Some level of counterpart financing however is
expected to continue in many projects. The Bank may selectively
finance 100% of project costs e.g., social sector projects and
projects in poor and remote areas. In individual projects, cost
sharing arrangements would take into consideration the
characteristics of the project and sector-specific aspects (e.g.,
based on the CAS ‘guidelines for Bank lending in key sectors’)
In national-level projects, where the Bank’s envisages
cofinancing with other development partners under common
arrangements, including sector-wide approaches, the Bank’s
financing share is expected to be relatively low.
In determining Bank financing of recurrent costs in individual
projects the Bank will take into account sustainability issues at
the sector and project levels including sustainability of the project
/ program achievements/outcomes, and implied future budgetary
outlays. Sector-specific considerations (e.g., based on the CAS
‘guidelines for Bank lending in key sectors’) would also be taken
into account.
India meets the criteria for Bank’s financing of local costs.
Therefore, the Bank may finance local and foreign costs in any
proportion as needed in individual projects.

Current levels of taxes and duties are reasonable. At the project
level , the Bank would consider whether taxes and duties
constitute an excessively high share of project costs

Annex 8
Government of India Project Screening Criteria1
In 2011, the Department of Economic Affairs, as the nodal agency for posing
projects to the World Bank, Asian Development Bank (ADB), and International Fund for
Agricultural Development, has decided to institute a new set of sc r e e n i n g principles to
govern the selection of projects to be posed to these agencies. The goal of instituting this
screening criteria is to maximize access and leverage of Multilateral Financial
Institution/Multilateral Development Banks’ (MDBs) knowledge base, international
experience and familiarity with best practices, making the best use of limited external
resources available. This selection criteria will form the main approach for accessing
assistance from the World Bank, ADB and the IFAD.
Central to this new approach are two principles: 1) size of external assistance will be
up-to a maximum of US$500 million from MDBs for any project inclusive of any
technical assistance for project preparation and 2). Overall portfolio will be progressively
re-balanced towards State Projects and amongst the States towards the lagging and the
special category States.
Systemic or transformational impact
1. Does the proposal have elements of sustainable systems re-engineering and or
sustainable process re-engineering which would lead to improved systems, business
processes or delivery mechanisms?
2. Does the proposal involve capacity and institution building that can foster better
outcomes on a long-term sustainable basis?
3. Does the proposal have focus on service delivery/improvement (rather than only asset
creation) in a sustainable manner - which other wise has not been the norm in the projects
implemented in the sector - e.g. focus on l evels of reduction of water loss, focus on
number of hours power/water is available per day, reduction in waterborne disease?
4. Does the proposal bring together otherwise disparate attempts/ schemes to one
synergetic platform which has not been possible hitherto (e.g. nutrition, gender
issues, livelihoods)?
5. Does the proposal seek to create additional choice for the citizens to access
required service/entitlements?
6. Does the proposal involve energy efficiency and environmental benefits without
making the project/ outcomes expensive?
7. Are knowledge transfer, technology transfer and best practices transfer from
international experience envisaged with adequate Jong term engagement for ensuring
sustainability in Indian context?
8. Does the proposal have institutional improvement measures: e.g. (a) Accounting
Reforms (moving from single entry cash based accounting system to double entry
accrual system of accounting (b) Ring fencing of finances/activities including
corporatisation wherever needed c) creation and implementation of appropriate revenue
models e.g. tariff reforms or alternative revenue structuring.
9. Does the proposal address issues of real sector reforms e.g. Development of sectoral
policies, development of institutional structures, setting up of regulatory framework/
regulators?
1

Based on Government of India circular (F.No. 3/2/2010-FB.II), issued on September 1, 2011, outlining a
country-led screening criteria for projects posed to the World Bank, ADB and IFAD.

10. Does the proposal have elements that are transformational in nature - which if
implemented could transform the way systems function or the way delivery of
services are done?
Innovations and piloting of new approaches
1. Does the proposal have innovative elements and new approaches that have not been
tried in the sector and have reasonable chance of changing for the better the way
things are done in the sector and have some chance of scalable replication?
2. Does the proposal look at financial sustainability and O&M related issues which
otherwise has not been the norm in the sector?
Innovations in financing and leveraging
1. Does the proposal use different/ innovative financing products /modalities?
2. Does the proposal involve co-financing from other financing agencies?
3. Does the proposal catalyze private sector financing in different ways and especially to
create leverage?
4. Does the proposal involve CDM and accrual of carbon credits as natural
by-product of core development projects which can be a way of financing the project?

Annex 9
Consultations Held to Inform the Preparation of the CPS
World Bank FY2011 Client Survey for India
Background. In order to develop more effective strategies for its work in the country, the World Bank in
India conducted a stakeholder perception survey in May–June 2012 to gauge how its work was perceived.
The survey covered a wide range of questions about India’s development priorities, perceptions about the
Bank in India, the Bank’s perceived strengths and weaknesses, the relevance and quality of its research
and knowledge, the ease of access and usefulness of its information, and its future role in the country.
Process. The survey was conducted by the market research firm AC Nielson through mailed and online
questionnaires, as well as face-to-face interviews. It covered a fair mix of think tanks, central and state
government bodies, development agencies, civil society, media, the private sector, and project
beneficiaries. About half of the respondents worked professionally with the World Bank. The survey
covered the states of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, and Himachal Pradesh, as well as the cities of Delhi
and Mumbai.
Results. Most stakeholders expressed confidence about the World Bank Group’s effectiveness and felt the
institution had the financing, knowledge, and skills to help India solve complex development challenges.
Better development results could be achieved if the WBG increased its collaboration with local
governments, academia, think tanks, and research institutes in India. Going forward, respondents felt the
World Bank had a significant role to play in the country; that value would be greater, however, if its
experts improved their knowledge of India’s specific challenges, reduced the complexity of obtaining
financing, and offered more innovative knowledge products.
Areas of focus. Stakeholders were of the opinion that rural development, agricultural development, and
food security were the most important areas for reducing poverty (tables A9.1 and A9.2). Education, job
creation, and economic growth were also believed to be critically important. Rural development,
governance, and energy were seen to be the key drivers of economic growth, and stakeholders wanted the
WBG to remain engaged in these areas. On the global development agenda, respondents wanted the WBG
to engage on issues related to climate change, communicable diseases, international financial systems,
and trade. Areas for future research included rural and agricultural development, food security, education,
poverty reduction, governance and water and sanitation.
Value to clients. Financing, particularly investment lending, was considered the Bank’s most effective
instrument in support of the development agenda (table A9.3). This was followed by the Bank’s technical
assistance and advice and its ability to strengthen institutions. Bank research was perceived to be relevant
and accessible. However, there were some concerns about the extent of the Bank’s inclusiveness and
openness, the accessibility of its staff, and its linkages to non-Bank expertise (table A9.3). Selective
concerns were expressed about the Bank’s effectiveness in governance, job creation, and natural resource
management.

Table A9.1. What would contribute most to reducing poverty?

Table A9.2. Where should the World Bank focus its resources?

Table A9.3. What is the greatest value of the Bank?

Note: In the previous FY2004 country survey, more than two-thirds (68%) of all respondents indicated
that providing loans to finance development projects was the greatest value of the Bank.

Table A9.4. What is the Bank’s greatest weakness?

Note: Respondents in the previous country survey (FY2004) indicated that the Bank’s greatest
weaknesses were imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities (24%), not
considering alternative policy options (21%), and being too bureaucratic in its operational policies
and procedures (20%).

World Bank Group CPS multistakeholder consultations
In the summer of 2012, the Bank team held multistakeholder consultations to identify priorities for the
new CPS. Consultations were held with a broad range of stakeholders to tap their experience and
knowledge and hear their ideas about how the Bank could help India meet its long-standing development
agenda as well as the new challenges thrown up by unprecedented economic growth and the recent
slowdown.
Process. In mid-May 2012, a draft concept note was prepared by the WBG, outlining initial thoughts on
its strategy for 2013–16. This was followed by discussions with the Ministry of Finance and line
ministries to assess the central government’s views on India’s challenges and to identify key areas where
the WBG assistance could have the greatest impact. To capture the diversity of development challenges
facing India today and the views of state governments, further consultations were held with officials in
four states: Assam, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, and Uttar Pradesh.
These early consultations were accompanied by parallel consultations with civil society organizations in
the state capitals of Assam, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, and Uttar Pradesh, as well as in Delhi and Mumbai.
Ahead of the consultations, all participants received a presentation in both English and Hindi that spelled
out the main thrusts of the previous CPS, opportunities and challenges both within and outside India, and
India’s own future direction as articulated in the approach paper to the 12th Five Year Plan. This was
followed by a paper presenting the WBG’s initial thoughts on its new strategy, based on early
deliberations.
Participants were asked to express their views candidly on what they felt should be the development
priorities for India (and their state), and whether the CPS captured those priorities. They were also asked
what role they envisaged for the WBG in support of those priorities, in which sectors that support would
be most effective, and what form the support should take (finance, knowledge, experience sharing, and so
on). After feedback from the Bangalore consultations, a section was added on the lessons learned from
earlier Bank projects.
To reach a much wider audience, the details of the discussions were shared on the Bank’s external
website, with comments and suggestions invited from the public at large.
Results. Despite the diversity of development challenges raised during the consultations, participants
identified a few key areas where the WBG could play a catalytic role:
Agriculture
Agriculture was repeatedly identified as an overarching concern, given the importance of food security
for the country and the fact that the majority of India’s rural poor depend on agriculture for at least a
portion of their income. Participants strongly felt that the WBG could help increase agricultural
productivity by supporting the development of agriculture-related infrastructure and services. Ideas
included support for low-cost irrigation, improved access to credit, the provision of adequate warehousing
and storage facilities, bringing the benefits of research to farmers, upgrading technological interventions,
providing crop insurance, developing village roads, and building primary-level processing and marketing
capacity at the grass roots. The improvement of livestock, particularly for dairy farming, was also seen as
important. Participants felt that the creation of one-stop facilities for farmers should be a priority. Other
matters of perceived importance were the proper management of the country's water resources and
strengthening agriculture’s resilience to climate change.

Health
Health and malnutrition were also high priorities. Participants pointed out that only a small percentage of
the population had access to formal health care. Public sector services were beset with poor management
and leakages, and some 80 percent of health spending occurred in the private sector. An average family
spent more on health care than on education, with the high cost of treatment often leading to
impoverishment. The sector faced a critical shortage of human resources, especially in rural areas, making
it necessary to train local people as paramedics. Some participants suggested that a public-privatepartnership model in health care could be promoted, with targeted subsidy for the poor. The World Bank
could help in providing technical and managerial assistance to the sector, along with capacity building at
various levels. Bank support could also be expanded to include the promotion of preventive and
alternative medical systems.
Education and skills
Education was another area of concern. Participants highlighted the poor quality of elementary education,
which laid a weak academic foundation that made it difficult for students to cope at higher levels, with
direct effects on the quality of human resources. Moreover, the emphasis on enrolment numbers created
an erroneous impression of universal schooling. Several speakers emphasized the need for meaningful
skills training for youth to enable them to set up microenterprises and small businesses, thereby slowing
the migration of rural youth to urban areas. There was also a perceived need to increase the number of
seats available in institutions providing technical and vocational education, and increase resources
allocated to such institutions.
Urbanization
Discussions also focused on the challenges created by India’s rapid urbanization. It was observed that $1
trillion would be needed for urban development over the next two decades to meet the needs of India’s
rapidly urbanizing population. However, it was also suggested that allocations should go primarily to
local governments, and that transparency in public expenditures should be strengthened. Some
participants recommended that the WBG support the planned development of the rapidly growing secondand third-tier cities, especially by providing technological and scientific solutions for public
transportation, waste disposal, and other urban problems. Several participants expressed apprehension that
rapid urbanization, especially through rural-urban migration, was creating pockets of urban poverty that
were likely to deepen unless the skills of rural migrants were developed to improve their employability.
Facilities in rural areas also needed to be improved to halt migration to urban centers.
Governance
The importance of good governance was repeatedly emphasized, particularly the need to tackle
corruption. It was felt that improving governance should be a focus area of the Bank's new strategy.
Participants expressed the need for greater transparency and disclosure regarding the use of public funds
and the outcomes of publicly funded programs. They also cited a need for independent monitoring at the
block, district, and state levels. The Bank, they said, could provide technical assistance and expertise in
this area. To support decentralized planning, participants saw it as important to strengthen grassroots
institutions (Panchayati Raj institutions, or PRIs) and to build their capacity by sharing examples of
successful community-driven projects, the more because the PRIs provided the only institutional
encouragement to women's political empowerment in the country. Convergence of government programs
was also needed through greater interministerial and interdepartmental coordination. Several speakers
pointed out the need to develop a current database of critical indicators—such as population, maternal
health, education, location of resources, and so on—to improve development planning at the grass roots
and to allocate resources wisely.

Environment
Participants highlighted the environmental cost of high growth as manifested in rampant water, air and
soil pollution. It was emphasized that development programs should factor in environmental sustainability
to ensure holistic development in addition to the creation of wealth creation and the stimulation of
economic growth. It was also suggested that the Bank help the government to come up with a climatechange response for the medium and long terms.
Infrastructure
Discussions also centered on the need for strengthening infrastructure, particularly transport,
communications, and power. Several participants felt that growth in sectors such as water, energy, roads
and rail was needed if the manufacturing sector was to develop to its full potential.
Small business
Several participants said that the informal sector needed to be recognized as the biggest trigger for growth
as it generated far more employment than the formal sector. However, productivity in small and mediumsize enterprises (SMEs) needed to be improved and such enterprises integrated with markets across the
country. Given the sector’s enormous potential, it was suggested that SMEs (including microenterprises)
should be served by dedicated financial institutions that provided expertise together with financial
support. It was observed that the World Bank could act as a catalyst and counselor for this sector;
moreover, deeper research on the sector’s considerable untapped potential was needed.
Regional imbalances and the unique characteristics of some of India’s regions were also discussed. For
instance, in the northeast, development projects needed to take into account the region’s unique ecological
characteristics, and more research was required to understand the richness of the resource base. The
World Bank could play an important role in Assam by supporting small farmers; strengthening
transportation (including river transportation on the Brahmaputra), communications, and power; and
expanding microfinance and vocational training. In Chhattisgarh, while highlighting the difficulties of
working in Maoist-dominated areas, participants pointed to the plight of farmers and forest-dependent
people and the need to improve primary health care and education, upgrade the delivery of government
programs, and ensure the judicious use the state’s natural resources.
Other areas of focus
Children, the disabled, the elderly, and agri-business were identified as sectors that required specific
mention in the strategy. It was mentioned that senior citizens—whose number is expected to rise to about
340 million by 2050 according to a United Nations estimate—required special focus as they were
excluded from most development programs. Further, in many rural areas, young people were migrating to
urban centers, leaving their elders behind to fend for themselves without a support system. In the absence
of a clear agenda to address this issue seriously, a major problem was bound to appear.

CAS Formulation and Consultation Process
A more detailed version of the CPS consultation process, with the names of participants, details of
discussions, and other information, is available on the World Bank’s India website:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/india.

Annex 10
The Indian Statistical System
India has been a pioneer in the collection and use of statistics for national development and has one of the
largest and most complex statistical systems in the world. The complexity derives from the size of the
economy and the population, the great variety of economic activities and social conditions, the variability
in natural endowments and environmental conditions and the constitutional structure of a federal state.
While national statistics are the responsibility of the central government, state and local governments
have formal responsibility for the collection of the basic data which make up the national estimates.
The Indian Statistical System (ISS) is the responsibility of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation (MOSPI). The Statistics Wing of the Ministry – also called the National Statistical Office
(NSO – includes the Central Statistics Office (CSO), responsible for the compilation of national statistics
and statistical standards, the National Sample Survey Office, responsible for sample surveys throughout
India, and the Computer Center. At the Center statistical work is also carried out in a number of ministries
coordinated by the CSO. At the state level and below, statistical activities are the responsibility of state
governments and most states have a department of Economics or Statistics, or its equivalent, to coordinate
activities. Statistical activities also take place in districts and panchayats (local levels). To oversee and
promote coordination of the ISS, in 2005 the Government set up a permanent National Statistical
Commission (NSC). The NSC works to promote coordination, improve standards and to ensure that the
ISS as a whole meets the needs of the nation to support economic, social and environmental development.
A strong history of statistical development: Significant development of the ISS and its related institutions
took place in the first decades after Independence. The Indian Statistical Institute, for example, was
responsible for the development of many of the statistical procedures and techniques that are widely used
today throughout the world. The National Sample Survey, which is now in its 68th round, has collected
and disseminated an enormous amount of extremely valuable data about the economic activity and social
conditions of households throughout the country. It represents the pre-eminent source of data for microeconomic research in India and a very important resource for historical analysis.
In many respects, the Indian statistical system in 2012 is sophisticated and well-resourced. For example,
India was one of the first subscribers to the IMF’s Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) and has
been in compliance with the standard since 19961. The most recent IMF Article IV staff report states that
“Macroeconomic statistics are adequate for surveillance, but weaknesses remain in the timeliness and
coverage of certain statistical series. India has an elaborate system for compiling economic and financial
statistics and produces a vast quantity of data covering most sectors of the economy.” 2 The World Bank’s
Bulletin Board on Statistical Capacity (BBSC) 3, indicates that the Statistical Capacity Indicator for India
is significantly higher than for other IDA countries and for other countries in the South Asia region. At
the national level, the statistical system is able to call upon a cadre of highly skilled and experienced
statisticians and there is an extensive education and training system in place to replace those who leave.
The statistical system under pressure: Despite significant progress, by the end of the twentieth century,
the Indian statistical system as a whole was under considerable pressure. As demand for statistics
increased generally and as new concerns and problems led to demands for new data. To a large extent,
however, both overall coverage and the quality of data also declined as financial resources were limited
1
2
3

http://dsbb.imf.org/images/pdfs/AnnualReports/2010/IND_SDDS_AR2010.pdf
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2011/cr1150.pdf
http://go.worldbank.org/QVSQM1R6V0

under general fiscal pressures and as Government policies turned away from central planning towards
greater private sector involvement in national development. By the time of the Millennium there was
widespread concern that the system had been increasingly unable to respond as economic reforms,
deregulating private investment, and promoting the market economy kicked in and as more powers were
devolved to the states. To help understand the problems, in 2000 the Government set up a National
Statistical Commission (NSC), to carry out a comprehensive examination of the statistical system and to
make recommendations on how it could be improved.
The 2001 NSC report identified a number of deficiencies in administrative statistics as well as censuses
and surveys, including: a) gaps in the availability of needed information; b) delays in the publication of
results; c) large and frequent revisions of published results; d) gross discrepancies between official
statistics from different sources; and e) lack of transparency in statistical operations. At the same time,
quality assurance processes were ineffective and significant sets of data especially at the state level were
judged to be of poor quality. The report also noted the absence of effective coordination to promote
efficient production of comparable statistics, inadequate technical knowledge of staff, inadequate
numbers of statistical staff in place and inadequate information and communications technology and
physical infrastructure. In addition, it was found that variations in the capacities of state Statistical
Bureaus had had a major effect on the quality and consistency of state and national statistics.
The World Bank’s involvement in statistics in India: The World Bank has been in a dialogue with the
Government on statistics for more than fifteen years. This engagement has been based on three
arguments. First, it supports a program of reform which the Government of India itself has identified as a
priority. The importance of good statistics to provide the evidence base for socio-economic development
has long been recognized in India. An efficient and effective national statistical system in India is seen as
a core function of Government at all levels and an integral component of the accountability and
transparency framework. Second, good statistics are an integral part of the development results agenda
and support development efforts at all levels and in all sectors. Third, an efficient and effective statistical
system is essential not only for the proper operation of government at all levels but also for the World
Bank Group’s own lending and non-lending operations in India.
World Bank support to statistics was initiated in 1996, and a draft project was prepared in 1999, but it did
not proceed until after the NSC issued its report. The engagement was re-started in 2005 with a number
of technical studies, including an assessment of the requirements to strengthen state statistical systems. In
2010, Statistical Strengthening Loan for India (a development policy loan for $107 million) was approved
by the Board. It supported a program of reform and capacity strengthening that the Government had
initiated in 2006, largely in response to the recommendations of the 2001 NSC Report. In particular, the
Government established a centrally sponsored scheme to support a process of reform and statistical
capacity building in the 35 States and Union Territories. Under this scheme states undertook to invest in
their statistical systems in line with the needs for both national and state level statistics, setting their own
priorities and timetable for reform. In return, the centre provided grants, training and technical support.
What has been achieved? Although the Loan closed in 2011, the process of reform and capacity building
continues. The centrally sponsored statistical strengthening scheme, which was set up under the 11th Plan
will continue through the 12th Plan and possibly beyond. Thirty-three out of 35 States have signed up to
participate in the scheme, nine states have completed their strategic plans, and most are now
implementing the reforms and building capacity. A monitoring system has been established and progress
reports are produced regularly. After a slow start, progress is now picking up and MOSPI anticipates that
significant additional funds will be needed in the 12th Plan beyond the initial allocation. Building on
lessons learned from the Statistical Strengthening Loan, the World Bank will explore options for further
engagement under the new CPS. An important part of the engagement for the Government was to gain
access to experience and knowledge of statistical capacity building programs and good practice

elsewhere. It is clear that success requires careful and sustained follow up of the reform and capacity
building process, and that all states would benefit from additional technical assistance and capacity
building efforts both to prepare strategic plans, and, more importantly, implement them.

Annex A2
2/5/2013
1:23:44 PM

India at a glance
India

South
Asia

Lowermiddleincome

1,241.5
1,410
1,746.5

1,657
1,299
2,151

2,533
1,760
4,458

1.4
0.2

1.5
1.1

1.5
1.4

30
31
65
47
44
92
63
116
116
116

..
31
65
48
33
90
62
106
107
105

..
39
66
46
24
87
71
104
106
102

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2011
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Development diamond*

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 2005-11
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

GNI
per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 2005-11)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Literacy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

India
Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1991

2001

2010

2011

274.8
22.5
8.3
22.5
..

492.4
25.7
12.4
24.2
..

1,684.3
35.8
22.8
31.7
..

1,848.0
36.6
24.6
31.1
..

-0.4
1.7
31.6
33.4
..
..

0.7
0.9
20.2
18.0
..
..

-2.7
0.3
17.2
6.3
..
..

-4.2
0.4
18.1
7.1
15.3
68.7

1991-01

2001-11

2010

2011

2011-15

6.2
4.2
12.3

7.9
6.4
15.1

9.6
8.0
22.7

6.9
5.4
15.3

7.0
5.6
21.8

1991

2001

2010

2011

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formation/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

Economic ratios*

Trade

Domestic
savings

Capital
formation

Indebtedness
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

India
Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
Growth of capital and GDP (%)

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

29.4
25.4
15.2
45.2

23.0
25.2
14.7
51.8

17.7
27.1
14.5
55.1

17.2
26.4
13.9
56.4

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Imports of goods and services

65.9
11.6
8.3

63.4
12.4
13.2

56.5
11.9
26.9

57.2
11.7
29.8

1991-01

2001-11

2010

2011

3.3
6.2
6.9
8.0

3.2
8.4
8.6
9.6

7.0
7.2
7.6
9.3

2.8
3.4
2.5
8.9

40

5.9
6.9
8.0
13.5

6.4
7.3
13.2
16.9

7.0
7.8
11.1
15.6

7.5
5.1
11.1
18.5

-10

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Imports of goods and services

20
15
10
5
0
-5

06

07

08

09

GCF

10

11

GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)
30
20
10
0
06

07

08

Exports

09

10

Imports

Note: 2011 data are preliminary estimates.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

11

India
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
1991

2001

2010

2011

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

13.5
13.8

4.3
3.2

10.4
8.5

8.2
8.0

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

18.6
-5.4
-8.6

16.2
-6.9
-9.7

20.2
-4.1
-7.9

18.7
-4.8
-8.3

1991

2001

2010

2011

17,865
492
135
13,148
19,411
..
5,325
4,233

43,827
361
230
33,370
51,413
..
14,000
9,882

251,136
691
639
168,098
369,769
..
106,068
71,627

309,843
853
789
207,393
499,533
..
143,291
96,763

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Inflation (%)
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
06

07

08

09

10

GDP deflator

11

CPI

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Tea
Iron
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
600,000
500,000
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
0
05

Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

06

07

08

Exports

09

10

11

Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
1991

2001

2010

2011

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

23,288
24,879
-1,591

61,843
70,093
-8,250

382,280
464,054
-81,775

450,777
576,439
-125,662

Net income
Net current transfers

-3,830
4,243

-4,206
15,856

-17,308
53,140

-15,987
63,494

Current account balance

-1,178

3,400

-45,958

-78,180

-4

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

4,563
-3,385

8,551
-11,951

59,008
-13,050

65,349
12,831

-5

9,220
24.5

54,106
47.7

396,666
45.6

414,136
47.9

1991

2001

2010

2011

86,864
8,459
14,203

99,499
7,009
19,458

290,351
11,180
25,888

334,331
11,524
26,605

7,858
1,170
242

11,770
1,091
570

24,407
625
1,024

29,177
740
1,101

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

Current account balance to GDP (%)
0
05

06

07

08

09

10

11

-1
-2
-3

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

Composition of 2011 debt (US$ mill.)
A: 11,524
B: 26,605

G:
78,052

C: 6,108
D: 10,711
E: 26,870

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

565
2,897
1,476
74
5

557
363
-1,444
5,472
2,950

1,007
5,400
18,989
26,502
30,442

..
2,631
17,958
32,190
-4,137
F:
174,461

2,861
2,184
669
1,515
744
772

2,582
1,997
1,152
845
508
337

4,348
4,401
1,374
3,027
275
2,752

7,144
2,683
1,534
1,149
308
841

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

2/5/13

Annex B2

INDIA - Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 1/24/2013

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
a
Number of Projects Under Implementation
b
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
e
Disbursement Ratio (%)
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousand)
Average Supervision (US$ thousand/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2010

2011

2012

2013

75
3.7
9.3
11.2
10.7
11.8
27.5

81
3.9
8.6
12.0
9.9
12.4
16.9

76
3.8
7.9
12.1
10.5
13.4
13.0

77
4.2
19.5
27.2
20.8
29.8
4.3

yes
14,390
192

yes
12,199
151

yes
16,243
214

yes
14,318
186

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
350
19
49,161
5,359
25.8
15.8
23.2
11.4

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3A - IBRD/IDA Program Summary: INDIA
As of March 31, 2013

Fiscal
Year

Project Name

IBRD
US$ M

IDA a/
US$ M

GEF/MP/CTF
US$ M

TOTAL
US $ M

INTEGRATION
2013

2014

Himachal Pradesh State Roads - Additional Financing b/

61.7

61.7

Kerala Transport II

216.0

216.0

National Highways Interconnectivity

500.0

500.0

Gujarat Highways II

350.0

350.0

1,200.0

1,200.0

Northeast Power Transmission I

425.0

425.0

Tamil Nadu Roads II

300.0

Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor II

2015

Implementing Perform, Achieve, Trade - CTF

300.0

50.0

50.0

100.0

AP Rural Roads

120.0

120.0

Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor III

525.0

525.0

Northeast Power Transmission II

500.0

Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization
Luhri Hydro
Sub-total by engagement area

500.0
325.0

325.0

650.0
4,897.7

650.0
325.0

50.0

5,272.7

TRANSFORMATION
2013

Karnataka Watersheds II b/

60.0

HP Mid-Himalayan Watersheds - Additional Financing b/

37.0

Himachal Pradesh DPL Green Growth b/

100.0
50.0
290.0

290.0

Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring II

300.0

300.0

Rural Water Supply and Sanitation for Low-income States

500.0

500.0

Karnataka Urban Water Modernization

190.0

190.0
100.0

100.0

Partial Risk Sharing Facility in Energy Efficiency - CTF

25.0

25.0

Efficient and Sustainable City Bus Services - GEF

10.1

10.1

Facility for Low Carbon Technology Deployment - GEF

10.0

10.0

100.0

100.0

8.8

8.8

203.9

2,280.9
-

Himachal Pradesh DPL II Green Growth - CTF
Sustainable Livelihoods & Adaptation to Climate Change - GEF
Informal Settlements Improvement Project

500.0
245.0

Neeranchal National Watersheds
Sub-total by engagement area

790.0

1,287.0

245.0

INCLUSION
2013

-

ICDS System Strengthening & Nutrition Improvement b/
Karnataka Health Systems - Additional Financing b/

106.0
70.0

Bihar Panchayati Raj Institutions b/
HIV AIDS IV
Bihar Social Protection

2014

2015

50.0

Maharashtra Rural Water and Sanitation III

Uttarakhand Watersheds II

2015

37.0

100.0

Super Efficient Equipment Program for Egy Effcy - CTF

2014

60.0

106.0
70.0

84.0

84.0

255.0

255.0

70.0

70.0

Low-Income Housing

100.0

100.0

Tamil Nadu & Puducherri Disaster Risk Reduction

202.5

202.5

AP Rural Inclusive Growth
Teacher Training in Bihar

150.0
200.0

150.0

SSA (Elementary Education) IIII

400.0

400.0

Bihar Flood Rehabilitation APL II

250.0

250.0

ICDS System Strengthening & Nutrition APL II

344.0
250.0

344.0

National Cyclone Risk Mitigation APL II
Kerala Health Systems
Bihar Flood Rehabilitation APL III

40.0
250.0

250.0

2,771.5

2,771.5

Sub-total by engagement area

200.0

Total by FY
2013

377.7
2,665.0

2,074.50
1,100.0

50.0
153.9

2,502.2

2014
2015 c/

2,645.0

1,454.0

50.0

4,149.0

a/$2.73 billion IDA16 committed in FY12
b/approved
c/project preparation underway; assumes transitional IDA17 financing

3,918.9

Annex B3B
India: IFC Investment Operations Program

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only

2010

2011

2012

2013*

1130
806

421
401

789
789

653
468

2
4
2

0
10
6

0
15
15
7
8
31
2
7
4
0
0
8
0
0
0
2
0
100

13
11
4

0
0
100

34
9
47
0
11
100

10
4
62
0
25
100

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY
CHEMICALS
COLLECTIVE INVESTMENT VEHICLES
EDUCATION SERVICES
ELECTRIC POWER
FINANCE & INSURANCE
FOOD & BEVERAGES
HEALTH CARE
INDUSTRIAL & CONSUMER PRODUCTS
NONMETALLIC MINERAL PRODUCT MANUFACTURING
OIL, GAS AND MINING
PLASTICS & RUBBER
PRIMARY METALS
PROFESSIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL SERVICES
TEXTILES, APPAREL & LEATHER
TRANSPORTATION AND WAREHOUSING
UTILITIES
Total

14
25

14
55
0

4
9
31
4
3
0
0
1
0
100

9

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity
Guarantee
Loan
Quasi equity
Quasi loan
Total

15
1
83
0
1
100

* Data as of Jan 17, 2013

0
0

3
2
100

36
0
58
6
100

35
26

9
0
2
0

CPS Annex B4 - Summary of World Bank Knowledge Services - India
As of January 23, 2013

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audience a

Objective b

ESW
ESW
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA

2012
2013
2012
2012
2012
2012
2013

172
12
138
408
65
89
45

G
G
G
G
G
B, G
G

KG
PS
PS
KG, PD
PS
KG
PS

ESW
ESW
ESW
ESW
ESW
ESW
ESW
ESW
ESW
ESW
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA

2013
2013
2013
2013
2013
2014
2014
2014
2014
2014

G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G

KG
KG
KG
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG
KG
KG
KG
PS

2013
2014
2014
2014
2014
2015

G
G
G
G
D
G

PS
PS
PS
PS
PS
PS

TA
ESW
ESW
TA
TA
TA
Impact Eval

2012
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012
2013

G
G
G
G
G
G
G

KG
KG
KG
PS
PS
PS
KG

ESW
ESW
ESW
TA
TA
TA
TA

2013
2013
2014

G
G
G

KG
KG
KG

2014
2014
2014
2015

G
G
G
G

PS
PS
PS
PS

Madhya Pradesh Pilot on Integrated Child Development
Teacher Accountability & School Outcomes
Health Insurance System of India
Financial Literacy & Education
Sundarbans Climate Change Mitigation & Disaster Risk Mgmt
Implementation Support for India Disaster Risk Mitigation Program
Bihar: Immediate Relief Support & Disaster Risk Management
Capacity Building in Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR)
Consultations on Human Development

Impact Eval
Impact Eval
Impact Eval
Impact Eval
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA

2012
2012
2012
2013
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012

569
1011
142
478
1765
204
297
286
242

G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
B

KG
KG
KG
KG
KG
PS
PS
PS
PD

Health Policy Notes & Client Engagement
Growth & Inclusion Workshop

TA
TA

2012
2013

628
121

G
G

KG
PD

Product Name

Product

INTEGRATION
Recent completions (FY12-13)

Macro Brief
Policy Brief on Indian Power Sector
Orissa: Institutionalizing PSIA Capacity
Issues in Employment: Global & Country Perspectives
Review of Regulatory Framework: Ports & Airports
Visiting Scholars Program
Manufacturing Plan Implementation
Underway (FY 13-14)

Bihar Growth Assessment
Financial Sector Assessment: Supplementary Studies
Experience with PPPs in Infrastructure
Policy Notes on Power
India Economic Update
Skills Development
States Report
Options Study for Growth on Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor
Growth, Inclusion & Competitiveness
Mobilizing Financing for Infrastructure PPPs

Manufacturing Plan Implementation II
Solar Power: Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative
Transport Policies & Reform Activities
Orissa Mining & Inclusive Growth
Partnership for Market Readiness in Renewable Energy
Financial Sector Assessment Follow-up: RBI Banking SPN
TRANSFORMATION
Recent completions (FY12-13)

PPP Options Study for Waste Water Management
Urbanization Review
Evaluation of National Rural Employment Guarantee Program
Urban Institutional Strengthening & Capacity Building
Strengthening Institutions for Mgmt of Land Acquisition and R&R
Facilitating PPPs for Urban Infrastructure Development
Impact Evaluation of Rural Credit Cooperatives Project
Underway (FY 13-14)
Social Dimensions of Urbanization
Enhancing Agricultural Productivity: Policy & Investment Priorities
Rural Road Development - Benefits Impact of PMGSY Project

National Land Records Modernization Implementation Support
Inclusive Heritage-Based City Development Planning
Food Security in Tribal & Conflict-affected Areas
Cap Dev for Integrated Water Resources Development & Mgmt

73
241
239
92
1178
62
350

INCLUSION
Recent completions (FY12-13)

CPS Annex B4 - Summary of World Bank Knowledge Services - India
As of January 23, 2013

Product Name
Underway (FY 13-14)
Human Resources for More Effective Health Systems
Service Delivery & Public Spending in Health
Institutional Arrangements for Nutrition
Madhya Pradesh Higher Education

Andhra Pradesh: Teacher Accountability & Student Achievement
Andhra Pradesh: Rural Poverty Impact Evaluation
Karnataka Results-based Financing Hospital Care
Strengthening Implementation of Rural Livelihoods Programs
Improving Technical & Vocational Education & Training in West Bengal
Improving Social Inclusion in India's Health Ins Scheme for the Poor
Teacher Education & Professional Devmt -Int'l Best Practices
National Unique Identification System
Multi-sectoral Nutrition Action in Bihar
Community Food & Nutrition Security Initiatives in High-Poverty States
Bihar Kosi Flood Recovery & Climate Adaptation Program
Social Pensions for Ministry of Rural Development
Foundation for Corporate Social Responsibility
Higher Education
Strengthening Institutional Capacity of RSBY
Social Observatory for Rural Food & Nutrition Security in NRLM

Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audience a

Objective b

ESW
ESW
ESW
ESW
Impact Eval
Impact Eval
Impact Eval
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA

2013
2013
2013
2014

G
G
G
G

KG
KG
PS
KG

2013
2014
2014
2013
2013
2014
2014
2014
2014
2014
2014
2014
2014
2014
2015
2015

G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G

KG
KG
KG
PS
PS
PS
PS
PS
PS
PS
PS
PS
PS
KG
PS
KG, PS

ESW
TA

2012
2012

446
55

G
G, D

KG
PS

TA

2012

327

G

PS

ESW
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA

2013

G

PS

2013
2014
2014
2014
2014
2014
2014
2015
2015

G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G

PS
PS
PS
PS
PS
KG
PS
PS
PS

ESW

2014

G

KG

ENVIROMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Recent completions (FY12-13)

Environmental Challenges of India's Rapid Growth
Climate Investment Plan
GOVERNANCE
Recent completions (FY12-13)

Constraints to Project Preparation & Implementation
Underway (FY 13-14)
Introduction of e-tools in Mgmt of Construction Projects

Procurement Capacity Building
Chattisgarh Capacity Building Program
Bihar Capacity Building Program
Karnataka Performance Management
E-Governance in the Northeast
Karnataka PFM Reform Action Plan
Support for Performance Management Initiatives
Uttar Pradesh Capacity Building
Jharkhand Capacity Building
GENDER
Underway (FY 13-14)
Gender and Development

a. Government, Donor, Bank.
b. Knowledge Generation, Public Debate, Problem-Solving.

Annex B5

India Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group
Lowermiddleincome

1980-85

1990-95

2004-10

South
Asia

784.5
2.3
24.3
4.3

964.5
2.0
26.6
3.5

1,224.6
1.4
30.1
2.6

1,633.1
1.5
30.1
2.7

2,518.7
1.6
39.4
2.9

..
..
..

45.3
31.8
50.1

37.2
25.7
41.8

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)

290
24

360
57

1,270
152

1,176
148

1,623
140

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

31.1
8.7
40.1

30.8
9.1
40.1

33.4
8.6
42.4

..
3.2

1.2
..

1.4
3.1

1.3
2.5

1.7
4.0

..
..
..

..
..
..

92
92
89

86
89
84

85
87
83

..
..
..

75
90
70

92
97
90

90
95
88

87
93
83

1
18
..

72
71
51

74
72
44

77
76
33

80
79
25

57
57
57

60
59
61

65
64
67

65
64
67

65
64
67

91
130

72
100

48
63

52
67

50
69

261
279
..
..

236
241
470
34

253
168
230
53

239
166
290
48

244
175
300
57

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 17 April 2012.

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

India - Key Economic Indicators
Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
a
Gross domestic product
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Actual
2008
2009

2007

Estimate
2011

2010

Projected
2013
2014

2012

2015

100
18
29
53

100
18
28
54

100
18
28
55

100
18
27
55

100
17
26
56

100
17
25
58

100
16
25
59

100
15
25
60

100
15
25
60

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

66
33
8
25

70
32
9
24

69
32
8
23

68
30
8
22

69
30
8
22

77
27
8
19

73
30
8
22

72
30
8
22

73
29
8
21

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

20
24

24
29

20
26

23
27

25
30

27
34

31
37

36
41

41
46

Gross domestic savings
c
Gross national savings

34
37

30
34

31
34

32
34

31
33

23
26

27
29

28
30

27
29

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

1238700 1224097 1361057 1684324 1847982 1967881 2113579 2295980 2475905
960

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 93 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
9.8
Gross Domestic Income
9.8

1030

1160

1280

1410

1540

1660

1770

1890

3.9
5.3

8.2
7.7

9.6
10.0

6.9
7.1

5.1
2.8

6.4
5.4

7.1
6.0

7.3
6.7

6.7
4.8
3.3

8.0
5.7
5.6

5.4
7.5
8.3

3.7
20.0
19.6

4.9
-6.3
-7.1

5.6
0.9
0.1

5.8
7.5
7.9
1012629
723648
1127393
1008240
-114764
76008
-63409

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 93 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
8.2
2.4
Total consumption
5.7
9.6
Private consumption
5.3
9.7
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR93 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

256504
166162
309119
257629
-52615
41945
-15737

294964
189001
360568
308520
-65604
44799
-27914

277991
182262
360181
300644
-82190
52045
-38435

382280 450777 529513 659244 822528
250627 309843 369430 458868 580173
464054 576439 670761 787609 942151
381061 499533 586140 693201 837620
-81775 -125662 -141247 -128366 -119624
53140
63494
70275
65674
70810
-45958 -78180 -87279 -79974 -69623

15893
24724
2272
22452
67284
-92164

22372
10303
2896
7407
-24840
20079

17966
5792
3039
2753
28118
-13441

9360
17145
5400
11746
32503
-13050

22061
11592
2631
8961
31696
12831

20000
7245
6631
614
49689
10345

26500
18423
6254
12168
49936
-14885

40000
19437
5656
13781
59989
-49802

40000
-2608
1348
-3955
61495
-35479

-4.2

-5.4

-6.0

-4.9

-6.8

-7.2

-6.1

-5.2

-4.6

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

India - Key Economic Indicators
Indicator
2007
Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
21.0
Current expenditures
21.2
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
-0.2
Capital expenditure
4.8
Foreign financing
..
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR93 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

(Continued)

Actual
2008
2009

2010

Estimate
2011

2012

Projected
2013
2014

2015

19.4
23.8
-4.4
4.0
..

18.3
24.2
-6.0
3.9
..

18.9
24.4
-5.5
3.8
..

18.7
23.5
-4.8
3.5
..

18.7
23.8
-5.1
3.6
0.1

19.0
22.8
-3.7
3.8
0.1

19.2
22.4
-3.2
3.9
0.1

19.2
22.2
-3.0
3.9
0.1

23.3
19.3
86.2

22.5
8.9
53.6

23.1
18.2
54.9

21.4
10.0
70.3

19.6
5.8
65.2

19.6
12.9
57.9

20.0
15.9
57.3

20.0
14.1
50.2

20.0
13.7
66.4

..
..
..
108.5

..
..
..
97.8

..
..
..
94.7

..
..
..
102.0

..
..
..
99.1

..
..
..
102.5

..
..
..
102.2

..
..
..
101.8

..
..
..
101.8

8.2
8.0

7.4
7.4

7.0
7.0

6.5
6.5

6.0
6.0

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
6.4
9.0
12.4
10.4
GDP deflator (% change)
5.8
8.7
6.0
8.5
a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Figure B6.1: INDIA's Demographic Transition

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Annex B7

India - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

2007

Actual
2008
2009

2010

Estimated
2011
2012

Projected
2014

2013

2015

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

204005

227043

256229

290351

334331

370576

401250

431936

439329

Net disbursements (US$m)a

83365

41064

29587

56064

55916

16745

30673

30687

7392

7307

7287

5532

5392

7039

39013

43689

53912

62034

..
16.5
..
21.8

..
18.5
..
20.8

80.2
18.8
1.7
18.8

69.3
17.2
1.3
17.4

67.9
18.1
1.4
15.6

64.4
18.6
6.8
14.8

56.4
18.6
6.1
14.0

49.0
18.5
6.1
12.9

40.7
17.4
5.8
12.2

6.8
19.5

4.7
14.0

10.0
30.7

10.0
32.7

9.3
28.7

6.8
26.1

8.0
29.5

7.9
28.1

12.2
40.0

..
6404

..
7187

0.2
7868

0.1
10755

0.2
11386

0.2
11654

0.2
12370

0.1
13560

0.1
15246

5
25319

6
25365

7
26050

10
25888

11
26605

14
26584

18
26907

23
27076

23
27083

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Total debt service (TDS)
a
(US$m)
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

..

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8A
INDIA - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 1/24/2013

Closed Projects

470

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)

6,957.0

of which has been repaid

230.6

Total Disbursed (Closed)

16,588.1

of which has been repaid

15,354.1

Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)

23,545.1

of which has been repaid

15,584.7

Total Undisbursed (Active)

16,179.8

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

61.5

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

16,241.3

Active Projects
Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development
Implementation
Objectives
Progress

Project ID

Project Name

P102771
P101650
P100789
P071250
P096021
P100954
P084792
P096018
P122096
P102627
P090764
P088520
P088598
P091031
P099979
P100584
P102790
P100531
P100101
P089985
P114338
P100530
P110051
P096019
P084632
P121731
P097985
P079675
P122486
P071160
P078832
P050653
P121774
P073370
P084790
P120836
P119043
P093720
P102331
P113028
P092735
P112060

IN: IIFCL - India Infras Finance
U Co Ltd
IN: A. P. RWSS
S
IN: AP Community Tank Management
S
Proj
IN: AP Municipal Development
S
IN: AP Road Sector Project S
IN: AP Water Sector Improvement
S
Proj
IN: Assam Agric Competitiveness
S
IN: Assam State Roads Project
S
IN: Bihar Kosi Flood RecoveryMS
Project
IN: Bihar PRI
MS
IN: Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project
S
IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihood
S
IN: Biodiver Cons & Rural Livelihoods
S
IN: CBldg for Indus Poll Mgt S
IN: CBldg for Urban Development
MS
IN: Chiller Effcy-GEF
#
IN: Chiller Energy Efficiency -MS
MP
IN: Coal-Fired Generation Rehabilitation
MS
IN: Coal-Fired Generation Rehabilitation
MS
IN: Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement
S
IN: Eastern Dedicated FreightSCorridor-I
IN: Egy Effcy at SMEs
S
IN: Haryana Power System Improv
S
Project
IN: HP State Roads Project MS
IN: Hydrology II
MS
IN: ICDS Syst Strength & Nut#Imp Prog
IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt
S
Project
IN: Karn Municipal Reform S
IN: Karn Wtrshed II
S
IN: Karnataka Health SystemsS
IN: Karnataka Panchayats Strengthening
MS
IN: KARNATAKA RWSS II S
IN: Kerala RWSSP II
S
IN: Madhya Pradesh Water Sector
S
Restruct
IN: MAHAR WSIP
MS
IN: Maharashtra Agric. Competitiveness
S
IN: Microf-Scaling Up Sustnble
S & Resp
IN: Mid-Himalayan (HP) Watersheds
S
IN: MPDPIP-II
S
IN: Mumbai Urban Transport Project-2A
S
IN: NAIP
S
IN: National Agricultural Innovation&SLM
S

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions
Fiscal Year

IBRD

2010
2010
2007
2010
2010
2010
2005
2012
2011
2013
2007
2011
2011
2010
2012
2009
2009
2009
2009
2010
2011
2010
2010
2007
2005
2013
2010
2006
2013
2007
2006
2002
2012
2005
2005
2011
2010
2006
2009
2010
2006
2010

1,195

MU
MU
MS
MS
MU
S
S
S
MU
MS
S
MS
MS
S
MS
MS
MS
MU
MU
S
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS
#
MS
MS
S
S
MS
MS
MS
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
MS
MS

95
300
320
451

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

150
95

204
320
220
84
163
15
8
25

39
60
6
1
45

180
175
975

175
11

330
282
105
106
222
216
60
212
120
302
155

17

394
325
200

7
100
100
97
100

430
200
7

Undisb.

1,172
130
93
276
257
354
68
320
194
86
98
14
7
58
57
5
1
45
180
347
972
11
215
132
43
102
196
97
60
98
14
96
151
175
61
90
167
45
48
375
56
4

Orig. Frm Rev'd

813
77
90
62
101
5
11
12
53
1
-58
1
1
8
3

-3
-1
-9

7

4
32
120
95
127
7
202
70
43

15

-115

57
97
0
15
-9
-67
1
181
61
-5
59
4
32
116
39

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.
Page 1 of 2

43
37
23
6
50
11
-6

16
2

Annex B8A
INDIA - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 1/24/2013

Closed Projects

470

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)

6,957.0

of which has been repaid

230.6

Total Disbursed (Closed)

16,588.1

of which has been repaid

15,354.1

Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)

23,545.1

of which has been repaid

15,584.7

Total Undisbursed (Active)

16,179.8

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

61.5

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

16,241.3

Active Projects
Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development
Implementation
Objectives
Progress

Project ID

Project Name

P119085
P104164
P121515
P102330
P094360
P085345
P093478
P096023
P124639
P101653
P115566
P090592
P090585
P040610
P124614
P102329
P095114
P118445
P086518
P102768
P110371
P100589
P102549
P079708
P075058
P090768
P083780
P100304
P112033
P083187
P112061
P096124
P099047
P105311
P105990
P107649
P102624
P092217
P100735
P107648

IN: National Ganga River Basin
MUProject
IN: National Rural LivelihoodsMS
Project
IN: NHAI Technical Assistance
MU
Project
IN: North East Rural Livelihoods
MS Project
IN: Ntnl VBD Control&Polio Eradication
MS
IN: ODS IV-CTC Sector Phaseout
HS Project
IN: Orissa Rural Livelihoods Project
MS
IN: Orissa State Roads
MU
IN: PMGSY Rural Roads Project
MS
IN: Power System Development
HS Project IV
IN: POWERGRID V
S
IN: Punjab Rural Water Supply&Sanitation
MS
IN: Punjab State Road SectorMS
Project
IN: RAJ WSRP
MS
IN: Rajasthan ACP
S
IN: Rajasthan Rural Livelihoods
MSProject
IN: Rampur Hydropower Project
MS
IN: Secondary Education Program
S
IN: SME Financing & Development
S
IN: Stren India's Rural Credit Coops
MS
IN: Sustainable Urban Transport
S Project
IN: Sustainable Urban Transport
S Project
IN: Tech Engr Educ Qual Improvement
S
II
IN: TN Empwr & Pov Reduction
S
IN: TN Health Systems
S
IN: TN IAM WARM
S
IN: TN Urban III
S
IN: UP Health Sys Strengthening
S Project
IN: UP Sodic III
S
IN: Uttarakhand RWSS Project
S
IN: Uttarakhand Watershed Mgmt.
S
SLEM
IN: Vishnugad Pipalkoti HEP MS
IN: Vocational Training
MS
IN: WB Minor Irrigation Project
S
IN: West Bengal PRI
S
IN:Karnataka State Highway Improv
S
Pro II
IN:Kerala Local Govt. & Service
S Delivery
IN:National Cyclone Risk Mitigation
S
Proj
IN:Orissa Community Tank Management
MU
Proj
National Dairy Support ProjectS

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions
Fiscal Year

IBRD

IDA

2011
2012
2011
2012
2009
2005
2009
2009
2011
2008
2010
2007
2007
2002
2012
2011
2008
2012
2005
2007
2010
2010
2010
2006
2005
2007
2006
2012
2009
2007
2010
2011
2007
2012
2010
2011
2011
2010
2009
2012

801

199
1,000

MU
MS
MU
MU
MS
MS
U
MU
MU
S
MS
MS
MS
S
S
MS
MU
S
MS
MS
MU
MU
S
S
S
MS
MS
S
MS
S
S
U
S
S
S
MS
MS
MS
MU
S

Overall Result

GRANT

Cancel.

45
130
521

160
53

82
250
500
1,000
1,000

1,000

154

0

159
109
163

26

250

400
500
520
300
105

300
20

335
300

300
274
229
150

20
1

152
197
120
7
648
125

280
125
200

350

56
13,302

200
255
56
352
10,185

35
160

265

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

943
959
40
124
124
14
61
222
1,341
138
727
79
105
37
107
150
82
497
20
164
87
17
235
130
53
237
56
137
144
41
1
646
136
244
134
323
133
225
65
336

20
203
16
3
247
3
50
147
349
-262
235
65
105
5
2
4
65
8
-380
163
68

16,285

4,267

115
-31
-49
209
57
18
9
32
-2
107
4
-12
47
3
125
53
7

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.
Page 2 of 2

137
19
2
-4

-7
20

58
20
34

8

17
385

B8B (IFC) for India
India
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 12/31/2012
(In USD Millions)

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

5

4

0

0

0

52

12

0

0

0

25

0

0

0

9

0

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

FY Approval

Company

Loan

2007

ABC Coffee

2005/ 2008/ 2009

ADPCL

2006/ 2009/ 2012

AHEL

63

2005

AP Paper Mills

2005

APIDC Biotech

2009

APPL

2012/ 2013

ATC India

2013

ATG BV

2003/ 2005/ 2010/ 2011

ATL

2010/ 2012/ 2013
2010
2007/ 2009

0

6

0

0

0

50

0

0

0

0

0

10

0

0

0

30

0

0

0

20

AU Financiers

0

22

0

0

0

Aadhar

0

4

0

0

0

Aavishkaar

0

3

0

0

0

2010/ 2013

AavishkaarFundII

0

6

0

0

0

2011

Aavishkaar MSME

0

15

0

0

0

2008

Aloe 2

0

17

0

0

0

2008

Ambit Pragma

0

12

0

0

0

2012

Ambit Pragma II

0

20

0

0

0

2008/ 2012

Angel Global

0

18

0

0

0

2010/ 2012

Applied Solar

8

6

0

0

0

2011

Attero Recycling

2006/ 2010/ 2011

Atul Ltd

2010

0

0

5

0

0

23

0

0

0

0

Auro Mira Energy

0

4

0

0

0

2008

Avigo Fund II

0

9

0

0

0

2009

Avigo Fund III

2012

Axis Bank

2010/ 2013

Azure Power

2007

BHSIL

2001/ 2004

BILT

2003/ 2007

Balrampur

18

2011

Bandhan

0

2012

Banyan Tree II

0

2001

Basix Ltd.

2010
2005

0

20

0

0

0

70

0

0

0

0

0

5

7

0

0

28

0

17

0

32

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

24

0

0

0

25

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

Belstar

0

1

0

0

0

Bharat Biotech

0

0

3

0

0

2010/ 2012

Bhilwara Energy

0

19

0

0

0

2012

Bhilwara Wind

13

0

0

0

0

1985/ 1990/ 1991/ 1993

Bihar Sponge

4

0

0

0

0

6

6

0

1

2

447

0

0

0

0

2001/ 2006/ 2007/ 2008/ 2010/
CCIL
2012

0

2008

CGPL Ultra Mega

2003/ 2005/ 2012

COSMO

10

0

0

0

0

2013

CapAleph

0

15

0

0

0

2010/ 2011

Chola

0

25

0

0

0

2009

Connectiva

0

0

0

0

0

2010/ 2012

Craftsman

0

13

0

0

0

2003/ 2004

DQEL

0

2

0

0

0

2005/ 2006/ 2009

DSCL

59

0

0

7

0

0

5

0

0

0

13

0

0

0

0

0

14

0

0

0

Dhunseri India
2009

Dishman

2012

Dunar Foods

2013

Ecolibrium

0

1

0

0

0

2012

Educomp

30

14

10

0

0

2007

Electrotherm

13

0

10

0

0

2012

Equitas

0

16

0

0

0

2009/ 2010/ 2011

Exim India

150

0

0

0

0

2007/ 2010

FINO

0

1

5

0

0

0

23

0

0

0

16

13

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2006/ 2008/ 2010/ 2011/ 2012Federal Bank
2008/ 2013

Finechem

2012

Flareum

2012

Forum Synergies

0

15

0

0

0

2007/ 2008

GSPL

49

13

0

0

0

2011

Gamesa India

15

0

0

0

0

1994/ 1999/ 2000/ 2001

Global Trust

0

0

0

0

0

2007/ 2009/ 2012

Granules

17

1

0

0

0

2013

Green Infra 20MW

8

0

0

0

0

2013

Green Infra 5MW

2

0

0

0

0

2007

HDFC Bank

0

0

100

0

0

2009

HIKAL

13

7

0

0

0

2008

HNGFG

6

4

0

0

0

2009/ 2011

Himadri

11

0

7

22

0

2010/ 2011

Husk Power

0

0

0

0

0

2007

ICICI Bank

0

0

150

0

0

2011

ICM-INDIA

0

2

0

0

0

1998/ 2005/ 2006/ 2010

IDFC

79

3

0

0

0

2006

IHDC

4

0

0

0

0

IHDC - Ascent

3

0

0

0

0

2012

IMGC

0

5

0

0

0

2008

Idea Cellular

98

0

0

0

0

2013

Inabensa Bharat

14

0

0

0

0

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

5
52
63
9
0
0
0
0
30
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
23
0
0
0
70
0
28
0
18
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
4
6
344
5
0
0
0
0
0
59
0
13
0
0
30
13
0
150
0
0
16
0
0
49
15
0
17
4
1
0
13
6
6
0
0
0
79
4
3
0
98
5

4
12
25
0
3
2
0
10
0
22
4
3
3
2
13
11
2
18
6
0
0
4
8
12
0
5
0
1
0
24
3
1
1
0
19
0
0
3
0
0
0
25
0
12
2
0
3
0
12
0
14
0
16
0
1
23
12
0
1
13
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
3
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
3
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
7
17
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
7
0
150
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
32
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2006

Indecomm

0

2

0

0

0

2008/ 2013

India Infr. Fund

0

46

0

0

0

2009

India Agri Fund

0

19

0

0

0

2012/ 2013

Infuse Capital

0

5

0

0

0

2013

Inox Rajasthan

50

0

0

0

0

2006/ 2009

JK Paper

10

2

0

0

2013

JMT Auto

2008/ 2009/ 2010/ 2013

Jain Irrigation

2007/ 2010

0

9

0

0

0

0

55

19

40

0

65

KCIL

0

0

0

0

0

2005/ 2006

KPIT

0

0

0

0

0

2011

Kaizen

2010

Kalyani Gerdau

2012/ 2013
2008

0

10

0

0

0

25

0

0

0

0

Kalkitech

0

1

0

0

0

Kamani Oil

0

5

0

0

0

2005/ 2007/ 2010/ 2011/ 2012/
Kotak
2013Mahindr...

0

0

45

17

0

2006

LGB

0

1

0

0

0

LGB FORGE

0

0

0

0

0

10

9

0

0

0

2012

Laxmi Organic

2006/ 2008

Lok Fund

0

2

0

0

0

2011/ 2012

Lok Capital II

0

13

0

0

0

1990/ 1993/ 1995

M&M

0

0

0

0

0

2007

MBPV

18

0

0

0

0

2010

MSETCL

45

0

0

0

0

2007

MSPL

8

0

0

0

0

2009

Macq-SBI Int F

0

149

0

0

0

2009

Macquarie IM

0

0

0

0

0

2011

MagmaFincorp

0

23

0

0

0

2012

Mahindra Solar 1

5

0

0

0

0

2004/ 2007

Max Healthcare

0

5

31

0

0

2009

Max India Ltd

0

28

0

0

0

2009

Midas

0

0

0

0

0

2009

Modern Dairies

0

6

0

0

0

1996/ 1997/ 1999/ 2000

Moser Baer

0

2

0

0

0

2011

NCMSL

0

6

0

0

0

1993/ 1996/ 1997/ 1998

NICCO-UCO

0

0

0

0

0

2012

NSL Power

0

16

0

0

0

2012

Nereus Capital

0

20

0

0

0

2007

OCL

23

0

0

0

0

2007/ 2009

Ocean Sparkle

11

9

0

0

0

2007

Ocimum

2

0

0

0

0

2011/ 2013

PTC Financial

80

0

0

0

0

2012

Paradeep Phosp

50

0

0

0

0

2006

Peepul CapFnd II

0

15

0

0

0

2007/ 2010

Petronet

42

0

0

0

150

2011/ 2012

Piaggio India

37

0

0

0

0

2009

Polycab

0

19

31

0

2004

Powerlinks

33

0

0

0

0

2013

Power Grid

100

0

0

0

120

2012

Pragati Fund

0

20

0

0

0

2008

Punj Lloyd

18

0

0

0

0

2008

Punj Upstream

23

3

0

0

0

2013

RK Forgings

14

5

0

0

0

Rabo Equity Mgt.

0

0

0

0

0

1996/ 1998/ 2005

Rain Calcining

0

0

0

47

0

2013

Religare

0

0

74

0

0

2012/ 2013

Rhodia Inc.

25

0

0

0

0

2008

Rockland

0

14

0

0

0

2011

SAFAL (Jain NBFC

0

2

0

0

0

2012

SAME DEUTZ India

13

0

0

0

0

2009

SBI - Macq DM

0

1

0

0

0

2012

SEWA

0

0

0

2

0

2012

SPSL

9

0

0

0

0

2012

SRLL

0

25

0

0

0

2008

Samara Capital

0

10

0

0

0

2008

Samson Maritime

18

4

0

0

0

1996

Sara Fund

0

0

0

0

0

2005

SeaLion

1

0

0

0

0

2011/ 2012

Shalivahana

0

5

0

14

0

2010/ 2012

Snowman

5

5

0

0

0

2008/ 2010

Soktas India

8

2

0

0

0

2007

Suguna

0

0

7

0

0

2010/ 2012

Suvidhaa

0

7

0

0

0

2012

Tata Cleantech

0

3

0

0

0

2011/ 2012

Techno Wind

29

4

0

0

0

2012

Ujjivan

0

8

0

0

0

2010/ 2011/ 2012

Utkarsh

0

1

0

0

2008/ 2010

VPF

0

15

0

0

0

2009/ 2010

VW-India

79

0

0

0

99

2010

VicatSagar

75

0

0

0

73

2011

Vinati

10

0

5

0

0

2011

Visakha Terminal

8

0

0

0

0

2011

Vishwa Infra

3

0

0

0

0

2011

Vishwa Utilities

2

0

0

0

0

2011

Vivimed

13

0

8

0

0

2012

Vortex

0

2

0

0

0

2007

WCPM

33

0

0

0

0

2010

WEG S.A.

22

0

0

0

0

2009/ 2010

WHI India

9

0

0

0

0

1998

WIV

0

0

0

0

0

1998/ 2000

Walden-Mgt India

0

0

0

0

0

2012

YES BANK LTD

0

0

75

0

0

0

0

0
0
0
0
0
10
0
55
0
0
0
25
0
0
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
18
45
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
23
11
2
50
20
0
42
37
0
33
100
0
18
10
0
0
0
0
25
0
0
2
0
0
9
0
0
18
0
1
0
3
8
0
0
0
29
0
0
0
79
75
10
0
2
2
13
0
33
22
4
0
0
0

2
27
13
0
0
2
0
18
0
0
3
0
1
5
0
1
0
9
2
4
0
0
0
0
96
0
23
0
5
28
0
6
2
6
0
16
0
0
9
0
0
0
14
0
0
19
0
0
1
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
9
0
0
1
0
0
21
8
4
0
0
5
5
1
0
7
0
4
8
1
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
40
0
0
0
0
0
0
45
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
31
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
31
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
74
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
75

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
17
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
65
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
150
0
0
0
120
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
99
73
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2010

Zephyr India II

0

9

0

0

0

2012

Zephyr India III

0

15

0

0

0

2,460

1,083

631

109

561

Total Portfolio:
* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

0
0
2,099

8
1
781

0
0
630

0
0
25

0
0
561

