Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
the World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 43385-UZ.

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN
FOR THE PERIOD FY08-FY11

Public Disclosure Authorized

May 14, 2008

Central Asia Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
The International Finance Corporation
IFC Department for Southern Europe and Central Asia

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of April 25, 2008)
Currency Unit = Uzbekistan Sum
US$1 = 1303.92 Sum FISCAL YEAR
(January 1 to December 31)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ADB
Asian Development Bank
AML/CFT Anti-Money Laundering and
Combating the Financing of
Terrorism
CAREC Central Asia Regional Economic
Cooperation
CAS
Country Assistance Strategy
CBU
Central Bank of Uzbekistan
CIS
Commonwealth of Independent
States
EBRD
European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
EITI
Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative
ESW
Economic and Sector Work
EU
European Union
EurASECEurasian Economic Community
FDI
Foreign Direct Investment
FSU
Former Soviet Union
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GTZ
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische
Zusammenarbeit (German Technical
Cooperation

HBS
IBRD

Household Budget Survey
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
ICARDA International Centre for Agricultural
Research in the Dry Areas
IDA
International Development
Association
IDF
Institutional Development Fund
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IFIs
International Financial Institutions
IMF
International Monetary Fund
ISN
Interim Strategy Note
IWMI
International Water Management
Institute
JETRO Japanese Trade & Industry
Organization

JICA

Japanese International Cooperation
Agency
KfW
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
LSA
Living Standards Assessment
NGOs
Non-governmental Organizations
MDGs
Millennium Development Goals
MIGA
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
OECD
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OSCE
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
PEFA
Public Expenditure & Financial
Accountability
POPs
Persistent Organic Pollutants
PPP
Purchasing Power Parity
PRSP
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
SDC
Swiss Development Corporation
SECO
Swiss State Secretariat for Economic
Affairs
ShoS
Shanghai Organization for Security
SME
Small and Medium Enterprise
UN
United Nations
UNDP
United Nations Development
Programme
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime
USAID United States Agency for
International Development
WBG
World Bank Group
WHO
World Health Organization
WIS
Welfare Improvement Strategy

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The World Bank Group appreciates the collaboration of the Government of Uzbekistan
in the preparation of this CAS, and the open and thoughtful discussions from which it has
benefitted. The team would like to extend special thanks to Mr. Rustam Azimov, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Ms. Galina Saidova, First Deputy Minister,
Ministry of Economy. The extensive consultations conducted with the Donors, Uzbek civil
society and academia allowed the WBG to understand more clearly the country’s challenges
and achievements. The WBG team is indebted to all those who participated in these
consultations.
The preparation of this CAS has been a team effort, which included hands-on
involvement and thorough contribution of the Uzbekistan WB/IFC country team. Members of
the core team working on the CAS include Mehrnaz Teymourian, Andrea Kucey, Cathryn
Summers (ECCU8), Dilnara Isamiddinova, Sevara Abdusamatova, Elena Klementyeva,
Matluba Mukhamedova, Irina Tsoy (ECCUZ), Roland Clarke, Saumya Mitra, Eskender
Trushin, Jariya Hoffman, Yulia Mironova, Jana Kunicova, Zakia Nekaien-Nowrouz (ECSPE),
Peyvand Khaleghian, Maureen Mclaughlin, Rekha Menon, Cem Mete, Flora Salikhova
(ECSHD), Christophe Bosch, Janis Bernstein, Jane Ebinger, Franz Gerner, Maurizio Guadagni,
Dilshod Khidirov, Rick Pollard, Mahwash Wasiq, Rinat Iskhakov (ECSSD), Andrea Mario
Dall'Olio, Brett Coleman (ECSPF), Pascale N. Kervyn De Lettenhove, John Ogallo, Naushad
Khan, Fasliddin Rakhimov (ECSPS), Tomasz Telma, Kaikham Onedamdy, Ulugbek Tilyayev,
Antoine Courcelle-Labrousse, Tania Lozansky, Vsevolod Payevskiy (IFC). We would also
like to thank Mr. Tevfik Yaprak for his invaluable guidance to the team.

IBRD
Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leaders

Shigeo Katsu
Annette Dixon
Loup Brefort & Ekaterine
Vashakmadze

IFC
Declan Duff
Shahbaz Mavaddat
Gorton De Mond, Jr.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... i
I.

INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 4

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT....................................................................................................... 5
A.

Political Background, Governance and Civil Society...................................................... 5

B.

Regional Significance ...................................................................................................... 6

C.

Economic Context............................................................................................................ 7

D.

Poverty, Socioeconomic Inequality and the MDGs ...................................................... 11

III.

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM ................................................................ 14

A.

Country Vision: the Government’s WIS....................................................................... 14

B.

Donor Partnership in Support of Uzbekistan’s Economic Development Objectives .... 17

IV.

BANK ENGAGEMENT IN UZBEKISTAN: LESSONS LEARNED ......................... 18

A.

Background .................................................................................................................... 18

B.

The Interim Strategy ...................................................................................................... 18

C.

Progress Under the ISN ................................................................................................. 19

D.

Lessons Learned from the Last CAS and ISN Implementation..................................... 21

E.

Rationale for CAS Engagement..................................................................................... 23

V.

THE WBG SUPPORT FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WIS .................................. 23
A.

Main features of the CAS .............................................................................................. 24

B.

Stakeholder Consultations ............................................................................................. 26

C.

Mechanisms for Bank Group Engagement .................................................................... 27

D.

WBG Proposed Activities in Support of the WIS Objectives ....................................... 28

VI.

MONITORING IN A RESULTS FRAMEWORK ....................................................... 37

VII.

POTENTIAL RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES ............................................ 39

TABLES
Table 1: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2003-2007 ................................................. 7
Table 2: Medium-term Economic Projections, 2008-2011............................................... 11
Table 3: Poverty Rates, 2000-2005................................................................................... 12
Table 4: Summary of the Results Based Framework........................................................ 38

FIGURES
Figure 1. Contribution to GDP growth, 2003-2007............................................................ 8
Figure 2. Net exports as % to GDP, 2003-2007 ................................................................. 8

BOXES
Box: 1: IFC helps Uzbekistan Improve the Business Environment ................................. 20
Box: 2: Voice of the Beneficiaries.................................................................................... 21
Box: 3: Assessing the World Bank’s AAA in Uzbekistan .............................................. 28
Box: 4: Uzbekistan – Undertaking Governance Work in a Difficult Environment.......... 33

ANNEXES
ANNEX 1: Results Matrix................................................................................................ 43
ANNEX 2: Matrix of Main Donor Activities in Uzbekistan for 2008-2010.................... 53

ANNEX TABLES
Annex A2:
Annex B2:
Annex B3:
Annex B3:
Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B8:

At a Glance Table. ……………………………………………………….…60
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management……..63
IFC Investment Operations Program..………………………………………64
IBRD/IDA Program Summary ……………………………………………..65
IFC Investment Operations Program..………………………………………66
Summary of IDA/IFC Advisory Services ………………………………… 67
Key Economic Indicators …………………………………………………..68
Key Exposure Indicators ……………………………………………..….…70
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio (IFC) ………71
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) ……………………………..73

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
The Government of Uzbekistan has been following a gradual approach to
economic reform to minimize the social costs of transition. Market-oriented reforms
have been slow and selective and focused on a few areas (e.g., current account
convertibility, adjustment of energy prices, privatization through lease-holding of
collective farms, gradual improvement in business environment and modernization of the
treasury). In recent years, the Government improved its macroeconomic performance
and significantly diversified exports. While the development model adopted by
Uzbekistan has brought benefits, it has also had opportunity costs, as evidenced by the
slow reduction of poverty and lower improvement in living standards than in reforming
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries. Constraints on the growth
potential of the private sector have dampened job creation, at a rate below the growth of
the working age population. In response to this challenge, the Government approved its
first Poverty Reduction Strategy paper (PRSP) – the Welfare Improvement Strategy
(WIS)1 - in September of 2007. The WIS is a comprehensive framework to sustain high
growth and address poverty and living standards issues. The strategy is built on the
policy of granting a greater role to market principles within a gradualist approach to
structural reforms.
ii.
Of the four key commitments which the Government made to the Interim
Strategy Note (ISN), three were carried out (maintaining macro stability, improving
portfolio performance, and preparing the WIS) and the remaining one (timely access to
data) was carried out partially. The quality of the working relationship between the Bank
and the authorities has improved and productive relationships have been established in a
number of key areas, including some aspects of Governance, where the authorities have
cooperated with the Bank under the Primary Health Care sector Governance Assessment,
which opened up significant opportunities for engagement and dialogue in this area. The
authorities have also been willing to allow significant elements of citizens’ voice and
participation during the design and implementation of the projects. A particularly notable
example of this (and a radical departure from previous practice) is the introduction of
public sector accountability mechanisms by stakeholders through the activation of school
boards in the Basic Education project.
iii.
Key Government commitments made to the ISN in support of private sector
development were carried out. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) SME Survey
has been continued, in the framework of business enabling environment (BEE) work and
for further legal and regulatory reforms to establish a better framework for microfinance
and mortgage lending. IFC has continued to maintain a good working relationship with
its Government counterparts which resulted in the development of significant legislative
1

The WIS and the associated JSAN was discussed by the Board on January 24, 2008 (Report No 41799UZ).

i

and procedural improvements in the business environment, including in streamlined
registration, permits, inspections, business liquidation and tax reporting procedures that
are expected to free up US$45 million for the SME sector. These reforms enabled
Uzbekistan to improve its “Doing Business” rating by seven places.
iv.
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), rooted in Uzbekistan’s own vision (the
WIS), sets out the planned lending and advisory support to the country from the World
Bank Group (WBG) over the period FY08-11. The new CAS will rely both on the
implementation of ongoing WBG projects and the development of technical assistance
and new lending. Six Bank projects in the current portfolio will continue during the CAS
period. These are concentrated in key areas of support for human development:
improved access to safe water, improved health status, improved incomes in rural areas,
and protection of the environment. The average annual International Development
Association (IDA) allocation to Uzbekistan was approximately US$77 million over the
last three years (IDA 14). The indicative 3-year allocation for the IDA 15 period
corresponding to that of the CAS is SDR 195 million, with final allocation for the Fiscal
Years 2010 and 2011 determined annually through the IDA Performance Based
Allocation (PBA) system. New IDA lending of about 2-3 projects per year will continue
to focus on the development of economic opportunities in rural areas, where the majority
of the poor live; on improving delivery of basic municipal services as well as reforms in
health and education; promoting sound environmental management, regional
development and the contribution of Uzbekistan to the provision of global goods. The
size of the projects will be determined based on the overall IDA envelope available. IFC
will continue its active engagement in advisory services in the areas of BEE and financial
sector development; provide funding and advisory services to support financial
intermediation to micro and small business enterprises, particularly in rural areas in
collaboration with IDA; increase its direct lending to SMEs; and seek opportunities to
finance and provide advisory services to support energy and infrastructure development
with private sector participation.
v.
The CAS is built around a dual track approach, where in addition to the core
program, the WBG will focus its analytic work on key areas to increase consensus with
the authorities. The advisory program will be focused on enhancing the environment for
shared growth, including through promoting good governance and assistance in
implementation of the WIS; as well as selected demand-driven analytical and capacitybuilding support in priority sectors, including activities to promote regional cooperation.
A CAS monitoring framework has been built around an explicit results framework
(Annex 1) of existing and currently planned activities. The evaluation of progress against
these results will take place in the mid-term review. In the event of significant progress
in key areas, and project proposals consistent with the CAS strategy, additional activities
outside of the core program may be supported by the WBG.
vi.
The present CAS faces four critical risks: (i) Fiduciary risks which are rated as
high due to weak Public Finance Management (PFM) capacity and accountability
mechanisms, and lack of transparency particularly in procurement. To mitigate this risk,
the WBG will assure that adequate resources are allocated to fiduciary supervision of
projects and project implementation arrangements will seek to strengthen procurement
procedures. In addition, financial management arrangements for new projects would
ii

build on the lessons of existing practices, but would be cautious in any move to make use
of country systems, and focus rather on the improvement of transparency and
accountability at a sectoral and project level; (ii) Development effectiveness. To ensure
the development effectiveness of the proposed program, all projects are assessed through
a results framework and by beneficiary monitoring. The WBG will closely monitor the
CAS implementation, and in case of adverse developments, will reassess the level and
focus of its engagement; (iii) Exogenous risks. These include possible regional tensions
over water and energy, reduction in regional growth rates or reductions in flows of
remittances or commodity prices, all of which could directly or indirectly affect internal
political stability, and security. Managing exogenous risks will require close cooperation
with the Government to encourage Uzbekistan’s continued international engagement and
integration. The above risks, if they materialize, may hinder the country’s ability to fully
utilize its IDA allocation. Uzbekistan also faces natural disaster risk. The current CAS
recognizes lessons from past engagement and builds clear linkages to the Disaster Risk
Management (DRM) agenda.
vii.

Executive Directors may wish to consider the following issues for discussion:
•

Do the Directors endorse the strategic approach proposed in the presented CAS?

•

Is the proposed program sufficiently aligned with the country’s own strategy?

•

Is the level of engagement adequate to address the developmental challenges?

iii

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The proposed Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) builds on the experience of
three previous CAS’s and intensive dialogue during the Interim Strategy period.
The previous CAS (FY02-04) expired on June 30, 2004. The level of assistance of that
CAS was set at US$350 million over three years, half International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and half International Development
Association (IDA) lending. In practice, only US$100 million was provided for 2
projects. During FY05, the Bank approved a US$40 million Health project that had been
identified in the previous CAS. The Interim Strategy was adopted for FY07-08. It
included one lending operation of US$40 million in Basic Education, the first phase of
which was approved by the Board on October 26, 2006. In addition the Avian Flu
Influenza project was approved by the Board on May 18, 2007. The new CAS covers the
period FY08-11 and provides direction for Bank operations and Economic and Sector
Work (ESW) during this period.
2.
Uzbekistan is an upper low income resource rich, doubly-landlocked
country, strategically located in the heart of Central Asia. It is the world's fifth
largest cotton producer and second-largest cotton exporter. Major raw materials exports
include gold, natural gas, copper and other non-ferrous metals and construction materials.
The country possesses a young and educated labor force, rich agricultural resources and
has significant economic potential. Uzbekistan accounts for one-third of the region’s
population, and its economic and social prospects are critical both for the 27 million
Uzbeks, and for the neighboring region comprising of Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz
Republic, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan.
3.
During the Soviet era, increasing cotton production in conditions that lacked
incentives for sustainable agricultural practices led to the massive expansion of
irrigated lands, overuse and unbalanced application of agrochemicals and the
depletion of water resources. This has severely degraded the quality of large tracts of
land and reduced the Aral Sea to almost one-tenth of its original volume. The country
seeks to gradually lessen its dependence on primary agriculture while developing its
mineral and hydrocarbon potential, further diversify its economy by expanding the share
of services and manufacturing in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and address serious
environmental challenges.
4.
In contrast to the majority of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) countries, Uzbekistan has adopted a gradualist state-led development
approach, in which features of an open-market economy are introduced to the existing
command and control system in a step-by-step manner. The guiding principle of reform
for the authorities is to reduce the risk of being subject to external influences in the
political and economic spheres. This has been manifested through – inter alia – a policy
of minimizing public debt, accumulating considerable external reserves and cultivating
wheat on irrigated land for food security and self-sufficiency. Adherence to this model is
also based on the fundamental belief of Government that this approach is necessary: (i) to
first build up Uzbekistan’s domestic real sector economy before it can face open
competition in the global marketplace with any chance of success; and (ii) to maintain
social and political stability in an ethnically heterogeneous and potentially volatile region.

4

5.
This paradigm has resulted in a gradual economic and a less severe social
transition than that experienced in most countries of the CIS. A policy of high public
spending during the transition years has mitigated the impact on human capital and on the
quality of infrastructure compared with other countries in the region. Market-oriented
reforms have been slow and uneven and progressed only in the areas which matched
Government’s development model and where support for reforms has prevailed over
vested interests (such as the introduction of current account convertibility in 2003, the
realignment of energy prices, the privatization through lease-holding of collective farms,
the adoption of measures to improve the business environment for small and mediumsized enterprises (SMEs) and the modernization of the treasury). In recent years, the
Government also achieved a strong macroeconomic performance. However, in spite of
high growth rates achieved in recent years, the cost of the gradualist approach to reform
in Uzbekistan was an insufficient utilization of the country’s economic potential. The
emphasis on large capital intensive projects, many of which were in the public sector, and
slow private sector development proved to be insufficient to create the number of jobs
required to absorb the growth of the working age population.
II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. Political Background, Governance and Civil Society
6.
Uzbekistan has a strong executive system with few checks and balances.
After the break-up of the Soviet Union in 1991, the ruling Communist Party of
Uzbekistan was restructured as the People's Democratic Party of Uzbekistan, with Islam
Karimov retaining the leadership. A referendum in 1995 extended President Karimov’s
term of office until 2000. He was re-elected to the presidency in 2000 and in December
2007. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) has criticized
the elections as failing to meet international standards. At the same time, however,
observers from a number of countries and other organizations assessed the conduct of the
elections positively.2 In 2005 following the suppression of the Andijan uprising, relations
with the US and the European Union (EU) deteriorated. Following US criticism of the
Uzbek government, cooperation between the two governments in many spheres was
reduced and US assistance to Uzbekistan was considerably cut. The EU imposed
sanctions in the form of an arms embargo and visa restrictions for senior officials.
However, these sanctions were relaxed in October 2007 and are now being reviewed.
7.
Economic management and governance remain characterized by low
transparency, and limited voice and participation of citizens. The restricted
dissemination of basic economic and social information, and questions regarding the
reliability of some data, is a serious impediment to strengthening the accountability of the
authorities, to encouraging public participation in policy-making debate and to allowing
civil society to play a constructive role in contributing to the effective monitoring and
evaluation of implementation and results of state programs. However, the Government
2

OSCE/ODIHR, LEOM, Republic of Uzbekistan, Presidential Elections 2007, Interim Report (5-15
December, 2007).

5

has indicated that it is working to enhance information dissemination and increase
involvement of civil society in the implementation of state programs.
8.
The activities of civil society have historically been tightly controlled. In 2005,
legal and administrative controls on non-governmental organizations (NGOs) were
tightened and scores of NGOs were denied mandatory re-registration with the Ministry of
Justice, and have been forced to close their operations. Despite this, a significant number
of domestic NGOs continue to operate in the social, and, to some extent, the
environmental spheres. The WBG has been able to continue operating a Small Grants
Program, albeit with fewer potential beneficiaries. Recently, a number of international
NGOs including Human Rights Watch and the International Red Cross have reached
agreements with the Government paving the way to a resumption of their activities in the
country. Moreover, there are emerging examples of more cooperative relations between
civil society and Government representatives, particularly at the local level.
B. Regional Significance
9.
Uzbekistan is strategically located in the heart of Central Asia. The design
and development of much of Central Asia’s transport, energy and irrigation infrastructure
during the Soviet Union created extremely tight links of mutual dependency between the
Central Asian Republics which were managed centrally in a borderless manner. Since
independence, Uzbekistan has pursued a policy of national self-sufficiency. In the
absence of the alternative effective arrangements, the coordinated management of the
Regional infrastructure systems has been disrupted and the benefits of close economic
integration and cooperation have been missed.
10.
Major opportunities for mutually beneficial cooperation in water-energy and
inter-regional trade remain under-exploited. The management of the water-energy
nexus has become a highly controversial and sensitive issue between upstream countries
(Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan) and downstream countries (Uzbekistan,3 Turkmenistan
and, Kazakhstan 4 ). Cross-border trade is complicated by unintegrated processes and
procedures. Purely national solutions, particularly those that involve by-passing
Uzbekistan, are expensive and potentially destabilizing. Regional powers including
China, Iran, Pakistan and Russia have stepped up diplomatic efforts to engage with
Uzbekistan, including in the context of the Shanghai Organization for Security (ShoS)
and the Eurasian Economic Community (EurASEC). The International Financial
Institutions (IFIs), including the World Bank, are providing support to the process of
regional cooperation through the Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation (CAREC)
forum. Nevertheless, relationships with direct neighbors remain rather tense.

3

The two great rivers of Central Asia, Amu Darya and Syr Darya, with their tributaries are the main source
of water for Uzbekistan, 95 percent of which is used in the agriculture sector.
4
Irrigation water is however less strategically important for development of Kazakhstan.

6

C. Economic Context
11.
Uzbekistan experienced a relatively modest decline in real GDP (20 percent
compared to more than 40 percent average in the CIS) between 1990 and 1995 following
the breakup of the Soviet Union. The initial recovery of 1996-2003 was marked by
modest but consistent growth (4 percent on average) followed by a strong economic
rebound with average growth of 7.3 percent between 2004 and 2006 and 9.5 percent in
2007. Uzbekistan is among the few countries in the former Soviet Union (FSU) which
have seen an increase in population during the transition years5 (from 21 to 26.8 million)
in contrast to many countries of the CIS, which have seen a dramatic decline 6 in
population. As a result, it is only in recent years that per capita incomes have begun to
increase significantly. With a gross national income (GNI) per capita (Atlas method) of
US$730 in 2007 (Table 1) and GDP per capita of US$2,394 at purchasing power party
(PPP) Uzbekistan is classified as an upper low income country.
Table 1: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2003-2007
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

10.1

12.0

14.3

17.0

22.3

GDP per capita, USD
396
465
GDP real growth
4.2
7.7
GNI per capita, USD, Atlas method
420
460
GNI per capita, PPP, current international $
1651
1808
National accounts (% GDP)
Exports of goods and services
37.3
40.2
Imports of goods and services
30.6
32.7
Consolidated Public finance (% GDP)
Public Revenues
33.4
32.2
Public Expenditures and net lending
33.3
31.6
Fiscal balance
0.1
0.6
Augmented government balance
0.1
0.6
PPG Debt (Gov't debt)
41.5
35.5
Prices
Consumer prices (official, eop)
3.8
3.7
Consumer prices (IMF, eop)
7.8
9.1
Balance of Payments
CAB, as % GDP
8.7
10.1
FDI, as % GDP
0.7
1.6
Gross official reserves, mln USD
1659.0
2147.0
Gross reserves (in months of imports)
5.1
6.3
Monetary
M2, as % GDP
10.3
12.2
Credit to private sector , as % GDP
27.5
24.5
Source: Uzbek authorities, IMF and World Bank staff estimates.

547
7.0
530
1970

643
7.3
610
2155

830
9.5
730
2,394

37.9
28.7

37.5
25.9

40.3
30.2

30.8
29.6
1.2
1.2
27.0

31.4
29.6
1.8
5.2
20.8

31.7
28.5
3.2
3.9
13.2

7.8
12.3

6.8
11.4

6.8
11.9

13.6
0.6
2895.2
7.9

19.1
1.1
4459.4
10.7

19.3
3.3
6613.9
13.5

14.4
21.8

15.2
17.4

16.3
15.0

Economy
GDP, bln USD

5

Period between 1990 and 2000.
This in based on official information. A census has not been conducted for several years and the
information may not be accurate.
6

7

12.
Economic growth is supported by stable macroeconomic management,
promotion of sectoral investments identified as priority by the Government,
favorable terms of trade and a buoyant external environment since 2003. The
industrial and manufacturing sectors are undergoing a process of public investment-led
modernization, through active localization and import substitution programs, especially
in strategic sectors, including car manufacturing, home electronics, machinery building
and chemicals. Export growth has been driven by high commodity prices (including for
cotton, gold and gas) and also by increased volumes of exports of industrial and
manufacturing goods, particularly capital intensive goods (cars, airplanes, cement,
electric cables, etc.) to the rapidly growing markets of key trading partners (Russian
Federation, Kazakhstan, and others). Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) more than doubled
between 2005 and 2007, albeit from a low base (FDI was estimated at 3.3 percent of GDP
in 2007). Investment also flows to housing, retailing, food processing, light industry,
textile, car manufacturing and supplies. The services sector is developing rapidly and
asset prices are at historically high levels. The inflow of workers remittances from
Russia and Kazakhstan give additional boost to domestic demand (remittances are
estimated between 10-17 percent of GDP in 2007).
Figure 1. Contribution to GDP growth, 2003-2007
10

Figure 2. Net exports as % to GDP, 2003-2007
8

9.5
7.0

7.3

(0.6% exl. gold)

4

2.7

1.5

services

7.4

9.8

5.1

7.7
8

7.37.2

6

3.6
2.8

0.0
4.2

trade and catering

0

construction

4

-4

agriculture

2

cotton

industry

-8

Total, economy

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2003

2007
-12

-0.6
-1.9
foodstuffs ferrous andmachinery andenergy
non-ferrous equipment
metals
-6.8
2005

2007

-9.2
-10.8

13.
Commodity price booms for major Uzbek exports account for a substantial
share of economic growth during the recent period of economic expansion.
Uzbekistan remains a net exporter of energy, cotton and minerals and became a net
exporter of foodstuffs in 2007 (Figure 1 and 2). Construction and services sectors also
showed substantial economic growth in response to increased domestic demand, while
growth in agriculture was lower than overall economic growth. The export expansion
also caused growth in transportation and trade services. Uzbekistan has managed to
capitalize on rapidly growing neighbors – China, Russia and Kazakhstan – to increase
exports of machinery and chemical products to these and other countries.
14.
The resulting inflows of foreign exchange have considerably strengthened the
external position over the past five years, but also created a dilemma for the
authorities. The current account has improved from small deficits in the late 1990s to an
8

average surplus of 14 percent of GDP in 2003-2007. Gross official reserves have risen in
2007 by 1.6 times compared to 2006, and were the equivalent of 13 months of imports.
The exchange rate, which was depreciating in nominal and real terms, has recently started
to appreciate. The large, partly unsterilized7, foreign exchange inflows, combined with a
policy of nominal depreciation of the sum, have fuelled the growth of monetary
aggregates, which have in turn put additional pressure on inflation8. Since 2004, broad
money has been growing by close to 50 per cent annually. This, in combination with the
global inflation pressures and continued adjustment in relative prices, complicates the
task of the Central Bank in controlling inflation.
15.
The fiscal position has also strengthened, supported by buoyant revenues
from the commodity sector. Although the direct tax burden has steadily decreased,
(e.g., the profit tax rates in commodity sectors declined from 18 percent to 10 percent
during 2004-2007), the consolidated budget has been in surplus since 2003. Public debt
has been reduced to less than one sixth of GDP in 2007 from over 40 percent in 2003.
With current tight external borrowing policies maintained, the debt to GDP and debt
service to exports ratios should decline further. The Government is expected to maintain
fiscal prudence and keep the consolidated budget in surplus during the CAS period.
16.
The outlook for 2008 is positive with real GDP expected to grow by 6-7
percent over the CAS period. These projections are more conservative than the official
Government projections, in that they recognize that some of the current growth is based
on the commodity price boom, itself fueling a strong demand for Uzbek exports of
industrial goods and services (labor) from key neighboring trading partners, and that the
official projections may be overoptimistic on the favorable impact in the short term of
current gradualist reform policies. Nevertheless, it is expected that growth will continue
to benefit from bringing under-utilized resources into production even if structural
reforms proceed at a modest pace. Investment demand will continue to remain strong
driven by modernization needs. In addition, to an active public investment policy,
interest from private investors in some key economic sectors is also likely to be
sustained. Indeed, Uzbekistan recently strengthened its ties with Russia and China and
relations with many important trading and investment partners such as South Korea,
Malaysia, India, Japan and the Arab States, are close. Private consumption, which grew
at a modest rate of 3.8 percent over 2003-2007 when net exports and fixed capital
formation grew at 11 and 35 percent on average over the same period, is projected to
boost domestic demand from envisaged wage and salary increases and the likelihood of a
gradual loosening (or at least no further tightening) of trade restrictions.
17.
There are currently no major macroeconomic imbalances in Uzbekistan, but
the authorities will need to be vigilant in the face of potential external shocks and
continue to exercise prudence in managing the economy. The Bank’s macroeconomic
forecast for the CAS period provides for a gradual acceleration in the pace of expansion
of domestic demand and a corresponding reduction in external surpluses. The rise in
7

The Capacity Building Unit (CBU) has sterilized some of the inflows, through the creation of a Reserve
Fund (Fund for Reconstruction and Development).
8
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) staff calculates inflation using the authorities’ source data and
applying international methodology. The IMF is providing technical assistance to the authorities on
National Accounts through a resident advisor in the Statistics Committee.

9

inflation as a result of increases in food and other commodity prices in 2007 is expected
to continue in 2008 with a gradual decline in later years. This assumes the absence of
serious external shocks and the continuation of gradual economic reforms. With fairly
diversified sources of growth, strong external position, and the limited openness of its
trade and financial sector, in the short term Uzbekistan may initially be in a better
position than other more open economies to withstand adverse external shocks, including
the current international financial liquidity crisis. Simultaneously, Uzbek banks have
limited exposure to foreign banks, with modest external borrowing, thus running little
risk of contagion from foreign banks suffering from the credit crunch.
18.
However, various distortions in the economy could undermine economic
growth unless these issues are addressed. In order to achieve the high growth rate
envisaged by the authorities (about 8 percent), it is the WBG’s view that additional
reforms are needed. These include further liberalization of trade and exchange systems,
particularly as regards the availability of imported inputs and the necessary foreign
exchange, development of the financial sector and improvements in the business
environment and investment climate, to stimulate private sector development. In
addition, the currently strong external and fiscal positions may hide weaknesses in the
economy if there were to be a reversal of the foreign exchange inflows. In the event of
negative external developments, there is a risk of the reversal of reforms with a return to
even more central control and protection in response to the external shock. In this regard,
Uzbekistan is in a position to take advantage of the current buoyant economic
environment for accelerating the implementation of structural reforms.
19.
Basic infrastructure may also emerge as one of the constraints to faster and
more widespread growth in the future. Uzbekistan has generally maintained its
infrastructure (roads, irrigation network, electricity, gas distribution) in better condition
than have some of its neighbors and has continued to invest in selected basic
infrastructure projects throughout the transition period. Nevertheless, it is facing a major
challenge going forward: the stock of infrastructure assets it inherited from the Soviet
Union is extremely large for a country of Uzbekistan’s GDP per capita and a large part of
it may already be beyond its technical-economic life. As a result, the financing needs
required to ensure that the provision and the quality of infrastructure services support
future growth objectives will be immense in both urban and rural areas.

10

D. Poverty, Socioeconomic
Inequality and the MDGs
Table 2: Medium-term Economic Projections, 2008-2011

20.
With per capita income
of US$730 (Atlas based) in 2007,
Uzbekistan is an upper low
income country.
Calculations
based on a food-only consumption
basket and a poverty line
estimated at 2100 kilo calories per
day suggest that slightly over one
quarter of the population could
still be considered poor (Table 3)
in 2007. 9 Given its large
population, Uzbekistan accounts
for a significant share of the poor
in all of Central Asia, and its
economic prospects are key to the
region as a whole.

2008
Real GDP
Consumption (per
capita)
Exports
Imports
GDP Deflator
Terms of trade

8.0
7.5
15.2
27.8
17.0
6.0

2009
2010
(percent change)
7.0
6.5

2011

6.5
6.2
13.8
10.8
13.3
9.6
15.0
12.0
-6.6
-3.5
(percent of GDP)
12.8
11.8
34.6
34.5
29.8
29.4
4.8
5.1

5.6
10.3
14.2
10.0
-2.4

6.0

CAB
15.3
9.5
Budget revenues
34.9
34.5
Budget expenditures
30.0
28.9
Fiscal Balance
4.9
5.6
Public &
Guaranteed Debt
11.1
9.7
8.7
8.1
Fixed investment
21.0
20.3
19.3
20.1
Source: Uzbek authorities, IMF and WB staff estimates.

21.
Based on available data, recent growth appears to have had a relatively
modest impact on poverty reduction (Table 3). In Uzbekistan a one percent increase
in mean consumption leads to a one percent decrease in poverty, which is small when
compared to the experience of other countries in the region. 10 A disaggregated data
analysis 11 shows that the consumption of households at the very bottom of the
consumption distribution and the consumption of those who are at the top of the
distribution improved much more than others during 2003-2006 period. Since there was
not as much movement around the poverty line, the poverty elasticity of economic
growth remains relatively modest.

9

The Bank’s regional poverty study (Growth, Poverty and Inequality in Eastern Europe and Central Asia,
October 2005) puts the share of people in Uzbekistan living on less than US$2.15 a day (in Purchasing
Power Parity terms) at 47 percent, comparable to levels in the Caucasuses or Moldova, but below levels in
the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan.
10
The average elasticity of poverty to growth in consumption per capita between 1998 and 2003 is -3.1 for
Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russian Federation and Ukraine. In low income CIS, the average elasticity is closer
to what is observed in Uzbekistan, at -1.4 (World Bank 2005).
11
Based on 2007 Living Standards Assessment (LSA).

11

22.
The low elasticity is a Table 3: Poverty Rates, 2000-2005
reflection of the type of growth
2000and
its
associated
limited
2002**
2003**
2004**
2005**
2001*
27.5
25.3
26.2
26.1
25.8
National
distributional effect across the
population. The findings from labor Urban
22.5
21.1
22
18.8
18.3
market analyses conducted under the Rural
30.5
27.7
28.7
30.3
30
LSA Update in 2007 12 suggest that Source: Uzbekistan Living Standards Assessment, World Bank, 2002.
**
Authors’ calculations based on Household Budget Surveys. The
key reasons for this relatively low
poverty line used is based on a food only consumption basket,
growth elasticity, especially for the equivalent to 2100 calories per day, considered an acceptable minimum
middle deciles, are constraints on level for a wheat based diet such as in Uzbekistan.
greater private sector development in the formal sector and therefore dynamic job
creation, and the persistence of underemployment in the informal sector. Although a
generous system of public transfers and subsidies, as well as large flows of remittances
contributed to reduction of extreme poverty, the population of the working age has grown
considerably faster than formal sector employment since the mid 1990s.
23.
The overall improvement in the macroeconomic situation has therefore not
been reflected in a widespread significant improvement in the standards of living of
the population. Because so many people still directly or indirectly derive their income
from agriculture or agriculture-related activities in the rural areas, and because the
traditionally labor-intensive micro- and small business private sector is limited to 45.7
percent of GDP, the recent upturn in overall economic growth has yet to be translated in
significant and widespread improvements in many people’s living standards. Greater
economic liberalization, to allow increased imports of consumer goods and improve the
environment for private investment, would contribute greatly to improve prospects for a
more pro-poor growth.
24.
There are significant differences across regions – with rural areas showing
more poverty than urban areas. As shown by the LSA, rural poverty has a number of
causes, including declining soil quality in some places, the absence of non-agricultural
jobs in most rural areas, and generally lower access to public goods. Environmental
conditions are also a particularly important factor in regional variation in poverty rates.
Karakalpakstan and Khorezm are at the tail-end of irrigation systems with insufficient or
unreliable access to water and have been severely affected by the Aral Sea crisis. Here,
as well as in other parts of Uzbekistan, water logging and soil salinity have continued to
reduce the ability of those in the rural communities to raise their incomes. With the
tightening of budget constraints for state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and utility price
adjustments in recent years, a newly emerging concern is the urban poor, particularly in
smaller regional towns.
This regional diversity also translates into persistent
socioeconomic inequalities, although consumption inequality is moderate compared to
the rest of the FSU (the Gini coefficient is estimated at around 0.368).
25.
Since independence, food-security policies increased self sufficiency and
partly isolated Uzbekistan from the effects of the current global price increase.
Food imports are relatively small and related to specific items, such as vegetable oils.

12

The World Bank, Report No. 40723-UZ.

12

Uzbekistan is a net exporter of fruits and vegetables and has achieved wheat selfsufficiency. The country officially imports relatively small quantities of wheat and flour
from Kazakhstan because of quality considerations. However, the isolation from global
price trends is not permanent and pressure on food prices will continue to increase. This
will inevitably place an additional burden on the poor, particularly in urban areas. In
rural areas, the impact will be less, since production for self-consumption in household
plots (the so called “Dekhan farms”) is widespread.
26.
Relative to its per capita income, Uzbekistan records favorable health
outcomes. It has not seen the decline in life expectancy that has characterized several
CIS states and MDGs in health appear achievable. However, a survey funded by the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) in 2006, reveals that infant mortality was still
around 48/1000 in 2006. The Bank’s LSA further revealed that poor people’s access to
health services, particularly the services provided by the hospitals, is impeded by
significant out-of-pocket payments, and that the input-based financing system has led to
significant regional inequalities in standards of service. Reforms in primary health care,
supported by the WBG, have improved governance and accountability in the health
sector, increased availability of funding and other medical inputs for rural PHCs and
increased financial autonomy of SVPs. These reforms have resulted in improvements in
quality and availability of health services as attested by beneficiaries’ surveys.
Uzbekistan however still faces challenges in maternal health, nutrition, HIV/AIDs and
TB. These last diseases have been spreading at an exponential rate in Central Asia and
have emerged as a key challenge for public policy over the coming years.13 However, for
these issues, appropriate policies and strategies have been developed and the Government
has been effective in implementing them.
27.
Results in education are also favorable. Uzbekistan’s spending on education
remains high; equal to and even exceeding levels in some Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries (although a significant part of this is
investment in new vocational training institutions). This has allowed primary and
secondary school enrollment rates to be maintained, although some concerns persist over
the quality of education and also over attendance rates particularly in rural areas.
Existing studies (including the Bank’s Public Expenditure Review (PER) further suggest
that the cost-effectiveness and labor market relevance of spending, particularly on
vocational secondary education, is low. Statistics on learning achievement based on a
measurement of skills rather than knowledge carried out through a random statistical
sampling of schools are not nationally available, and a systematic analysis of access
issues has not been carried out. Further work is needed both to develop an adequate
monitoring system and to improve targeting of government expenditures. The

13

The recorded HIV infection rates in Uzbekistan (estimated at over 3,500 at end-2003, up from 230 at
end-2000) remain low. However, as elsewhere in the region, there are worrisome signs of very rapid
growth due to expanding use of drugs, especially in urban areas. Moreover, international experience
suggests that the actual number of people infected may be 5-10 times higher than officially recorded rates.
The Government has approved a National Strategy for Prevention of HIV/AIDS, and successfully applied
for a grant from the Global Fund against AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM). Uzbekistan (together
with Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan) is also an active participant in a US$27 million
Regional AIDS Control project to minimize the human and economic impact of HIV/AIDS epidemic.

13

Government, with support from the WBG and the Asian Development Bank (ADB), is
increasingly focusing on student assessment and reforms in school governance.
III.

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

A. Country Vision: the Government’s WIS
28.
The Government of Uzbekistan has endorsed the MDGs. For Uzbekistan, the
main goal under the MDGs translates into a reduction of the poverty rate from 27.5
percent in 2000 to 14 percent in 2015. The Government has been increasingly concerned
by the disconnect between the impressive economic results of recent years and the
relatively modest reduction of poverty. Aggregated GDP growth in 2002-2005 was 24.9
percent, but the number of poor for the same period was reduced only by 2 percentage
points.
29.
In response to this challenge, the Government approved its first Poverty
Reduction Strategy paper (PRSP) – the Welfare Improvement Strategy (WIS)14 - in
September of 2007. The WIS is a national strategic document for the social-economic
development of the country over the period 2007-2010. It was prepared by an
interdisciplinary team of government experts under the leadership of the Ministry of
Economy, with analytical support of the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), ADB and the WBG. The WIS is a comprehensive framework to address
poverty and living standards issues built on the policy of granting a greater role to market
principles within a gradualist approach to structural reforms. It aims at improving the
living standards of the population through sustaining a robust and inclusive economic
growth, developing a modern and diversified globally competitive economy, enhancing
the quality of public services and reducing inter-regional inequalities in socio-economic
development.
Poverty Diagnosis:
30.
The WIS provides a candid assessment of poverty level and trends in the
country relying primarily on the Household Budget Survey (HBS) data. The quality
of poverty monitoring and the capacity for poverty analysis, including that related to nonincome dimensions of poverty and access to services, require further strengthening.
Increased access to information and encouraging broad-based discussion of development
challenges that the country faces, would enhance the possibility of analysis of the critical
poverty-growth related issues and deepen the understanding of the linkages between
policy actions and pro-poor growth.

14

The WIS was discussed by the Board in January. 2008.

14

Macroeconomic Framework and Main Policy Areas in the WIS:15
31.
The WIS highlights the role of maintaining sustainable high rates of
economic growth as a main instrument for poverty reduction. This goal is to be met
by a combination of continued stable macroeconomic management, state-led
industrialization policy and acceleration of structural reforms in selected areas.
• Improvement of the business environment and tax reform. The WIS recognizes
the need to enhance private sector development through a gradual reduction of state
regulation in the economy and reducing the costs of doing business. The WIS does
not elaborate much, however, on the reduction of transaction costs, streamlining of
customs procedures and simplification of certification and licensing.
• Trade. The WIS contains a candid discussion of the shortcomings of the trade regime
and trade practices, but does not contemplate comprehensive changes to the current
trade regime and practices. The Government however proposes to anchor its gradual
trade liberalization to the process of harmonization with the EurAsEc and, in the
future, through joining the World Trade Organization (WTO). For the time being,
however, the Government intends to continue encouraging the build up of the
industrial base of the country, using localization and import substitution as
mechanisms to achieve this objective.
• Financial sector reform. The WIS includes a list of financial sector reforms needed
to further enhance financial deepening and to strengthen the role of banks in economic
development, as well as to improve the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.
The WIS, however, would have been strengthened had the document explicitly
included a road map for the further development of the financial sector over the next
three years.
• Rural sector development and environmental management. The WIS recognizes
the importance of agricultural growth for improving the livelihood of people and
emphasizes the close link to environmental issues including sustainable irrigation and
water management systems, soil improvement and drainage, more efficient use of
water resources and the importance of cost recovery. The WIS, however, does not
envisage the gradual reform of the state procurement system for cotton, although it
may well have a huge potential to improve income and unleash new opportunities for
growth in the rural economy.
• Improving the performance of utility and communal services in large and small
cities, towns and villages. The WIS proposes rehabilitation and extension of water
supply, sewerage and solid waste management systems, the reduction of physical and
commercial losses in the electricity and gas systems, the installation of energy
efficient heating systems including options to decentralize inefficient Soviet-era
systems. It also proposes the development of appropriate market based pricing
systems for utilities, so as to combine efficiency with financial sustainability and
15

For a detailed joint Bank-IMF assessment of the WIS please refer to the Joint Staff Advisory Note dated
January 24, 2008 (Report No 41799-UZ).

15

protection of vulnerable social groups. In the field of public utilities, the Government
strategy calls for private sector participation.
• Strengthening human development. The WIS recognizes that, although the
Government pays special attention to the development of social services, including
health and education, the quality of these services still needs to be improved.
Therefore, continued public investments and more efficient financing mechanisms in
education and health, would be needed to ensure that the poor contribute to and benefit
from economic growth. The WIS focuses on achieving the MDG’s and envisions
improvements in primary, emergency and specialized health care, preventive health
measures, and a gradual transition to output-based financing. In education, the
Government’s objective is to maintain a high literacy rate. The Government’s
priorities therefore include providing 12 years of mandatory free education and
improving the quality of primary and secondary education while maintaining universal
access.
• Improving the functioning of the labor market and social protection systems.
The WIS recognizes how critical the strengthening of the social protection programs is
to protect the poorest sections of population. The WIS also stresses gender equality as
one of its goals and contemplates targeted government interventions to support
investment and job creation in less advantaged regions of the country and ensure
equality of access to services regardless of the place of residence. However, the WIS
does not provide a detailed program on how to improve the (pro-poor) targeting
performance of social assistance programs, although it highlights the importance of
programs targeted to the poor households. The WIS contains clear labor market
objectives, but specific policy actions, regulatory changes and measures will have to
be elaborated in the course of implementation.
• Improving governance. The WIS includes measures on administrative reform,
improvements in policy-making structures and in strengthening the role of the
legislature in oversight of the executive, greater access to information,
decentralization, as well as longer term reform of the civil service. It proposes to
tackle the challenge of more transparent and efficient allocation of resources through
reforms in public expenditure management and introduction of a robust monitoring
and evaluation mechanisms. However, the WIS does not propose an actionable plan
of measures to implement the stated objectives.
32.
Broad participation of both line ministries and civil society would enhance
WIS implementation. As noted in the Joint Staff Advisory Note (JSAN), the
implementation of the WIS will be challenging and will require Government’s further
efforts to: (i) set clear priorities amongst policies, programs and investments through
costing and cost/benefit analysis; (ii) establish methods and institutions for monitoring
and evaluation; (iii) sharpen policy analysis in selected sectors and detailing the measures
to be taken in support of sector goals and (v) strengthen public and civil society
participation.
33.
The authorities have recognized the central importance of technical
assistance and external advice in WIS implementation. Their request for such
involvement from the donor community is encouraging. The preliminary estimate for TA
support across the WIS agenda that would be provided by a combination of largely local
16

and selected international experts amounts to approximately US$6 million over an
implementation period of three to four years. The Government has initiated and will
continue to seek grant funding support from donors to meet these technical assistance
needs. It should be recognized, however, that progress on understanding and addressing
the poverty challenge will depend both on funds being available for TA support for WIS
implementation and on willingness by all partners and Government to cooperate and
advance a more open dialog and improved information sharing.
B. Donor Partnership in Support of Uzbekistan’s Economic Development
Objectives16
34.
There is a relatively small group of donors active in Uzbekistan and overall
external funding decreased during the ISN period. However, there is strong support
among all donor agencies for coordination and harmonization of activities. There is
extensive collaboration in capacity building, as illustrated recently in the joint
involvement of the UNDP, ADB and the WBG in support of the Government’s
preparation of the WIS. There is also considerable collaboration at the project level in
the health sector in partnership with the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) and ADB. In the areas of irrigation and drainage, the Bank has
active partnerships under its existing projects with the number of international agencies.
The Government of Japan is a source of significant trust funding through the Japan Social
Development Fund (JSDF) and Japan’s Policy and Human Resources Development
(PHRD) in support of activities planned in this CAS. The ADB and the WBG conduct
Joint Portfolio Reviews with the Government, and where possible use the same
implementation arrangements. UNDP and the World Bank have also coordinated to
provide support for improved monitoring and evaluation systems in the context of
implementing the WIS.
35.
Uzbekistan is party to all of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC’s) regional projects (which are supported by other donors including the
WBG). These projects are focused on drug abuse prevention and treatment, HIV/AIDS
prevention, and counter-narcotics enforcement all of which promote regional cooperation
and coordination. The WBG and UNODC have also collaborated in the delivery of
capacity building workshops in the context of the AML/CFT Mentor Program since
Uzbekistan enacted an AML/CFT law (in 2004), created a financial intelligence unit, and
ratified the major United Nations (UN) Conventions17 covering money laundering and
terrorism financing. These workshops covered role and functions of a Financial
Intelligence Unit, training on international AML/CFT obligations and best practices.
36.
The WBG is working closely with the IMF on issues related to
macroeconomic stability and economic management. The Government is cooperating
fully with the IMF, in particular in the context of the Article IV review, and is benefiting
from continued IMF’s Technical Assistance (TA). IFC has been working with the
16

For more detailed information on donor partnership please refer to Annex 3.
UN Convention Against Illicit Trafficking of Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances; the UN
Convention for Suppression of Financing of Terrorism; and the UN Convention Against Transnational
organized Crime (Palermo Convention).
17

17

Government on addressing regulatory obstacles in the business environment for SMEs
and improving the legal framework for housing finance, and with private sector on
improving access to finance for SMEs. Funding for IFC’s regional advisory services,
such as leasing, the mortgage program and the SME banking advisory, has been provided
by IFC trust funds, the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) and the
Netherlands.
IV.

BANK ENGAGEMENT IN UZBEKISTAN: LESSONS LEARNED

A. Background
37.
The operational environment for the Bank in Uzbekistan has been difficult
for many years. The previous CAS (2002-2004) attempted to establish a framework for
policy dialogue and set policy triggers for various scenarios. This approach proved to be
ineffective, given the authorities gradualist state-led development strategy. Triggers were
often perceived as imposed external conditionalities, and there was thus little ownership.
In addition, the fact that Uzbekistan had little need for external financing provided little
incentive for active cooperation with the Bank in areas that were not clearly demanddriven by the government. Reforms which did take place came about from the gradual
absorption of technical and project work over a number of years and the slow but steady
build up of ownership and generation of a critical mass for reforms. In view of the good
macroeconomic performance and buoyant growth over the past few years, the
Government perceives its strategy to be successful and therefore has little motivation to
fundamentally revise it in the short term.
B. The Interim Strategy
38.
A CAS was prepared in 2005 for discussion at the Board, but was eventually
switched to an Interim Strategy Note (ISN) approved in July 2006 as questions arose
on developmental effectiveness of the proposed program. The ISN included financing
of one project together with technical assistance and analytical advisory services to
support the development of the WIS and ensure local stakeholder participation for
increasing development effectiveness. The IFC’s program focused on advisory services
aimed at improving the business environment and legislation, as well as increasing access
to finance to MSMEs and establishing the basis for the development of housing finance.
The ISN was intended to give the Government and Bank staff a focused opportunity to
work together to address areas of difference, while continuing to demonstrate good
cooperation in the implementation of existing lending operations. A key question for the
Interim Strategy was the process by which readiness to return to a standard assistance
framework would be reviewed.
39.
The Government and the Bank agreed on assessing the results against four
basic benchmarks to be achieved in the short-term: (i) finalization of PRSP/WIS; (ii)
stable macroeconomic management; (iii) improved portfolio performance and (iv) timely
access to data. It was agreed to look at the totality of progress during the ISN, not
treating each result area as a necessary pre-condition for moving ahead. In addition, it
was agreed to carry out a governance assessment to be conducted jointly with the
18

Government in a sector selected by the authorities and where the Bank was active
(health).
40.
In addition, in preparation of the ISN, the Bank reviewed jointly with the
Government future reform priorities against the authorities’ own policy plans.
Incomplete structural reforms were documented as a list of policy actions in the ISN as a
guide for this review, noting that priorities could shift in reflection of the dialogue. As
had been the case with the triggers under the previous CAS, however, the Government
expressed the view that, while there was no fundamental disagreement on the need to
ultimately move in the areas indicated, internal consensus on the timing of
implementation of many reforms did not yet exist and could hardly be secured under the
ISN. In this context, the policy actions specified in the ISN were a framework for
organizing policy dialogue with the authorities and included governance, poverty
monitoring, agriculture policy, financial sector, business environment and trade.
C. Progress Under the ISN
41.
On all four benchmarks, results have been achieved. The WIS has been
developed and approved by the government. Macroeconomic management has been
prudent and stable, and growth high. There have been significant improvements in the
portfolio, although still subject to heavy bureaucratic processes that slow down project
implementation. While data sharing remains somewhat ad hoc and its timely provision
inconsistent, the government has made genuine attempts to respond to data requests.
Finally, the dialogue and collaboration established in the context of the governance
assessment in the primary health care sector has been a success.
42.
During the ISN period, the Uzbek authorities succeeded in maintaining and
strengthening macro-economic stability. They continued the gradualist approach they
have pursued since independence and advanced on a few of the structural reforms areas
identified in the ISN. Although progress has been less than anticipated, actions were
taken in those selected areas the government itself had committed to move on during the
short ISN period. Progress was noted, for instance, on the launching of the preparation
for privatization of one of the major state-owned bank (Asaka Bank), on the initiation of
privatization of urban land, on the completion throughout the country of the
transformation of collective farms (“Shirkats”) into private leaseholds and on the slow
but noticeable improvement of the business environment for SMEs (reduction of taxes,
number of inspections and reporting requirements; reliance on court rather than
administrative decisions; reduction in number of permits and licenses to start business
activities; shortening of enterprise bankruptcy procedures, etc.).
43.
The overall quality of the working relationship between the WBG and the
authorities has improved during the period of the ISN. One example was the
Government’s close collaboration with the Bank team during the preparation of the WIS
and joint work on poverty diagnostics. Another encouraging sign in the improving
relationship between the Government and the WBG team is that the Government
recognizes the shortcomings of the WIS as well as the challenges of its implementation
and has recently indicated its interest in receiving TA to support the implementation of
the WIS. The Government is also very appreciative of IFC’s Private Enterprise

19

Partnership (PEP) TA services, and has been encouraged by this work to make
improvements in the business environment for SMEs and establishing the legal basis for
housing finance (Box 1).
Box: 1: IFC helps Uzbekistan Improve the Business Environment
IFC’s SME Survey and the BEE work has included the following accomplishments which in part led to Uzbekistan
improving seven places in the “Doing Business” report:
•

•
•
•
•
•

Assisted in developing 9 Presidential Decrees, expected to free up $45 million for the SME sector. The
project has worked closely with government agencies to improve the business environment leading to streamlined
registration, permits, inspections, business liquidation and tax reporting procedures.
Conducted 5 nationwide surveys of the SME sector. These annual surveys have provided the basis for more
than 150 policy recommendations, 100 of which have been fully or partially adopted by the government.
Introduced risk-based management in inspections. The project has helped to implement risk-based
management at all 33 inspectorates across the country.
Provided trainings for over 2,200 government officials. Trainings have been provided on new regulatory
procedures, such as risk based inspections, inspections checklists and the streamlined registration process.
Increased awareness on the new procedures. The project developed and disseminated easy-to-read information
materials on inspections and business registration procedures to SMEs.
Created 11 inspections checklists. The project developed checklists for the Fire and Sanitary Inspectorates, to be
used by both agencies in the course of inspections of business entities.

Source: Doing Business 2007.

44.
Strong progress has also been made in portfolio performance, which resulted
in upgrading all of the problematic projects to “satisfactory” status and in a
significant improvement in disbursement ratios. As of March 2008 the Uzbekistan
portfolio has no problem projects (as opposed to 2 problem projects at the time of the
ISN), resulting in a 100 percent Proactivity Index. This portfolio improvement effort was
also supported by high disbursement ratios (24 percent in FY07 and 20 percent in FY08 above the current ECA average of 14.5 percent). Critical systemic issues are common for
all IFIs and across the Bank's portfolio (e.g., contract award delays, slow project start and
weaknesses in project monitoring and evaluation systems). To address these problems the
Country Office has intensified work with the Government on project implementation
through the Joint Technical Group and the Portfolio Action Plan reviews and is also
providing support for improving monitoring and evaluation.
45.
Perhaps the most significant achievement during the ISN period was in
project implementation.
Some projects were able to implement important policy
components and innovative features (e.g., Rural Enterprise Support project (RESP) has
been able to support privatization of collective farms (“Shirkats”), Health I and II have
contributed to a major reform in the financing of primary health care, Basic Education
supported the development of parental participation in school governance, etc). Under
the Basic Education project, two important governance improvement measures (the
activation of school boards, and progress in standard student assessments, measured
against the State Standards for Public Education (GOS OSO)) were agreed upon with the
Government. Notwithstanding much evidence of stronger engagement and a more
trusting relationship with the WBG, the dialogue and progress are not as smooth as they
could be.
An area causing continuing bureaucratic complications in project
implementation is the process of contract expertise of public procurement. As a result,

20

project implementation remains fraught with unnecessary delays and complications
despite recent improvements.
46.
General access to data has improved, but unpredictability and ad hoc data
provision continues, and more work needs to be done by the WBG and the
authorities to ensure smooth data exchange in the future. On the WBG side,
streamlining economic and sectoral data requests that can prove onerous,
acknowledgement that information requested may not be readily available and requires a
special effort to collect and/or analyze, and establishment of clearer linkages between
Bank requests for detailed data and Bank’s output would probably help increase trust and
improve collaboration. On the government’s side, automatic and timely routine
fulfillment of its obligations as regards data sharing deriving from its membership in the
WBG should become the norm.
47.
During the ISN period, engagement on governance issues was also
strengthened. The Bank has been able to conduct regular Beneficiary Assessments for
projects under implementation. Beneficiaries and civil society are very positive about
project benefits and delivery of results on the ground (Box 2). In addition, cooperation
with the authorities in the discussion on selected governance dimensions such as PFM,
HR management and even procurement was encouraging, as it demonstrated that a
careful, selective dialogue on governance is possible. The Primary Health Care
Governance assessment has now been completed and will be shared and discussed with
the government in April 2008. Building on these experiences, the CAS will strengthen
the dialogue on selected governance issues through projects as well as dissemination and
advocacy work.
Box: 2: Voice of the Beneficiaries
A beneficiary assessment on selected projects was carried out at the ISN Mid-term Review, in March-April 2007.
Beneficiary views on project outcomes were sought on the Bukhara-Samarkand Water Supply (BSWS), Rural Water,
and the RESP, and the Health II projects. Heath II project focus group discussions were carried out in Khorezm and
Karakalpakstan regions. A summary on BSWS, Rural Water Supply and RESP is based on social assessments
conducted under these projects in FY07. The beneficiary assessment provided useful information on project results,
especially ones that depend on new institutional developments in respective sectors such as agriculture and primary
health. A summary of key findings on the impact of WB-supported projects is presented below:
•
Nearly 44,000 people got access to safe water and over 800,000 receive improved quality and quantity water in
South Karakalpakstan
•
90 percent of covered population have access to water and 75-87 percent satisfied with water supply services
•
Over 5,000 farmers benefited from improved irrigation
•
Over 11mln rural population using improved medical services in over 2,300 refurbished primary care centers
•
The incidence of infectious diseases has reduced
Source: World Bank project supervision surveys and consultations.

D. Lessons Learned from the Last CAS and ISN Implementation
48.
In preparation for this CAS, the lessons of the CAS Completion Report (CAS
CR) of the previous FY02-04 CAS and of the ISN implementation have been. The
CAS CR concludes that, notwithstanding the slow overall pace of reforms, there were
successes during the CAS period at the sectoral level, particularly in the implementation
21

of projects targeting improved public service delivery and benefiting from strong local
stakeholder support (health, water supply, and municipal services). Government
ownership of the reform process in these areas has allowed the Bank to orient public
policy attention towards improving the efficiency of public service delivery as well as
issues affecting poor people’s access to basic services. The intensive dialogue around the
LSA was the first time poverty issues were openly discussed with the Government. This
experience suggests that development results can be achieved even against the
background of a difficult overall policy dialogue and significant remaining differences on
economic policy and the pace of structural reforms. However, the CAS CR18 cautions
against expecting much more movement in areas where the Government’s approach
differs from that of the Bank. By diverting attention towards areas of disagreement, the
Bank missed opportunities to contribute to enhanced living conditions and income
earning opportunities for the poor that were feasible even under the prevailing policy
regime, according to the CR.
49.
Over the years, the policy dialogue between the Government and the WBG
has proved effective when demand-driven, specific and clearly articulated, like in
the reform of health financing. Officials are often keen to receive and act upon the
Bank’s advice and capacity building activities (for example in utility reform and housing
finance). The dialogue has largely failed, however, when perceived by the Government
as supply-driven or in areas where the Bank and the Government have different time
frames and overall approaches, such as in reform of the cotton sector. Several important
lessons emerged from past experience, which have been factored into the design of the
FY08-11 CAS. They include:
•
•

•

•

•

18

Positive development outcomes in support of basic human needs and improved living
standards can be achieved within the prevailing policy environment of Uzbekistan.
The WBG interventions are likely to be more successful in areas where common
ground exists. While the Bank will need to continue to advocate reform on a broad
front, the use of CAS triggers will be avoided. A move toward a deeper engagement
will be facilitated by assisting the authorities prepare areas for enhanced engagement
outside basic human needs.
Shared ownership is key to successful engagement and can be strengthened through
the use of pilots, demonstrating and communicating success, and involving
stakeholders and beneficiaries in the design and implementation of projects. Building
on the WIS as an explicit guide to Government’s own priorities and objectives,
should also serve this purpose.
The WBG experience in Uzbekistan clearly demonstrates that investment projects
rather than stand alone ESW or TA have been the most effective ‘entry points’ for
policy dialogue and ultimately reform as they demonstrate effectiveness impact
through concrete results.
Future Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) will need to consider carefully both
the Government’s demand for advice and the readiness to provide access to data.

Distributed to the Board in August, 2005. Report No. 32293-UZ.

22

•
•
•

Involving a wider group of stakeholders both in the preparation and dissemination of
AAA to build a constituency for reform.
There is a need to tackle limited capacity for project implementation through
renewed attention to generic issues such as the public procurement process.
Incorporation of Project Implementation Units (PIUs) into Government Ministries
can promote the longer term objective of gradual integration of the WBG operations
into government systems. Notwithstanding this longer term agenda, the Bank
should remain uncompromising in its defense of the highest standards of fiduciary
management, which is rightly regarded as important to mitigate governance risks.

E. Rationale for CAS Engagement
50.
The progress achieved under the ISN indicates that the WBG support to
some key Government priorities can achieve effective results. The proposed CAS
framework will allow the consolidation of results, expansion of the areas of engagement
and the establishment of the Bank as a trusted partner. It will allow engaging the
authorities in areas where there is potential for common agreement, particularly to
increase the effectiveness of service delivery through good governance.
51.
Consultations with non-government stakeholders in Uzbekistan indicated
that a majority of local development partners support the Bank’s continued
financial assistance and advice. There is a consensus that the WBG assistance should
focus in areas which they regard as critical to improve people’s livelihoods, rather than
disengagement leading to increased isolation. Moreover there is a broad-based consensus
that this is an appropriate role for IFIs (ADB has a similar approach). As was previously
discussed, engagement has only been effective when sustained and long term.
52.
Finally it is important to recognize that given the regional importance and
close linkages to neighboring states, engagement and development in Uzbekistan has
the potential to bring benefits well beyond Uzbekistan’s borders. The importance of
regional stability cannot in this context be underestimated. The Bank’s experience and
analysis of regional issues suggests that the potential costs of Uzbekistan disengaging
from the regional dialogue are high, given the country’s strategic location and its role in
the future development of the entire Central Asia region. These concerns warrant
continued efforts by the international community to advocate the benefits of greater
cooperation with the country’s neighbors.
V.

THE WBG SUPPORT FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WIS

53.
There is broad agreement between the Government, the WBG the donor
community and other stakeholders on the overall direction and end-result objectives
of the economic strategy of the Government expressed in the WIS. There is also a
consensus on the need to accelerate the pace of poverty reduction and persistent socioeconomic inequalities. Thus, support to the market based elements of the Government’s
growth agenda provides broad areas for effective engagement with the Government.
Nevertheless, there is a difference of views on the pace of transition.

23

54.
Based on lessons learned during the previous engagements, the current CAS
will be results-based. Levels of engagement will be calibrated by the degree of
government ownership of an agenda which is shared by the WBG. This differs from past
approaches in three important respects: (i) it recognizes that the same result may be
achieved with different policy instruments and thus provides flexibility in devising a
reform program adapted to the country’s needs; (ii) it relies on joint agreement over
shared target outcomes, thereby offering the potential for significantly greater client
ownership; and (iii) the assessment of progress towards an agreed intermediate target
would be made taking into account direct feedback from project beneficiaries and other
affected stakeholders, and would allow for adjustments upward or downward to reflect
exogenous factors outside the project’s direct control. Moreover, the results framework
adopted does not encompass Uzbekistan’s entire development agenda but concentrates on
those areas where – as a result of joint ownership and agreement – the Bank expects to
make a difference.
A. Main features of the CAS
55.
Overall, the proposed approach in the current CAS is to recognize that the WIS
provides for different possible levels of engagement:
•

At the first level in the areas identified as WIS priorities upon which there is mutual
agreement on a reform sequence and content, which supports: (i) poverty reduction
and improvement of living standards of the population and (ii) global goods
provision.

•

At the second level, (i) in the areas where the Government and the World Bank agree
on broad directions and ultimate objectives of the reforms, but where further
engagement is necessary to identify common ground, reform sequence and timing and
to agree upon detailed work programs; and (ii) if there develops openings during the
CAS period, in areas which, in the Bank’s view, may be key for sustainable growth
and poverty reduction but where the Government, while it may be willing and open to
receive information and advice on alternative options has not yet committed to
implement reforms.

•

In addition, the WBG would continue to help facilitate increased regional
cooperation, in particular through its support for Uzbekistan’s involvement in
CAREC activities.

56.
An important feature of the CAS is to demonstrate through concrete results the
central role of better governance and accountability in improving service delivery.
57.
At the first level, in areas where there is strong engagement on the part of
Government and where the WBG has a successful track record, the CAS will actively
support the government in implementing its own reform agenda through ESW, TA and
lending activities. This includes areas of common agreement such as: maintaining stable
and sustainable macroeconomic performance; supporting economic growth through
improving the business environment and investment climate; supporting development of
agriculture services; improving public service provision (in ways which also reduce
poverty) in areas such as irrigation, drainage and soil improvement, delivery of municipal

24

services and health and education. These are all areas where the WBG and the
Government have had a sustained and very productive collaboration over the years, but
where the needs for further advice, capacity building and financial resources remain
immense. Additionally, the CAS will support specific activities related to the provision
of global public goods, particularly related to carbon emission reduction and climate
change issues, and communicable diseases.
58.
At the second level, where broad agreement exists but where programs,
sequencing and timetable remain to be articulated, work will be conducted during the
CAS period, initially through ESW and TA, to establish the details and feasibility of
future engagement, including as needed through lending. Areas of focus under this
second strategic pillar will include: support for further financial sector liberalization and
modernization. Indeed, the WIS emphasizes the need to enhance financial deepening and
the role of banks in economic development. Building upon the WIS’s welcome
commitments to measures to improve governance, dialogue will also continue on
improvement in this area, including as regards data availability, transparency, and
accountability to citizens on the delivery of basic services. In the area of social
protection, the WBG will engage with the authorities through dialogue and AAA
activities to improve the targeting of social assistance. In addition, the CAS will aim at
improving the fiduciary environment and capacities through promoting good
international practice of PFM based upon PEFA type instruments.
59.
The CAS proposes to explicitly recognize areas where there is currently no
agreement between the Bank and the authorities on the introduction of some
features of a full-fledged market economy and the completion of transition, but
where the authorities are willing to learn from international experience, to consider
alternative options and to conduct joint analytical work. While the Bank would
respect existing differences in approaches, it could nevertheless continue a low profile
and opportunistic dialogue in order to reconcile these different approaches in the future.
For instance, although the WIS contains a candid discussion of the shortcomings of the
trade regime and trade practices, the authorities remain committed to the program of
localization enacted by Presidential Decree no PP-386 dated June 22, 2006 aimed at
ensuring a more rapid introduction of new production technologies, wide use of local raw
materials, and increased production of modern competitive goods. Dialogue in this area
in the short term would have to accept the basic premises of the authorities and be
confined to ensuring that protectionist policies are applied efficiently and revised once
some of their main objectives have been achieved. Additionally, the Bank will explore
the interest of the Government for peer exchanges with officials from other countries
facing similar technical or policy challenges to exchange views without the Bank "in the
room". Such an approach has already been successful in public finance reform through
the PEM- PAL (Public Expenditure Management – Peer Assisted Learning) program in
which Uzbek officials have been participating. This could complement the more classic
Bank provision of analytical work as a foundation for dialogue, and sometimes creates a
more candid and open space for authorities to re-visit policy choices or stances.
60.
The CAS will also support continued engagement of Uzbekistan to advance
the CAREC agenda of accelerating economic growth and the raising of living
standards by encouraging economic cooperation in the central region. By fostering
25

and facilitating regional cooperation in transport, trade, energy and other key areas of
mutual interest, the CAREC program helps Central Asian and neighboring countries
realize their immense potential in an increasingly integrated Eurasia. By partnership with
multilateral and other international agencies, the CAREC program is a proactive
facilitator of practical, results-based regional projects and policy initiatives critical to
trade expansion, sustainable development and meeting new challenges.
61.
The CAS will provide an opportunity to contribute to mainstreaming
regional cooperation in Uzbekistan through facilitation or allocation of resources
towards: (i) knowledge and capacity-building to strengthen the understanding of what is
at stake in regional cooperation and the benefits from more effective transport, trade and
energy systems; (ii) the development and implementation of special project initiatives
that address emerging interests or concerns of CAREC countries and that contribute to
broadening and deepening regional cooperation; (iii) contribution to the design and
development of country ownership of sector strategies to guide regional transport, trade
and energy initiatives; and (iv) business development by giving an opportunity to Uzbek
business enterprises to participate in regional cooperation fora.
B. Stakeholder Consultations
62.
During consultations for the preparation of this CAS, 19 the Government
expressed its broad agreement with the proposed priority framework for WBG’s
assistance under the CAS. Discussions with civil society representatives were also very
supportive of the proposed strategy and participants expressed their keen desire to see the
WBG continue and increase its support and activities in Uzbekistan. Overall the
consultations indicated that the new CAS’s focus on basic human needs and improving
living standards is the right one, with many stakeholders also soliciting increased
involvement of the WBG in improving the enabling environment for development of the
private sector.
63.
The consultations also highlighted the growing optimism over future
economic developments in Uzbekistan, which need to be factored into the
implementation of the CAS. The CAS does this through its annual monitoring
framework, as well as the mid-term review scheduled after two years. Consultations with
civil society stressed the importance of involving civil society in the design and
monitoring of projects, and the desire of civil society to be closely involved in the
implementation of World Bank activities. The government has also indicated its
willingness to consult with stakeholders in the course of implementation of the WIS.

19

In preparing the CAS, an outline of key issues and a preliminary results framework were presented and
discussed with the Government, donors, and civil society. CAS consultations were held in Bukhara, Navoi,
Khorezm and Fergana regions, in the Republic of Karakalpakstan and the city of Tashkent. All visits
included meetings with local government officials and with stakeholders’ group comprising of
representatives of civil society organizations, research and academia, entrepreneurs, farmers and media.
Overall the consultations covered about 40 local government officials and about 300 representatives of
various audiences. In addition to face-to-face discussions, the country office designed and implemented an
Internet-based online CAS consultation facility to receive feedback, comments and suggestions for the
widest possible audience.

26

C. Mechanisms for Bank Group Engagement
64.
Proposed lending engagement will focus on: investments (i) that impact directly
on income/quality of life of citizens, particularly the poor: in rural (education, irrigation
and drainage, water supply and sanitation, agriculture credit, health, energy efficiency
and reliability) and urban areas (education, health, solid waste management, wastewater
management) and support furthering/deepening of sectoral reforms; and (ii) that support
Uzbekistan’s contribution to addressing global public goods and climate change issues
(gas flaring, carbon finance) and promotion of the regional cooperation agenda. The
Bank program would include 2-3 projects per year, the size of which will depend on the
amount of IDA resources determined by the Performance Based Allocation (PBA)
system and will be in line with the priorities mentioned above. The RESP II project
(US$68 million 20 ) is presented to the Board together with the CAS. The Bank is
preparing two projects for FY09 delivery, Basic Education – Phase II and Ferghana
Valley Water Resource Management Phase-I. Also under preparation in FY10 are a
Health project and a Small Town Infrastructure project.
65.
Uzbekistan is a blend country. In recent year however, difficulties have been
encountered in using the full IDA allocation. Hence there has been no active
consideration of IBRD borrowing. At this stage, the authorities have not indicated an
interest in borrowing on IBRD terms. If this changes, eligibility for renewed access to
IBRD might be considered during the mid-term review of the CAS, even at GNP per
capita levels below the usual IDA operational cut-off, if significant reform progress is
made and if disbursements accelerate considerably. In this case a creditworthiness
assessment would be necessary.
66.
Proposed non-lending engagement will focus on: (i) key sectoral and cross
sectoral areas where Bank group supports Government’s reform efforts, promote good
governance as a way to improve efficiency and effectiveness and quality of service
delivery and where the ESW is needed to deepen research and strengthen capacity. This
engagement will seek to build on existing activities and develop new approaches towards
dissemination and advocacy of selected governance reforms. For example, the WBG will
seek to engage the government in discussing the issues that underlying low governancerelated Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) indicators. The WBG will
also develop new approaches towards discussing efficiency constraints related to
procurement issues.
67.
Other non-lending engagement would – inter alia - support for the
deepening/strengthening the WIS and building up capacity for monitoring and evaluation
of its impact; programmatic TA in economic evaluation of and prioritization of
investment projects; growth and poverty diagnostics; dialogue on increasing the
efficiency of the protectionist trade regime; AAA activities in social protection to
improve targeting, diagnostic of macroeconomic vulnerability; TA focusing on efficiency
of service delivery and user accountability for efficient and sustainable use of water;
dialogue on business environment; etc.); and (ii) activities that are linked to ongoing or
future regional programs, to exploit synergies and promote regional exchanges and
20

Equivalent of SDR 41.3mn.

27

cooperation.
68.
These AAA activities are geared to advocate and prepare the ground work
for reforms, consistent with the two levels of engagement proposed in the CAS. In
line with lessons learned under the previous CAS, particular attention would be placed on
joint analytical work with the Government, with a focus on providing just in time TA to
maximize the impact of the AAA program, taking into account the lessons of recently
completed AAA impact assessment (Box 3). The pace of progress will, however,
ultimately be determined by the Government’s own agenda and political will.
Box: 3: Assessing the World Bank’s AAA in Uzbekistan
What have been the impacts and effectiveness of the analytic and advisory activities (AAA) that the World Bank has
provided to the Government of Uzbekistan? To answer this question, the Bank’s country office in Tashkent
collaborated with the World Bank Institute Evaluation Group in early 2008 to assess a series of technical assistance
activities and economic and sector work.
On the whole, the Bank’s counterparts rated the AAA favorably. Officials in several ministries noted their appreciation
of the Bank’s analyses, their typically high quality, and the level of knowledge and expertise represented among the
Bank’s staff and consultants involved in the AAA.
Opportunities for improvement related to a desire to make the Bank’s reports as practical as possible as opposed to
complex and theoretical and to ensure that the material is accessible, desirably through brief reports with effective
executive summaries. Clear identification of development objectives was occasionally lacking. In some instances,
objectives identified in concept notes were not evident or well addressed in the completed report. Several reports
overwhelmingly emphasized summary or description of an “existing situation,” which is already likely to be well
known within the government, at the expense of proposed options for change and how to implement them.
Effective distribution of completed reports and their dissemination to promote achievement of the AAA’s development
objectives were identified as major opportunities for improvement. Although the AAA had led to six reports, all
completed between 2006 and mid-2007, none had been formally published or were available in the Public Information
Center in Tashkent or on the Bank’s website. None were internally available to Bank staff at the ImageBank, the
mandatory repository for completed economic and sector work. In several instances, key government officials had
either not received reports pertinent to their responsibilities – or at least had no recollection of having received them.
Such a situation clearly diminishes the Bank’s opportunities to influence policies or reforms.
To strengthen the Bank’s AAA, the review recommended the development of a standard framework that can be used to
develop and implement effective concept notes, an enhanced role for the country office at each stage of the AAA cycle,
substantive involvement of government officials in the development and review of concept notes, and a substantial
increase in attention to publication and dissemination. A systematic postmortem and review of each completed activity
with appropriate government officials about two months after a report’s completion can also improve the impact and
effectiveness of the Bank’s AAA.
Source: World Bank: Assessment of the effectiveness of the AAA assistance in Uzbekistan.

69.
Overall, the CAS lending and AAA program is proposed to be flexible to
allow for adjustment to reflect client demands and the extent of agreement on policy
issues during implementation. At the same time, in response to Government’s decision
to undertake reforms, the country management team will provide appropriate lead-time
for project preparation and sector work to ensure quality and adequate participatory
process.
D. WBG Proposed Activities in Support of the WIS Objectives
70.

The WBG will support government priorities through four main pillars:
•

Enabling environment for shared growth

•

Increasing economic opportunities in rural areas

•

Improving service delivery

•

Managing environmental and global goods provision
28

Pillar 1: Enabling environment for shared growth
71.
Continued sound macroeconomic management is key to sustaining growth and
this CAS pillar will be supported by regular macroeconomic policy dialogue, in
conjunction with the IMF. The Bank will work with the authorities on issues of
macroeconomic vulnerabilities and long-term sustainability through a series of targeted
economic issues notes. One of the key issues in the WIS – the link between economic
growth and the reduction of poverty – could be more closely investigated jointly with the
authorities under a Programmatic Poverty Analysis.
72.
Institutional support for WIS implementation. The WIS contains a large
agenda of structural reforms to promote further and more pro-poor economic
development. However, limited capacity and political constraints will dictate a
sequenced implementation of this agenda as the WIS does not imply a fundamental shift
in economic strategy. The Bank will therefore proceed cautiously in providing support
only where there is clear evidence of progress in implementation. One area in which the
Government and the Bank have established common ground is the need to improve the
efficiency of public resource management. The Bank would provide analytical support
through a Programmatic Public Expenditure Review (PPER), which would provide
support to the authorities in agreed areas of public financial management reform (initially
agreed focus areas include assistance in the Medium-Term Budget Framework (MTBF),
and a review of municipal financing arrangements), and might include benchmarking
through PEFA type assessments. In addition, the WBG proposes to address the
Government’s request for support in implementation of the WIS through a WIS TA,
which will focus on supporting the authorities in improving prioritization, economic
evaluation and costing of public investment projects, for which the WIS provides only
preliminary estimates, through focused ESW and the mobilization of donor resources. In
conjunction with other donors, the WBG will also provide assistance in strengthening
monitoring and evaluation, of the WIS, including through greater stakeholder and
beneficiary group participation. This support would also extend to assisting the
authorities in the design of necessary “mid-course” corrections, as required in the light of
results achieved.
73.
Private Sector Development, Business Environment and Investment Climate.
Further development of the private and financial sectors is crucial for sustained growth
and poverty reduction – as recognized by the WIS. The Government has been reluctant
to borrow for TA, but the WBG will continue to engage in policy dialogue in those areas
in response to the authorities’ interest in understanding policies and regulations that affect
the structural areas of the CPIA. Other AAA work on private and financial sector issues
would be undertaken in close collaboration with the IFC, IMF and the EBRD. In
addition, the WBG will provide support to the development of the private sector in rural
areas by building on the positive experience of the RESP (see paras 84 and 85).

29

74.
For the purposes of private sector development and to encourage informal
activities to move to the formal economy, the Government should continue implementing
reforms aimed at increasing the efficiency of government, as well as sustain the policy of
reducing direct government intervention in entrepreneurial activities and simultaneously
developing the tools for indirect economic regulation based on market principles. The
IFC has devoted substantial resources to help develop the private sector and to advisory
services for project identification as well as capacity building in the financial sector.
Despite these efforts, it has been difficult for IFC to identify bankable projects and attract
foreign investors due to limited foreign investment and the difficulty for private sector to
operate. In light of this, IFC’s activities in the country have been heavily focused on
advisory services, particularly in the financial sector, for capacity building and on
improving the business environment.
75.
Going forward, IFC is increasing its operations in Central Asia in order to support
more competitive businesses, improve access to finance and contribute to the sustainable
and equitable development of the region. In Uzbekistan, IFC focuses on increasing
access to finance for MSMEs, particularly those in rural areas such as the Ferghana
Valley and Karakalpakistan. In addition to supporting the improvement of the business
environment, IFC will strengthen the financial sector by promoting the development of
microfinance, leasing, housing finance and institution-building of local banks and will
seek to create a private microfinance bank with other IFI’s. IFC will also support the
development of an efficient credit bureau system. Furthermore, IFC will seek
opportunities for new investment in agribusiness and general manufacturing such as in
construction, retail and distribution; this may be in the form of more direct investment to
small enterprises. Uzbekistan’s rich oil and gas resources can potentially attract large
FDI if the authorities make progress in introducing transparency in the sector. IFC will
seek to selectively engage with companies in the oil, gas and mining sectors, subject to
public disclosure of revenue payments made to the Government, on a pilot basis, as a
means of encouraging greater overall transparency, and hence investment, in the sector.
76.
As a landlocked country, efficient cross-border trade and trade facilitation
infrastructure, logistics and intergovernmental agreements are important, yet Uzbekistan
is only ranked 129 in the Logistic Performance Index. A regional advisory services
project to promote PPP in infrastructure is being scoped. However such a project would
be contingent on serious commitment on the part of the Government. Finally, in the
financial sector, the Government is working towards the privatization of the NBU and of
Asaka Bank, two major players, whose share in the total assets of the banking system has
reduced in the period of 2000-2007 from 80% to 46%. Should banking privatization
progress during the CAS period, IFC would be prepared to consider advisory services and
financing to support these privatizations.
77.
Under the World Bank/UNODC mentor program, several technical training
workshops were delivered to build desired capacity on AML/CFT standards.
Nevertheless further World Bank AML/CFT technical assistance would be made
available upon request from the authorities, should they wish WBG support to address
issues raised by the FATF regarding compliance of the current Uzbek legal framework

30

with an internationally recognized AML/CFT regime. 21 Progress to re-establish such a
framework would also assist in attracting foreign investment, particularly in the financial
sector, and in so doing would facilitate increased IFC support.
78.
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) has currently no
outstanding exposure in Uzbekistan but could also provide support. Going forward,
MIGA would consider opportunities to support foreign investment in Uzbekistan through
the provision of political risk guarantees. MIGA's assistance will mostly depend on the
country's progress on implementing reforms and foreign investors' demand.
79.
Finally, an Accounting and Auditing Report on the Observance of Standards and
Codes (ROSC) is currently being conducted for Uzbekistan and the report will be
delivered to the government before the end of June 2008. Based on this assessment, the
WBG will engage the Government in the development of an action plan to further
improve accounting and auditing practices in Uzbekistan as this critical for private sector
development, with a view to ultimately consider adoption of the International Financial
Reporting Standards (IFRS) including International Accounting Standards (IAS).
80.
Promoting Good Governance. The key governance challenges in Uzbekistan lie
in weak mechanisms for interaction between the Government, private sector and civil
society, centralized decision making and control; low transparency and instances of selfcensorship. The strength of the state combined with the lack of checks and balances
suggests that changing such an environment will be a slow process. However the
authorities have demonstrated that where poor governance can be shown to be an
impediment to efficiency there is a clear willingness to improve governance. Some of the
most important examples are recent improvements in PFM through introduction of a
Treasury, and in the business environment through the simplification of regulations,
which should also lead to a decline in the unofficial payments faced by SMEs engaged in
those procedures 22 . In addition the successful engagement of the authorities on
governance issues in the area of primary health care and in education through the creation
of mechanisms for parent feedback and influence on the running of schools shows how it
is possible to incorporate governance issues into sectoral dialogue.
81.
Thus the governance agenda can be supported through on-going projects and
directly in areas where the government is willing to borrow for sector investment,
through design features of the projects themselves. In addition to project design
governance issues can be addressed through stakeholders’ involvement, TA and dialogue
maintained during project preparation and throughout the project supervision period.

21

In early 2007, three Decrees (Presidential Decrees of 12 Jan 2007; 20 Feb. 2007 and 27 April 2007) were
enacted suspending the obligation for financial institutions to report certain transactions to a financial
intelligence unit until the year 2013, while in February 2008 an "Amnesty" Decree was enacted imposing
penalties on anyone who questions the legality or origin of financial resources deposited in an Uzbek
financial institution. Although adopted with the intention of improving public confidence in the banking
system, the effect of these decrees was to prompt the Financial Action Task Force to post a public
statement on its website on February 28, 2008 (http://www.fatf-gafi.org/dataoecd/16/26/40181037.pdf)
expressing serious concerns that these Decrees "effectively repeal the AML/CFT regime."
22
Indeed, the IFC SME survey shows an overall decline in the unofficial payments, in particular for those
procedures where reforms have been undertaken.

31

82.
There will be engagement on governance issues through a number of vehicles.
The first involves a focused dialogue with the authorities on measures that address poor
governance outcomes. The dialogue will need to be based on exposure to international
experience, including through such instruments as PEMPAL and other peer-learning
tools. In particular, it is proposed that Internal Audit and/or procurement Community of
Practitioners events could be organized under the PEM-PAL program in Uzbekistan.
83.
The second will be to build upon the detailed governance assessment in the
Primary Health sector which was carried out with strong support and excellent
collaboration from the authorities (Box 4). The WBG will continue its intensive work
with the Government focused on improvement of efficiency of public service provision
through existing “governance entry points” where there is real Government ownership,
prompted by concerns over poverty reduction and persistent socioeconomic inequalities,
and by the recognition and acceptance that governance improvements can clearly
improve efficiency; and greater accountability would significantly improve quality of
service delivery. This approach would include (i) involving civil society in monitoring
efforts for social services provision; (ii) promoting managerial flexibility and
management objectives in state-owned providers of social services, as well as rule-based
approach (improve corporate governance of providers); (iii) expanding private provision
of social services and client choice, where appropriate; and (iv) continued data collection
and dialogue on business environment through IFC-PEP.
Pillar II: Increasing economic opportunities in rural areas
84.
Rural development. Agriculture is an important sector of the Uzbek economy,
accounting for 24 percent of GDP, 33 percent of foreign exchange receipts, and 41
percent of employment. This pillar is aligned with the WIS’ calls for investment into
rural services for reducing rural poverty and overcoming regional disparities. It will also
support the Shirkat23 reform which significantly improved the farm incentive structure,
but also increased rural unemployment, and created new needs for the newly independent
farmers to gain access to skills, inputs and credit. Two major obstacles prevent the
Shirkat reform achieving its full economic benefits:
− The state procurement system for cotton and wheat creates important
disincentives for cost effectiveness and productivity improvements 24 . As a
consequence, cotton yields have stagnated in Uzbekistan since independence;
− Demand from the newly independent leasehold farmers for access to services
such as extension and medium term finance to purchase agricultural equipment
far outstrips available supply, although leasing, in particular, has registered a
significant development in the past years.

23

Shirkats are cooperative farms which took over the management of the Soviet-era collective farms. The
recent reform caused important structural changes to agriculture and resulted in the establishment of around
200,000 new independent farmers with an average size of 15-20 ha each. The total land area managed by
the new farmers is around 2 million ha, from the restructuring of 1,600 collective farms. Non-tradable
leases of up to 50 years are inheritable although full private ownership of land is not yet allowed.
24
See for example Country Economic Memorandum, 2003; Policy Note on Cotton Taxation, June 2005.

32

Box: 4: Uzbekistan – Undertaking Governance Work in a Difficult Environment
The ISN identified governance as an important focus of the Bank’s analytical and advisory work in Uzbekistan during the
interim period. The governance study has focused on the health sector – more specifically, on primary health care (PHC) at
the local level; a sector selected by the Government itself, where reforms were being implemented and where the Bank and
other donors have actively supported such efforts in the context of the Health I and II projects. It was decided that two
oblasts, one representing an advanced reformer (Ferghana), and a later reformer (Samarkand), would be the focus of the
analysis; it was also agreed that a survey as to the quality of service delivery would also be undertaken.
To assure the government’s buy-in of the findings and recommendations, the study was conducted in close collaboration
with the authorities at both the central and local levels. In particular, the Ministries of Health and Finance (including their
subordinated departments at the oblast and rayon levels) actively supported Bank missions and the surveys conducted in
August and September 2007. The Bank regularly informed the central ministries and local government of its agenda and
activities, and formed an inter-ministerial working group comprising government officials in Finance and Health to discuss
the relevant governance issues. Mission members held a number of consultations with government stakeholders (service
providers, health care managers, regulators and policy makers), and invited local government officials to participate in field
missions. The team also discussed findings and highlighted issues with the central ministries at the end of each visit.
Preliminary findings of the assessment indicate that implementation of the (ongoing) health reforms over the past several
years has had a positive impact on governance. Continued government commitment to the comprehensive health reform
agenda, combined with the implementation of treasury modernization (piloted in Samarkand in 2006), has improved the
effectiveness of local government in the provision of health services. The reforms have increased the budgetary allocation
to health facilities, and thereby the availability of medical supplies, equipment, and repair and maintenance. The
introduction of per-capita financing and autonomy in financial management for rural primary health facilities has improved
funding predictability and accountability in management and the use of public funds. The introduction of a modern
treasury system has increased reliability in the flows of funds, reduced delays in cash releases, and improved transparency
and financial reporting. Further, staff training and the introduction of a development account for incentives and material
techniques has improved incentives among health workers and their performance. The surveys’ findings also confirm that
consumers are generally satisfied with the reforms: health service has improved in term of access, quality, and
affordability, especially in areas where health reform is more advanced (Ferghana and the rural area). Health workers have
indicated they are more content and motivated because they have been provided with updated skills and the necessary
medical supplies, equipment and good infrastructure; staffs have also responded to being acknowledged and rewarded for
good performance.
Source: Assessment of Governance Constraints to Health Service Delivery, World Bank, 2008.

85.
The Bank’s approach in the CAS will be to demonstrate ways in which rural
incomes, in particular, can be effectively increased, through a variety of pilot
interventions in support of pricing and marketing reforms in the cotton sector, enhanced
credit to rural enterprises and farmers, the development of microfinance through the
existing banking system and the exploration of alternative rural employment and earning
possibilities, particularly for the country's population of unemployed youth. The Rural
Enterprises Support project (RESP I) brought important benefits in the project areas
because it complemented the Shirkat reform by providing farmers with credit, access to
finance, and improved irrigation and rehabilitation infrastructure. The newly independent
farmers significantly increased their independence from the state by becoming the owners
of farm equipment and becoming less dependent on State machine tractor parks for their
mechanization. This proved an effective boost in the process of privatization which
produced clear results in terms of increased yields and productivity (see FAO evaluation
of RESP Project). These pilot interventions will be accompanied by AAA targeted at
agricultural reform to continue the intensive policy dialogue carried out under the
existing RESP and the proposed scaled up Second Rural Enterprise Support project
(RESP II) in FY08 to significantly enlarge the project area.
86.
Water resource management, irrigation and drainage. Consistent with the
WIS objectives of “improving the system and increasing the efficiency of water resource
management including investment in land improvement”, and “development of an
integrated sustainable water management system for supply of irrigation water”, the Bank
33

will support financing of projects that will build upon the achievements of the Drainage
Irrigation and Wetlands Improvement project and that would rehabilitate and modernize
irrigation systems, support more cost-effective supply and use of irrigation water,
improve on farm land management, and introduce modern technology and institutional
development for improved irrigation. Bank-supported projects, starting with the
irrigation and drainage component of the proposed RESP II in FY08 and proposed
Ferghana Valley Water Resource Management Phase-I project in FY09 will continue to
further strengthen the capacity of water user associations (WUAs) and to introduce more
efficient irrigation practices and mechanisms of accountability and good governance.
Pillar III: Improving service delivery
87.
Household survey data analysis suggest that significant declines in poverty
reduction can be achieved by a combination of policies that encourage economic growth
(and thus enable productive job opportunities) while at the same time increasing the
efficiency and effectiveness of the delivery of public services. Despite Uzbekistan's
relative success in the social sectors, the WIS highlights the importance of further
improving service delivery and ensuring adequate financing and promotion of costeffectiveness in service provision (reform of municipal utilities and health and education
financing) . Lending interventions in the health, education and municipal services sectors
would aim at saving public resources through creating incentives at the service delivery
level and strengthening local accountability and sectoral governance, thus providing
support to the Government in reaching the above WIS objectives. An important feature
of all WBG interventions in this area will be to demonstrate through concrete results the
central role of better governance and accountability in improving service delivery.
88.
Municipal services sector development and financing. Support in the
municipal sector is envisaged for targeted investment in the areas of solid waste
management, water and wastewater management and, possibly, to promote communitybased heritage protection25. Municipal sector support activities would be designed and
implemented in a programmatic manner, drawing upon advisory sector work on the
management of municipal services and infrastructure. To the extent that an environment
conducive to PPPs develops, IFC could also become involved in financing investments in
this sector.
89.
In rural water supply and sanitation, the Bank will build upon the ongoing
Water Supply, Sanitation and Health project, that supported the provision of safe drinking
water along with improved hygiene education for the Republic of Karakalpakstan and
Khorezm Oblast, and strengthened institutional capacity for management, operation and
financial performance of the regional water supply and sewage utilities. A review of
rural infrastructure and communal services is expected to establish a new approach to
sustainable decentralized basic service delivery in rural areas with a particular focus on
supporting/expanding rural communal services in Karakalpakstan as a part of the Aral
Sea Initiative.

25

The Bank will also explore additional income generating possibilities in cultural tourism following the
successful implementation of the TFESSD financed pilot community-based cultural tourism and heritage
protection activities in FY05-08.

34

90.
Starting in 1996, the Government’s health sector reforms, supported by Bank’s
Health I and II projects, focused on rural primary care aimed aims to shift the system’s
focus from secondary care to primary care. The reforms included restructuring of health
facilities and rationalizing the health system; introducing the role of general practitioner,
and increasing financial incentives to health workers. These were implemented along
with the reform of SVP financing mechanisms. Implemented initially in only three pilot
oblasts, the Government is now rolling out the reforms nationally and they will cover the
entire country by end-2008. The reforms have improved governance and accountability
in the health sector. SVPs are now the first point of contact in the health system and the
rural population has expressed increased satisfaction with services compared with three
years ago.
91.
The Government is committed to continue strengthening primary care, but
recognizes that to reap further efficiency gains, restructuring of the hospital sector needs
to be undertaken. Future assistance to the sector envisages a combination of investment
operations, technical assistance and analytical work to support deepening of ongoing
reforms in the sectors focusing on secondary care, improvements in medical education
and quality of care, implementation of drug policy and implementation of a multi-sectoral
public health strategy. Further technical assistance and analytical work in the areas of
nutrition, food safety and hospital reform including the role of private sector in health is
envisaged. The development of PPPs in the hospital sector will be reviewed. Finally, it is
envisaged to provide further support during the CAS period for implementing a multisectoral public health strategy focusing on areas of nutrition, food-safety and HIV/AIDS
through investment and analytical work. This would include strengthening the regional
response to infectious diseases control through scaling up existing and future regional
investment and analytical operations.
92.
The proposed CAS program of support in the education sector will focus on
enhancement of quality and strengthening governance in the sector. The Basic Education
project started in 2007 supports the Government’s new basic education program, which
addresses the previous bias in the provision of funding for education towards specialized
secondary education and includes important policy innovations such as teacher incentives
and greater involvement of locally elected school boards. Further lending support for the
sector during the CAS period is not excluded, but would be decided on the basis of initial
results achieved under the recently started project. AAA is envisaged in support of the
Government’s priority regarding the need to improve vocational education and training
and better align it to the existing and future needs of the job market.
93.
In the area of social protection, the WBG will offer to work closely with the
authorities to further strengthen targeting. The first years of the proposed CAS will be
limited to analytical work, and only in case of mutual agreement the Bank may consider
preparing a lending operation in this area.
Pillar IV: Environmental management, disaster risk management and global goods
provision
94.
Environmental Management. As highlighted in the country’s National
Environmental Action Plan, adopted in 1998, and subsequent environmental strategies
developed for the country, the most important environmental challenges confronting

35

Uzbekistan are the pollution of soil, air, and water resources; reduced flora and fauna;
and inadequate management of industrial, hazardous, and municipal solid waste. In
addition, low water use efficiency has caused widespread waterlogging and soil
salinization. In recognition of these challenges confronting Uzbekistan, the Bank will
support the Government’s two new programs promoting environmental sustainability: the
Environmental Security Strategy of the Republic of Uzbekistan and the National Strategy
for Renewable Energy Sources.
95.
In the context of AAA, the Bank will work with Government and other
stakeholders to identify specific areas in these strategies that can be supported in the
coming years. Cooperation modalities explored will include World Bank loans and
Global Environment Facility (GEF) and carbon finance resources. In the case of the
latter it is notable that there is very strong demand from government officials to build on
previous work on carbon finance26. Second, building on the Bank’s earlier involvement
addressing poorly managed municipal solid waste, and an IDF Grant in strengthening the
country's environmental management institutions, the Bank will consider providing TA to
strengthen the management of industrial and hazardous waste (industrial, medical) and
identify investment needs. Third, the Bank may also support the Government in
addressing threats to public health and the environment from persistent organic pollutants
(POPs) Uzbekistan would be eligible for GEF grant funds for the preparation and
implementation of a plan to manage POPs if it decided to ratify the Stockholm
Convention on POPs.
96.
Disaster Risk Management, Weather Forecasting, and Adaptation to Climate
Change. It is estimated that two thirds of Uzbekistan’s population and economy are at
risk from at least two disasters, such as earthquakes, floods, droughts or landslides – the
poor being disproportionately vulnerable to them. Climate change is expected to
exacerbate natural disasters associated with hydro-meteorological conditions, with
associated damages particularly impacting the rural economy.
Since reducing
environmental disasters is key to reducing macro-economic risks and improving welfare,
the Bank will support activities to prevent, mitigate and adapt to disaster and climate
change risks, through AAA and mainstreaming in investment projects. These may
include drought proofing of agricultural activities, modernizing “Hydromet” services,
and reducing financial vulnerabilities of the economy and the population to the adverse
impacts of disasters and climate change through market-based risk transfer mechanisms
(such as catastrophe insurance and weather derivatives).
97.
The Bank will also support the authorities’ interest in achieving energy
efficiency, and developing pilot renewable energy investments. The introduction of
energy-efficient technology would contribute to helping industry meet environmental
challenges and will assist in reducing losses in the electricity and gas systems and support
increase of the financial viability of the electricity and gas utilities, in a socially
responsible manner. Loss reduction would reduce the need of further tariff increases, and

26

An IEG assessment in January 2007 gave the Bank’s work on carbon finance the highest rating of all the
ESW assessed. The government officials were consistent in their praise of the Bank’s assistance with
carbon finance as well as the quality and practicality of this assistance.

36

coupled with the design of an adequate social safety net will increase affordability and
will alleviate the financial burden notably for the poor.
98.
Global Public Goods. During the period of the ISN, the Bank strengthened its
outreach and capacity building program on carbon finance related matters. During the
CAS period, the Bank will work with the Government and project entities to develop the
carbon projects that have been accepted and bring them to closure through signature of an
Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement. While opportunities under the CDM
mechanism are presently limited by the Kyoto commitment period and international
uncertainties, the Bank’s Carbon Partnership Facility (CPF) 27 provides significant
opportunities in Uzbekistan to develop sectoral or programmatic carbon projects,
particularly in the energy sector.
99.
In partnership with agencies such as the World Health Organization (WHO),
UNICEF, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and others, the
positive engagement with the Uzbek authorities experienced throughout the ISN on
fighting communicable diseases will continue during the CAS period (e.g., avian
influenza, animal health, TB and HIV/AIDS).
Regional Cooperation
100. Specifically during the period of the CAS, it is envisaged to support a number of
activities through CAREC (Transport and Trade Facilitation, Energy), or in coordination
with CAREC, in the case of some CAREC second tier activities such as regional public
goods including cross-border environmental issues (water-energy and climate change
impacts), communicable diseases, and disaster management. On water, energy and
related regional issues the following activities are contemplated: (i) an Independent
Assessment of the Regional Impacts of Vakhsh River Basin Development (to start in
May 2008), (ii) An Action Plan for Improving Weather and Climate Service Delivery
(Hydromet) in Central Asia (started in March 2008), (iii) A Roadmap for Adaptation to
Climate Change in the Amu Darya River Basin (to start in May 2008), (iv) possibly, a
Regional Disaster Risk Management and Adaptation Program.
VI.

MONITORING IN A RESULTS FRAMEWORK

101. The Bank’s AAA and project supervision and preparation work during the initial
CAS period will be closely tied to the results framework contained in Annex 1. Table 4
summarizes the main elements of the results-based framework agreed between the WBG
and the GoU. It lists the main development outcomes which the CAS aims to influence
over the longer term, the principal problems or challenges in reaching those outcomes,
and the shorter term outcomes that the CAS is designed to contribute to directly over the
period of its implementation.

27

The CPF was approved by World Bank’s Board on September 25, 2007 and takes a step towards
implementation of large-scale and long-term greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction activities
worldwide. It is also envisaged that the CPF will include a Carbon Asset Development Fund to support
program development and preparation of necessary “carbon” documents.

37

Table 4: Summary of the Results Based Framework
Main Country Goals
Principal Problems
Goal I: Enabling environment for shared growth
Maintain prudent
• Capacity constraints, both
macroeconomic
institutional and technical
management and make
• Inadequate Monitoring and
growth more pro-poor
Evaluation system for WIS
implementation
More effective service
• Lack of transparency in PFM
provision
• Insufficient accountability to citizens
for the quality of public service
delivery
Improve the business
• Substantial state control over
environment
economy
Goal II: Increase income and economic opportunities in rural areas
Increase agricultural
• Cotton and wheat – dominant crops
productivity and
and subject to state order system
farmers incomes
• Stagnating cotton yields
• Poor rural financial services
• High net taxes on agriculture
• Poor state of irrigation system

Outcomes to be Influenced by WBG Support
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•

•

•
•
•

PFM reform is informed by good international
practice by PEFA type assessments
Civil society has better access to information on
public services
Government implements a system of screening
legislation for its impact on the private sector

Increase incomes for rural population resulting from
increased productivity of farming though:

•
Goal III: Improve service delivery
Increased access to safe • System deterioration
water
• Incomplete coverage
• Unsustainable financing

Macroeconomic policy formulation is informed by
enhanced analytical research and international
experience
The Government is equipped with a M&E system

Improved irrigation and drainage system
Improved soil quality as measured by:
Include the international price of by-products to
establish the state procurement price for cotton
Increased capacity and financial viability of the
WUAs
Improved access to safe and sustainable water
services through technical (upgrading treatment
plants, replacing pipes), financial and institutional
measures
Sustainable plan adopted for municipal water
services
More efficient financing mechanisms
Improved health in targeted areas through better
equipped health clinics with better training
Improved access to fortified foods
Improved learning in targeted areas through new
teaching materials and resources for the teachers
as well as improvement of teacher training system

Inefficient hospitals
•
Poor health equipment, practices and
•
training
• Poor diet and nutrition
•
Increase access to
• Teachers have inadequate supplies of
•
quality basic education
teaching materials and resources and
do not use advanced teaching
technologies widely enough
• Goal IV: Environmental management, disaster risk management and global goods provision
More efficient use of
• Excessive water use and water
• Rehabilitation of irrigation & drainage works &
natural resources
logging in agriculture
increased water use efficiency; strengthening of
river basin organizations & WUAs
• Uncontrolled municipal solid waste
Improved disaster risk
and industrial waste disposal
• Reduced environmental risks from poorly
management
managed municipal and industrial waste, & POPs
• Energy inefficiency and emission of
greenhouse gases
• Mobilize carbon finance resources in support of
energy efficiency & loss reduction (incl. gas
• Vulnerability to disaster, weather
flaring)
risks and climate change
• Strengthen capabilities to prevent, mitigate and
adapt to disaster risks and climate change
Improved health
indices particularly in
rural population

102. In addition, for each ongoing and new project, a monitoring framework will be
designed that specifies how progress will be measured, how implementation risks

38

particularly in the fiduciary area will be mitigated, and how the benefits of Bank lending
for the people of Uzbekistan will be verified. The results framework will be further
refined during the course of CAS implementation. Progress on results, measured against a
set of target outcomes and implementation milestones, as well as the lending program for
the next FY, will be reviewed with the Government at the time of the annual CPPR.
103. Building on work undertaken in the context of the existing portfolio, the resultsbased approach of the CAS will focus attention in all interventions on defining and
achieving measurable outcomes. In this regard, the CAS will contribute to improved
monitoring of service delivery standards, greater accountability at the point of delivery
and feedback to allow for corrections and policy improvements. The WBG will seek to
involve civil society as much as possible in its monitoring and evaluation work, making
use of social and beneficiary assessments and consulting with all stakeholders on project
outcomes. The focus on results will be supported by institutional support for the WIS
implementation. This aims to build capacity in the Government for monitoring and
evaluation, including through greater stakeholder and beneficiary group participation. It
will also act as an instrument for the monitoring of outcomes under the CAS. The WBG
will leverage its capacity building work in this area with additional donor funds.
104. The achievements of the results matrix will be discussed with the Government on
an annual basis during the annual Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR)
(carried out jointly with ADB during the last two years). The mid-term review would be
another opportunity to review progress towards agreed results, and also to consider any
appropriate adjustments to the CAS. To facilitate this process, the Bank will engage in
ongoing training and capacity building of key Government counterparts. Monitoring of
portfolio performance will be done through two main channels. Firstly, the established
regular meetings of a Joint Technical Working Group between the Government and the
Bank’s Country Office will provide day to day support in resolving systemic and project
specific issues. Secondly, the Bank will also seek to consult at regular intervals with
project beneficiaries and wider stakeholders on the outcomes of its interventions,
including the involvement of NGOs. Such an iterative process is necessary to ensure
improvements in several areas such as establishing a reliable baseline for monitoring.
VII.

POTENTIAL RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES

Fiduciary Risks
105. Uzbekistan made some good progress in public financial management
through the introduction of a modern treasury system, which will greatly improve
financial reporting and transparency for the use of public resources. With support
from an IDF grant, the Ministry of Finance is also implementing a project aimed at
establishing an institutional framework for modern internal audit function. Uzbekistan,
however, has a centralized power structure with few checks and balances. The CFAA of
2004 indicated that that there were significant risks that budget funds may not be used for
their intended purposes due to the fragmentation and opacity of the budget. While there
has been some progress in reducing the fragmentation of the budget, and certain increase
in transparency since then these problems persist. It will be a challenging task for the
39

Bank to implement any broad-based reforms in improving governance and accountability.
Nevertheless the active Uzbek participation in PEM-PAL activities and the moves
towards reform of the budget and treasury systems indicate that engagement through a
PEFA (Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability) type assessment, under the
PPER, could be productive and move forward the public finance reform agenda in a
manner consistent with the authorities’ vision. The CAS strategy also proposes to engage
the government in improving financial management and governance at sector and project
levels, involving the civil society to play some role, where feasible.
106. Fiduciary risks remain high due to weak public finance management
capacity and inadequate accountability mechanisms, including particularly the lack
of an effective independent external audit function in public expenditure
management. At the project level, the CFAA noted that the key financial management
weaknesses are weak budgeting and internal control structures within PIU’s (and also
public bodies), which is partly the result of the lack of skilled staff. Nevertheless despite
these weaknesses, project financial management arrangements have been judged to be
satisfactory. In addition, the 2003 CPAR noted that the public procurement framework in
Uzbekistan suffers from a multiplicity of uncoordinated regulations, a lack of
transparency in the whole process and in particular in bid opening, with a large potential
for petty corruption. Moreover one of the major obstacles to transparent procurement has
been the process of price verification of winning tenders.
107. The WBG will continue to use and improve the current systems to implement
on-going projects. Financial management arrangements for new projects would build on
the lessons of existing practices but would be cautious in any move to make use of
country systems. Such a move would be gradual, but would accelerate depending on
demonstrable commitment by the authorities to strengthen public financial management
systems and accountability mechanisms. The CFAA and the CPAR identified broad
weaknesses in public financial management and procurement arrangements which
indicate high fiduciary risk. They also identified broad (and probably impractical) reform
agendas with little government ownership. Nevertheless, progress is being made with
budgeting and financial management under the reforms linked to the establishment of the
Treasury.
108. The WBG will focus on building in accountability mechanisms at a sectoral
and project level, identifying issues of efficiency which can be addressed through
greater accountability (as was shown by the governance assessment of the health
sector).
Thus Project implementation arrangements would seek to strengthen
procurement procedures and to link project activities with development outcomes. The
WBG will also develop new approaches towards discussing efficiency constraints related
to procurement issues as part of its efforts to engage the Government on the importance
of public procurement reform and the need to bring domestic practices more closely in
line with accepted international standards. In the meantime, an internal Government
circular has been developed with input from the WBG to try and smooth the process of
contract registration and improve the cooperation between the PIUs and the Agency for
Foreign Economic Relations, responsible for reviewing all foreign contracts with public
entities.

40

Risks to Development Effectiveness
109. The effectiveness of development assistance in Uzbekistan depends strongly
on the maintenance of a good dialogue and common understandings between the
Bank Group and the authorities in the agreed focus areas of the CAS. A loss of such
common understanding as a result of a stalling of even the gradualist reform process
could potentially reduce the effectiveness of assistance in achieving development goals.
To ensure the development effectiveness of the proposed program, all projects are
assessed through a results framework and by beneficiary monitoring. The WBG will
closely monitor CAS implementation and in case of adverse developments in broad
policy fields or in project specific areas, which may put at risk the development
effectiveness of the program, will reassess the level and focus of its engagement. Among
current areas of concern in this area is the impact of recent Decrees that are seen as
moving the legal framework of Uzbekistan away from an internationally recognized
AML/CTF regime and has the potential to cause difficulties in international banking
relationships and to limit the range of foreign investment available to the country,
including from the IFC.
Exogenous Risks
110. The continued tensions over the use and exchange of energy and water have
the potential to undermine trade and economic cooperation between Uzbekistan and
its neighbors. In particular concerns about the use of water by Tajikistan and
Turkmenistan could lead to a deterioration of relations. A fall in regional growth and the
potential outlet for rural migration could feed tensions and become linked to growing
political extremism (or at least the fear of such extremism by the government). The result
would likely be increasing the isolation of the Uzbek government. Further risks include a
deterioration of the security situation in Afghanistan and the increased trade in drugs.
111. Uzbekistan’s vulnerability to exogenous economic shocks.
Economic
performance over the past few years has been strong. Nevertheless, the reliance of the
country on high commodity prices, as well as on the demand for goods and labor from its
rapidly growing partners, whose continued high growth is itself highly dependent on
continued high commodity prices, represents a potential risk for the future.
112. The existence of exogenous risks could threaten internal political stability
and security. In addition to presenting a direct threat, these tensions may generate a
government’s response in which moves towards economic freedom are reversed, and
political activity focuses on maintaining power and security rather than economic
development.
113. Managing risks will require that the Bank Group work cooperatively with
the Uzbek Government to encourage Uzbekistan’s continued international
engagement and integration. Given the very high level of uncertainty in the region, this
CAS is perhaps best seen as setting out a broad engagement strategy rather than as a
detailed blueprint for Bank Group support, which would in any case imply a return to the
failed conditionality of the past.
Natural Disaster Risks

41

114. Uzbekistan has faced severe natural disasters in the recent past—drought of
2000/2001 affected 1.1 million and an earthquake in 1992 affected about 50,000 (EMDAT 2008). About two thirds of the population as well as about two thirds the GDP are
at economic risk from two or more hazards (WB/Columbia University 2005). The
previous CAS progress report draws several lessons pertinent to Disaster Risk
management (DRM) in the country, for example, the Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and
Health (RWSP), which was used effectively as a tool for disaster mitigation during the
drought of 2000/2001, and in mitigating the environmental consequences of the Aral Sea
disaster. The current CAS has recognized these lessons and has clear linkages to the
agenda of DRM in Uzbekistan through several projects such as the Drainage, Irrigation
and Wetlands Improvement (Phase I) project, and new AAAs such as the Disaster Risk
Mitigation and Adaptation, Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation.

42

ANNEX 1: Results Matrix
Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

CAS Outcomes/Measurement
indicators

Milestones

Bank program

PILLAR 1. Enabling environment for shared growth
Institutional support for WIS implementation and Promoting Good Governance
Maintain macroeconomic
stability

Contain inflation:
Baseline (IMF): 12% (2007)
(Official government figure
is 6.8%)
Target: 6 % (2008-2011)

Reduce poverty rate:
Baseline: 25% (2006)
Target: 20% (2010)

Increase the Efficiency of
Public Financial
Management

More Effective Service
Provision

Capacity constraints,
both institutional and
technical
Limited exposure to
broad international
experience
Shortcomings in
assessment of nonincome dimensions of
poverty
Inadequate Monitoring
and Evaluation system
for the WIS
implementation

Lack of transparency in
PFM
Insufficient
accountability to
citizens for the quality
of public service
delivery

Macroeconomic policy
formulation is informed by
enhanced analytical research and
international experience and
shows ability to respond
adequately to internal or external
shocks

Constructive dialog with the
authorities takes place on
macroeconomic policies to ensure that
aggregate demand is consistent with
macroeconomic stability, and potential
external shocks to the economy

The Government is equipped
with a M&E system for assessing
implementation of the WIS and
adapting it where necessary.
Aspects of Public Financial
Management reform process are
benchmarked by PEFA type
assessments
Increased transparency in the
utilization of public resources as
measured by:

43

Growth vulnerability assessment,
under the Programmatic CEM
AAA
Dialogue on Poverty trends AAA

The government provides timely
access to official statistic data and
carries out joint analytical work with
the WBG

The Government adopts
techniques consistent with
international practice in
carrying out and analyzing
Household Budget and Labor
Force Surveys

Core Macroeconomic Dialogue

WIS monitoring framework is
developed and implementation started;
Improved statistical indicators
integrated in WIS M&E process

Agreement is reached on
benchmarking elements of the PFM
system and the reform process,
including a possibility of a joint PEFA
assessment
Treasury uses good practice tools to
manage expenditures

Dialogue on Social Protection
targeting AAA
IDF grant on Monitoring and
Evaluation (ongoing)
Just in time assistance in WIS
implementation support
Partnership: IMF, UNDP, ADB

Programmatic PER

Guidance and TA support for
Treasury implementation

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

Low transparency, high
secrecy and selfcensorship

CAS Outcomes/Measurement
indicators

Milestones

• Regular publication of summary
Budget implementation reports
Government implements first
stages of Internal audit reform
documented in a coherent
Internal audit strategy based on
good international audit
practices

Government adopts and begins
to implement formal economic
appraisal methodology for large
investment projects
Government adopts new
accountability mechanisms on a
pilot basis as a result of common
work on Governance challenges
in service delivery

Development of Internal Audit
Strategy and a comprehensive internal
audit manual
Training activities to enhance capacity
for modern internal audit techniques
tested through pilot audits
Up to 20 officials exposed to and
obtain knowledge of economic
appraisal techniques for investment
projects.

Primary Health Care Governance
assessment findings are widely
disseminated and set of actions to
implement the findings are agreed and
implemented

Dialogue on Governance
challenges progresses and is
gradually extended from sector
specific to broader common
issues

Governance assessment carried out in
at least one other key public service
delivery sector and results are
disseminated

Civil society has better access to
information on in a least on
major public service

Results of the Primary Health Care
Governance assessment and other
Governance assessments are publicly
available

44

Bank program

IDF Grant on External and
Internal Audit (ongoing) in
conjunction with the PPER (see
also above)
Just in time assistance in WIS
implementation support

Dialogue on Good Governance to
improve public service delivery
AAA (e.g. Education/Hospitals
and/or municipal services sectors)
Follow-up dialogue based on
results of Governance assessment
in the Primary Health sector
Partnership: IMF, UNDP, ADB

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

CAS Outcomes/Measurement
indicators

Milestones

Bank program

Private Sector Development, Business Environment and Investment Climate
Improve the business
environment
Increase investment-to-GDP
ratio
Baseline: 18.6% GDP
(2006)
Target: 24% GDP (2010)
Increase share of SME in
GDP
Baseline: 42.1% GDP
(2006)
Target: 52% GDP (2010)
Increase share of private
sector
Baseline: 45% GDP (2006)
Target: >45% GDP (2010)

Substantial state control
over economy
Unstable and nontransparent regulatory
and tax environment
Significant de facto
controls over financial
system, cash
transactions, foreign
currency convertibility
Low public confidence
in banks, in spite of
recent improvements,
partly due to their
performance of nonbanking functions.

Low risk management
in banks

Government adopts and
implements a system of
screening legislation for its
impact on the private sector and
at least 4 pieces of legislation
approved through the new
system as measured by:
• SMEs report easier compliance
with tax legislation and less
harassment from the authorities,
as measured by the IFC BEE
survey
Enterprises and financial
institutions have greater control
in financing, as measured by
SME survey
Government policy is informed
by agreed assessments of
financial sector performance

Laws, regulations, and
infrastructure generally
sound, but
implementation weak
Weak accounting in
SMEs limits quality of
information for banks

45

Introduction a screening mechanism
for policy proposals affecting
businesses
Reducing tax compliance costs for
businesses through changes in Tax
Code
Law prepared in consultation with the
IFC PEP team “On Permits” is passed
Law prepared in consultation with the
IFC PEP team “On Credit
Information” passed
Annual SME surveys are conducted

Private sector investments by
IFC.

Mandatory deposits of cash receipts by
enterprises are relaxed; the distinction
between cash and non-cash payments
is reduced
Non-banking functions (including tax
collection and non-essential reporting
requirements) are eliminated in
practice, as measured by SME survey
Action plan to further improve
accounting and auditing practices is
developed and implementation started
Increase exposure to international best
practices in risk management,
microfinance, and/or credit scoring
Finalization of plan to bring strategic
investor into Asaka Bank and
announce tender

Follow-up dialogue based on
results of Accounting and
Auditing ROSC (active)
IFC PEP TA on leasing, financial
infrastructure and housing finance
(active)
IFC advisory services on Banking
Association on its credit bureau,
and with the Insurance Supervisor
on an insurance glossary – might
want to confirm with IFC.
Dialogue on Financial Sector
reform and development
Partnership: IMF, EBRD

IFC PEP TA on BEE (active)
Dialogue on Private Sector
reform and development
Partnership: IMF, EBRD, IFC

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

CAS Outcomes/Measurement
indicators

Milestones

Bank program

Low supervision
capacity for insurance
sector
Potential program: IFC’s support of state bank privatization program, IFC’s involvement in housing finance TA, IFC investment projects oil and gas subject to disclosure of
revenue payments made to the government, WB/IFC support for introduction of PPP in infrastructure AAA
PILLAR II INCREASE INCOME AND ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES IN RURAL AREAS
Rural Enterprise Support project
Cotton and wheat –
Increased incomes of rural
RESP I (active) and II
dominant crops and
Increase productivity of
population through:
subject to state order
agriculture
Support to build capacity of the newly Agriculture review ESW
system
1. Increased productivity of
independent farmers in seven
Stagnating cotton yields
Increase farmers’ incomes
Small towns/rural communal
farming in a total area of 2
provinces
Poor rural financial
services project (FY10-11)
million ha as measured by:
Yields of cotton, wheat,
services
Achievement of accreditation of one
potatoes, fruits and
High net taxes on
IFC 1) agribusiness through
food laboratory
vegetables, and silage corn
agriculture
banks, possibly with IDA support;
Food safety certification
2) support for access to
Rehabilitation of irrigation and
obstacle to export of
microfinance in rural areas; 3)
• Improved irrigation and
drainage facilities is selected areas
selected agriculture
private agribusiness projects
drainage system for rural
products
producers
Rehabilitation of selected drainage
Administrative and
Water Sector Investment Planning
- Area of irrigated land with
networks
volatile obstacles to
study ESW (active)
adequate water supply is
exports
increased by 40,000 ha (RESP
Implementation of the project on
Poor state of irrigation
Drainage, Irrigation and Wetlands
II area)
drainage diversion in priority areas
system
Improvement project - I (active)
- Area of irrigated land with
Land degradation and
adequate drainage is increased
Strategy for raising efficiency in water Fergana Valley Water Resources
soil erosion
Increasing efficiency,
by 30,000 ha (RESP II area)
use is developed
Excessive water use and - Area of irrigated land with
effectiveness and
Management project (FY09)
environmental sustainability water logging
adequate irrigation and
Land degradation and
of irrigation and soil
Partnership: ADB, UNDP,
drainage facilities is increase
soil salinization
improvement
USAID, IFC
by 100,000 ha (Fergana
ICARDA, IWMI, SDC/SECO,
Valley)
KfW
• Improved soil quality as
measured by:
- Water table below the ground

46

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

CAS Outcomes/Measurement
indicators

Milestones

Bank program

Baseline: 1.5 m (2007)
Target: > 2.0 m (2010)
2. Enhanced farm access to
commercial financial services in
seven provinces as measured by:
500 new microcredit lines

Introduction of improvements and
reduction of advance requirements in
the commodity exchange

3. Including the international
price of by-products such as
vegetable oil to establish the
state procurement price for
cotton

Adoption of a resolution allowing
farmers to market above state-quota
cotton within the RESP II area

Financial and institutional support is
Capacity and financial viability
of the Water User Associations is provided to 84 Water User
Associations (WUAs)
enhanced as measured by:
- Increase amount of
maintenance conducted by
these WUAs from 30% to
45%
- Increase water fee collection
from 15% to 30%
Potential program: IFC’s support to establish new micro-finance lending institution in rural area, Cultural Tourism and Heritage Protection Project/ESW (FY10-11),
ESW/JSDF on Youth Development, Irrigation Infrastructure project(s)

47

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

CAS Outcomes/Measurement
indicators

Milestones

PILLAR III. Improved human development and social protection through improved basic services delivery
Improved provision of safe water and sanitation
Treatment plant upgraded in Nukus
Safe water unavailable Improved access to safe and
Increased access to safe
and Urgench,
or unsustainable due to: sustainable water services in
water
existing and future project areas
Treatment plan design completed and
Baseline: 80% (2006)
measured by:
− System deterioration
work commissioned in B&S
- Increased proportion of
Target: 86.8% (2010)
− Incomplete coverage
population in the project areas
− Unsustainable supply
Replacement or rehabilitation of
with access to safe water
due to lack of financial
desalination plants in Karakalpakstan
- Higher average quality of
resources
and Khorezm
water in project areas by
(WHO/National standards)
Pipe replacement in relevant areas
- Better financial performance,
cost-recovery, billings and
collection
Improved health indices
Output based financing for hospitals
Improved health status,
Hospitals consume a
Access to quality Health Care
introduced in all CRHs in at least 1
particularly among the rural large share of public
enhanced through:
oblasts
population
health budget and their
− Infant mortality per 1000 funding is still capacity
• Output based financing of
Increasing number of Evidence-Based
and input based, leading
live birth
hospitals introduced as
Medical guidelines used by GPs.
to inefficiencies.
Baseline: 14.9 (2005)
measured by:
However reforms are
- Number of CRHs using caseTarget: 12 (2010)
Increased financing and use of primary
underway to introduce
based financing
and outpatient services
case-based
funding
.
Baseline
:
0%
(2007)
− Maternal mortality per
Insufficient medical
Target: 100% in at least 1
100 thous. live-birth
Pooled contracting for drugs for SVPs
supplies and equipment
oblast (2010)
Baseline: 29.2 (2007)
introduced.
and lack of experienced
Target: 24 (2010)
professional staff
• Increased financing for
impacting the quality of
primary and - outpatient
treatment.
services as measured by:
Little implementation of - % of health budget expenditures
evidence based medical
on PHC and outpatient care
Baseline – 43% (2007)

48

Bank program

Bukhara-Samarkand Water
Supply Project (active)
Rural Water Supply Project
(active)
Municipal Infrastructure
management AAA
Policy Note and TA dialogue on
development of PPP approach in
municipal services
Municipal Services Project
(FY10)

Health II project (active)
National Flour Fortification
Project (GIAN-financed)
Health III project with focus on
CRHs (FY10-11)
Poverty Work AAA
Nutrition Sector/ Food safety
AAA
Partnership: ADB, USAID,
WHO, UNICEF

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles
practices.
The procurement of
drugs and medical
equipment is not “best
practice” in terms of
efficiency and
transparency.
Diseases related to
failure to fully adhere to
the principles of healthy
nutrition and food safety
regulations.

CAS Outcomes/Measurement
indicators

Milestones

Bank program

Target – 50% (2010)
- % of SVPs stocked with
essential medicines
Baseline – 45% (2007)
Target – 60% (2010)
• Increased utilization of
primary care services
- % of women who receive
antenatal care in the early stage
of pregnancy (up to 12-week
pregnancy period
Baseline – 85% (2007)
Target – 95% (2010)
• Anemia in fertile age women
is decreased
The baseline 60%
Target 48%

Reduced health risk from
global pandemic
− HIV/AIDS prevalence

Inadequate in-country
capacity to quickly
diagnose and respond to
risks of global
pandemic.
Threat to overall health
due to rapidly rising
HIV and TB infections
Insufficient level of
public awareness of
measures of HIV and
TB prevention

Heath risk from global pandemic
is reduced through:

Reduction in mother to child
transmission of HIV/AIDs

• Improved HIV/AIDs
prevention and control
- Number of HIV-ve children born
to HIV+ve mothers
Baseline: 60%(2007)
Target: 85%(2010)

100% coverage of HIV+ve positive
pregnant women with ARV treatment.

- % of HIV +ve pregnant women
receiving ARV prophylaxis of
vertical transmission of HIV
Baseline: 90%(2007)

49

Avian Flu grant project (active,
grant)
CA AIDS Control project (active,
regional grant)
Health II (IDA grant for
HIV/AIDS)
Partnership: FAO, WHO

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles
Inadequate veterinary
services and food safety
Insufficient incentives
for animal owners to
report diseases

CAS Outcomes/Measurement
indicators

Milestones

Bank program

Target: 100%(2010)
- % of HIV +ve women receiving
ARV treatment among those
voluntarily requesting treatment
Baseline: 70%(2007)
Target: 100%(2010)
• Improved seasonal influenza
prevention and control
- Percentage of population at
risk vaccinated
Baseline: 50%(2007)
Target: 100%(2010)
Number of AI diagnostic tests
carried out annually on animal
and human samples

Improved basic education and learning
Increase access to quality
Inadequate availability
basic education:
of basic teaching and
learning materials
− Improved learning
Poor children have less
achievements
access to learning
Baseline: NA
materials
Learning achievement is
deficient because some
teachers lack knowledge
of effective teaching
practices
Ineffective learning due
to lack of cooperation
between parents and

Schools adopt quality enhancing
techniques, materials and
participatory practices as
measured by:
- % of schools where core set of
educational materials is
available
Baseline: 10% (2007)
Target: 80% (2011)
- % of retrained teachers in
project schools
Baseline: 5% (2007)
Target: 70% (2011)
- % of project schools with active
boards
Baseline: 75% (2007)

50

Increased availability and use of
teaching and learning materials

Basic Education Project I (active)
Basic Education Project II (FY09)

Teachers in project schools retrained in
interactive teaching methods through
school-based teacher training
Activation of participation of School
Boards and local community
involvement in project schools.
An assessment tool for standardized
student assessment is developed and
implemented.

Education AAA
Partnership: ADB, UNDP,
UNICEF, SECO, KfW, JICA,
JBIC

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles
teachers

CAS Outcomes/Measurement
indicators

Milestones

Target: 85% (2011)

Although all the issues
above are being
addressed by
Government with the
support of the BE
project.
PILLAR IV. ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT, DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT, AND GLOBAL GOODS PROVISION
Improving municipal solid
Technical, institutional
Investment needs for waste disposal
Municipalities in project cites
waste management
and financial capacity
improvement are identified
improve collection, transfer and
constraints
safe disposal/treatment of solid
Solid waste collection and disposal
waste , as measured by
improvements in project cities are
internationally recognized
initiated
indicators and standards

Improvement of energy
efficiency

Reducing greenhouse gas
emissions

High losses in electricity
and natural gas sectors
and unreliability of
supply in rural areas

Significant gas flaring
High technical losses in
the gas and electricity
distribution networks

Bank program

Awareness on energy savings and
renewable energy supply sources
is enhanced in selected remote
areas:
- Number of Public service
buildings in rural/remote areas
equipped

Reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions as measured by:
• Emissions: Baseline: 121 mln.
tons CO2,(2004)
• Intensity: Baseline: 2686 tons
CO2 per mln. 2000 ppp US$
GDP (highest in ECA)

51

Pilot introduction of alternative
energy sources in health and education
facilities in some remote areas

ESW to identify investment needs
Industrial and Hazardous Waste
Management TA (follow up to
IDF grant on improving
environmental management
institutions)
Small towns/rural communal
services project (FY10-11)
Municipal Services Project (FY10
Energy saving and renewable
energy AAA

Support to improvement of legislation
on energy use
Financial viability of energy
companies further improved
Assistance to GoU to attract carbon
revenues for eligible projects under the
CDM of the Kyoto Protocol
Agreement on the portfolio of CDM
projects under CDM Funds utilization
of the Kyoto Protocol is signed

Carbon Finance Shurtan Gas
Flaring Reduction project (active)
Carbon Partnership Facility
(CPF): sectoral or programmatic
carbon project(s) (FY09

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

CAS Outcomes/Measurement
indicators

Milestones

Bank program

Increased portfolio of CDM projects
under the Kyoto Protocol as
measured by:
- Number of signed agreements
Regional Water-Energy dialogue
ESW/TA (regional program)
Disaster risk mitigation and
adaptation AAA (regional
program)
- Strengthening of policies and
Climate change mitigation and
Institutions for environmental Assessment of the climate change
adaptation in the Syr Darya and
sustainability (institutional
impact and its implications for
Amu Darya River Basins AAA
context components)
irrigation and rural poverty
(regional program)
Persistent organic pollutants
Preparation of the inventory of
(POP) and environmental
persistent organic pollutants and
liabilities ESW/TA (regional
implementation plan for safe
program)
storage/management
Partnership: ADB, UNDP, IWMI,
CAREC. UNECE
Potential program: CF Solid waste project, CF Tashkent Combined Cycle Gas Turbine project, CF UzTransGaz (gas transmission) project, CF Gas distribution leakage
reduction project, Energy efficiency / renewable project, or as component(s) of other investment projects (health/municipal services) (FY10-11), CF Gas distribution leakage
reduction project, GEF Hydromet/Agromet ESW (regional program), GEF Past Environmental Liabilities, Environment ESW/TA (supporting CF and GEF projects).
Improved environmental
and disaster risk
management

Analytical and technical
capacity to analyze and
evaluate environmental
impacts

Number of constructive dialogues with
authorities and donors on Disaster Risk
Management and climate change
adaptation

Government adopts improved
environmental management
practices and capacities by:

52

ANNEX 2: Matrix of Main Donor Activities in Uzbekistan for 2008-2010
Sector/Thematic
Area

Donors’ Activities

Agriculture and
Natural Resources

ADB: Loans: Ak Altin district Agricultural Development; Grain Productivity
Improvement; Amu Zhang Irrigation Rehabilitation; Land Improvement; Agriculture
Market Infrastructure Development; Agriculture Sector Development, Water Resources
Management; Urban Water Supply, Western Uzbekistan Rural Water Supply;
Kashkadarya & Navoi Rural Water Supply and Sanitation; Surkhandarya Water Supply
and Sanitation. TA: Agriculture Review and Planning; Implementation and Monitoring
of Policy Reforms in Agricultural Sector; Agriculture Market Infrastructure
Development; Water Resources Management; Djizzak & Surkhandarya Rural Water
Supply & Sanitation; Improved Water Resources Management (regional TA)
EBRD: Investigates the possibility of working with foreign strategic partners in agroprocessing and mining sectors as a way to promote foreign investment with introducing
new technologies, enhancing business standards including adherence to international
environmental standards. Loans: Microfinance loans to agribusiness: to small fruit and
vegetable processing and other private food processing plants to expand their production
capacities and increase market share. TA: Provision of credit adviser for local banks on
allocation of credit lines.
Islamic Development Bank: Loans: Rehabilitation of Irrigational Network and
Drainage System in Jizzak and Syrdarya; Reconstruction of the main Irrigation Canals
of Tashsaka in Khorezm Province. TA: Feasibility Study for Reconstruction of the
main Irrigation Canals of Tashsaka in Khorezm Province
EU/TACIS: Support to non-farm rural enterprises; agriculture information system;
agriculture wholesale market development; solar heating plants
USAID: Irrigation network management and on-farm water management activities;
Agricultural linkages project
UNDP: Feasibility studies of investment projects in irrigation
JICA: Improvement of water management in agriculture; Improvement of water
management of on-farm water-users association in Syrdarya and Tashkent provinces;
Improvement of agricultural technology
JETRO: Financing feasibility studies for Japanese companies on request in the mining
and natural resources management (e.g. uranium and chemical products)
Government of PRC: Reconstruction of irrigation objects; Training seminars and study
tours to China on agriculture

Education

ADB: Loans: Education Sector Development Program; Textbook Development;
Information and Communication Technology in Basic Education; Rural Basic
Education; Basic Education Development. TA: Effective Management of Investments
and Reforms in Basic Education; Rural Basic Education
EU/TACIS: Vocational Education; University Networks; Restructuring of higher
education (TEMPUS program) through financing grants to encourage interaction and
balanced cooperation between universities in the partner countries and the European
Community

53

Sector/Thematic
Area

Donors’ Activities

KFW: Support to Vocational Education in construction and communal utilities sectors
GTZ: Introduction of vocational training model, training of trainers at universities;
Vocational Education and Training in agriculture, including in IT area
SECO: Skills development project upscale in vocational education
JICA: Vocational Education project
UNICEF/UNESCO: Education Management Information System
USAID: Basic Education support
Government of PRC: Provision of ICT in Basic Education
UNICEF: Early Childhood Development and Quality Basic Education
Islamic Development Bank:
Schools

Loan:

Construction and Equipping of Secondary

JICA: Provision of scholarships to 20 students each year to study in universities on
human resources development; Support to educational reform, retraining teachers to
expand professional education
Energy

ADB: Loans: Regional Power Transmission Modernization; Navoi Thermal Power
Plant Modernization; Gas to Coal Conversion of Novo-Angren TPP; Construction of
“Kamolot” Hydropower Plant; Installation of Turbo-Tender Units at Talimardjan and
Syrdarya TPPs; Tashkent City Street Lighting. TA: Navoi Thermal Power Plant
Modernization; Gas to Coal Conversion of Novo-Angren TPP; Construction of
“Kamolot” Hydropower Plant; Installation of Turbo-Tender Units at Talimardjan and
Syrdarya TPPs; Tashkent City Street Lighting
EBRD: Regional energy trade, energy-saving, metering
JBIC: Thermal power
UNDP: Assisting the Development of Biogas Technology in Uzbekistan; Clean Energy
for Rural Communities in Karakalpakstan – Phase II; Renewable energy for rural
communities
Islamic Development Bank: Loan: 500KW Transmission Line of Guzar-Surkhan with
autotransformer and two substations; 500 KW Sogdiana-Talimarjan Transmission Line
and Substation
Government of PRC: Construction of new power stations; Training seminars and study
tours to China on power stations and electricity

Environment

ADB: Loans: Clean Development Mechanism. TA: Clean Development Mechanism;
Greenhouse Development
UNDP: Biosphere Reserve; Enhancement of Environmental Indicators Database with
GIS application to monitor the state of the Environment in Uzbekistan; Conservation of
Tugai Forests and Strengthening protected Areas System in the Amu Darya Delta of
Karakalpakstan; Establishment of the Nuratau-Kyzylkum Biosphere Reserve as a Model
for Biodiversity Conservation; Support to the Environment and Energy Interventions;
Kyoto protocol energy issues and development of alternative sources of energy,

54

Sector/Thematic
Area

Donors’ Activities

biogas/livestock technologies and new crops development
UNEP: Elimination of ozone destruction materials
SECO: Water Management and Disaster Risk Reduction
GTZ: Stabilization of desiccated Aral Sea; Locust control
JICA: Promotion of environmental protection through the establishment of an
environmental monitoring system and waste processing; improving administrative
capacity and technology relating to monitoring of natural disasters like earthquakes and
landslides, provision of equipment and machinery
JETRO: Kyoto protocol gas emissions reduction
Government of PRC: Provision of diagnostic equipment for seismology and
environmental monitoring points
OSCE: Review of legal norms and their implementation in the area of transportation of
toxic cargo and waste
Gender and
Development

ADB, British Embassy, FINCA, NOVIB, JICA, IOM, Italian Embassy, Mercy Corps,
OSCE, Embassy of Switzerland, USAID
UNDP: Capacity Building of the Women’s Committee in Uzbekistan; Preparatory
Assistance: Gender and Development Project
UNICEF: Family and Community Empowerment

Governance

ADB: Loan: Public Finance Management Reform. TA: Supporting Public Finance
Management; Policy and Institutional Reform Support
UNDP: Capacity building for civil society group; Improving Tax Administration in
Uzbekistan; Reforming Tax System and Developing New Revision of Tax Code;
Enhancing Legislative and Institutional Capacities of the Parliament, computers and
software support to Parliament, and training; Enhancing the Capacity of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs to better respond to the Emerging issues of the new Millennium;
Enhancing the Capacity of the University of World Economy and Diplomacy to Support
the Foreign Policy of Uzbekistan; Improving Public Sector Management Skills through
Building Training and Research Capacity of the State Academy for State and Public
Construction under the President of Uzbekistan; Public finance reform, including
introduction of MTBF, performance-based budgeting, and improvement of public
procurement
USAID: Grassroots efforts e.g. NGO development and civic advocacy, support for
independent broadcast and print media, internet development, dialogue on judiciary law
enforcement, judicial ethics, and judicial training; Support to anti-money laundering and
anti-terrorism financing, border control and prevention of trafficking of people and
illegal drugs SECO: Public Institutions and Services
EU/TACIS: Enhancing the judiciary and rule of law, good governance, market
regulatory reforms and building administrative capacity; Fight against terrorism,
organized crime, drugs and human trafficking and corruption

55

Sector/Thematic
Area

Donors’ Activities

UNICEF: Local Capacity Building in Management of Basic Service for Women and
Children; Social Policy development, Advocacy and Social Monitoring
Islamic Development Bank: TA: Capacity Building for the Information Support and
Foreign Investment Promotion Agency “UzInfoInvest”
GTZ: Legal reform (training of lawyers in economic legislation
JICA: Training of tax officials on improvement of tax administration
OSCE: Development of website of the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection (jointly
with Center for Economic Research)
Health, Nutrition,
and Social
Protection

ADB: Loan: Woman and Child Health Development
UNFPA/UNDP/UNODC/UNAIDS: Strengthening capacity in Family Planning;
Reproductive health services, HIV/AIDS, drug-related morbidity and mortality
JICA: Supporting healthcare reform by improving nurse training, maternal and infant
health; Study on the reform of healthcare services in Navoi province to improve
organization of health services; Improvement of primary health care in Tashkent and
Jizzak oblasts; Support to social empowerment of disabled people
KFW: TB program V, reproductive health, contraceptives, mother and child
GTZ: Family Planning
UK-DFID: Capacity building for GP training and education program, technical
assistance for medical education, nursing education
EU/TACIS: Preventive health care
GTZ: Family Planning
SECO: Health Care Reform
WHO: Reducing the burden of communicable diseases; reducing the burden of
noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), mental disorders, violence and injuries and the
related major risk factors; addressing issues in maternal, child and adolescent health;
strengthening the key functions of the health system to improve its overall performance,
with special emphasis on primary healthcare and greater equity in health, and mother
and child health
UNDP: Promotion of the rights of disabled individuals through sport activities
UNICEF: Improvement of maternal and child health and nutrition; Child protection;
Young People’s Health and Development; Training of medical personnel on new born
child survival, improvement of statistics of child and maternal mortality rates
Islamic Development Bank: Loan: Equipping Hospitals with Modern Medical and
Diagnostic Equipment
USAID: HIV/AIDS; Primary health care financial reforms under World Bank’s Health
II; Infectious deceases treatment and Anti-tuberculosis
Government of PRC: Provision of medical equipment for hospitals

56

Sector/Thematic
Area

Donors’ Activities

Poverty Reduction/
Improvement of
Living Standards

UNDP: Regional development strategies, monitoring of MDG implementation, capacity
building of the State Statistics Committee; Development of Capacities of the National
Human Rights Institutions in Uzbekistan; Enhancement of Living Standards in Fergana
Region; Enhancement of Living Standards in Karakalpakstan; Enhancement of Living
Standards in Namangan region; Support to Welfare Improvement Strategy Process
ADB: TA: Support of WIS Review and Preparation of the Next Stage WIS for 20112013
EU/TACIS: Poverty alleviation/raising living standards and protection of vulnerable
social groups, particularly through PRSP approaches
UNFPA: Increase awareness of the linkages between population, development, gender
and poverty and their integration into poverty reduction strategies (advocacy, gender
equity and equality, data collection, improve national capacity in demography and
statistics)
OSCE: Trainings for “Mahalla” institutions on equitable distribution of social
allowances among the population and prevention of misconducts in the area of financial
management at mahalla (self-governing bodies) level; Social monitoring in rural areas
of Karakalpakstan, including monitoring of effectiveness of microcredit provision
(ordered by the Fund for Salvation of Aral Sea)

Private Sector
Development

ADB: Loans: Small Enterprises and Microfinance Development. TA: Microfinance
Development
EBRD: Loans: Support to private sector investment and entrepreneurship through
direct credits to local SMEs, microfinance loans through local banks for development of
tourism, pharmaceuticals, cable production, telecom & media, non-banking financial
institutions, light industry, and risk-sharing facility for local banks. TA: Enterprise
management organization and innovation survey; creation of an association of private
hotels
USAID: Support to SME, microfinance development
UNDP: Microcredit programs; Micro-credit development for income generation and job
creation in the Kashkadarya province of Uzbekistan.
SECO: Support to Private Sector, including financing of IFC PEP surveys of SMEs
KFW: Small business development; Microfinance and Housing Finance loans
GTZ: Private sector development in Andijan, Termez and Karakalpakstan
JICA: Commentary on the law on bankruptcy; Business courses in Uzbekistan-Japan
Center for human resources development
JETRO: Provision of seminars and exhibitions on Uzbekistan for Japanese companies,
identification of promising business projects for Japanese companies
OSCE: Development of commercial arbitrage; Protection of intellectual property rights;
Protection of SMEs in light of anti-money laundering activities (jointly with UNDP);
Support of private farmers in Ferghana and Bukhara provinces on timely provision of
fertilizers, gasoline and other inputs through round tables with local banks, microcredit

57

Sector/Thematic
Area

Donors’ Activities

institutions, and offices of public prosecutor; Provision of information and trainings in
support of development of ecological tourism and community-based tourism in rural
areas of Surkhandarya, Djizzakh and Tashkent provinces
Policy Dialogue

EBRD: Policy dialogue with the authorities on improvement of investment climate and
supporting reform efforts. Monitoring of political and economic reforms in Uzbekistan
USAID: Open dialogue on national democratic institute development

Telecommunications EBRD: The Bank seeks opportunities to provide long-term financing to
telecommunications and media private companies. This, however, is highly dependent
upon improvements in the regulatory framework
UNDP: Assisting the Government of Uzbekistan in the formulation and implementation
of ICT for development policy; Capacity building for internet development in
Uzbekistan – phase II
Government of PRC: Provision of telecommunications equipment; Training seminars
and study tours to China on transport and communications
Banking Sector

EBRD: Proactive approach towards the restructuring and privatization process of the
Uzbek banking sector, with the ultimate goal of increasing the level of intermediation in
the country. It will pursue this approach by working with Asaka Bank to create a
demonstration case for successful restructuring and investment by a strategic foreign
bank. Promoting competition in the banking sector through increasing the number of
participating banks
ADB: Equity: Equity Investments in two local banks. TA: Financial sector
infrastructure development; Support banking sector development
Islamic Development Bank: Loan: Second Line of Financing to the National Bank of
Uzbekistan

Infrastructure

ADB: Loans: CAREC Regional Road; Railway Maintenance; Road Rehabilitation.
TA: Regional Infrastructure (Roads); State-Owned Road Enterprises
EBRD: Loan: Finalizing the Tashkent Water Supply Improvement Project. TA:
Assistance to the MoF on communal services regulatory framework (duration 1.5
years). If management is to decide on having more TA to public sector, the main areas
of TA would be grant financing of feasibility studies in communal utilities and
financing of PIUs
SECO: Basic infrastructure development in Energy and Water sectors
JICA: Promoting the efficient use and maintenance of infrastructure by improving the
management of public utilities, such as water and electricity supplies
KFW: Loan and TA to support Electrification of railroad Tashkent-Angren; Water
supply project
Islamic Development Bank: Loans: Water Supply and Sewerage System in Tashkent;
Construction of Water Supply and Ferghana and Margilan cities; Construction of Water
Supply and Sewage Systems in Andijan and Urgench cities. TA: Feasibility Study for
Water Supply and Ferghana and Margilan cities; Feasibility Study for Water Supply and

58

Sector/Thematic
Area

Donors’ Activities

Sewage Systems in Andijan and Urgench cities
UNDP: Feasibility studies of investment projects in sewage and other communal
utilities
JICA: Improvement of road maintenance and road administration
Government of PRC: Water measurement equipment in urban water supply; Railway
transportation machinery and equipment
Regional
Development

UNDP: Regional development strategies
JETRO: Strengthening of economic ties between the countries of Central Asia
JICA: Regional development study in 10 districts of Karakalpakstan; Development of
tourism and promotion of regional industries

Trade and
Investment

UNDP: Capacity building and strengthening foreign trade and investment promotion
institutions in Uzbekistan; Industrial policy development for EurAsEC trade and
transport integration; improvement of public investment policy through capacity
building and strengthening of investment cycle
USAID: Support of accession to the WTO
JETRO: Potential transportation projects in framework of CAREC activities
OSCE: Support to regional trade development through surveys of business on nonofficial payments at customs (surveys ordered by Uzbek Ministry for Foreign Economic
Relations, Investment and Trade)

59

Uzbekistan at a glance

9/28/07

Uzbekistan

Europe &
Central
Asia

Low
income

26.5
447
1.4
37

460
24,114
0.0
64

2,403
29,215
1.8
30

16.1
610
2,250

2,206
4,796
9,662

1,562
650
2,698

7.3
5.8

6.8
6.8

8.0
6.1

…
26
67
57
8

1
10
69
28
5

..
..
59
75
..

99
99
100
99

99
96
103
100

72
50
108
96

82
67

92
85

75
38

Key Development Indicators

Age distribution, 2006

(2006)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

Female

70-74
60-64
50-54
40-44
30-34
20-24
10-14
0-4

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

15

10

5

0

5

10

15

percent

(most recent estimate, 2000–2006)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
100

75

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

50

25

0
1990

1995

Uzbekistan

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2005):
Japan
United States
Germany

1980

1990

2000

2006

..

62

186

172

..
..
..

1
1
0

82
36
9

54
38
17

..
..

0.5
3

1.4
8

1.2
7

2000

2005

Europe & Central Asia

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
10
5
0

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

-5
-10

Long-Term Economic Trends

-15
90

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

..
..

3.1
4.0

25.0
47.3

11.4
21.5

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

..
..

0.0
118

236.6
100

1,218.9
134

95

00

GDP

05

GDP per capita

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–06
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

16.0
..

20.5
13,361

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

32.8
33.0
22.1
34.3

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

..
..
..

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

..
..
..

24.7
13,760

26.5
17,031

2.5
..

1.8
-0.2

1.2
5.7

34.4
23.1
9.4
42.5

26.1
27.4
10.8
46.5

..
..
..
..

0.5
-3.4
0.7
1.1

6.9
4.3
1.8
5.8

61.4
25.4
32.2

61.9
18.7
16.3

50.8
15.3
22.3

..
..
..

..
..
-2.5

..
..
5.2

28.8
47.8
3.2

24.6
21.5
17.9

37.5
25.9
41.2

..
..

-3.7
-7.4

13.1
7.6

(% of GDP)

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2006 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2005.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

60

Uzbekistan
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2006
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2006

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

2,935
2,696
422

5,615
3,994
1,986

Voice and accountability

..

..

Regulatory quality

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

216
1.6

3,221
18.9

Reserves, including gold

1,273

4,459

W orkers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

Political stability

Rule of law
Control of corruption
0

Central Government Finance
(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

36.8
34.8
29.4

33.8
29.5
30.5

Overall surplus/deficit

-2.5

3.4

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

36
26

29
12

25

50

75

100

2006

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

2000

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, W orld Bank

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

2005

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

87.3

..

69

80

..

..

65
7.6
..

64
7.7
4.8

..
357.9

623
..

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

4.8

4.8

GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

0.7

0.8

2,035

2,088

2000

2006

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

217
31
5
12

316
32
21
15

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

0
0
0

26
13
0

8
8
2

15
15
4

1

8

10
0

0
0

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

4,634
883
–

4,226
788
–

33.7
26.1

29.5
14.2

75
0

45
0

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)
Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

Composition of total external debt, 2005
IBRD, 298.92
Short-term,
36.496

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)
IDA, 11.492
IMF, 0

World Bank Group portfolio
Other multilateral, 487.936

(US$ millions)

Private, 1724.353

Bilateral, 1666.37

US$ millions

Private Sector Development

2000

2006

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)

–
–
–

29
14.1
91

Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Tax rates
Access to/cost of financing

..
..

18.1
16.0

0.2
..

0.3
..

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2006 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

61

9/28/07

Millennium Development Goals

Uzbekistan

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
Uzbekistan

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)
Goal 1: halve the rates for $1 a day poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
<2
..
10.9
..

1995
3.3
..
7.3
18.8

2000
19.2
27.5
3.9
7.9

2005
<2
..
7.2
..

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

78
..
99
..

..
..
..
..

..
99
95
..

..
97
95
..

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

94
47
..

..
44
6

98
42
7

98
40
18

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

79
65
84

75
62
91

71
59
99

68
57
99

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

..
..

..
98

24
96

..
..

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

..
..
68
..

..
56
76
..

..
68
93
4

0.2
..
113
39

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

94
51
7.2
..
6.3
0.7

93
52
..
..
4.3
0.7

87
61
7.6
..
4.8
0.7

82
67
7.7
4.8
4.8
0.8

68
0
..
..

68
0
..
..

69
5
..
..

80
34
..
..

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Youth unemployment (% of total labor force ages 15-24)

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year olds)

125

ICT indicators (per 1,000 people)

100

100

75

75

50

50

25

25

100
75
50
25
0
2000

2002

2005

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2000

2002

2005

Primary net enrollment ratio (..)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary &
secondary education

Uzbekistan

Europe & Central Asia

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

62

Fixed + mobile subscribers
Internet users

9/28/07

CAS Annex B2 Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date
01/23/2008

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2005

2006

2007

2008

7
4.3
0.0
0.0
42.9
53.8
11.9

5
4.5
40.0
33.7
60.0
59.5
22.3

6
4.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
24.2

6
5.3
0.0
0.0
16.7
5.9
16.8

yes
1102.5
122.5

yes
774.8
110.7

yes
767.7
127.9

yes
615.2
76.9

Since FY 80

Last Five FYs
9
332.2
37.5
55.4

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

5
86.6
40.0
27.9

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

63

CAS Annex - B3
Uzbekistan: IFC Investment Operations Program
2005

2006

Commitments (US$m)
Gross
Net

Net Commitments by Sector (%)
Financial Sector
Total

2007

2008*

3.00
3.00

0.00
0.00

0

0

100
100

0
0

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
Loan
0
Total

0

100
100

0
0

* As of April 14, 2008

64

CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary
As of May 14, 2008

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Programa
Fiscal
year
2008
(IDA14)
2009

2010

2011

Proj ID

US$(M)

Rural Enterprise Support Project Phase II

68.0

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation
Risks (H/M/L)

H

M

Result

68.0

Ferghana Valley

65.0

H

M

Basic Education II

25.0

H

L

Result

90.0

Small town / rural water supply in SyrDarya Oblast

65.0

H

L

Bukhara & Samarkand Sewerage

40.0

H

M

Results

105.0

Health III

70.0

H

M

Sewerage in Ferghana and Republic of Karakalpakstan

40.0

H

L

Results

110.0

Overall Result

373.0

Preparation for possible delivery under IDA-15, or early IDA-16
Irrigation and Drainage – Phase II

100.0

Rural Water Supply in Bukhara oblast

15.0

Note: The program is indicative. The actual size of the projects in the pipeline will be
determined in line with available resources determined using the IDA PBA system.

a

This table presents the proposed program for FY08-FY11.
For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high
(H), moderate (M), or low (L).
b

65

b

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of IDA Advisory Services As of April 21,
2008

Cost
(US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

Product
IDA
Recent completions
Cotton Taxation Study
Nutrition review I
PER 2
Municipal Sector Review

Completion FY

FY06
FY06
FY06
FY07

Trust Fund
Trust Fund
100.9
244

Gov/WB/Donor/Public
Gov/WB/Donor/Public
Gov/WB/Donor/Public
Gov/WB

UZ Poverty Assessment

FY07

156

Gov/WB/Donor/Public

Underway
Governance Assessment (Health Sector)

FY08

326

Gov/WB

Health and Nutrition Review

FY08

85

Gov/WB/Donor/Public

Water Sector Investment Planning Study
Adv. On Dev. Of Treasury Syt TA
Accounting & Auditing ROSC
PSD/FSD Dialogue

FY09
FY09
FY09
FY09

260
82
100
100

Gov/WB/Donor/Public
WB/Gov
Gov/WB
Gov/WB

PS
KG, PS,
PD
KG, PS,
PD
KG, PS
KG
KG,PS

FY09
FY09
FY09

300
120
200

Gov/WB/Donor/Public
Gov/WB
Gov/WB

KG, PS,
PD
PS
KG

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PS,
PD

Planned
WIS TA
Governance Assessment in Municipal Sector
Growth and Poverty Dialogue

____________
a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

66

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of IFC Advisory Services
As of May 06, 2008

Product

Underway
CA Mortgage (Uzbekistan share of Regional
project)
Advisory services to Hamkorbank-III
CA Leasing Facility (Regional project)
SME Policy Development-IV

Planned
SME Policy Development-V
CA FM Infrastructure (Uzbekistan share of
Regional project)
CA Infrastructure Scoping (regional Scoping
project)

Completion FY

Cost
(US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

FY10

1,580

Gov/Market participants

KG/PS

FY10
FY10
FY09

290
2,240
713

Market participant
Gov/Market participants
Gov/WBG/Donor/Public

KG, PS
KG/PS
KG, PS,
PD

FY11

930

Gov/WB/Donor/Public

FY11

500

FY10

1,000

Market participants/
Gov/WB
Gov/WB/Public/Market
participants

KG, PS,
PD
KG, PS

____________
a. Government, market participants, donor, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

67

KG, PS,
PD

CAS Annex B6 - Uzbekistan - Key Economic Indicators
Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services

2004

Actual
2005
2006

2007

Estimate
2008

2009

Projected
2010

2011

100
31
26
43

100
28
23
49

100
26
27
46

100
24
30
46

100
24
31
45

100
23
32
45

100
23
33
44

100
22
33
45

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

68
24
5
19

64
22
4
18

66
21
4
18

70
19
3
16

71
21
3
18

74
20
3
17

75
19
3
16

76
20
3
17

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

40
33

38
29

38
26

40
30

41
33

41
34

41
35

41
37

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

32
34

36
40

34
41

30
34

29
36

26
33

25
31

24
29

12030

14308

17031

22308

27195

29884

32654

35479

460

530

610

730

880

1040

1160

1240

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 97 prices)
Gross domestic product at market
prices
7.7
7.0
Gross Domestic Income
7.7
7.0

7.3
7.3

9.5
9.5

8.0
9.4

7.0
5.1

6.5
5.9

6.0
5.4

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 97 prices)
GDP at market prices
6.5
5.8
6.0
Total consumption
6.2
3.2
0.9

8.1
0.5

6.7
7.5

5.8
6.5

5.3
6.2

4.8
5.6

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

4837
4263
3928
3061
909
356
1216

5416
4757
4101
3310
1315
658
1949

6390
5615
4404
3614
1986
1222
3248

8991
8026
6736
5730
2255
1990
4307

11186
10103
8948
7720
2238
1975
4153

12192
11024
10295
8822
1897
2039
3820

13369
12123
11501
9740
1868
2131
3840

14630
13302
13290
11199
1340
2225
3378

Net private FDI
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital ( incl. errors & omissions)
Change in reservesd

187
-89
78
-168
-802
-512

88
-212
28
-240
-1076
-748

194
-152
29
-182
-1726
-1564

734
-303
156
-460
-2583
-2155

311
95
38
57
-3300
-1259

368
131
47
83
-3072
-1247

433
135
31
104
-3184
-1224

510
150
23
127
-2866
-1173

19.1
11.7

19.3
10.1

15.3
8.2

12.8
6.3

11.8
5.7

9.5
3.8

13.7
5.6

37.7
38.2

15.2
27.8

13.8
13.3

10.8
9.6

10.3
14.2

Memorandum items
Current account balance (% of GDP)
10.1
13.6
Resource balance (% of GDP)
7.6
9.2
Real annual growth rates ( YR97 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
25.8
6.3
Merchandise imports (CIF)
19.1
8.1

68

(continued)

CAS Annex B6 - Uzbekistan - Key Economic Indicators
2004
Public finance (as % of GDP at
market prices)e
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or
deficit (-)
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Price indices( YR97 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real interest rates
GDP deflator (% change)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Actual
2005
2006

2007

Estimate
2008

2009

Projected
2010

2011

32.2
31.6

30.8
30.5

34.4
30.7

35.2
28.7

34.9
30.0

34.6
29.8

34.5
29.4

34.5
28.9

0.6
0.7

0.2
0.7

3.7
0.4

6.4
0.6

4.9
0.2

4.8
0.1

5.1
0.1

5.6
0.1

12.2
47.8

14.4
54.2

15.2
36.8

16.3
46.2

16.7
29.1

16.8
24.1

16.9
20.3

16.9
16.6

118.0
103.3
114.2

123.8
103.3
119.9

128.5
106.6
120.6

133.4
110.6
120.6

145.8
116.6
125.0

139.7
117.6
118.8

138.7
118.5
117.0

138.0
119.3
115.7

15.7

21.4

21.5

24.0

17.0

15.0

12.0

10.0

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.

69

CAS Annex B7 - Uzbekistan - Key Exposure Indicators
Indicator

2004

Total debt outstanding and disbursed (TDO)
(US$m)a

Actual
2005
2006

2007

Estimated
2008

2009

Projected
2010
2011

4833

4226

4106

3505

3259

3179

3077

3093

-157

-372

-152

-253

-224

-69

-103

84

871

787

920

842

666

599

611

448

TDO/XGSb

97.9

76.3

62.3

38.0

24.6

22.2

19.8

18.4

TDO/GDP

40.2

29.5

24.1

15.7

12.0

10.6

9.4

8.7

TDS/XGS

17.7

14.2

14.0

9.1

5.0

4.2

3.9

2.7

Concessional/TDO

36.0

37.6

38.5

45.7

43.5

42.7

42.0

40.8

4.2

4.9

5.8

8.2

8.9

9.8

9.3

12.0

16.2

18.3

21.2

17.7

26.3

29.8

29.9

39.2

0.6

0.6

0.7

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

312

299

291

278

273

249

221

191

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

5

11

23

41

52

70

91

116

31.4
2.4

26.7
1.8

19.2
1.8

10.2
1.5

8.0
1.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Net disbursements (US$m)

a

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)

a

Debt and debt service indicators (%)

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%)
IBRD DS/XGS
d

IBRD TDO (US$m)

Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)

d

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

c

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for
International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

70

CAS Annex - B8 (IFC) for Uzbekistan
Uzbekistan
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of March 2008
(In USD Millions)

Committed

FY Approval

Company

1997
ABN AMRO Uzbek
2000/ 2003
Asaka Bank
2000
SEF Elma Cheese
1998/ 1999
SEF Fayz
2001/ 2007
SEF Hamkorbank
2001
SEF Parvina
1996/ 2001/ 2003
UZBEK LEASING
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quas
i Equity

*GT/R
M

Partici
pant

2.7
0.0
0.0
3.2
1.5
7.4

1.0
0.5
1.5

0.6
0.6

-

-

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

71

-

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/R
M

Partici
pant

2.7
0.0
0.0
2.2
4.9

1.0
0.5
1.5

0.1
0.1

-

-

CAS Annex B8 Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 04/21/2008

Closed Projects

9

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)

157.95
20.33
332.23
110.43
490.18
130.76
105.75

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

105.75

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development Implementatio
Objectives
n Progress

Project ID

Project Name

P094042
P049621
P009127
P051370
P046043
P009121
Overall Result

BASIC EDUC
BUKHARA/SAMARKAND WS
DRAINAGE, IRRIG & WETLAND
HEALTH 2
RUR ENT SUPPORT
RURAL WS & SAN

MS
MS
S
MS
S
S

MS
MS
S
MS
S
S

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions
Fiscal Year

2007
2002
2003
2005
2002
1998

72

IBRD

IDA

20
35

15
20
25
40

36.14
75
166.14

100

GRANT

Cancel.

0.17

13.67
13.85

Undisb.

15.82
16.93
34.54
29.93
1.70
6.84
105.75

Orig. Frm Rev'd

12.29
12.56
2.41
17.74
1.70
20.51
67.22

0.85

1.70
6.84
9.39

