Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 42026-TR

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTIONAND DEVELOPMENT

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
WITH
THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
FOR THE PERIOD FY 2008-2011

January 25,2008

Turkey Country Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
Central and Eastern Europe Department
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

DATE OF LAST CAS - PROGRESS REPORT
(November 8,2005)
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange rate as o f December 3 1,2007)
Currency Unit = YTL
US$l.OO = YTL 1.16
F I S C A L YEAR
January 1 - December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
Analytical and Advisory Activities
IPARD
Instrument for Pre-Accession for
EBRDiWorld Bank Business
Rural Development
IPO
Initial Public Offerings
Environment and Enterprise
JPPR
Performance Survey
Joint Portfolio Performance Review
Local Initiative
Current Account Deficit
LI
CAD
Monitoring & Evaluation
Common Agricultural Policy
CAP
M&E
CAE
Country Assistance Evaluation
Millennium Development Goal
MDG
Country Assistance Strategy
CAS
MIC
Middle Income Country
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
CAS CR Country Assistance Strategy
MIGA
Completion Report
Agency
Conditional Cash Transfer
CCT
Organization for Economic CoOECD
Programmatic Competitiveness and
CEDPL
operation and Development
Employment Development Policy
Public Financial Management and
PFMC
Loan
Control L a w
Consumer Price Index
Assessment: Program for
PISA
CPI
Country Partnership Strategy
International Student Assessment
CPS
Development Policy Loan
DPL
Project Implementation Unit
PIU
Disbursed and Outstanding Debt
DOD
Public Private Partnership
PPA
European Bank for Reconstruction
EBRD
Programmatic Public Sector
PPDPL
and Development
Development Policy Loan
European Union
Research and Development
EU
R&D
Foreign Direct Investment
Regional Development Agency
FDI
RDA
Gross Domestic Product
GDP
SBA
Stand-by Agreement
GNP
Gross National Product
Small and Medium Enterprise
SME
Sector-wide Approach
GRECO Group o f States against Corruption
SWAP
International Bank for Reconstruction
IBRD
TEMAD Turkish Emergency Management
and Development
Agency
Independent Evaluation Group
Under-Five Mortality Rate
IEG
UMR
International Finance Corporation
IFC
WBI
World Bank Institute
International Monetary Fund
IMF
World Bank Group
WBG
N e w Turkish L i r a (Yeni Turk Lira)
IMR
Infant Mortality Rate
YTL
IPA
Investment Promotion Agency
IBRD
IFC
Vice President
Shigeo Katsu
Lars Thunell
Director
U l r i c h Zachau
Shahbaz Mavaddat
Team Leader
Ina-Marlene Ruthenberg
George Konda

AAA
BEEP

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................

i

I.

Country Context ........................................................................................................... 1
A . Political and Social Context ................................................................................
1
B. Recent Economic Developments ........................................................................ 2
C. Medium-term Prospects ...................................................................................... 4

I1.

Turkey’s Vision and K e y Development Challenges .................................................... 6
A . Improved Competitiveness and Employment Opportunities .............................. 6
B. Equitable Human and Social Development ......................................................
10
C . Efficient Provision o f High Quality Public Services ........................................ 14

I11.

Turkey-World Bank Group Partnership ..................................................................... 20
A . Past Bank Group Assistance ............................................................................. 20
B. Lessons Learned................................................................................................ 21
C. Strategic Objectives and Results Framework o f the N e w Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) .................................................................................................. 23
D. Overall Approach ..............................................................................................
25
E. Areas o f Engagement ........................................................................................ 26
a) Improved Competitiveness and Employment Opportunities................26
b) Equitable Human and Social Development .......................................... 31
c) Efficient Provision o f High Quality Public Services ............................
34
F.
Working with Other Development Partners ...................................................... 37
G. Bank Financing ................................................................................................. 38
H. External Debt Sustainability and Bank Exposure ............................................. 41

I V.

Risks ........................................................................................................................... 42

V.

Conclusion ..................................................................................................................

45

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties . I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization .

Tables and Boxes

Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3 :
Table 4:
Table 5:
Table 6:

Selected Medium-tern Macroeconomic Indicators .................................,..,,.,.......... 4
Baseline Debt Dynamics ...........................................................................................
5
Poverty and Inequality, 1994-2005,.............,....,...,..,,,,,,..,,,.,,,,,,,,.,,,..,,,..,,,,,.,.,....,... 11
Strategic Goals and FY04-06 CAS Framework ......................................................
22
Turkey’s Ninth Development Plan Shapes the W o r l d Bank Group CPS ................ 27
Indicative Turkey CPS Program FY 08-11 ............................................................ 28

Figure 1: Distribution o f 15 Yr. Old Students by Proficiency Level, Turkey, EU & OECD . 13
Figure 2: Changes in Infant Mortality Rates in Turkey Between 1970 and 2007 .................. 14
Figure 3: Legal and Judicial Issues ......................................................................................... 17
Figure 4: Turkey Portfolio Indicators vs. Bank and E C A (FY07) .......................................... 20
Figure 5: Gross External Debt to GNP Ratio.......................................................................... 41
Figure 6: Gross External Debt to GNP Ratio.......................................................................... 41
Figure 7: Share o f Short-term External Debt in Total Private Sector External Debt Stock ... 42
B o x 1:
B o x 2:
B o x 3:
B o x 4:

Government Program ................................................................................................
6
Joint Portfolio Performance Review (JPPR) Lessons Learned ............................... 24
WBI in Turkey: An Integrated Multi-Year Capacity-Building Program ................ 34
CPS - C i v i l Society Consultations .......................................................................... 38

Annexes:

Annex 1:
Annex 2:
Annex 3:
Annex 4:
Annex A2:
Annex B2:
Annex B3:
Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B8:

Results Matrix
Major Development Partners
World Bank Group Private Sector Strategy
CAS Completion Report (FY04-07)
At a Glance Table
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio and Management
I B R D / I D A Program Summary
IFC Investment Operations Program and MIGA
Summary o f Non-lending Services
Social Indicators
K e y Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
Operations Portfolio (IBRDADA and Grants)

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Turkey’s economic development has global significance, given its size, role as a
regional power, and strategic location, bridging East and West. Turkey i s a member o f
the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), and the prospect o f
European Union (EU) accession remains a key anchor o f political and economic reforms.
Turkey, with a population o f 70.6 million, i s one o f the large middle-income partners o f the
World Bank Group (WBG).’
1.

ii.
Turkey has one of the world’s 20 largest economies. Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) reached US$400 billion, and GDP per capita reached around US$5,500 in 2006,
following a spectacular recovery from a deep economic crisis in 2001.2 Turkey has
succeeded in reducing poverty, from about 28 percent o f the population in 2003, to about 18
percent in 2006, pulling more than 7 million people out o f p ~ v e r t y . Fewer
~
than 10,000
people, or less than 0.0 1 percent o f the population, are extremely poor, living o n U S $ l or less
a day. At the same time, some social indicators lag behind those o f countries with similar
incomes.

...

Turkey’s vision for development, set out in its Ninth Development Plan 20072013, i s “a country with an information society, growing in stability, sharing more
equitably, globally competitive and fully completed her coherence with the European
U n i ~ n . ~ ”In achieving this goal, Turkey can build o n a track record o f six years o f
stabilization, rapid economic growth, and declining poverty.
111.

iv.
The goal of the new Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY0811 i s for the Bank Group to be a partner with Turkey in realizing her development
vision-to achieve fast and sustained growth with equity-through full integration into
the Government’s formulated development strategy. Accordingly, the CPS i s shaped
directly by Turkey’s N i n t h Development Plan and by the Government’s Program and aims at
contributing to three main development pillars: (i) improved competitiveness and
efficient provision o f
employment, (ii)equitable human and social development, and (iii)
high-quality public services.
Pillar I : Improved Competitiveness and Employment Opportunities.
Government goals and outcomes to which the WBG program w i l l contribute to under this
pillar include (i)
sound macro-policies leading to sound public debt and external position, (ii)
increased private investment through improved export competitiveness and deeper and
broader financial markets, (iii)increased employment, and (iv) reliable and efficient energy
supply. Accordingly, analytic and advisory services (AAA)-including
economic and sector
work, dialogue, workshops, panels, and expert groups-is planned, inter alia, o n selected
V.

I Turkey is the largest borrower in the Europe and Central Asia Region and it has been the third largest
W o r l d Bank borrower in terms o f new commitments o f over US$1.5 billion during the last three years.
Turkey i s currently IFC’s fifth largest exposure after Russia, India, China and Brazil. As o f September
2007, IFC’s committed portfolio totaled US$1.6 billion.
The Turkish authorities are completing w o r k to update the data series for Turkey’s G D P t o account for the
structural evolution o f Turkey’s economy. The update, which is expected to revise G D P upwards and to be
released in the coming months, may affect k e y macroeconomic indicators.
National poverty data, TurkStat, end 2006.
Turkey’s Ninth Development Plan 2007-2013, Page 1 1, para. 1.

*

growth issues (e.g., employment, informality), Turkey’s investment climate, i t s energy
strategy, female labor force participation, financial sector aspects, and public private
partnerships. WBG financing under this pillar i s planned in the same thematic focus areasw i t h specific operations and investments expected in the areas o f competitiveness, access to
export and small and medium enterprise (SME) finance, employment, and private-public
financing o f skill training and social inclusion as they relate to employment. The CPS also
envisages substantial Bank Group financing in the energy sector, which reflects the
importance o f energy security and energy efficiency for the economy, as well as the priority
the Government places o n the energy sector and o n continued substantial Bank Group
engagement. Infrastructure, especially energy and transport, i s expected t o be a priority area
for IFC financing, while Bank support for the railway sector i s expected to continue.
vi.
Pillar 11: Equitable Human and Social Development. Government goals and
outcomes to which the WBG program will contribute to under this pillar include (i)
increased
effectiveness o f the social security system and improved income distribution as w e l l as
improved social inclusion and the fight against poverty, (ii)
making the health system more
effective, and (iii)enhancing the educational system and increasing the sensitivity o f
education to labor demand. The CPS envisages continued extensive Bank engagementincluding analysis, advice, and financing-as
Turkey’s partner in the implementation o f
social security reform as w e l l as social inclusion and welfare policy. Parametric and
institutional changes in the pension and health insurance systems, supported by the Bank, are
expected to improve the long-term financial sustainability and equity o f the social security
system and dramatically increase access to health services for the most vulnerable groups o f
the population, through the introduction o f fiscally sustainable universal health insurance. In
view o f the critical importance o f skills to improve competitiveness and employment, and i t s
role in reducing inequalities, education w i l l remain a priority area for the WBG program.
Following the completion o f the Bank-supported primary education project, ongoing and
planned future Bank and I F C financing i s expected to focus o n secondary and tertiary
education as well as technical and vocational skill training, both public and private.
vii.
Pillar 111: Efficient Provision of High Quality Public Services. Government goals
and outcomes to which the WBG program will contribute to under this pillar include (i)a
better structured public expenditure system, (ii)
strengthened public sector governance, and
(iii)improved local service delivery and disaster preparedness. The planned WBG program
w i l l include analysis, advice and dialogue o n public expenditure and finance, public debt
management, regional development and municipal finance, and natural disaster risk
assessment. Planned IBRD financing includes continued programmatic policy-based lending
in support o f strengthened public administration and governance and improved public service
delivery, in addition to social security reform, as w e l l as financing for investments to
strengthen Turkey’s cadastre and judiciary systems, municipal infrastructure and services,
irrigation, and natural disaster preparedness. I F C financing i s expected to focus o n private
sector participation in urban transport as well as water, wastewater and waste management
sectors, as and when further private sector participation occurs in these sectors. The CPS
also envisages further exploration o f the possible use o f the j o i n t W B - I F C Sub-national
Financing Facility, which provides financing to sub-sovereign public entities without
sovereign guarantees.

viii.
Flexibility i s a guiding characteristic of the CPS. The CPS i s demand driven and
i s designed and w i l l be implemented flexibly, so as to respond to evolving priorities, with an
11

appropriate m i x o f instruments. The Government’s priorities will drive the program, and the
WBG w i l l seek to mobilize the best available technical expertise and international experience
and, working together with the authorities, find, develop, and support integrated development
solutions. The t w o main reasons for flexibility in the composition and phasing o f WBG
financing, reflecting the Turkish authorities’ preference, are the intrinsic and persistent
uncertainties and volatility in global financial markets and the rapid evolution o f the Turkish
economy. Such flexibility i s also consistent with the implementation o f the Bank Group’s
M I C Strategy.’
ix.
The WBG offers Turkey its full range of analytic, advisory, and financing
instruments.
The CPS envisages IBRD engagement through free-standing and
programmatic economic and sector work, just-in-time TA and advice, WBI capacity building,
investment and policy lending at the project, program, sector, local, and country level,
contingent financing tools (such as for catastrophic risks), as well as banking advisory
services. Development policy lending i s expected to account, o n average, for around fifty
percent o f IBRD financing. This substantial share o f development policy lending reflects the
authorities’ strong interest in DPLs to accompany and support Turkey’s ongoing reform
agenda, primarily because o f the Bank’s comparative advantage in policy advice and support
linked to flexible budget financing. IFC also expects to provide a wide variety o f products
and services in Turkey-including loans, equity, quasi equity, and syndicated loans. MIGA
guarantees are available as well.
The CPS envisages Bank financing equivalent to new commitments up to USs6.2
x.
billion. The phasing o f Bank financing and the mix o f DPLs and investment financing w i l l
be flexible. Thus, Bank financing may be front-loaded, back-loaded, or evenly phased, and
the share o f DPLs may exceed or fall short o f the expected fifty percent average in any one
year and over the 4-year CPS period-depending o n the economic circumstances in Turkey
and the substantive content and pace o f implementation o f the Turkish authorities’ economic
reform and investment programs. The levels o f actual Bank financing will also depend
substantially on the availability and terms o f other financing, such as from domestic and
international financial markets, the EIB, EU, and other development partners.
xi.
The design of the CPS and the Bank Group program reflects lessons learned,
which have emerged from close collaboration with the authorities, the Completion
Report for the FY03-07 CAS, and the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG’s) Country
Assistance Evaluation (CAE) ,which covered the 1993-2004 period. Three main lessons
are that (i)
the programmatic approach to development policy lending has proven useful; (ii)
high quality analytical work has been critical as a basis for the in-country policy dialogue o n
key development challenges; and (iii)
ownership and flexibility w i l l be essential for the
effectiveness o f the new CPS-specifically,
reliance o n the leadership o f the authorities in
defining the program, and increased flexibility in terms o f lending levels and instruments,
content to respond to emerging priorities, and portfolio implementation.

5
Strengthening the World Bank’s engagement with IBRD partner countries (DC2006-0014), September 7,
2006 and Strengthening the World Bank’s engagement with IBRD partner Countries (DC2007-0022),
October 9,2007

...

111

The Bank Group w i l l continue collaborating closely w i t h Turkey’s development
partners. Among these partners, the EU i s particularly important, because o f the process o f
Turkey’s EU membership accession and the significant volume o f EU financial assistance on
grant terms as well as through EIB. The Bank has become more f i l l y engaged with the
members o f the United Nations (UN) system, especially in the social sectors and in poverty
alleviation and local developmentlparticipation.
Turkey also receives significant
development support from the Islamic Development Bank, the Montreal Protocol, the OPEC
Fund, and bilateral ODA from a number o f countries. Collaboration with the IMF w i l l
continue to focus on public sector and financial sector reforms, along with macroeconomic
monitoring.
xii.

xiii.
Turkey’s economic program and i t s Bank Group support continues t o entail
non-negligible risks. The main risks factors include: (i)
political economy risks-where the
most important remaining political risks (after resolution o f the political uncertainties before
and after the 2007 elections) relate to the process o f constitutional reform and the border
tensions with Iraq, with the EU accession anchor expected to remain a major unifying force
behind political and economic reforms and to continue mitigating risks; (ii)external
vulnerabilities-where investors w i l l observe the development o f Turkey’s large current
account deficit and reliance on capital inflows, and where maintaining satisfactory
macroeconomic performance and continuation o f structural reforms will be the key to
mitigating external financing risks; (iii)
risk o f natural disasters-where Turkey i s one o f the
most vulnerable countries to natural disaster but continues to invest substantially in
preparedness and mitigation; and (iv) reform implementation risks-where social consensus
o n the reform program and sufficient institutional capacity are needed for the implementation
o f the CPS, and which itself includes a host o f planned activities that help promote such
consensus and help build the requisite capacity.
xiv.
As of January 2008, Turkey enjoys a combination of political and economic
stability, with a single-party government w i t h broad public support and a clear
mandate, an overall s t i l l favorable global economic environment, prospects of EU
accession, and favorable long-term population dynamics. These circumstances provide
Turkey w i t h an historic opportunity, by continuing i t s strong economic policies and
programs, to achieve sustained high income growth and b e t t e r lives for the Turkish
people and, over the medium term, approach the levels of income and development in
other OECD countries and in the EU. This CPS aims for the WBG to be a partner
w i t h Turkey in realizing this opportunity.

iv

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT
A. Political and Social Context
1.
Turkey’s economic development has global significance, given its size, role as a
regional power, and strategic location, bridging East and West. Turkey i s a member o f
the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), as well as a regional
power, bridging East and West. Turkey has one o f the world’s 20 largest economies, with a
population o f 70.6 million. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) reached US$400 billion, and
GDP per capita reached US$5,500 in 2006, following a spectacular recovery from a deep
economic crisis in 2001 .6 Turkey i s one of the large middle-income partners of the World
Bank Group (WBG).
2.
I n parliamentary elections in July 2007, Turkey’s governing party (the Justice and
Development Party) w o n an absolute majority in Parliament and a renewed mandate to form
a single party government. In August 2007, Mr. Abdullah Giil, former Minister o f Foreign
Affairs, became Turkey’s 11th President. The new Government i s pursuing an ambitious
program o f economic and institutional reforms, underpinned by an agenda for comprehensive
constitutional reform.
3.
The prospect of Turkey’s European Union (EU) accession remains a key anchor
of political and economic reforms. The accession negotiations started at the end of 2005,
but an impediment emerged soon thereafter, related to Turkey’s obligation to implement fully
the Additional Protocol (October 23, 1970) to the Agreement Establishing an Association
Between the European Economic Community and Turkey (the Ankara Agreement,
September 12, 1963). At the end o f 2006, the EU decided to suspend the negotiations o f 8
out o f 35 chapters. Popular support for Turkey’s EU accession i s rather uneven in the EU
member countries and has also weakened in Turkey itself. Notwithstanding temporary
setbacks, the EU harmonization agenda and accession process are expected to continue in the
years ahead. Indeed, the Government has prepared a six-year program o f economic, social,
and institutional harmonization with the EU Acquis Communitaire. In i t s Action Plan, dated
October 8, 2007, the Government reiterated its commitment to implement EU-related
reforms, highlighting their importance for Turkey’s o w n development. Negotiations on one
chapter, science and research, were opened and provisionally closed in June, 2006. As o f
October 2007, negotiations o n three out o f 35 chapters o f the Acquis were open.
Turkey has been successful in reducing poverty. At the same time, some social
4.
indicators lag behind those of countries with similar or higher incomes. According to
Government statistics, poverty was reduced from about 28 percent in 2003 to approximately
18 percent in 2006, pulling more than 7 million people out o f poverty. Less than 0.01 percent

The Turkish authorities are completing work to update the data series for Turkey’s G D P to account for the
structural evolution o f Turkey’s economy. The update, which is expected to revise G D P upwards and to be
released in the coming months, may affect key macroeconomic indicators.
Turkey i s the largest borrower in the Europe and Central Asia Region, and it has been the third largest
World Bank borrower in terms o f new commitments o f over US$1.5 b i l l i o n during the last three years.
Turkey i s currently IFC’s fifth largest exposure after Russia, India, China and Brazil. As o f September
2007, IFC’s committed portfolio totaled US$1.6 billion.

1

o f the population i s extremely poor, living o n US$1 or less a days8 Nevertheless, infant and
maternal mortality rates are w e l l above those o f most comparator middle-income countries,
inequality i s high, there are significant regional differences and migration to major urban
centers continues at a rapid pace. Social inclusion remains a challenge.

B. Recent Economic Developments

5.
Turkey produced a spectacular recovery after the 2001 crisis and people’s lives
have improved significantly. During the past five years, Turkey’s vibrant private sector
rebounded, and economic growth exceeded 7 percent o n average. Inflation was brought
down from 70 percent in 2001 to single digits, although the inflation target was significantly
missed in 2006, in part on the account o f high o i l prices. N e t public debt f e l l from over 90
percent o f GNP in 2001 to 45 percent in 2006. Improved macroeconomic stability led to
reduced spreads in international capital markets and higher levels o f FDI, especially in the
past t w o years.
6.
Good policies and credible external anchors have been critical for Turkey’s
economic success since the 2001 crisis. Turkey’s impressive economic performance i s due
first and foremost to credible and sustained stabilization, with strong fiscal discipline at i t s
core, combined w i t h an ongoing structural reform agenda. T w o International Monetary Fund
(IMF) programs, WBG support o f the structural reform programs, and the beginning o f the
EU accession negotiations in 2005, constituted the external anchors o f the successful
program.

7.

The authorities implemented major reforms over the past five years. In the
financial sector, the Central Bank’s independence was established and maintained, the
banking sector was restructured, and the banking supervision was strengthened through the
adoption o f a new banking l a w and implementing regulations. In the public sector, the public
procurement system was overhauled, and a new Public Financial Management and Control
L a w was adopted with a major impact o n the transparency o f public finances. In the
agricultural sector, subsidies were drastically cut and replaced w i t h direct income support.
Privatization, especially in the past t w o years, picked up considerably. Privatization revenues
in those t w o years (exceeding US$16 billion) were almost twice as high as combined
privatization revenues in the previous 18 years. The increase in Foreign Direct Investment
(FDI) has been equally impressive. FDI inflows amounted t o US$2.9, 10.0 and 20.0 b i l l i o n
in 2004, 2005 and 2006, respectively. FDI inflows are expected to have reached US$18.2
b i l l i o n (about 3.7 percent o f GDP) in 2007. This i s an unprecedented sum in Turkey’s
history where annual FDI flows often amounted to n o more than a mere US$1 b i l l i o n a year.
Most recently, Turkey embarked o n an ambitious social security reform, whose design has
been supported by the Bank. The originally designed reform i s currently being adjusted due
to a ruling by the Constitutional Court from December 2006.

8.
Despite the good economic performance of the past years, macroeconomic
vulnerabilities remain. Turkey has weathered the recent uncertainties and the ongoing
market volatility originating from U S sub-prime mortgage losses, demonstrating much
improved resilience o f the economy. Nevertheless, the Turkish economy still faces
significant risks arising from i t s large Current Account Deficit (CAD), at 8.2 percent o f G D P
National poverty data, TurkStat.

2

at end-2006, comparatively high public debt burden, recent loosening in fiscal stance, and
slowing disinflation process. The possible materialization o f risks hinges o n international as
w e l l as domestic events.

9.

Fiscal performance has been strong since 2002, notwithstanding a loosening
earlier in 2007. The primary surplus for the public sector averaged 6.7 percent o f GNP in
the period 2003-06. However, the large majority o f public expenditures remain inflexible,
including the public sector wage bill, transfers to cover the social security deficit, and
servicing o f public debt. This means the state has limited ability to invest in infrastructure
and labor skills, and promoting Research and Development (R&D). The pending social
security reform i s critical for long-term fiscal sustainability. The 2007 primary surplus target
o f the overall public sector was revised to 6.7 percent o f the Gross National Product (GNP)
from 6.5 percent during the Sixth Review o f the IMF Stand-By Arrangement (SBA).
Nevertheless, the central government budget underperformed in the period January-October,
2007. In this period, the cumulative primary surplus o f the central government, calculated as
per the IMF definition, decreased by almost 36 percent o n an annual b a s i s - d u e partly to
expenditure overruns in the first h a l f o f the year, and partly to lower than expected tax
revenues as economic activity slowed down and domestic sales declined during 2007. In
October 2007, the Government revised i t s year-end public sector primary surplus projection
to 4.1 percent o f GNP and set a headline primary surplus target o f 5.5 percent o f GNP for
end-2008’. Achieving this headline primary surplus target i s expected to be challenging
unless revenue performance strengthens.
The Central Bank adopted a formal inflation targeting regime in 2006.
10.
According to the implementation framework, the inflation targeting approach adopted allows
for reasonable flexibility, by attaching an uncertainty band o f plus or minus t w o percentage
points around the headline Consumer Price Index (CPI) program target. Reaching the
historically low level o f 7.7 percent end-year rate in 2005, inflation increased to 9.7 percent
in 2006 -at close to double the 5 percent end-year target. The annual rate o f inflation at 8.4
percent as o f November, 2007 was higher than the year-end target o f 4 percent.
Nevertheless, the Central Bank decreased i t s policy rate by 125 basis points between
September and November 2007 in view o f expected deceleration o f prices in coming months
owing to the lagged impact o f monetary tightening. The end-2007 annual C P I inflation at 8.4
percent was above the upper uncertainty band.

9

See 2008 Annual Program and 2008 Economic Targets and Investments issued by the State Planning
Organization.

Table 1: Selected Medium-term Macroeconomic Indicators
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
3Np Growth
-9.5
7.9
5.9
9.9
7.6
.nvestment (% o f GNp)
18.4 16.7 15.6 17.9 19.6
Public
5.7
5.4 4.2
3.7
4.3
Private
12.7 11.4 11.4 14.1 15.3
:PI Inflation
68.5 29.7 18.4 9.3
7.7
99.1 63.5 44.1 24.9 16.2
Vominal Interest Rate
Zurrent Account (billion $)
3.4 -1.5 -8.0 -15.6 -22.6
Exports (f.0.b.)
34.4 40.1 51.2 67.0 76.9
-38.1 -47.4 -65.2 -90.9 -110.5
Imports (f.o.b.)
Zapital Account (billion $)
-14.6
1.2
7.2 17.8 43.7
-12.9 -0.2
4.1
4.3 23.2
Overall Balance (billion $)
Source: Government, IMF and WB estimates.

2006
6.0
21.0
4.3
16.7
9.7
18.0
-32.8
91.9
-133.2
45.6
10.6

2007
5.0
21.0
4.3
16.7
8.4
19.3
-36.0
112.7
-158.6
49.4
13.4

2008
5.5
21.5
4.3
17.2
5.2
18.4
-43.8
129.9
-182.3
52.3
8.5

2009
5.5
21.6
4.4
17.2
3.9
14.9
-41.6
145.9
-197.5
48.3
6.7

C. Medium-term Prospects

11.
Conditions are in place for Turkey to sustain a growth rate of around five
percent in the medium term. The strong growth in private investment expenditure in the
period 2004-2006 - despite a slowdown in 2006, and the robust industrial production growth
starting from the last quarter o f 2005 are indicative o f the improved prospects for sustained
growth and employment generation. The medium-term projection o f economic growth
averaging 5 percent annually during 2007-2012 i s underpinned by: (a) strong external
anchors, supporting enhanced confidence in the policy framework; (b) improved
macroeconomic stability, which would stimulate private investment and consumption
demand; (c) stronger export performance, which would permit faster import and output
growth; and (d) strong external inflows, including FDI.
12.
Turkey’s large Current Account Deficit (CAD) i s a source of concern. Together
with the strong recovery in the economy, the CAD began widening in 2003. I t continued
deteriorating due to rising o i l prices and the growing trade imbalance stimulated by the
appreciation o f the currency caused by reverse currency substitution and large capital
inflows. After reaching a record high o f 8.2 percent in 2006, the C A D to GDP ratio i s
expected to have narrowed to an estimate o f 7.4 percent in 2007 due to slowing domestic
demand and a moderate recovery in tourism revenues. In 2008, the CAD i s projected to be
around 8 percent o f GDP again, because o f the evolution in domestic demand, slowing global
growth, high o i l prices, and the recent appreciation o f the YTL.
13.
The quality of financing of the current account deficit has significantly
improved, though risks remain. The share o f non-debt creating inflows (FDI plus net
errors and omissions) in total capital inflows grew to 51 percent in 2006 from 27 percent in
2004. Net FDI inflows reached a record high o f US$19 billion in 2006, corresponding to 4.8
percent o f GNP and covering almost 60 percent o f the CAD. Nevertheless, debt-creating
inflows s t i l l account for a significant share o f total inflows. Maintaining high levels o f nondebt creating inflows will be important for the continued sustainable financing o f Turkey’s
current account deficit.

4

Table 2: Baseline Debt Dynamics

Gross Domestic Debt Stock
Net Debt Stock
Net Domestic Debt Stock
Domestic Interest Payments 21
D o m Debt Amortization
PSBR 31
Net External Debt Stock

71.1
90.5
52.8
23.0
25.5
16.7
37.7

56.3
78.5
46.2
15.9
24.7
12.5
32.3

56.4
70.4
48.3
14.8
24.3
9.6
22.1

54.5
63.5
46.0
11.7
29.2
4.8
17.5

52.9
55.4
46.9
7.6
27.6
-0.7
8.5

46.3
44.6
39.3
6.0
20.6
-0.7
5.2

43.5
40.7
37.7
6.1
17.6
2.2
3.0

42.0
39.2
35.7
6.5
15.2
2.4
3.6

40.4
36.2
34.4
7.8
13.6
2.1
1.8

37.4
33.2
32.4
7.0
7.9
1.7
0.8

35.1
31.4
31.1
5.4
9.0
1.1
0.3

I

IMacroeconornic Indicators

CPI Inflation (%, DecDec)
GNP growth rate (%)
Primary Balance (% o f GNP) 13

68.5
-9.5
5.1

29.7
7.9
4.2

18.4
5.9
6.3

9.3
9.9
7.0

7.7
7.6
6.8

9.7
6.0
6.7

8.6
5.2
4.3

8.5
5.0
4.1

5.2
5.5
5.5

3.9

5.5
5.0

4.0
5.0
4.0

I ) For the Central Government
1 ) For the Consolidated Public Sector
3) Figures are in terms of annualized GNP as of June, 2007. Stock variables are as oflune 2007; others are annualized as o f this date.
4) As oflune, 1 0 0 7 .

14.
Foreign investors’ substantial and growing exposure in Turkish assetsreflected in the rising share of foreigners’ holdings in equity and bond market-has
increased the economy’s vulnerability to changes in global risk appetite. As o f
November 2007, non-resident bond holdings amounted to YTL 35.7 billion, corresponding to
about 31 percent o f total market debt, while foreigners held almost 72 percent o f Turkish
equities. Such flows carry the risk o f sudden reversals, due to a change in investors’ risk
appetite for emerging market assets. Turkey’s flexible exchange rate regime and increased
foreign exchange reserves help cushion against market volatility and mitigate the adverse
effect o f sudden reversals.
15.
Turkey’s CAD i s a particular concern because of i t s still substantial external
debt. The external debt to GNP ratio fell from 77 percent in 2001 to an estimated 50 percent
in 2007. I t i s projected to increase in the near term, at a decelerating pace, before beginning
to stabilize at the end o f the CPS period. The projected upward trend in the period 20082009 mainly reflects an expected widening in the CAD in 2008. In this period, corporate
sector external borrowing i s expected to be the main driver o f the projected increase in
external debt ratio, as i t has been in recent years. The gross external debt-to-exports ratio i s
projected to remain broadly stable, declining only moderately throughout the period.

The net public debt to GNP ratio, which fell from over 90 percent in 2001 to 45
16.
percent in 2006, i s projected to decline further, from about 40 percent in end-2007 to around
3 1 percent in 201 1-in a scenario o f sustained growth, adherence to fiscal discipline, and a
stable external environment and exchange rate. (See Table 2 above). Either a lower than
projected primary fiscal surplus or a depreciation o f the Turkish L i r a would imply
correspondingly higher public debt as a share o f GNP. Also, public debt remains sensitive to
interest and exchange rate movements as floating rate notes and foreign exchange (FOREX)
denominated debt accounted for about 57 percent o f total debt stock as o f June, 2007.

5

17.
The Central Bank has announced its goal to bring inflation down to 4 percent in
the period 2008-2010. In 2006, inflation had reversed i t s downward trend o f the previous
years and risen back to about 10 percent. In 2007, CPI inflation fell again to 8.39 percentbut inflation stayed well above the Central Bank’s 4 percent target and the upper uncertainty
band o f 6 percent. Nevertheless, the core C P I index - excluding energy, unprocessed food,
alcoholic beverages, tobacco products and gold - remained around 6 percent during 2007. In
the first months o f 2008, possible increases in food and energy prices may lead to a
temporary increase in annual CPI inflation. The annual CPI inflation i s projected to fall to
about 5 percent in end-2008.

11. T U R K E Y ’ S V I S I O N AND KEY DEVELOPMENT C H A L L E N G E S
Box 1: Government Program
The development program o f the Turkish Government i s set out in three key documents that
outline Turkey’s overarching development goals, the medium-term reform agenda, and
specific actions and responsibilities within the Government.
Ninth Development Plan 2007-2013: The Turkish General National Assembly approved this
plan in 2006 and it has become L a w No. 877. This framework provides a long-term
perspective and represents unity in objectives by the public sector and c i v i l society. I t aims
for an enhanced quality o f life through an inclusive development process.
Government Action Plan: Separate short and medium-term plans translate the broader
objectives o f the Ninth Development Plan into specific operational actions for line ministries’
and Government agencies’ responsibilities. The Government issued a Quarterly Action Plan
for the fourth quarter o f 2007 and an Annual Program for 2008.
Program for Harmonization with EU Aquis: T h i s i s a detailed plan outlining the specific
actions needed to be implemented to hlfill the 35 chapters for EU accession.

18.
The Government’s Ninth Development Plan for 2007-13 sets out a vision of
Turkey with stable growth, a more equitable income distribution, and increased global
competitiveness, as the country transforms into an information society and completes
EU harmonization. The development priorities embedded in the Plan are clustered around
improved competitiveness and employment, equitable human and social development, and
efficient provision o f high-quality public services, with emphasis o n the reduction o f
regional differences. The agenda for EU accession i s a major cross-cutting theme. The
following i s a selection o f Government action areas that are particularly relevant to the
cooperation with the WBG.

A. Improved Competitiveness and Employment Opportunities
19.
Government policies aim to achieve sustained r a p i d growth and improved
living standards through increased competitiveness and the creation o f employment
opportunities. Maintaining sound macroeconomic policies, improving the investment
climate, enhancing the flexibility o f the labor market, upgrading the skills o f the labor
force, increasing access t o investment capital, promoting the generation o f knowledge
and innovation, modernizing Turkey’s infiastructure and developing conditions for non-

6

agricultural rural activities are critical ingredients o f the Government’s multi-year reform
program.
20.
Creating jobs i s a central priority. Despite strong growth, the employment rate
i s low, especially among women, and unemployment i s high, especially among youth. In
2006, only 48 percent o f the working age population had a j o b or were looking for a job;
26.1 percent o f Turkish women were employed (EU averages were 64 percent and 56
percent, respectively). Current youth unemployment i s 18.7 percent, almost twice as high
as the overall unemployment rate o f about 10 percent.” International experience has
shown that the most important element to reduce poverty o n a sustainable basis i s the
creation o f good jobs that i s productive jobs in safe environments that generate sufficient
income to raise a family.
Creation o f more and better jobs in T u r k e y i s closely related to continued
21.
private sector growth. Strong private sector growth in Turkey in turn depends on: (i)
an improved investment climate; (ii)a better functioning labor market and improved
skills; (iii)enhanced financial stability and access to finance; and (iv) improved f i r m s ’
technological progress and increased use o f quality standards; and (v) adequate and
affordable electricity supply.
22.
Reduced informality, lowered barriers to entry, operation and exit o f firms,
and continued strong privatization are key ingredients o f a better investment
climate. In order to streamline the legal, regulatory and administrative framework o f the
investment climate in Turkey “Reform Program for the Improvement o f the Investment
Climate o f Turkey” i s underway. Recently, Turkey has attracted record levels o f foreign
direct investment which i s a s i g n o f the improving investment climate in the country.
However, there are continuing problems that should be resolved during the upcoming
period. A large portion o f GNP (with estimates varying between 35 to 55 percent) i s
produced by the informal sector, and social security contributions are only paid by about
47 percent o f the active labor force. Taxation i s the main driver o f informality, which
decreases productivity, growth and employment. The Government recently reduced the
corporate income tax from 30 to 20 percent and implemented tax reforms to improve
collection efficiency and reduce f i r m s ’ compliance costs. Further reforms are needed to
spread the tax burden to all firms, reduce compliance costs and minimize labor tax rates.
While starting a new business does not take much time, i t s cost i s high. Obtaining a
license also takes longer than in comparator countries, and the fees are also high. Finally,
exiting the market takes longer and yields lower recovery rates than in comparator
countries.
Continued strong privatization will also support a better investment
environment.
lo

Available regional data reveal n o particular difference in terms o f change in employment and
unemployment across regions. I t i s also not clear that lagging regions have higher unemployment rates. For
example, unemployment is significantly above the country average in Istanbul despite the l o w participation
rate, while unemployment is almost h a l f the average in the less developed regions o f the Black Sea and
North-East Anatolia. Employment rates are higher in lagging regions probably because o f informal
employment in agriculture.

7

23.
Reforming the labor market and improving the quality o f labor s k i l l s are
essential for job-creating growth. Turkish labor regulations are inflexible. Payroll
taxes and compulsory non-wage costs are high, and the employment protection
legislation i s restrictive. Key measures to reform the labor market include increasing the
flexibility o f labor regulations, extending unemployment insurance coverage, easing
restrictive employment protection rules, and reducing payroll taxes and other laborrelated costs. Improving labor skills i s also essential and the Government’s Development
Plan includes a number o f programs and policies which would link skill-building
activities, including vocational and technical training, to the development o f core,
demand-determined competencies.
Despite successful results o f recent education
reforms, challenges remain, including l o w enrollment in secondary and tertiary
education, l o w students’ proficiency in problem solving (math, reading and science) and
limited training provided by Turkish firms. Raising educational achievement, aligning
the contents o f education with the needs o f the labor market, and increasing training
provided to workers by f i r m s are all critical for improving the skills o f the labor force.

24.
Strengthening financial sector stability and improving access to finance are
needed for private sector growth. The financial system has substantially recovered
from the 2001 crisis. Credit has grown rapidly, numerous foreign banks have entered
through acquisitions or partnerships, Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) for two large state
banks have been successful, and a new Banking L a w in 2005 i s facilitating strengthened
regulation and supervision. Strengthening the supervisory framework and completing the
privatization o f the three large state banks remains a key medium-term goal. Enhancing
access to medium and long term finance for f i r m s and individuals remains an important
priority for strengthening private sector competitiveness and growth.
Financial
intermediaries in Turkey are constrained in their access to medium term funds, and are
mostly funded by deposits and up to 1 or 2 year borrowing. In order to manage the
liquidity and interest rate risks associated with medium and long term lending, financial
intermediaries (banks and leasing companies in particular) need better access to medium
term funding, for instance as provided by medium and long term credit lines.
Complementary reforms to strengthen the underpinnings o f the credit market include
improving the movable collateral regime, the collection and sharing o f f i r m s ’ credit
information, enforcing the bankruptcy law, improving the quality o f accounting and
auditing among firms, and strengthening corporate governance. Streamlining the taxation
regime to level the playing field between financial intermediaries could help improve
efficiency in the Turkish financial sector.

25.
Technological progress a n d the increased use o f the Internet and quality
standards enhance firms’ competitiveness. Turkey almost doubled R&D expenditures
in the past decade, but R&D, financed by private f i r m s and productive innovation are s t i l l
limited. The level o f technology absorption i s moderate. Increasing productive
innovation and technology adoption at the firm level requires reviewing the existing
legislation, improving protection o f intellectual property rights, reviewing fiscal
incentives for R&D and assessing the results o f existing innovation and technology
adoption programs. Increasing f i r m s ’ access to-and

8

productive use of-the

Internet

requires continuing liberalization o f the telecom sector, improving telecom regulation,
implementing universal access fund schemes, improving I T skills o f the labor force and
use o f the internet by Government agencies. As for the use o f quality standards,
increasing the number o f certified firms requires improving the National Quality System,
including standardization, accreditation services and metrology, as well as providing
training, consultancy services and matching grants for quality certifications to firms.

26.
Continued restructuring o f agriculture and off-farm r u r a l development are
necessary for improving competitiveness a n d creating jobs in rural areas.
Agriculture accounts for 9.2 percent o f GNP and 27.3 percent o f employment. W h i l e
employment in agriculture i s s t i l l high, i t has been declining during the last two decades
with the resultant rural-urban migration. A particular challenge in the years ahead will be
to balance agricultural and rural development and the respective policies and institutional
and implementation arrangements against the backdrop o f on-going changes in the
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). Support to entrepreneurial activities in the services
and industry sectors will continue gaining in importance, with priority o n financing o f
essential institutional and infrastructure investments rather than income support as such.
To take maximum advantage o f EU pre-accession funds for agriculture and rural
development, several complementary actions are underway. A Rural Development
Strategy has been prepared, and an Instrument for Pre-Accession for Rural Development
(IPARD) plan i s in preparation, which, among other things outlines the establishment of a
Rural Development Paying Agency, and which proposes to strengthen participatory
management processes
27.
Infrastructure services are an important driver o f growth. The importance o f
these services reflects both internal demand and Turkey’s geopolitical position - as a link
between Europe, Asia and the Middle East. Although Turkey is relatively well-endowed
with infrastructure compared to other emerging economies, i t falls short o f OECD and
EU standards. Businesses are burdened by costly backbone infi-astructure services of
insufficient quality. The dominant transport mode - road -- suffers from localized
congestion and deteriorating road quality. W h i l e daunting, this combination suggests that
much can be gained through more efficient, user-financed, operations. The largest
transformational challenge i s moving from monopolistic state entities providing services
toward the m i x o f private and state that characterizes efficient higher income economies.
In key infrastructure service areas, Turkey has already introduced or made substantial
progress in designing the changes to legal and regulatory structures needed to meet EU
acquis requirements.
28.
Energy supply security i s a crucial concern for Turkey. As a result o f rapidly
growing demand generated by strong growth and rising social standards, electricity
supply shortages have begun to emerge and Turkey faces a potentially serious supply
crisis that could have significant macroeconomic implications. Efforts to improve
efficiency and improve demand management are yet to have a significant impact and
need to be enhanced. Levels o f private sector investments have not been sufficient to
ensure that supply keeps pace with demand growth, and options for significant imports
being available are also limited in the near term. There i s thus a need for increasing
investments in domestic generation and transmission capacity. This will entail a range o f
9

measures to encourage greater private sector investment in additional generation
capacity. Public sector investments will be required to augment transmission capacity
and, at least in the short-term, also in generation to meet the shortfall between the
required level o f investments and the investment expected to be realized from the private
sector.
29.
T h e Government i s updating i t s national energy strategy, with a view to
meeting Turkey’s growing energy demand in an efficient and sustainable manner. The
strategy will be consistent with the Ninth Development Plan’s objective o f ensuring
security o f energy supply while keeping adverse environmental effects at a minimum
level. While Turkey’s carbon emissions are s t i l l below those o f several comparable
countries, especially o n a per capita basis, emissions have been increasing substantially,
along with high economic growth over the last decade. The energy sector has contributed
most to this increase in emissions, and as Turkey’s energy demand and energy use are
expected to continue growing rapidly, energy efficiency and environmental and climate
change considerations will be o f increasing importance. The strategy will likely include a
wide range o f measures to: increase energy efficiency and improve demand management;
revise end-user tariffs, reduce electricity losses, improve collections (particularly from
municipalities) and resolve inter-enterprise arrears to improve the financial viability o f
the sector and thereby improve the incentives for private investment; emphasize
renewable energy development; increase the reliability and efficiency o f existing
generation through investments in rehabilitation (including environmental upgrades);
privatize the distribution network and selected existing generation plants; improve the
functioning o f the wholesale market; and introduce a capacity mechanism. Similarly,
continued investments would be required in the gas sector to ensure the adequate gas
supply to meet residential, industrial and power generation needs.

B. Equitable Human and Social Development
30.
H u m a n a n d social development constitutes a k e y objective o f the
Government’s program. Turkey has successfully reduced poverty and inequality in the
past years but social indicators lag behind comparator countries. The Government plans
call for the implementation o f social security reform, including the introduction o f
universal health insurance, modernization o f the education system to improve i t s quality
and relevance, the restructuring o f the health sector and a reduction in social disparities,
all leading to reduced poverty rates and inequality levels.
Improving income inequality and promoting social inclusion i s core to
31.
Turkey’s social policy plans. Turkey’s income inequality i s comparable to other middle
income countries but i t remains well above levels in the EU. Turkey’s income
concentration had a Gini coefficient (measuring inequality) o f 38 in 2005, compared with
25-30 for most EU countries. Nonetheless, inequality has been reduced considerably
since 1994 (see Table 3 below). The Government’s Development Plan specifically calls
for improving the income distribution over the next years.

10

32.
Poverty has also declined and extreme poverty i s low. Poverty declined from
28 percent in 1994 to 17.81 percent in 2006, and extreme poverty was reduced to below 1
percent, according to Turkish statistics'
Important regional difference in welfare and
poverty do persist, however. In 2001, the highest provincial GDP per capita was almost
11 times the lowest GDP per capita, reflecting substantial differences in income and in
economic growth across provinces. In Turkey, there i s a high degree o f social solidarity
such that poor people share resources with poorer neighbors, reducing the extent o f
extreme poverty. This informal coping mechanism, strongest in rural areas, was under
considerable stress after the crisis o f 2001 but appears to be working still, as qualitative
fieldwork suggests.

',

Table 3: Poverty and Inequality, 1994-2005

Sources 1994 & 2002, World Bank poverty assessments 2003-2005, Turkstat.

33.
As an important poverty reduction measure, Turkey introduced, with Bank
support, a conditional cash transfer (CCT) program in 2001. Today, the program
reaches 2.6 m i l l i o n children in poor households in a, by international standards, welltargeted manner. An impact evaluation has shown that the CCT program has improved
nutrition and school attendance o f beneficiary children, with important positive spill-over
benefits in health, education, improved frequency o f treatment for diarrhea, improved
vaccination compliance and registration o f marriages and births. Further, qualitative data
suggests that the program has contributed to the empowerment o f women who receive the
CCT payments for their children.
Implementationof the social security reform remains a key priority. In 2006,
34.
Parliament passed a landmark reform, including parametric and institutional changes in
the pension system and the introduction o f universal health insurance. The pension
reform i s important for fiscal sustainability, the health reform i s important for access, and
both are important for equity. In December 2006, the Constitutional Court ruled that
some o f the provisions o f the law should not be implemented, mostly those affecting c i v i l
servants and that such provisions be revised in accordance with the particular status o f
civil servants in the Constitution. In view o f the Court decision, the Government decided
to postpone the implementation o f the law. The Government has confirmed i t s strong
support for the reform and submitted revised legislation to Parliament in November 2007.
The implementation i s not expected to begin until July 2008, leaving time for any further
~

II

Poverty is defined in the 2005 Joint Poverty Assessment as the consumption level required to meet
necessary food and non-food needs. Reflecting local conditions and a local line, extreme poverty is
measured by consumption below the cost o f food. Other poverty estimates such as U S $ l per day poverty
depend o n the purchasing power parity used, but are also low.

11

constitutional challenges to be resolved. W h i l e the long term financial balance will be
unaffected, the short and medium term deficits are expected to rise somewhat due to the
revision required by the Constitutional Court. Nevertheless, savings from the reform are
expected to be substantial.

35.

L o w levels o f education translate into a workforce with s k i l l deficiencies and
present significant constraints on operations and job growth in the private sector.
The Turkish workforce has lower levels o f education than nearly all comparator countries
(such as Bulgaria, Chile or Poland with approximately similar income levels). Almost 60
percent o f the Turkish workforce has less than ten years o f education. In addition, and as
the Government spells out in i t s Development Plan, no system currently exists that would
offer new labor market entrants and current workers to build their job-relevant
competencies in a flexible, modular manner.
Enhanced quality and relevance o f education are critical for Turkey’s future.
36.
While enrollment in basic education has increased by almost 1.8 million since 1997
reform, the gross enrollment rate for 2005/2006 stood at 96.34 percent with the net
enrolment rate likely to be lower due to repetition and coverage, showing that s t i l l an
important fraction o f school-age children remain outside the primary school system,
many o f them girls, or live in rural areas and/or are poor. In addition, the availability o f
early childhood development and preschool programs are quite limited in Turkey.
Secondary education attainment i s l o w by international standards. Figure 1 below shows
that in Turkey, the learning proficiency level (‘1’ being the lowest proficiency, ‘6’ being
the highest) o f 15 year olds i s significantly below the levels o f the OECD and the new
member states o f the EU). The Assessment Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA) results in 2006 show the same results (as well as the same average
ranking for Turkey, being second-to-last among all OECD member countries). In 2006,
44.7 percent o f Turkish youth between the ages o f 20 and 24 had a secondary diploma
compared with 74.8 percent for the EU15 countries. For girls the comparable rate in
Turkey stands at 38.9 percent. The rates also vary significantly by geographic region,
with much lower rates o f enrollment and attainment in the eastern provinces. Even if
students have secondary education, skill levels are l o w by international standards, as
illustrated in the graph below.
Higher education r e f o r m i s a high priority. The gross higher education
37.
enrollment rate in Turkey was 30 percent in 2004 compared with an average o f 70
percent in Western Europe and North America. The current entrance examination system
diverts resources from more productive learning, and increases inequality between the
rich and poor.

12

Figure 1: Distributionof 15 Yr. Old Students by Proficiency Level, Turkey, EU & OECD

I

301

I

25

g

20

U
0

*

$

15

f

10

n

WTurkey
O N e w Members

,

O M e m bers

5

<I

1

2

4

3

5

6

Learning Proficency Scale

Source: Program o f International Student Assessment-PISA 2004

38.
Significant improvement in health outcomes has been achieved over the past
years. The Government has a strong vision and commitment to health sector
modernization, and a well-formulated health reform strategy. The focus o f the
Government's strategy i s on improving health outcomes while simultaneously controlling
rising health expenditures. Implementation i s a challenge with reforms taking years to
implement, particularly with respect to passing laws. Despite these challenges, much has
been achieved in expanding health services, especially for rural and vulnerable
populations (e.g., rapid expansion o f family medicine, mobile health teams in rural areas
and coverage o f outpatient services and pharmaceuticals for low-income families). For
example, the infant mortality rate dropped from 53/1000 in 1989-1993 to 29/1000 live
births for 1999-2003 period and i s expected to have further declined. Similarly, the under
five mortality rate declined from 52/1000 live births (1994-1 998) to 3711 000 live births in
1999-2003 .I'
39.
Further improvement in aggregate health outcomes will involve addressing
geographic, urbanhural and income-based disparities. Currently, significant
geographic, urbadrural and income disparities in health outcomes driven by access
barriers for the poor and vulnerable and lower levels o f knowledge about seeking care
exist. For example, the maternal mortality rate stood at 28.5 per hundred thousand live
births in 2005, varying from a l o w 7.4 in western Anatolia to 68.3 at the East Black Sea
and North East Anatolia. Also, despite the notable improvements, infant- and under-five
mortality rates targeted by the fourth and fifth MDGs, respectively, are high in Turkey
compared to other M I C s and they are among the highest in Europe. L i f e expectancy at
birth in 2006 was 69.1 years for males and 74.0 years for females, s t i l l about seven years
below the OECD average. With the population pyramid changing in the coming decades,
so will the burden o f disease, placing added importance o n reforming the health care
delivery model which would need to include a review o f both quantity and specialization
o f health personnel. Also, there i s a need to continue focusing o n the equity o f spending
by better targeting public spending o n poor and vulnerable and with more resources o n
13

preventive and primary health care services and making sure poor are covered for lifethreatening illnesses.

Figure 2: Changes in Infant M o r t a l i t y Rates in T u r k e y Between 1970 a n d 2007
140

Q)

-.-g-"Qc
E'

$
-

&Q

-

10080604020 01
1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Years

Source: * Trends in Fertility and Mortality in Turkey US-NRC and SPO Five Years Development Plan Estimations
1983 Turkish Population and Health Survey 1979-1982 period estimation.
1988 Turkish Population and Health Survey
1993, 1998,2003 Turkish Population and Health Survey
2004,2005,2006,2007 TUFXSTAT estimations

40.
Promoting social inclusion i s a m a j o r element o f meeting the Copenhagen
criteria and thus for the EU accession negotiation process. Turkey has made notable
progress in strengthening the social safety-net towards the disadvantaged and vulnerable,
primarily through the introduction o f a conditional cash transfer program that effectively
- and with notable impact - reaches 2.6 m i l l i o n children in poor households. M a i n
priorities in the years ahead would include: (i)
building on the conditional cash transfer
rethinking the income support
program, further strengthening o f social safety net; (ii)
strategy for the poor and vulnerable in the context o f providing a springboard for gainful
employment; (iii)taking initiatives aiming at youth inclusion; and (iv) providing
continuous support to female employment, reducing the pay gap and in general
integrating women as full equal partners in society; (v) improving the monitoring and
evaluation o f social services and then expanding cost-effective services to underserved
population groups.
C. Efficient Provision of High Quality Public Services

41.
T h e Government's p r o g r a m puts great emphasis on improving the efficiency
and quality o f public services. Improving the quality and management o f public
expenditures, strengthening public sector governance, putting into practice the egovernment, reducing regional disparities, improving local delivery o f public services,
and strengthening environmental protection, and emergency preparedness and disaster
risk mitigation are among the key priorities. Strengthening regulation and pricing public
services in accordance with economic criteria will be important to achieve these
objectives.

14

42.
Continuing improvements in the composition and quality of public spending
will greatly help Turkey meet its development challenges and foster sustained
growth. Fiscal consolidation so far has relied heavily on revenues. Future efforts on the
expenditure side will be important to increase the sustainability o f fiscal adjustment and
help support economic growth in particular by containing current expenditures so that
sufficient fiscal room i s left for financing productive public investments. Sustained
investments will be needed in education, in infrastructure for less-developed regions, in
the energy sector, in areas where alignment with the EU acquis entails a cost (e.g.,
environment), and where significant co-financing i s needed for absorbing pre-accession
funds (e.g., rural development). Moreover, a high level o f public sector primary budget
surplus will need to be maintained in order to accelerate the reduction o f public debt in
proportion to GDP and forestall pressures on the external current account. T o this end,
reducing state aid and implementing the social security reform will be important.
Although short-term fiscal gains from the social security reform are not expected to be
large, creating fiscal room in the medium-term, especially for lowering high payroll
taxes, as well as sustainability o f fiscal balances will heavily depend on i t s
implementation.

43.
Trade-offs in expenditure allocations will be important as will expenditure
reforms aimed at efficiency gains. Increased fiscal space could be sought possibly by
reducing spending in functional areas where i t appears to be oversized in international
comparison and by implementing reforms that improve efficiency and help contain costs
in areas where expenditure pressures are being felt-such as health care and pensions.
Horizontal reforms, focused on the modernization o f civil service pay and employment
and the careful formulation o f the investment program, would also help contain pressures
on the wage bill and investment spending across functional areas. The Government
recognizes the importance o f ensuring appropriate allocations for operation and
maintenance o f public capital o n accelerated decay o f capital goods may unduly burden
the investment program in the future. A framework conducive to a greater role o f the
private sector in the financing, development and operation o f infrastructure should be
created-requiring a predictable policy and regulatory environment, together with careful
design o f Government commitments to private operators to minimize the risk o f
contingent liabilities.

44.
Addressing the unfinished agenda in public financial management reform
represents a major challenge. Far-reaching public financial management reforms have
improved budget coverage, formulation, execution, accounting, auditing, and
procurement, providing a new legal fiamework for modem public expenditure
management and accountability. The main challenge ahead i s the implementation o f the
reform agenda throughout the entire general Government, including extra budgetary
funds and revolving funds. The key areas that require further attention are: (i)
enabling a
fully functioning internal audit structure; (ii)
enactment o f the Turkish Court o f Accounts
legislation, and (iii)bringing the remaining extra budgetary funds and revolving funds
under the public financial management and control structures. l2 Effective leadership and
l 2 The Government i s expected to restructure the revolving funds by mid 2008 as envisaged in the Public
Financial Management and Control Law (PFMC), seems challenging. The Government has initiated a draft

15

coordination among agencies would be required for the effective implementation o f the
overall public financial management reform agenda.

45.
Continued improvement in governance remains a priority. Recent governance
indicators reflect improving trends, including reduced corruption. Surveys o f f i r m s and
households suggest that corruption levels in Turkey are not unlike those in many EU
countries.
Reforms undertaken to meet the EU’s political criteria (democratic
institutions, rule o f law) for accession talks are starting to have an impact. The legal
fiamework against corruption has been strengthened with specific provisions in the new
Criminal Code, new legislation on public procurement and c i v i l service ethics, and the
N e w legislation o n access to
ratification o f major international convention^'^.
information and o n the press has helped increase transparency. More streamlined
procedures for tax administration, customs and business licensing have also reduced
opportunities for corruption. As a result, between 2002 and 2005, Turkey’s performance
improved according to several surveys o f the business community. The European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)-World Bank Business Environment and
Enterprise Performance Surveys (BEEPS)14 indicate improvements in many areas
vulnerable to corruption (including business licensing, tax administration, customs and
the courts) and reductions in overall bribe frequency and the perception o f state capture”
The BEEPS also show a higher level o f confidence in the legal system in Turkey than in
the EU8 countries. D o i n g Business ranks Turkey higher than the EU8 average in starting
a business and registering property, but much worse in dealing with licenses, employing
workers, and closing a business.
46.
Public sector governance i s a key priority for Turkey in the medium term.
The Ninth Development Plan o f the Government for the 2007-2013 period identified
“increasing quality and effectiveness o f public services” as one o f the 5 development
axes. Priorities under this axes include among others restructuring o f the public
administration, human resources management and judicial reform. The public sector
governance and judicial reform agendas are o f crucial importance for a strong investment
climate conducive to growth and j o b creation, and thus for meeting Turkey’s long-term
development challenges. Turkey would also benefit from a strong public administration
that i s more apt to implement the EU Acquis. Similarly the justice sector will play a
critical role in adapting to EU requirements and standards. Improving public sector
governance encompasses a broad agenda, underpinning many o f the short-term and

restructuring plan for Ministry o f Health revolving funds and announced in its Annual Program for 2008
that revolving funds would be restructured by mid-2008 Depending o n the restructuring alternative,
bringing the revolving funds under the public financial management and control structure may not be
necessary.
l3 Turkey’s accession to the Council o f Europe’s anti-corruption monitoring mechanism - the Group o f
States Against Corruption (GRECO) - and i t s peer review processes have strengthened governance and
anti-corruption.
l4 \~~~~.worldbank.orriecairovernance
has more information o n the BEEPS.
I s The W o r l d Economic Forum’s survey o f business executives similarly finds reductions in the frequency
o f bribery related to tax, exports-imports, courts, procurement, and the diversion o f funds for personal use.
I

16

medium-term priorities in the Accession Partnership with Turkey adopted by the EU
Council in January 2006. l6 Some key challenges, for example, include:
e

e

e

e

e

Strengthening institutions implementing anti-corruption policy and
coordination among them-a
prerequisite for further improving the
investment climate;
Promoting judicial reform-to
ensure consistent interpretation o f legal
provisions and strengthen the efficiency o f procedures;
Reforming public administration and civil service, to improve efficiency,
accountability, and transparency-a key “horizontal” requirement for the
effective implementation o f the EU acquis;
Strengthening the independence and effective functioning o f regulatory
bodies-for
example, in key network industries such as public
procurement-and establishing new ones when needed (for example, for
monitoring o f state aid); and
Ensuring effective, transparent, and participatory local administration-a
key for improving the quality o f public services; for effective
implementation o f regional development policies and rural development
and the absorption o f EU pre-accession finds.

Figure 3: Legal and Judicial Issues

I

All Firms
JUdlClaryas a problem doing business
implementation of laws is consistent
information on laws is easy to obtain
confidence in the legal system
able to enforce its decisions
affordable
quick
honesthncorrupted
fair and impartial
percent of firms with overdue debts using courts to resolve
percent of firms that have been to court

0Yo

25%

75%

100%

Rl EU8-2005 0 Tur-2005

EU8 countries include Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Slovenia (Source: BEEPS
2005)

47.
The reduction of regional differences i s also part of the Government’s
medium-term agenda. Income disparity both across regions and provinces in Turkey i s
considerable. In order to support regional development and facilitate the use o f EU finds
for this purpose, the Government has begun to set up regional development agencies.
These would play a planning and coordination role, supporting implementation o f
regional plans and programs. As o f October 2007, only two regional development
16

2006135IEC: Council Decision o f 23 January 2006 o n the principles, priorities and conditions contained
in the Accession Partnership with Turkey
httu:/leuropa,eu.intIsmartapi/ce;i/sga doc?smartapi!celexapi!prod!CELEXnumdoc&le;=en&numdoc=32006
DO03 5&model=guichett

17

agencies (RDAs) have been established in regions o f Izmir and A d a n d Mersin. They are
not functioning yet because the secondary legislation required i s under formulation. The
establishment o f new RDAs needs a resolution o f a Constitutional Court challenge.
Other remaining challenges include: (i)
designing and implementing a national strategy
for regional development, (ii)
managing the EU funds for regional development, and (iii)
building capacity at the regional development agencies.

48.
Advancing decentralization w i l l have a major impact on the efficiency a n d
quality o f public services at the local level. Local governments account for only about
10 percent o f government expenditures. The Government has embarked o n a gradual
process o f decentralization. The authorities are aware o f the importance o f successful
decentralization, o f improvements in the technical capacity o f local administrations and
in local accountability, and o f the matching o f expenditure responsibilities and revenues.
The targeting o f intergovernmental transfers i s also a key issue, given the wide disparities
in tax bases among Turkey’s 3,225 municipalities and 81 provinces. Finally, the
Government i s concerned about the current mechanism used to finance capital
investments in smaller municipalities.
49.
T h e Government’s objective i s to position administrations to deliver the
public services for which they have comparative advantages a n d create the
framework that will promote efficient and sustainable service delivery. T o this end,
the Government’s program includes: (i)
improved system o f intergovernmental transfers;
and (ii)
fundamental reforms in the legal and financial structure o f Iller Bank, the public
financial institution for financing municipal development. In addition, administrations
would need to disengage from such activities that could be better provided by the private
sector. In addition local administrations would focus on those core public serviceswater supply and wastewater, solid waste management, and land use planning and
development-where the private sector i s unlikely to engage, at least in the medium term.
However, over time implementing pricing policies that will enable service providers to
recover the full cost o f regulated services will be likely to stimulate private sector interest
but will require transparent procedures o f contracting and regulating the services o f
private providers.

50.

Developing municipal infrastructure i s key to improved local service
delivery. Infrastructure investment needs at the local level are significant for water
supply, sanitation, air pollution reduction, solid waste management, secondary roads and
other related municipal services. Migration from rural to urban areas has further
increased the pressure o n municipalities to provide safe and reliable municipal services.
Migration has also created social, economic and environmental problems, and added to
the complexity o f urban planning in Turkey. Municipalities and their utilities have
depended on the central government to subsidize sector investment and operations, but
such subsidies must be linked to higher coverage and better quality o f service. The poor
credit record o f municipalities and the lack o f availability o f long-term funds have
prevented most municipalities to access private capital for investments, except for the
largest metropolitan municipalities. Allocation o f public and private funds for
maintenance and new investments at the municipal level, greater use o f public-private
partnerships (PPPs) to operate publicly owned systems (with appropriate fiscal

18

monitoring and risk management) and improvement o f governance at the municipal and
central government levels are key objectives.

51.
A particular challenge in the provision of public services i s Turkey's
vulnerability to natural disasters, especially earthquakes and wildfires due to severe
droughts. After the devastating 1999 Marmara earthquake, consecutive governments
have shifted attention from post-disaster recovery to hazard risk management. Some
progress has been made through the introduction o f a decentralized emergency
management model and the establishment o f a single central coordination agency
(Turkish Emergency Management Agency (TEMAD)).
However, institutional
restructuring has been slow and incomplete.
The difficulty o f consolidating
responsibilities for disaster risk management, currently fragmented and spread between a
number o f agencies, hampers progress in this area. While some progress has been made
in strengthening the enforcement o f building codes and adherence to seismically safe
construction practices, this remain a long-term agenda which requires not only regulatory
changes, but more importantly, good governance and better public awareness and
determination o f authorities to enforce better compliance with legal requirements and
technical standards. There i s also progress to be made in integrating disaster risk
management in the overall development and planning agenda.

52.
Enhancing environmental standards and compliance mechanisms i s p a r t of
Turkey's p r o g r a m to meet EU Accession criteria. The EU i s taking the lead in
supporting this effort. Complying with the EU environmental directives will be a major
challenge for Turkey, and will require significant investments over a long period in water
treatment, solid and hazardous waste management, industrial pollution control, nature
protection, and water resources management. The environmental acquis provides an
opportunity for greater public participation in environmental assessment and for
transparency regarding environmental information and decision making. The process o f
planning for the EU negotiations are expected to give Government and the business
community an opportunity to work together to identify and address the main barriers to
adopting cleaner technologies. Finally, appropriate management o f the environment i s
also fundamental to the Government's poverty reduction efforts, as i t helps break a
vicious circle o f poverty, environmental degradation, and rural to urban migration. In
some rural areas, over-use and degradation o f natural resources appears to be the only
way for the poor to survive. Around 65 percent o f Turkey's agricultural land i s suffering
from 'severe' or 'very severe' erosion, covering around 45 m i l l i o n ha. In many o f these
areas, rural poverty and a degraded environment forces people to migrate to urban areas,
further stressing urban physical and environmental infrastructure. In poor urban areas a
degraded environment contributes to illhealth and social exclusion.

19

1II.TURKEY-WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP
A. Past Bank Group Assistance

53.
Turkey i s the largest borrower in the Europe and Central Asia Region and it
has been the third largest World Bank borrower in terms of new commitments o f
over US$1.5 billion during the last three years. The original, FY04-06 CAS envisaged
a low-case scenario with a lending volume o f up to US$1.3 billion and a high-case
scenario with a lending program o f US$4.5 billion. Under the CAS Progress Report at
the end o f 2005, an additional year was added to the program and the overall envelope
was increased to US$6.6 billion for the four-year period. The solid lending program has
been supported by an active AAA program which has responded to the Government’s
needs for knowledge and technical assistance and included flagship reports on EU
accession, labor markets, education, and significant advisory work by a panel o f experts
in the energy sector. A focused World Bank Institute (WBI) program, aligned with the
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), has complemented the Bank’s Analytical and
Advisory Activities (AAA) work. The quality o f the portfolio has been good, with
performance indicators which are generally in line with or better than regional and Bankwide averages, with one area requiring sustained attention i s the disbursement ratio (see
chart below).
Figure 4: Turkey Portfolio Indicators vs. Bank and ECA (FY07)
I

96 loo

100

Disbursement
Ratio %

Pro-activity %

Realism %

1 rn Bank

ECA

OO
/

Turkey

Problem
Projects

OO
/

Projects at
Risk

1

54.
A strong International Finance Corporation (IFC) program contributed to
the achievement of the CAS objectives. During FY05-06, IFC has committed over
U S 9 17 million for i t s own account and mobilized US$329 million through syndicated
banks, compared to US$443 million and US$112 respectively during FYO1-FY03.
During FY07 only, IFC has committed US$551 million for i t s own account and
mobilized US$413 million through syndicated banks, the highest IFC financing ever in
Turkey. IFC’s investments have been well diversified across sectors with projects in
manufacturing, the financial sector, information technology, oil and gas, health and
education, and infrastructure. IFC has increasingly supported Turkish companies to
become more competitive, diversify risk through increased exports and outward

20

investments, and to develop into regional players. During FY04-07, I F C has financed
about US$200 m i l l i o n with Turkish companies engaging in south-south investments,
including in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Egypt, Georgia and Russia.

55.
Finally, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) has also
been active in Turkey. It has provided guarantees both for investments in Turkey and to
Turkish investors investing abroad, including under the newly established Small
Investment Program. MIGA has one outstanding guarantee for infrastructure projects
(US$135 million total gross exposure) and has issued guarantees to Turkish investors
abroad.

56.
The expected FY04-07 CAS outcomes and WBG benchmarks have been
largely achieved, as shown in Table 4 below. A detailed assessment o f CAS
implementation and lessons learned i s included in the attached CAS Completion Report
(CAS CR).
B. Lessons Learned

57.
Three main lessons emerge f r o m t h e draft CAS CR, prepared in close
collaboration w i t h t h e authorities, and t h e Independent Evaluation Group (IEG’s)
Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) ,covering t h e 1993-2004 period:
The programmatic approach to development policy lending has proven useful
in light o f the (longer term and institutional) nature o f the reforms supported by the
Development Policy Loans (DPLs) and the fact that the authorities are keen to
maintain full ownership o f these reforms. The program perhaps could have had
fewer DPLs but larger individual loan amounts.
H i g h quality analytical w o r k has been critical for helping the policy dialogue
in-country o n such key issues as education, energy and labor market reforms and
for assisting the authorities to prioritize the economic agenda for Turkey’s EU
accession. Collaborative preparation o f economic and sector work, wide and
participatory dissemination and engagement with country counterparts on the
findings, and workshops o f international practitioners, supported by WBI, have
proven particularly effective.
Looking ahead, ownership and flexibility w i l l b e essential f o r t h e effectiveness
rely on t h e leadership o f the authorities in defining the
of the new CPS: (i)
program, while seeking to enhance c i v i l society engagement in the consultation
process; (ii)
allow increased flexibility in terms o f lending levels and instruments,
content to respond to emerging priorities, and portfolio implementation; (iii)
envisage greater support for private sector development to help create jobs and
alleviate poverty; and (iv) aim at deepening t h e engagement in environment
Drotection.

21

Table 4: Strategic Goals and FY04-06 CAS Framework
Turkey’s Long-term Strategic Goals
A. Transform
economic and
social structure

B. Raise level o f health and
education, improve income
distribution

C. Strengthen scientific and
technological capacity,
enhance infrastructure

D. Protect the environment

a. Sound
Macroeconomics
and Governance

b. Equitable Human and Social
Development

c. Attractive Business
Climate and Knowledge

d. Strong Environmental
Management and Disaster
Prevention

Stabilization o f
public
creditworthiness
indicators at
sustainable levels
Less volatile
economic growth
in the range o f 5%
Single digit
inflation

L o w extreme poverty (1.8%)
maintained and vulnerability reduced
f r o m 15% in 200 1 to 12% in 2006
N e t enrollment rate in basic
education maintained at not less than
99%; girls’ enrollment increased,
especially in secondary education:
maleifemale ratio improved from
1.20 to 1.15 by 2006
C h i l d mortality reduced and
maternal health improved

Exports growth rate
exceeds GNP growth rate
FDI reaches US$1.5 b i l l i o n
o n average during the C A S
period
Stability o f financial
markets improved

Significant convergence with EU
environmental standards
Disaster prevention and
management system improved

Satisfactory
macroeconomic
and fiscal
framework
consistent with the
key outcomes
Implementation o f
public sector
reforms

Public expenditure o n health,
education and social protection
sustained at pre-crisis levels
Implementation o f (i)
the C C T
program to benefit over 1 m i l l i o n
children, and (ii)
at least 1,500 local
initiative (LI) projects to support
vulnerable people
Renovation and modernization o f
schools
Improvements in access and quality
o f basic health provision

Increase in export capacity
o f enterprises
Impro\.ements in the overall
investment climate,
implementation o f the new
FDI law, establishment o f
an Investment Promotion
Agency (IPA)
Continued independence o f
financial markets regulatory
agencies
Completion o f privatization
o f state banks; passage o f
new Bankruptcy L a w and
Commercial Code;
implementation o f nonbank financial institutions
reform

Environmental sector priorities
updated in the EU context
Introduction o f mandatory
insurance cover o f private
housing units; creation o f a strict
and enforced construction code
enforcement system, and
strengthening o f emergency
preparedness

Achieved

Achieved

Largely Achieved

22

Partially Achieved

I

C. Strategic Objectives and Results Framework of the New Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS)

58.
T h e goal o f the CPS i s to help unlock Turkey’s potential for fast and
sustained growth while establishing equal opportunity and allowing more citizens to
share in the benefits o f growth, through reforms that also facilitate Turkey’s EU
accession. This overarching goal i s fully in line with the Government’s priorities as
expressed in various Government programs, and in particular in the Ninth Development
Plan. In order to support the achievement o f this goal, the new Bank Group program will
aim at contributing to the three identified pillars: improved competitiveness and
employment, equitable human and social development, and efficient provision o f highquality public services, with emphasis o n the reduction o f regional differences. The EU
accession agenda will remain a cross-cutting theme in the design and implementation o f
the WBG program. The track record o f the authorities during the past five years and the
much improved economic fundamentals bode well for the continuation o f a successful
program.
59.
T h e results framework for the C P S i s shaped by Turkey’s o w n development
goals a n d country indicators (see Annex Al). The framework ‘uxtaposes key
objectives set out in Turkey’s Ninth Development Plan and the 60t i government’s
program and the indicative program o f activities on which the WBG will collaborate with
Turkey as a partner in helping achieve these objectives. Naturally, many o f the
objectives to which the CPS aims to contribute have a longer time horizon than the CPS
and depend on other factors in addition to those to which the CPS contributes.

60.
In several areas, the sound implementation o f the portfolio, rather than new
activities, i s expected to contribute to the achievement o f key milestones. Effective
monitoring and evaluation o f portfolio implementation and o f the achievement o f the
objectives o f ongoing projects and programs will therefore be critical. The Government
has requested the Bank’s support in strengthening i t s capacity in monitoring and
evaluation. The authorities and the Bank have agreed to conduct periodic joint high-level
reviews o f portfolio implementation and country program performance, and to focus o n
the outcome and impacts o f projects and programs in those reviews. The reviews will
build on the successful Joint Portfolio Performance Review in 2007 (see B o x 2).
61.
T h e results framework for the C P S i s adapted to the nature o f the WBG
engagement w i t h Turkey, which for calls for greater flexibility. First, there i s a tradeo f f between pre-defined outcomes and the required flexibility o f WBG engagement.
Turkey i s an advanced M I C that i s fully integrated in the global economy, and flexibility
in adapting targets, milestones, policies and programs to evolving country and global
conditions i s essential for success. The results framework will be adjusted as the CPS
program evolves and the CAS Progress Report will reflect these adjustments. Second, the
CPS i s a strategy o f partnership where the WBG engagement represents a small share o f
Turkey’s public external financing, public expenditures, private sector financing and
overall economic agenda. T o illustrate, the International Bank for Reconstruction and

23

Development (IBRD) financing accounted for about 10 percent o f public external
financing in 2006, and the share o f IBRD investment financing in total public sector
investment was 2.2 percent in the same period. Consequently, the CPS program w i l l be
one o f many factors that will be contributing to development results in Turkey, as such,
its contributions, while being important, will be limited.

62.
Turkey's statistical system generally provides reliable and timely data for
policy making. The country subscribes to the Special Data Dissemination Standard
(SDDS), and data collection and dissemination o f core economic and monetary statistics
are being carried out according to established international standards and methodology.
TURKSTAT has been receiving significant support from Eurostat and EU member
countries. The current statistical capacity allows for effective monitoring and evaluation
o f most development priorities, and in areas where further capacity building i s needed,
the Bank stands ready to collaborate with the authorities and other development partners
to establish such a capacity.
Box 2: Joint Portfolio Performance Review (JPPR) Lessons Learned
Overall assessment: The JPPR confirmed the strong Government/World Bank partnership at the highest
levels, and a j o i n t determination to strengthen i t further. K e y issues highlighted and proposed actions are
summarized as follows:
Ownership: The success o f projectsiprograms depends o n "ownership." Ownership starts with project
proposals prepared by the line agencies, based o n their own assessment o f priorities and issues and through
the participation o f a l l stakeholders.
Simplification: Choosing the simplest possible project design is critical. This i s a challenge for the line
agencies, Treasury, the State Planning Organization, and the Bank alike. In this regard, the Turkish
authorities' experience has been that sector-focused programs can successfully realize ultimate project
objectives with a sustained impact more often than ambitious projects involving many agencies.
Flexibility: Flexibility in designing and implementing programsiprojects is key. This will entail:
Limiting linkages between investment operations and legislative reforms, with the latter preferably
supported through dialogue, AAA, o r development lending
Using innovative financial and operational instruments
Reviewingiharmonizing Government and Bank requirements (such as feasibility studies) to speed up
preparation and l i m i t bottlenecks
Capacity building: Development o f institutional capacity in line agencies is an important shared goal. Full
integration o f project implementation by Government employees within line agencies will contribute to
achieving this goal. The use o f consultants in Project Implementation Units (PIUs) will ideally be minimal.
Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E): Line agencies will strive to strengthen capacity in M&E and focus o n
outcomes, not inputs. The Bank has M&E expertise and i s ready to provide support in this regard.
Implementation arrangements: Realistic project implementation timeframes and assessment o f local
capacity will help reduce the need for project restructurings, extensions and amendments.

-

..

24

D. Overall Approach

63.
The emphasis will be on partnership with the Government to help address
complex development challenges. In doing so, the WBG will seek to mobilize the best
available technical expertise, international experience, and a wide range o f instruments
that the Bank Group can deliver. WBG teams will work across sectors to develop
integrated development solutions together with the authorities.
64.
The design and implementation of the program will be flexible and demanddriven. In line with the Bank Group’s M I C agenda, the CPS provides flexibility to
respond to evolving priorities in a timely fashion, with an appropriate m i x o f instruments.
The Government’s priorities w i l l drive the program, and the WBG’s engagement will
focus on finding and supporting the best development solutions through dialogue, AAA
and financing. The Bank offers Turkey a full menu o f AAA and financing-including
free-standing and programmatic economic and sector work, just-in-time TA and advice,
WBI capacity building, investment and policy lending at the project, program, sector,
local, and country level, contingent financing tools (such as for catastrophic risks) and
banking advisory services. I F C also expects to provide a wide variety o f products and
services in Turkey-including loans, equity, quasi equity, and syndicated loans. Some o f
IFC’s long-term products such as equity and subordinated debt are not easily available
from other commercial sources o f financing. MIGA guarantees are available as well.
65.
Development policy lending i s expected to play an important role. The
authorities expressed strong interest in DPLs to accompany and support Turkey’s
ongoing reform agenda, primarily because o f the Bank’s comparative advantage in policy
advice and support linked to flexible budget financing.

66.
Reflecting the authorities’ preferences, Bank investment financing under the
CPS will focus on helping Turkey address complex development challenges, with a
heightened emphasis on results. The authorities expressed their interest in exploring
the design o f investment lending operations that link the disbursement o f Bank funds
directly to performance or service delivery. Such programs could play an important role
in supporting reforms, for example in the social sectors. The implementation o f Bank
financed projects i s expected to continue relying largely o n the capacity o f line agencies
and civil servants or regular staff from independent entities (such as Halkbank and
TSKB)-thus helping ensure the sustainability o f project outcomes over time.
A continued strong IFC engagement i s planned for the next four years. I F C
67.
w i l l continue focusing o n helping Turkey become more competitive, improve i t s
infrastructure, improve the quality o f health and education and reduce regional
development inequalities. During the FY08-11 CPS period, I F C anticipates to commit
US$1.6-2.0 billion for i t s o w n account. Turkey i s currently IFC’s fifth largest exposure
after Russia, India, China and Brazil. As o f September 2007, IFC’s committed portfolio
totaled US$l.6 billion.

25

68.
PPPs, such as in health, education, energy, a n d infrastructure, privatization
in t h e energy sector, a n d financial sector development, including micro-finance are
likely areas o f IBRD-IFC complementarity in t h e CPS. The Bank’s analytical work
and dialogue on the investment climate aims to contribute to an improved business
environment, facilitating private investments, including, but not limited to, IFC. Work on
the overall PPP framework, at the request o f the authorities, i s being closely coordinated
within the WBG. Group work on PPPs i s expected to help the authorities create a solid
policy and institutional framework for PPPs, while offering a comprehensive set o f
instruments that the authorities may want to draw on in addressing the most pressing
investment needs. For the Private Sector Development Strategy: see Annex 3.

E. Areas of Engagement
69.
T h e envisaged WBG operational p r o g r a m i s mapped i n t o t h e three m a i n
development themes o f the CPS, w h i c h reflect Turkey’s overarching development
objectives a n d t h e Government’s p r o g r a m a n d action p l a n (see Tables 5 a n d 6
below). Naturally, several activities will contribute to the achievement o f more than one
development objective.
a) I m p r o v e d Competitiveness a n d Employment Opportunities
70.

Under this pillar, the key objectives are to:
e
e
e
e
e

e
e

Maintain macroeconomic stability and sustain economic growth
Improve the investment climate and decrease the informality o f the economy
Increase labor market flexibility and improve skills
Maintain soundness o f the financial system, and improve access to finance
Enhance technology adoption and innovation
Meet Turkey’s growing demand in efficient and sustainable energy.
Promote off-farm employment creation and increase the competitiveness o f farm
and off-farm sectors

71.
The backbone o f this p a r t o f t h e WBG p r o g r a m w i l l b e t h e planned
Programmatic Competitiveness a n d Employment Development Policy Loans
(CEDPLs). The CEDPL series supports a sustained medium-term process o f legal,
institutional, and structural development that promotes growth and the creation o f more
and better jobs in Turkey by: (i)
maintaining the enabling macroeconomic framework;
(ii)
improving the investment climate - including a vast program o f privatization o f state
owned enterprises, (iii)increasing labor market flexibility, (iv) enhancing access to
investment capital, and (v) promoting the generation o f knowledge and innovation, the
adoption o f new technologies, and upgrading the skills o f the labor force.

26

Table 5: Turkey’s Ninth Development Plan Shapes the World Bank Group CPS
Vision: Turkey, a County with an Information Society, Growing in Stability, Sharing More
Equitably, Globally Competitive and Fully Compliant with the European Union
The Strategy of the Ninth Development Plan
(2007-2013):
Five Economic and Social Development Axes

World Bank Group Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS):
Three Pillars

1) Increasing Competitiveness:
Making Macroeconomic Stability Permanent
o
Improving the Business Environment
o
Reducing the Informal Economy
o
Improving the Financial System
o
Improving the Energy and Transportation
Infrastructure
Protecting the Environment and Improving the
o
Urban Infrastructure
o
Improving R&D and Innovation
o
DisseminatingInformation and Communications
Technologies
o
Improving Efficiency of the Agricultural Structure
o
Ensuring the Shift to High Value-Added Production
Structure in Industry and Services
2) Increasing Employment:
o
Improving the Labor Market
o
Increasing the Sensitivity o f Education to Labor
Demand
o
Developing Active Labor Policies
o

3) Strengthening Human Development and Social
Solidarity:
o
Enhancing the Educational System
o
Making the Health System Effective
o
Improving Income Distribution, Social Inclusion
and Fight against Poverty
Increasing Effectiveness of the Social Security
o
System
Protecting and Improving Culture and
o
Strengthening Social Dialogue

Pillar I :
Improved Competitiveness and Employment
Opportunities

1.

Sustained Economic Stability and Sustained
Economic Growth

2.

IncreasedPrivate Investment, Improved
Financial Intermediation, Deeper and Broader
Financial Sector

3.

Increased Employment

4.

Reliable and Efficient Energy Supply and
Improved Transportation Infrastructure

Pillar 11:
Equitable Human and Social Development

b

4) Ensuring Regional Development:
o
Making Regional Development Policy Effective at
the Central Level
o
Ensuring Development Based on local Dynamics
and Internal Potential
o
Increasing Institutional Capacity at the Local Level
o
Ensuring Development in Rural Areas
5) Increasing Quality and Effectiveness in Public
Services:
o
Rationalizingpowers and Responsibilities Between
Institutions
o
Increasing Policy Making and Implementation
Capacity
o
Developing Human Resources in the Public Sector
o
Ensuring the Disseminationand Effectiveness of eGovernment Applications
o
Improving the Justice System
o
Making Security Services Effective

1.

Increasing Effectiveness and Sustainability o f
the Social Security System

2.

Health Care System has Improved
Governance, Efficiency, User and Provider
Satisfaction, and Long-Term Sustainability

3.

Enhancing the Educational System and
Increasingthe Sensitivity of Education to
Labor Demand

Pillar 111:
Efficient Provision of High Quality
Public Services

27

1.

Public Expenditures Rationalized and Well
Structured

2.

Public Sector Governance Strengthened

3.

Improved Local Service Delivery and Disaster
Preparedness

n one or more o f three areas-:
Public Sector
Development (PPDPL
series)
P Competitiveness and
Employment (CEDPL
series)
b Energy

800

P Programmatic

b

900

one or more o f three areas:
PPDPL series
*Competitiveness and
Employment (CEDPL series)
Energy

SME Productivity &
Competitiveness
(credit line)

500
*Private Sector Renewable
Energy and Energy Efficiency
(credit line)
*Energy Investment Loan (incl.
transmission)

700900

300

Services I1

(additional financing)
D

Cadastre Modernization

200

*Health (UHI Implementation)”
*Health Reform and Social
Security (APL Phase 11)

Total

l’

1800

Total

’’

Energy Efficienc yl
Supply Security
Railways APL I1

*Energy Supply Security Sector
Investment Program (incl.
generation)
P Municipal

1400

employment, public
sector reform, human
capital development
& social protection,
and environmental
protection

3oo-

Export Finance (additional
credit line financing)

Lendink in areas such
as competitiveness &

I

2oo? A n

JUU

1800

Municipal Infrastructure
(Metropolitan Cities)
Environment & Natural
Resources incl. GEF from
Investment Fund for the
Mediterranean Sea Large
Marine Ecosystem
Partnership
Irrigation SWAp
Education
Social Inclusion &
Employment Program

’’

Total

2600

lrities and the World Bank have
identified the following additional areas for possible World Bank financing during the CPS period: (i)
natural
disaster contingentlinsurance or prevention investment financing; (ii)combined private-public financing o f skill
training and employment; (iii)
road maintenance; and (iv) judicial reform.
” The CPS envisages Bank financing equivalent to new commitments up to US$6.2 billion during FY08-11, with an expected
share o f around 50 percent in development policy lending (DPLs). Bank financing up to these levels-assuming Turkey’s
historical disbursement and amortization schedules-is projected to increase the Bank’s exposure to Turkey between endFY07 and FYI 1 by up to US$4.5 billion-reflecting both the demand of the Government of Turkey for Bank financing and
IBRD financial considerations. The phasing of Bank financing and the mix of DPLs and investment financing will be flexible.
Thus, Bank financing may be front-loaded, back-loaded, or evenly phased, and the share of DPLs may exceed or fall short of
the expected 50 percent average, in any one year and over the 4-year CPS perioddepending on the economic circumstances
in Turkey and the substantive content and pace o f implementation of the Turkish authorities’ economic reform and investment
programs. The total amounts of U S $ l . 8 billion each in FY08 and FY09 and US$2.6 billion during FY 10-1 1 are indicative of
the extent to which the Turkish authorities expect possible frontloading of IBRD financing during the CPS period.

” T h e planned health and education investment projects in FY09 and FY I O are expected to involve outpudperformance based
disbursements to the extent possible. Their sequencing will depend on country and sector developments-either project might
proceed in FY09 and the other in FYIO.

28

Table 6 (contd.): Turkey-Indicative

FY09 Analytic and Advisory
Services

FYOS Analytic and Advisory Services
(completed or ongoing)
3
3

3
3
3
3
3

o
o
o
o
o
o
o

o World Water Forum
o Country Economic Work
(selected issues)
o Public Expenditure and

CEMII
Policy Notes
C E M on selected growth issues, e.g., informality
Investment Climate Assessment (ICA)
Financial Sector Assessment follow-up
Youth Employment
Youth Policy
Programmatic Social Insurance Non-Lending TA
(social security modeling)
Health Sector Integrated Fiduciary Assessment
Programmatic Welfare & Social Policy
Programmatic Energy (incl. expert panel)
PPP Advisory Work + TA (consultant study)
ESMAP-supporting electricity market
Istanbul Municipal Development
o
o
o
o
o
o

CPS Program FY 08-11

Finance Work

FY10-11 Analytic
and Advisory
Services
3

Country
Economic Work
(selected issues)

2

Programmatic
Welfare and
Social Policy
AAA (ctd.)

3

Investment
Climate Work

o Programmatic Welfare and

Social Policy AAA (ctd.)
o Programmatic Energy (ctd.)
o Judicial Reform AAA

Technology adoption, research and development, and innovation: FY08-09
Health Sector Assessment (joint with OECD): FY08-FY09.
Female Labor Force Participation: FY08-FY09
Education quality: beginning FY08
PPP- implementation o f legislation: FY08-FY09
Municipal Financing & Regional Development-Selected Issues: FY08-FY09

72.

The CEDPL series i s designed around five expected program areas in support of
competitiveness and employment which will evolve and be elaborated or modified in
line with country circumstances and priorities:
0

Maintenance o f the macroeconomic framework which has underpinned Turkey’s
recovery following the 2001 crisis as w e l l as the ongoing sustained rapid economic
growth that began in 2002.

0

Improving the investment climate to foster the investment and productivity growth
necessary to maintain rapid economic growth and generate enough formal sector jobs
to absorb the growing supply o f labor arising from Turkey’s demographics and the
transformation o f agriculture.

0

Laying the foundation for overhauling labor market regulations so hiring formal
sector workers becomes more attractive for the private sector and working in the
formal sector also becomes more attractive for workers.
Consolidating the soundness o f the financial sector and increasing access to
investment credit and other forms o f investment capital.

29

0

Increasing private sector capacity to innovate, adopt new technologies and quality
standards, as well as a diagnosis o f the policies needed for endowing the labor force
with better skills to enhance the competitiveness o f the private sector.

73.

F

The CEDPL series will be accompanied by investment operations and IFC
investment financing. Building o n the successful completion o f the Industrial Technology
Development Project, further IBRD investment financing i s being considered-to support the
sustained implementation o f policy reforms launched under the CEDPLs, foster innovation
and technology adoption, and help address existing regional productivity, growth and
employment gaps. The CPS also envisages continued long-term financing to exporters and
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), such as through additional credit line financing or
new Bank and/or I F C operations-reflecting
lessons from the recent Investment Climate
Assessment and contributing to increased competitiveness. Private sector credit line
financing i s also being considered to help achieve objectives with public good elements, such
as energy efficiency, pollution abatement, or food safety. Finally, an operation supporting
the creation o f j o b opportunities in poor rural upland communities i s under consideration.
I F C investments will focus o n (i)
local banks to broaden their reach and market penetration
and to improve their financial products delivery to SMEs and microfinance, (ii)
second tier
Turkish companies to become more competitive through implementing modem technology to
diversify risk through increased exports and to reach out to less privileged parts o f the
country, (iii)companies investing outside Turkey diversifying market risk and becoming
competitive regional players, and (iv) rural employment generation mainly through support
for the agribusiness sector like second-tier food processing companies with a potential o f
expanding exports.

74.

The CEDPLs and accompanying investment operations will be underpinned by
substantial analytical work and dialogue. These A A A s are expected to build o n the
recently completed Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) and C E M 2 o n sustaining rapid
growth with equity, the investment climate assessment, and labor market and education
studies. Issues o f informality and youth and women’s employment will also be likely focus
areas.

75.
The Bank Group will continue its strong partnership with Turkey to support the
development of a sustainable energy sector. The CPS envisages substantial Bank
Group financing in the energy sector, with private sector development playing a central
role. The emphasis o n the energy sector reflects the importance o f energy security and
energy efficiency for the economy, as well as the priority the Government places o n the
energy sector and o n continued substantial Bank Group engagement.
0

Dialogue and analytic and advisory work w i l l continue o n achieving an efficient,
sustainable and secure supply o f energy to meet Turkey’s growing energy
demand, as well as strengthening the financial viability o f the sector, improving
the functioning o f the electricity market, and mitigating adverse environmental
and social effects.

0

Bank Group financed energy projects are under implementation in electricity
generation, transmission and distribution, in the gas sector and in the area o f
renewable energy. N e w Bank Group financing i s expected for investments in
generation rehabilitation, energy efficiency improvements, renewable energy, and

30

in the electricity and gas transmission networks-through
public and private investment projects.

a m i x o f individual

IBRD financing, in addition to individual investment projects, may be in the form
o f adaptable program lending, a sector-wide approach (SWAP), and possible
development policy lending to support critical sector reforms.
0

Privatization o f distribution, further increase in private generation capacity, and
privatization o f existing generation (including financing environmental retrofits)
could be supported through IFC investments and, depending o n demand, possible
IBRD partial risk and MIGA guarantees.

0

Specifically, I F C intends to support the power sector demonstrating that, properly
structured, private generation projects can represent feasible and financially
attractive investments for foreign investors in the recently restructured and
competitive power sector. Depending o n the Government’s evolving priorities as
well as market appetite, IFC would also consider pre-privatization support
through convertible loans or equity financing-with
a view to increasing the
valuation o f assets by providing additional comfort to potential investors.
Working directly with the private sector, IFC i s prepared to take long-term
merchant-risk in the electricity sector in selected cases.

76.
Infrastructure, especially transport, i s expected to be a priority area for IFC
financing, while Bank support for the railway sector i s expected to continue. IFC will
work in tandem w i t h the Bank as a partner with Turkey in moving toward an effective mix o f
private and state infrastructure services, as i s characteristic o f efficient higher income
economies.
Specifically, I F C will look for opportunities to support private sector
investments in ports, airports and logistics facilities. IFC plans to make a number o f
investments to support private sector entry into the transport sector in Turkey during the CPS
period. The Bank stands ready to provide continued support for the restructuring o f the
railway sector t o help alleviate the fiscal burden o f subsidies and reduce transport logistics
costs to improve competitiveness. However, any such additional Bank support hinges o n
sufficient progress in the creation o f a proper legislative framework for the railway sector and
the company, and the implementation o f initial restructuring actions as envisaged under the
ongoing Railways Restructuring Project. In addition, I F C will seek opportunities for
financing urban transport projects o n a commercial project-finance basis at the sub-sovereign
level through structures acceptable to the Government in the overall context o f sub-sovereign
borrowing.
b) Equitable H u m a n and Social Development

77.

The CPS aims t o contribute t o three key country development objectives under the
Equitable Human and Social Development pillar:

0

Increasing the effectiveness o f the social security system and making the health
system more effective;
Enhancing the educational system and increasing the sensitivity o f education t o labor
demand; and
Improving income distribution, social inclusion and fighting poverty.

31

78.

Implementation of the social security reform and continued support for the
Health Transformation Program will remain a key priority in the CPS period.
Parametric and institutional changes in the pension system and the introduction o f a fiscally
sustainable universal health insurance system are expected to improve the long-term financial
sustainability and equity o f the social security system, and dramatically increase access to
health services for the most vulnerable groups o f the population. Bank support for
implementation o f key health services delivery and public health reforms, as well as
monitoring and evaluation o f these interventions, i s expected to continue during the CPS
period. These interventions aim to improve the cost-effectiveness o f health services and
make health services responsive to population needs (e.g., integration o f health promotion
and public health into primary health care). Implementation o f the social security reforms,
including health reforms, w i l l continue to be supported in the context o f development policy
lending, complemented by a planned investment operation, possibly a SWAp, as a follow-up
to the Health Transition Project. Continued TA in pensions, just-in-time policy notes o n
health sector reform (possibly including the evaluation o f the impact o f universal health
insurance and the impact o f health reforms o n access to and equity, efficiency and quality o f
health services) and the continuation o f W B I ’ s health reform flagship program will
complement lending. IFC i s expected to continue to contribute to increased private sector
provision o f health services. Based o n i t s previous experience in the health sector, IFC w i l l
focus o n supporting: (i)companies that plan to become national healthcare service providers
or expand their domestic or foreign operations; (ii)companies seeking t o establish
specialized centers o f excellence; (iii)smaller hospitals and clinics, through a wholesale
approach in cooperation with domestic banks.

79.
I n view of the critical importance of s k i l l s to improve competitiveness and
employment, and its role in reducing inequalities, education will be an important
element of the CPS. The implementation o f the Secondary Education Project i s expected to
contribute to the achievement o f the Government’s strategic target o f considerably increasing
the net enrollment rate in secondary education and improving the quality o f secondary
education by updating curriculum, providing effective use o f I C T and raising qualification o f
teachers. The Bank stands ready to provide on-demand technical assistance and advice t o the
Government, drawing o n a significant body o f recently completed analytical work, covering
all levels o f education. Planned new sector work will likely focus in areas such as early
childhood development, equity in education, higher education financing, and vocational and
technical higher education. In such sector work, the Bank plans to engage young people
actively as key stakeholders.
L i n k s established through the JSDF grant for youth
development and social inclusion (implemented through the Youth General Directorate in the
Ministry o f Labor) as w e l l as the Youth Voices group (a group o f youth supported by the
Bank for three years) could be used as entries in for such engagement. Collaborative AAA, a
deep engagement o n the findings and conclusions o f the analysis, and a broad dialogue o n
policy options will be particularly important in the education sector. Capacity constraints o f
implementation o f both policies and investments, and the social sensitivities should not be
underestimated. This i s an area where the Bank consciously plans to take a relatively high
risk because o f the critical importance o f education for Turkey’s future.
80.
The CPS envisages possible new Bank financing in education. L i k e l y focus areas
o f such work include: (i)the improvement o f the quality o f primary education and human
capital development o f poor and vulnerable children, including before they start elementary
school through pre-school and early childhood development; (ii)
l i f e skills and school-to32

work transition through upgrading secondary and technical education, promoting l i f e skills
and entrepreneurship amongst youth; and (iii)
development o f a competency-based skillbuilding system, based o n actual demand, for new labor market entrants and today’s workers,
especially the poor and unemployed. Financing instruments could vary from traditional
investment lending through SWAps to a possible D P L . IFC expects to continue promoting
high quality private education at the tertiary level, and it may support vocational and
technical education that i s better linked to the needs o f the private sector. Accordingly, I F C
w i l l consider financing the establishment o f private universities and the introduction o f
university student loans.

81.
Reducing poverty and inequality and promoting social inclusion are explicit goals in
the Government’s Development Plan. The Bank aims to accompany the Government in this
endeavor through a major, programmatic AAA-in large part j o i n t l y w i t h Government
entities. In this work, the Government and the Bank will together aspire to develop policy
options o n social assistance and welfare policy, but also options for sharing the benefits o f
economic growth, that is, for making economic growth pro-poor and equitable. An important
part o f this programmatic work w i l l likely be to explore options for active employment
policies and for the inclusion o f vulnerable groups in the Turkish society. This analytical
work could lead to the preparation o f a social protection project later in the CPS period, with
a focus o n labor market activation and o n facilitating the full participation in the labor market
o f disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.

33

Box 3: W B I in Turkey: An Integrated Multi-Year Capacity-Building Program
WBI pursues a selective approach in Turkey, focusing on four areas that complement the Bank’s
analytic and financing services in support of Turkeys’s development objectives. The Legal and Judicial
Reform program supports the Government’s strategy to improve administrative governance in the public
sector. Linked to the Bank’s Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project (ISMEP)
and expected to support the Istanbul Municipal Infrastructure Project, W B I ’ s Disaster Risk Management
(DRM) program contributes to strengthening the capacity o f universities and municipalities to use customized
DRM teaching materials and formulate comprehensive policies o n DRM.
The EU Accession Leadership Support program uses the power o f peer to peer knowledge
exchanges where WBI brings leaders and practitioners from other EU member countries to share their
experience with designing and implementing reforms required for convergence with the EU. The Health
Reform program has been responsible for the successful implementation o f one o f the components o f the
Bank’s Health Transition Project “Strengthening the School o f Public Health.” The a i m i s to support the
school o f Public Health to become a center o f excellence for continuing education in health system development
and advocacy.

-

These multi-year capacity building programs have resulted in: (i)institutions that are strengthened to
implement policy reforms, (ii)better trained practitioners, (iii)a larger cadre o f trainers who ensure the
sustainability o f the capacity building efforts in Turkey, and (iv) peer to peer knowledge sharing between leaders
o f Turkey and other EU member states. WBI also enabled Turkey to share i t s experience with developing a
National Development Plan to senior Government representatives from Bosnia and Herzegovina and facilitated
other SoutWSouth knowledge exchanges where Turkey shared i t s experience o n Migration with Russia and o n
disaster risk management with India.
In FY09, WBI will transition to support the new areas o f focus in the CPS. N e w programs include: (1)
Education to support reforms in a knowledge-based economy necessary for improved employment generation;
(2) PPP in support o f knowledge transfer and hands-on technical assistance to PPP agencies to establish the
enabling policy, regulatory and institutional environments required for PPP development in line with the Bank’s
policy dialogue; and (3) Social Protection and Risk Management capacity building aimed at increasing
security, reducing vulnerability and extreme poverty for improved regional development. WBI expects to
continue its Judicial Reform and Disaster Risk management programs during the CPS period.

c) Efficient Provision of High Quality Public Services
Under this pillar, the key objectives are to:

82.
e
e
e
e

e
e
0

Improve the effectiveness o f public expenditures
Enhance the efficiency o f public expenditure management
Strengthen public sector governance
Reduce regional disparities
Putting into practice the e-Government
Improve local delivery o f public services
Strengthen environment protection, and emergency preparedness and disaster
management

83.
The Bank’s partnership with Turkey in support of continued public sector
reforms i s expected to constitute a key component of the CPS. Bank advice and financing
for public sector reform under the CPS w i l l aim to contribute to the achievement o f Turkey’s
objectives o f strengthened public administration and governance and improved public service

34

delivery and social protection, with the ultimate goal o f sustained economic growth. The
CPS program envisages continued D P L financing under the Programmatic Public Sector
Development Policy Loan (PPDPL) series. The PPDPL series supports the Government’s
program to (i)
improve the quality o f fiscal expenditures, (ii)
enhance the efficiency o f public
expenditure management, including the public investment program (PIP) and alternative
financing mechanisms for the PIP such as Public Private Partnerships; (iii)improve public
sector governance, (iv) reduce regional disparities, and (v) improve the local delivery o f
public services. PPDPLs during the CPS period and will likely focus on:
0

Support to the macroeconomic-fiscal framework that has underpinned Turkey’s
recovery and strong growth after the 2001 crisis, with an aim to ensure sustainability
o f growth and mitigate the risks arising from a complex and dynamic external
environment.
Improvement o f the quality o f fiscal expenditures, through reduction o f the deficit of
the social security system, implementation o f systemic reform for long-term fiscal
sustainability and administrative reform to strengthen the capacity o f the social
security administration, and efficiency-increasing and cost-saving measures in the
health system in order to contain pressures in health expenditures.

0

Support to the sustained implementation o f the public financial management and
control law that has underpinned the outstanding improvements in the public
expenditure management system in Turkey.

0

Support for improvements in the administration and governance o f the public sector
through actions intended to reduce regional disparities, improve local administrations
and the financing structure for municipalities through I l l e r Bank and improve the
justice system.

84.
Reform of Turkey’s cadastre and the judiciary system i s an important priority.
Bank financing i s envisaged through investment lending for the automation o f land
administration t o allow improved property valuation and taxation, and urban development.
Possible financing support for judicial reform will be decided o n the basis o f analytic w o r k
planned for FY09. The AAA program underpinning and complementing lending in support
o f public sector reforms includes the recent PER and CEM with a special focus o n public
sector reform, IDF-grant supported TA and a WBI program for judicial reform, work o n
fiscal decentralization, and a JSDF grant to strengthen the role o f Turkish c i v i l society in
local governance. The Grant i s predicated o n the belief that participatory decision making
through greater transparency and accountability can lead to better access to and quality of
locally provided public services. Additional AAA work i s envisaged o n regional
development and fiscal decentralization, while a new PER could be undertaken in the second
part o f the CPS period.

35

85.
The development of municipal infrastructure i s necessary for improved
competitiveness, better service delivery at the local level and environmental
sustainability. The cluster o f activities in this area will include h r t h e r lending to
metropolitan municipalities, as well as to small- and medium-sized municipalities that are
financially less affluent. In the area o f sub-national financing, I F C aims to support the
Government in fostering increased participation o f commercial lenders in municipal finance,
to complement the limited pool o f available concessional resources, to increase gradually
access to credit for 2"d tier municipalities, and to build up local credit appraisal capacity,
while contributing to the commercialization o f public sector domestic banks which currently
dominate the municipal finance market. The CPS also envisages further exploration o f the
possible use o f the joint WB-IFC Sub-national Financing Facility, which provides financing
to sub-sovereign public entities without sovereign guarantees and potential WBG support for
PPPs. IFC w i l l try to develop a wholesale approach to reach a wider market o f creditworthy
sub-national entities, in partnership with interested local financial institutions through risk
sharing or other arrangements.
Finally, the CPS envisages continued Bank engagement in strengthening
86.
environment protection, and emergency preparedness and disaster management.
Consistent with the C A E recommendations, the Bank i s ready to intensify i t s engagement in
environment protection-in a manner responsive to, and depending on, specific demand and
interest by the authorities, and where complementary to assistance from other sources,
especially the EC.
0

Turkey has completely phased out methyl bromide ahead o f the 2010 target under
the ODS Phase-Out 2 Project. Building on this success, Turkey and the Bank
consider launching an ODS 3 project targeting the phase-out o f
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs).
Ongoing and future planned municipal infrastructure investments are focusing o n
environmental improvements in water supply, wastewater and solid waste
management, and operations supporting renewable energy investments.

The CPS envisages new Bank financing in the second h a l f o f the CPS period for
an environment and natural resource management project which would provide
support for improved rural service delivery to poor communities in upland
catchments affected by serious problems o f land degradation and soil erosion.
The focus o f these efforts would be to scale up to the basin level some o f the
lessons learned from earlier investments, by coupling income generating
activities with land rehabilitation efforts in remote rural areas.
0

0

Additional sources o f funding, for example from the GEF-financed
Mediterranean Investment Fund, could complement these investments.
Provided funds are available and can be allocated from the GEF 4 Replenishment,
Global Environment Facility (GEF) support w i l l be sought to assist Turkey, once
i t has ratified the Stockholm Convention o n Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPS),
to manage and reduce i t s toxic POPs stockpiles.

36

Depending o n Government demand, the Bank stands ready to offer new financing
for emergency preparedness (e.g., the seismic retrofitting o f buildings) and
disaster management, including through innovative tools o f contingenthnsurance
catastrophe financing for public expenditures in case o f a major natural disaster.
Turkey i s eligible for technical assistance from the Global Facility for Disaster
Reduction and Recovery for sector work and project preparation for risk
mitigation investments.
0

Finally, Turkey has the potential o f becoming a regional leader in assisting other
countries to build their disaster response and mitigation capacities as part o f the
South Eastern Europe Disaster Risk Reduction and Adaptation Program.

F. Working with Other Development Partners

87.
Collaboration with the IMF will continue to focus on public sector and financial
sector reforms, along w i t h macroeconomic monitoring. The work o n public sector
management and governance has aimed at the strengthening o f public expenditure
management system while maintaining fiscal discipline. The Fund has taken the lead in the
short-term measures needed for the fiscal adjustment such as incomes policy, urgent revenue
and expenditure measures, and budget monitoring. The Bank has taken the lead in assisting
the Government o n the medium-term public expenditure management strategy,
rationalization o f the public investment program, public procurement reform, accounting
reform, and public liability management. The collaboration has been especially strong in the
area o f social security reform, including the containment o f health expenditures. As for the
financial sector, both the Fund and the Bank have supported the strengthening o f banking
supervision and the privatization o f public banks; a j o i n t financial sector assessment (FSAP)
has been recently completed. W h i l e i t i s expected that the collaboration with the Fund will
continue in the area o f public sector and financial sector reforms, the three-year Stand-by
Arrangement o f about US$10 b i l l i o n w i l l come to an end in the spring o f 2008. The nature
o f Turkey’s h t u r e relationship w i t h the IMF i s yet to be decided by the authorities.

88.

The EU i s a particularly important development partner of Turkey, because of
the process of Turkey’s E U membership accession and the significant volume of E U
financial assistance on grant terms as well as through EIB. The EU’s Instrument o f PreAccession Assistance (IPA) i s expected to amount to EUR 2.25 b i l l i o n (US$ 3.31 billion)
during 2007-2010. The EU w i l l support (i)
institution building and cross-border cooperation,
(ii)regional development, (iii)
human resources development, and (iv) rural development.
Programming o f Bank and EU assistance i s coordinated o n a regular basis, and strategic joint
agendas include education, financial and public sector reforms, including governance. EIB
has become a major source o f long-term finance both for the public and private sectors,
especially in transport, S M E financing and energy. Co-financing opportunities are likely to
emerge in municipal infrastructure, environment, seismic risk mitigation and social sectors.
Continued dialogue with the Government and the EIB w i l l be important to identify the t w o
institutions’ respective comparative advantage and areas o f complementarity, including
specific opportunities o f co-financing.

89.
The Bank has become more fully engaged with the members of the United
Nations (UN) system. Partnership w i t h the UN system has been particularly close in the
social sectors (United Nations Children’s Fund UNICEF, W o r l d Health Organization

37

(WHO)) and in poverty alleviation and local development/participation (United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP)). The Bank has chaired and w i l l continue to play a
leading role in the UN thematic group o n youth, and the Bank and UN collaborate on gender
issues. Further areas o f possible operational collaboration are being explored, in particular
with UNDP.

90.
I n addition to the European Union, UN agencies, IMF, and W o r l d Bank Group,
the Islamic Development Bank and the Montreal Protocol provide significant
development support to Turkey, as do a number of countries on a bilateral basis -including France, Germany, Japan, Korea, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Most such support focuses o n
infrastructure and o n sustainable social and environmental development. Annex 2 provides
an overview o f major development partners’ activities and support to Turkey.

A consultations event with c i v i l society representatives o n the new CPS took place in
Istanbul. M a i n observations included requests for (i)stronger financial and institutional
cooperation with c i v i l society through direct support mechanisms to NGOs; (ii)more
more Bank
emphasis on capacity building measures strengthening Turkish NGOs; (iii)
involvement in education, labor, gender, social work, youth, migration and transparency
issues; (iv) more attention to special education needs, including education programs for the
handicapped, early childhood development, gender equality and entrepreneurship programs
for women and skills upgrading programs for youth, (v) advocacy for an increased role o f
civil society in social sectors and request for consultative role for NGOs in every stage o f
project implementation, and (vi) creating a support mechanism to the NGO community via a
project or a newly created NGO consultative body.
G. Bank Financing

91.
The CPS envisages Bank financing equivalent to new commitments up to US$
6.2 billion during FY08-11, w i t h an expected share of around fifty percent development
policy lending (DPLs). Bank financing up to these levels-assuming Turkey’s historical
disbursement and amortization schedules-is projected to increase the Bank’s exposure to
Turkey between end-FY07 and end-FY 11 by up to US$4.5 billion-reflecting
both the
demand o f the Government o f Turkey for Bank financing and IBRD financial considerations.
92.
The phasing o f Bank financing and the m i x o f DPLs and investment financing
w i l l be flexible. Thus, Bank financing may be front-loaded, back-loaded, or evenly
phased, and the share o f DPLs may exceed o r fall short of the expected fifty percent
average in any one year and over the 4-year CPS period-depending on t h e economic
circumstances in Turkey and the substantive content and pace of implementation o f the
Turkish authorities’ economic reform and investment programs. Recognizing the
importance o f continuity and predictability, the Bank will nonetheless aim, working with the
authorities, to manage Bank financing in a way consistent with a broadly even distribution o f

38

new commitments over the CPS period.17 The two main reasons for flexibility in the
instrument m i x and phasing o f Bank financing, reflecting the Turkish authorities’ preference,
are the intrinsic and persistent uncertainties and volatility in global financial markets and the
rapid evolution o f the Turkish economy. Such flexibility in instrument choice i s also
consistent w i t h the implementation o f the Bank Group’s M I C Strategy.’’

93.

The scale of available Bank financing and its phasing over the CPS period will
be regulated by the Bank’s review and approval of each new loan commitment. The
Bank’s review will focus o n the maintenance o f sound macroeconomic management,
financial sector stability, and progress in the three CPS development areas, namely (a)
improved competitiveness and employment opportunities, (b) equitable human and social
development, and (c) the efficient provision o f high quality public services. Bank funds
account for only a fraction o f Turkey’s budget and external financing, and the levels o f actual
Bank financing w i l l depend substantially o n other available financing, such as from the EIB,
EU, and other development partners, and o n the competitiveness o f the Bank’s financial and
non-financial terms o f funding.

94.

Specifically, the Bank will assess Turkey’s macroeconomic management and
financial sector stability and performance in the three CPS development areas by
considering public policy action triggering progress in the following six reform areas:
0

Continued good macroeconomic policies, through the implementation o f a
satisfactory macroeconomic framework broadly in line with the scenario presented in
the CPS document.

0

Continued good financial sector policies, designed to enhance financial sector
stability through improved efficiency o f the financial sector, including public sector
banks.

0

Improved investment climate and reduced informality through measures such as
the enactment o f the new commercial code, further simplificationheform o f the
income tax system, and development o f a strategy for combating informality.

0

Improved functioning of the labor market including through the enactment o f
legislation aimed at increasing labor market flexibility and participation, especially
for women and youth, reducing non-wage labor costs, and increasing the protection
for workers relative to protection o f jobs.

0

Implementation of sustainable and more equitable social security through
measures such as the enactment and initial implementation o f a revised social security
and universal health insurance law that addresses the Constitutional Court decision
while maintaining the twin objectives o f long-term fiscal sustainability and

” At the outset o f the CPS, the authorities envisage moderate frontloading o f IBRD financing-with
new
commitments up to US$l.8 billion per year on average in FY08-09, and US$1.3 billion per year on average
during FY 10-1 1.
IS
Strengthening the World Bank’s engagement with IBRD partner countries (DC2006-0014), September 7,
2006 and Strengthening the World Bank’s engagement with IBRD partner Countries (DC2007-0022),
October 9, 2007

39

equitability o f the social security system, continuation o f targeted benefits to poor
families, and adoption o f a new social assistance law.
0

Improved effectiveness of public expenditures, through measures such as the
enactment o f appropriate state aid legislation in conformity with EU directives,
budget implementation consistent with the medium-term framework, continued
implementation o f the Public Financial Management and Control Law, and the
adoption o f a new law o n the Turkish Court o f Accounts.

95.
High levels of Bank financing would reflect both strong overall policy
performance and progress in the six reform areas-although not necessarily even
progress in all areas and over time-and continuing high demand for Bank financing.
Levels o f Bank financing close to or at the CPS ceiling assume, in particular, a sound
macroeconomic framework commensurate w i t h continued improvements in creditworthiness,
as characterized by, inter alia, sustainable current account deficits, improvements in the
structure o f public debt, and trends in public sector and external debt ratios.

96.

The amount and phasing of development policy lending will likely be a key
determinant of the level of total Bank financing in line with Turkey’s policies and
reforms over the course of the CPS period. Consistent with Bank operational policy, an
appropriate macroeconomic framework i s a prerequisite for development policy lending.
W i t h overall strong policies and reforms, development policy lending i s expected to play a
significant role as an instrument o f Bank financing, and Turkey w i l l likely make substantial
progress toward the desired country outcomes in this case. By contrast, a combination of
inadequate macroeconomic management, backtracking o n past reforms, and prolonged
periods o f political uncertainty over the time horizon o f the CPS, by reducing domestic and
international confidence, would likely result in stagnating progress toward Turkey’s o w n
goals o f rapid growth and income convergence with the European Union. In such a scenario,
Bank financing would not include development policy lending and would be managed so that
exposure at the end o f the CPS period would not exceed the level that would result from new
commitments averaging US$500 m i l l i o n per year.
CPS Progress Report in FY10. A CPS Progress Report i s envisaged to be
submitted to the Board o f Executive Directors in FY 10.

97.

40

H. External Debt Sustainability and Bank Exposure
98.
The external debt to GNP ratio declined from 77percent in 2001 to 52 percent in
2006. After falling to 47 percent in 2005, the external debt to GNP ratio rose to 52 percent in
2o06 and remained at this level
in
Figure 5: Gross External Debt to GNP Ratio
the first half o f 2007, - mostly due
to increased corporate sector
....................................
borrowing from foreign sources.
Private sector debt accounted for
more than 60 percent o f the total
external debt stock as o f June 2007,
compared to less than 30 percent in
m
O
N
O
*
m
w
end-2001 (see Figure 5).
m
o
o
- No N
N oN o N o N o z z

I

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

N
0

0 private sector Ipublic sector and CBRT

Note: 2007HI figure is in terms of annualized GNP as of
June, 2007. Source: Treasuiy, Turkey

99.
With Turkey's current National Accounts and GDP methodology and statistics
taken as a given, the external debt to GNP ratio i s projected to be on an upward path in
the period 2008-2011, reaching
Figure 6: Gross External Debt to GNP Ratio
almost 56 percent in 2011 (see
80
Figure 6). This projected path in
part reflects the expected widening
in the CAD in 2008 because o f the
evolution in domestic demand,
slowing global growth, high oil
prices, and the recent appreciation
o f the YTL. In addition, FDI
g 2 s g 2 g & g g z z
flows to Turkey may be adversely
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
affected by a slowdown in global
growth and delays in the
completion o f privatizations in the Source: Staff Projections
medium-term.
7

41

100. Similarly to recent years, private sector external borrowing i s expected to be the
main driver of the projected increase in Turkey’s gross external debt stock in the period
2008-2011. By contrast, the public sector i s projected to make net external debt repayments
in this period. The private sector
Figure 7: Share of Short-term External Debt in
has been behind the economic
Total Private Sector External Debt Stock
expansion o f recent years, and this
80 7
expansion has been associated
75
with a considerable increase in i t s
70
external borrowing. On the one
65
hand, the private sector’s reliance
8a 60
on
external
borrowing has
55
increased i t s exposure to exchange
50
rate risks. On the other hand, the
45
O N
O
~
X
~
surge
in corporate
sector’s
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
FOREX denominated assets and
increasing export revenues have
Source: Treasury, Turkey
partly mitigated this risk. The
share o f short-term private sector external debt in total private sector debt has been
decreasing since 2004 - increasing i t s resilience to shocks (see Figure 7). In addition, the
maturity o f almost the entire external debt stock o f the public sector was medium or long
t e r m as o f June 2007.
h
1

-

101, With high Bank financing, close to the CPS ceiling, Bank exposure might reach
around US$11.4 billion. The strong Bank lending program during the past C A S period led
to an increase in Turkey’s disbursed and outstanding debt (DOD) to IBRD from about
US$5.4 to close to US$6.9 billion,’’ putting Turkey among IBRD’s largest borrowers by
exposure.
IV. RISKS
102. Turkey’s economic program and i t s Bank Group support continues to entail
non-negligible risks. Some risks can be reduced b y sustained implementation of reforms
and by managing Bank financing accordingly. Other risks are outside Turkey’s and the
Bank’s control. The main risks factors include: (i)
political economy risks, (ii)
external
vulnerabilities, (iii)
risk o f natural disasters, and (iv) implementation risks.
103. Political economy risks. After a victory o f the governing Justice and Development
Party in the twin Parliamentary and Presidential elections in the summer o f 2007, risks o f
political uncertainty have declined substantially. The new Government received a strong
mandate to continue reforms w i t h vigor. The recent passage o f the mortgage l a w and the
continued efforts to pursue the social security reform show the authorities’ commitment to
continued reforms. The most important remaining political risks relate to the process o f
constitutional reform and the border tensions with Iraq. One important factor mitigating
political economy risks remains the EU accession anchor which, notwithstanding the ups and
downs, has been and i s expected to remain a major unifying force behind political and
economic reforms. As for the Bank, the main mitigating factor will be the use o f

l9

CY02 to CY06

42

~

S

programmatic series o f typically single-tranche development policy loans which allow the
Bank to support reform actions.

104. External vulnerabilities. The Turkish economy remains vulnerable to shifts in
investor sentiment due to i t s large current account deficit (CAD) and reliance on volatile
international capital inflows. High returns o n Turkish assets have brought large international
flows to the country. Large exposure o f foreign investors in Turkish assets made the
economy more vulnerable to changes in global risk appetite:
The Turkish economy has weathered a number of shocks since 2006,
demonstrating improved resilience of the economy. Turkish markets’ relatively
fast recovery from volatility in financial markets in May-June 2006, February
2007, and April 2007, as well as from the recent market volatility originating from
U S sub-prime mortgage losses, showed the economy’s improved resilience to
such shocks. At the same time, the impact o n domestic markets was not
negligible, indicating Turkey’s continued vulnerability to external shocks. , A
change in global liquidity conditions and risk appetite for emerging markets
remains an important external risk factor.
Key vulnerability indicators have improved substantially over the last five years,
but Turkey’s still relatively high public debt stock and the recent slowdown in
disinflation process highlight the importance of further improvement. As set out
in Sections I.B, I.C, and III.H, (i)
the cost o f borrowing has declined, (ii)
the
annual inflation rate has declined sharply, (iii)
the composition and maturity of
public debt have improved, (iv) debt management practices have strengthened;
and (v) the public debt-to-GNP ratios have declined noticeably.
Turkey’s substantial foreign exchange reserves and flexible exchange rate
regime mitigate risks associated with capital reversals. FOREX reserves o f the
Central Bank increased from US$19.8 billion to US$75 billion as o f November
2007. Reserves represented 55 percent o f gross external financing requirements in
2006 and more than covered Turkey’s short-term external debt in the first half of
2007. Turkey’s flexible exchange rate regime has helped cushion outflows during
periods o f volatility.
Gross external financing requirements are projected to stay at similarly high
levels during 2007-10 as in recent years - at about 20 percent o f GDP. Currently,
the Turkish economy i s not expected to face difficulty in meeting the external
financing requirements, as foreign investors’ interest in Turkish assets remains
strong. For instance, foreigners equity holdings increased by YTL 5.9 billion
(US$3.6 billion) in the period August-December 2007, bringing their share in the
stock market to 72.2 percent in December 2007. Foreign investors’ appetite for
Turkish equities i s expected to continue in the medium term, in part as a
consequence o f falling interest rates and an expected acceleration o f economic
growth in 2008. In addition, FDI inflows would remain strong in the mediumterm, assuming continuation o f privatization.

43

Q

The external debt to GNP ratio, after declining from 77percent in 2001, is
expected to increase from an estimated 50 percent in 2007 to 56 percent in 201 1,

reflecting largely the high C A D in 2008. With export growth projected to be
vibrant, the CAD i s estimated to decline starting in 2009, and the external debt to
GNP ratio i s estimated to begin stabilizing at the end o f the CPS period.
Maintaining satisfactory macroeconomic performance and continuation of
structural reforms will be the key to mitigating external firtancing risks. They
w i l l signal to market participants that Turkish fundamentals are sound and thus
mitigate the risks associated with large external financing needs. In i t s Action
Plan dated January 10, 2008, the government reiterated i t s firm commitment to

maintaining strong fiscal discipline, inflation targeting, flexible exchange rates,
and overall macroeconomic stability, while deepening structural reforms,
including implementation o f the pending Social Security Reform. The Turkish
authorities will continue managing macroeconomic developments, including
public and external financing and debt, accordingly, with the Bank continuing
monitoring these developments closely.
105. Risk of natural disasters. Turkey i s one o f the most vulnerable countries to natural
disasters, especially earthquakes. More than 80 percent o f the population lives in areas prone
to natural disasters, such as earthquakes, floods and landslides. These areas also generate an
estimated 83 percent o f GDP. Between 1992 and present, Turkey experienced 130
earthquakes o f 5.0 or above o n the Richter scale. In total, these caused over 80,000 casualties
and heavy damage to 450,000 buildings. The 1999 Marmara earthquake alone left 17,000
people dead, 200,000 homeless, and resulted in a fiscal cost o f some US$2.2 billion.
Strengthening the coordination o f disaster preparedness and response at the national and local
level, and the increased enforcement o f building codes would go a long way in mitigating the
impact o f natural disasters.
106. Implementation risks. Social consensus on the reform program and sufficient
institutional capacity are needed for the implementation o f the CPS, which supports the
Government’s Ninth Development Plan. The complexity and social impact o f many
elements o f the reform program, for example, the reform o f the social security system,
governance, education and decentralization o f service delivery, require consensus building
among the social partners that takes time and inevitably results in compromises. However,
implementation o f reforms would face difficulties in the absence o f this process. Bank
supported project preparation activities and analytic work can provide a platform for dialogue
and help promote consensus building o n key reforms and sharing relevant international
experience with the stakeholders. Strengthening institutional capacity to implement policies
and projects, especially as Bank financed projects rely more o n country systems, w i l l also be
necessary. Bank supported reforms in the public sector and the continued strengthening o f
country systems, including in governance, fiduciary assessments o f institutions, technical
assistance embedded in operations and IDF grants in select areas w i l l help mitigate these
risks.

44

V. CONCLUSION

107.

Given i t s size and i t s role in the region, Turkey's economic development has
global significance. Turkey has an impressive five-year track record o f macroeconomic
performance and reforms.
However, significant challenges remain: maintaining
macroeconomic stability, strengthening competitiveness, sustaining strong economic growth,
creating more jobs, further developing human capital and reducing inequalities, and
improving the provision o f public services. A substantial Bank Group program i s planned for
the next four years in partnership w i t h the authorities in achieving their vision o f a
prosperous Turkey, with income convergence with the countries o f the EU.
'

45

. .

. .

. .

. . .

. . .

. . .

. .

.. .

. . . .

rn

' .

El

El

. .

..

.

. .

Annex 2
Page 1 o f 2

Multilateral Cooperation
Council of Europe
Development Bank

Focus on strengthening social integration, managing the
environment and developing human capital.

Approximately Euro 1.5
billion for 2008-201 1

European Investment Bank

Support for enterprise development, infrastructure
development, energy sector and work in partnership with
local banks and financial institutions to increase the
availability and diversity of financing and improve the
investment climate.

At least Euro 2 billion per
annum between 2008-10

Energy, earthquake risk
mitigation, support to
SMEs, transport and
Znvironment and
infrastructure.

European Union

Ongoing support through MEDA and Pre-Accession
Assistance for Turkey. New support through the
instruction for Pre-Accession. Focus on institution
building, regional and cross border cooperation, regional
development (transport, environment, regional
competitiveness), human resources development
(employment, education, social inclusion) and rural
development.

Euro 1.759billion for 2008 to
2010 expected.

Education, agriculture and
rural development,
transport, financial and
public sector reforms,
imgation, environment
and Avian Flu

IMF

Fiscal adjustment, including incomes policy, urgent
revenue and expenditure measures and budget monitoring

Three year stand by
arrangement between 20052008: US$IObillion

Islamic Development Bank

Focuses on the economic development and social progress
o f its member countries and Muslim communities in nonmember countries.

Targets a lending volume of
US$150-200million
annually.

Social security reform,
financial sector including
strengthening o f banking
supervision and
privatization of public
banks.
Trade and Project Finance

Montreal Protocol

Elimination of the production and consumption of ozonedepleting chemicals. The objective of the World Bank as an
implementingagency i s to help client countries accomplish
their ozone protection objectives through strategic
planning, policy formulation, and technical support in
project identification, preparation and implementation.

US$4.4 million spent between
2004-07 under the Ozone
Depleting Substances grant.

World Bank-implemented
grant for phasing out of
ozone-depleting
substances.

OPEC Fund

Infrastructureitransport

Antalya Light Railways
System and Samsun Light
Railways System projects in
2006 (US60 million). No
available projections for
2009-10 (based on demand
from Government).

Disaster management,
transport and
infrastructure.

UN Group

Focuses on governance, poverty reduction, environment &
sustainable development, capacity development for
democratic governance, gender & youth, private sector
partnership and information technology.

UNDP: US$33 million
delivered between 2006 and
2007, and estimated
programmatic delivery of
US$75-90 million between
2008 and 2010.
UNHCR: Gross ODA (200405) average o f US$6 million.

'

Education, social loans,
iealth, urban
ievelopment, judicial
ievelopment, ecological
md natural disasters.

Social sectors with focus
on poverty reduction,

youth inclusion, and
technical assistance at the
local government level.

Annex 2
Page 2 o f 2

Bilateral Cooperation
France
(Agence Franqaise de
Developpement -AFD)

Focus on three pillars: (i) SME support promoting
socially and environmentally sound practices, (ii)
environment (sustainable energy and industrial
pollution) and (iii) regional development through
supporting decentralization, including at municipal
level financing (Kayseri, Bursa and Istanbul).

Germany
(Kreditanstalt fuer
Wiederautbau (KfW)
and Gesellschaft fuer
Technische
Zusammenarbeit
(GTZ))

Through KfW: Water sector and financial sector
development

Japan
(mainly Japan Bank for
International
Cooperation, Japan
International
Cooperation Agency)

Priority areas are environment infrastructure
improvement, solid waste management, energy
efficiency, disaster prevention and recovery
measures, traffic management, reduction o f
disparities, human resource development and
technicaVenvironmentaVsectorspecialized training
programs for government officials.
32 Set Electric Suburban Train Project.

Korea
(Export-lmport Bank of
Korea - KEXIM)
Spain

Through GTZ: Technical assistance on
environmental protection; SMEs, support for local
government capacity building.

Priority areas are light raiVtransport, energy and
waste water.

.

.
.
9

The Netherlands

Mostly through the UNDP as implementingagency.
Focus on social sectors such as post-disaster
humanitarian assistance, development of women and
children in the East and South East, and on Youth
initiatives.
Light rail, environment, agriculture, industry,
environment, telecommunication, human rights and
SMEs.

United Arab Emirates
(Abu Dhabi
BanWFoundation)

Municipal infrastructureand disaster management.

United Kingdom

EU accession support, including capacity building
for individual ministries and judicial reform. They
also have initiatives in the area of climate change.

United States
(USAID)

Education, health, poverty.

Commitments for 2007 are Euro 4.5 million
and for 2008 are Euro 4 million.
Financial Assistance disbursed through KfW of
around US$57.25 million in 2008.
Technical Assistance disbursed through GTZ
o f around Euro 1 million between 2008-10.

1

Total ofJPY101.5 billion -for yen loans, grant
and technical assistance (2004 - 2005).
Including: Bosporus Rail Tube Crossing
Project JPY 98 billion in 2005 (about US$936
million).

1

US$50 million in 2006

1

1

Switzerland

Euro 550 million committed between 20052007, including Euro 151 million from
PROPACO (AFD’s subsidiary focused on
private sector support). AFD started its
activities in Turkey in 2004.

Energy, support to SMEs and subnational lending.

KfW: Cooperation in the areas of
infrastructureand environment.
GTZ: environment and
infrastructure

Environmentalprotection,
environnental infrastructure,
disaster management.
Governance and decentralization in
the context o f the large grant to
Turkish Economic and Social
Studies Foundation (TESEV)

JPY 24 billion for Fast Train Project in 2006
(Instituto de Credito Oficial).
US$87 million targeted for 2008 (Instituto de
Credito Oficial).
About CHF 6 million allocated for ongoing
activities between 2004 and 2005.
CHF 1 million committed for 2008-09, under a
Youth project implemented through UNDP.

1

-

About Euro 23 million allocated to projects
initiated between 2004 and 2007, half of which
financed through the Netherlands’ Program for
Cooperation with Emerging Markets (PSOM). .

Railways and PPP

Municipal infrastructure projects (estimated
around US$5 million).

lnfrastructure with Iller Bank and
disaster management.

1

About E680,000 spent between 2004 and 2005
About L1.5 million per year targeted for 200810.

1

About U S 1 0 million between 2005 and 2007.

1

Conditional Cash Transfers under
World Bank supported Social Risk
Mitigation project. (USAID
contribution of US$8.82 million).
World BanWUSAlD co-financing
of Avian Influenza project (USAID
contribution o f US$I million)

Annex 3
Page 1 o f 7

Annex 3: World Bank Group Private Sector Strategy (FY08-11)
Introduction

1.
Turkey’s private sector will have a critical role in shaping the country’s
economic future. Turkey’s development plan i s grounded in a vision o f Turkey, whose
economy grows rapidly and equitably, as the country pursues harmonization with the EU,
The private sector will be the primary source o f the productivity gains and innovations
required to sustain economic growth, generate employment opportunities and bring living
standards closer to European levels. The government has endorsed the importance o f private
sector development frequently, including in the Ninth Development Plan, which set out a
strategy for raising the international competitiveness o f the Turkish economy.
2.

This note presents the WBG’s (IBRD, IFC and MIGA) strategy for supporting
Turkey’s private sector development for FY08-11. The entire menu o f WBG products
will be available to support private sector development in Turkey. The division o f labor
among WBG institutions will draw o n each institution’s comparative advantage, and joint
work will draw complementary strengths. The next section lays out the m a i n challenges for
private sector development in Turkey and the main government policies. The final section
presents details o f the strategy.
Private Sector: Status, Issues, and Government Strategy

3.
Turkey has a large, dynamic and diversified private sector, characterized by an
entrepreneurial spirit and risk taking. W i t h the end o f the 2001 financial crisis,
macroeconomic stabilization and the expansion o f the world economy, the conditions for
private sector development in Turkey were once again favorable. Since then, Turkish
corporations are beginning t o make a mark in international markets, occasionally becoming
global players in the process. High value added goods, such as cars (7 percent); TV receivers
(5 percent) and trucks (4 percent) are among the top 5 export products, surpassing traditional
goods such as clothing and textile. Foreign direct investments reached US$20.2 b i l l i o n in
2006, a tenfold increase from only three years before. In addition, private investments in
infrastructure sectors totaled US$32 b i l l i o n in approximately 36 projects.

4.

Medium sized enterprises have been the most dynamic component of the
Turkish business sector. These f i r m s operate in all manufacturing and services activities, in
particular in the tradable sectors such as textiles, clothing, metal working and machinery.
They have grown in the traditional industrial centers o f the country (Istanbul, Bursa and
Izmir) as well as in many Anatolian towns that benefited from infrastructure development
(the “Organized Industrial Zones”).
These companies began adapting commercially
successful international designs at a much lower cost. M a n y o f them n o w consider internetenabled access to any domestic and international market as an opportunity for doing business
and developing their o w n know-how. Their strengths are based o n good engineering and
technical capabilities and in their capacity to avoid the burdens o f formality. However,

Annex 3
Page 2 o f 7
limited access to state o f the art technical and managerial knowledge and financial capital
constrains their growth possibilities.’

5.
Despite this dynamism, new enterprises do not survive for long in Turkey and
those that survive do not grow much. The survival rate o f f i r m s in Turkey after two and
four years, for example, i s l o w vis-&vis comparator countries such as Mexico, Chile and
Romania. While surviving f i r m s in Mexico increase the number o f employees by 30 percent
o n average between the second and the fourth years o f operation, Turkish f i r m s increase
employment by less than 10 percent. Quite surprisingly for i t s high levels o f enterprise entry
and exit, the more productive firms are not necessarily the larger ones, suggesting that
Turkey’s harsh market selection process may be partially inefficient. Turkey therefore has
substantial potential for productivity growth by enabling more productive f i r m s to expand
and by ensuring that the poor performers either shrink or exit. By removing obstacles to
growth o f the surviving incumbent enterprises and adjusting the competitive environment to
improve the market selection mechanism, Turkey could further develop i t s private sector.2
6.

The World Bank’s 2007 Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) identified four
main obstacles to the growth of the business sector in Turkey. The first i s the level o f
informality, which remains widespread in Turkey: at least one-third o f Turkish f i r m s , across
all sizes and sectors, indicated that they competed with informal f i r m s which have the
advantage o f not paying VAT or being subject to rigid labor regulations. M o r e than 55
percent o f the f i r m s considered informality a “major” or “very severe” obstacle for their
expansion. A second obstacle for sustained expansion i s labor regulation: more than twothirds o f the Turkish f i r m s believe they would expand the number o f regularly employed
workers if labor regulations were more flexible, helping in adjustments to business cycles. In
Turkey, 46 percent o f the firms consider labor regulations to be a “major” or “very severe”
obstacle to their growth, a level close to Brazil (57 percent) but much higher than Bulgaria
(20 percent) or Chile (26 percent). Labor skills and access to updated knowledge are the other
two main obstacles according to the 2007 Turkey ICA. Labor skills are identified as a key
factor affecting the export competitiveness o f Turkish f i r m s and an important attribute when
attracting FDI. Despite skill deficiencies, few f i r m s in Turkey provide formal training to their
workers. Turkish f i r m s make limited use o f quality certification, essential to export growth
and a vehicle for knowledge absorption: while use o f quality standards i s quite widespread in
manufacturing, it i s s t i l l very limited in the service industries and among SMEs. Smaller
f i r m s also have lower access to information and communications technologies.

7.
Access and cost of credit are also important obstacles to the growth of the
private sector in Turkey. According to the ICA, the banking sector i s s t i l l the largest and
most important part o f the Turkish financial system. By international comparison, the
banking system performs well against non-Asian emerging markets in terms o f mobilizing
deposits, but credit generation to the private sector remains problematic. M o r e than 40
percent o f the f i r m s do not have access to loans, compared to less than 25 percent in Brazil, a
situation that i s accentuated for small f i r m s and those outside the major urban areas.
Although Turkey’s financial sector has efficiently mobilized savings, i t has not been

’

Goneng, Rauf, Leibfritz, W. Yilmaz, G. (2007): Enhancing Turkey’s Growth Prospects by Improving the
Formal Sector Business Conditions. Economics Department Working Paper. OECD Paris
ECO/WKP(2007)2.
World Bank (2007) .Turkey Investment Climate Assessment, 2007. Report No.41611-TR.

*

Annex 3
Page 3 o f 7
supportive o f private sector investments, being relatively more invested in Government
securities. For instance, banking credit to the private sector in Chile (as a share o f GDP) i s
twice larger than in Turkey. N o t surprisingly, f i r m s face shorter loan maturity than in
comparator countries (for example, o n average one third the maturity o f the loans in
Bulgaria).

8.
The I C A also identifies certain aspects of infrastructure that significantly affect
the performance of Turkish firms-including an unreliable electricity supply. Although
Turkey i s relatively well-endowed w i t h infrastructure compared to other emerging
economies, it falls short o f O E C D and EU standards. In particular, the reliability o f the
electricity system i s l o w with frequent outages affecting a large number o f firms: outages in
Turkey are more frequent (on average 25 per year in 2005) and affect a large share o f f i r m s
(80 percent), as compared for example with Poland (less than 3 per year affecting less than
30 percent o f the enterprises). The prices o f electricity in Turkey are higher than those for
comparator countries and Turkey risks facing power generation shortages starting in 2009
(and possibly even in 2008). M o r e private investment in generation will be crucial for
meeting Turkey’s growing electricity consumption demand.
Box 1: Support for a Better Business Environment
Corporate tax rates were reduced from 30 to 20 percent
50 state owned enterprises were privatized in the years 2005 and 2006 with total
privatization revenues amounting to US$15.6 billion
The 2003 “FDI Law” assisted in increasing flows by, among other things, streamlining
investment procedures, enhancing rights o f foreign investors (previously weaker than
those o f their domestic counterparts) and eliminating minimum capital requirements. The
creation o f the Investment Support and Promotion Agency o f Turkey (ISPAT) will further
contribute to sustain the inflow o f foreign capital
Simplification in business registration reduced the time to open a b
o f the lowest times in the world, according to 2008 Doing Business Report
The Government has embarked upon a co
rm and restructuring program
o f the electricity sector,
increased private sector participation.
geographically, an independent regulatory framework has been established, and a
competitive electricity market i s under implementation
Innovation and technology adoption (particularly I C T use) is another priority o f the gth
Development Plan. Public expenditures in R&D increased to approximately US$ 1 billion
in 2006.

9.
The Turkish Government has undertaken a series of reforms to improve the
country’s investment climate for the private sector. Reforms have focused particularly o n
areas such as tax policies, privatization, FDI promotion, access to credit, ease o f entry and
exit o f firms, the modernization o f Turkey’s infrastructure, R&D and innovation, steps
toward labor market reform, and education reforms (such as modernizing curricula) to
upgrade the skills o f the labor force (see B o x 1).

Annex 3
Page 4 o f 7

The WBG’s Private Sector Strategy

10.
The backbone of the Bank Group’s program in support of the Government’s
private sector strategy i s the planned Programmatic Competitiveness and Employment
Generation Development Policy Loans (CEDPL). The C E D P L series supports a sustained
medium-term process o f legal, institutional, and structural development that promotes growth
and the creation o f more and better jobs in Turkey by: (i)
maintaining the current enabling
macroeconomic framework; (ii)
improving the investment climate to foster higher levels o f
investments and productivity gains, (iii)laying the foundations for overhauling labor market
regulations so that hiring formal sector workers becomes more attractive for the private
sector and working in the formal sector becomes more attractive for workers, (iv)
consolidating the soundness o f the financial sector and enhancing access to investment credit
and other forms o f investment capital, and (v) increasing private sector capacity to innovate,
adopting new technologies and quality standards, and improving labor skills.
11,
The CEDPL series i s expected to be accompanied by investment operations and
IFC investment financing. Building o n the successful completion o f the Industrial
Technology Development projects, further IBRD investment financing i s being considered to
support the sustained implementation o f policy reforms launched under the CEDPLs, to
foster innovation and technology adoption, and to help address existing regional productivity,
growth and employment gaps. The CPS also envisages continued long-term financing to
exporters and SMEs, including through additional credit line financing or new Bank or I F C
operations-reflecting
lessons from the recent Investment Climate Assessment and
contributing to increased competitiveness. Private sector credit line financing i s also being
considered to help achieve objectives w i t h public good elements such as energy efficiency,
pollution abatement, or food safety. IFC investments will focus o n (i)
helping local banks to
broaden their reach and market penetration and to improve their financial products delivery
to SMEs and microfinance, (ii)supporting second tier Turkish companies to become more
competitive through implementing modern technology and helping them to diversify risk
through increased exports, and (iii)
promoting rural employment generation mainly through
support for the agribusiness sector like second-tier food processing companies w i t h a
potential for expanding exports.

12.
The CEDPL series and the accompanying investment operations will be
underpinned by analytical work and dialogue, including on growth constraints. This
analytic and advisory work i s expected to build o n the recently completed C E M o n EU
accession, the labor market report and the education sector study, by helping the authorities
in finding the best solutions for implementing the recommendations. Analytical work and
technical assistance in the fields o f trade facilitation; technology adoption and innovation as
well as regional development will continue to support Government reforms. This cluster o f
AAA could also cover issues o f informality, including the role o f labor taxes, youth
employment, as well as follow-up o n the recently completed I C A , including a series o f
dissemination events through WBI, and perhaps a review o f Turkey’s innovation policy and
institutions.
Continued post-FSAP technical assistance will be also performed in
coordination with the Government.
13.
The Bank Group will continue its strong support for the development of a
sustainable energy sector. The emphasis o n the energy sector reflects the importance o f
energy security and energy efficiency for the whole economy, as well as the priority the

Annex 3
Page 5 o f 7
Government places o n the energy sector and in continued substantial Bank engagement.
Bank financed energy projects are under implementation or are planned in electricity
generation, transmission and distribution, in the gas sector and in the area o f renewable
energy and in the electricity and gas transmission networks-through a m i x o f individual
investment projects, adaptable program lending, a sector-wide approach (SWAP), and
possible development policy lending to support critical sector reforms. Privatization o f
distribution, further increase in private generation capacity, and privatization o f existing
generation (including financing environmental retrofits) could be supported through IFC
investments and possible IBRD partial risk and MIGA guarantees. Specifically, IFC intends
to support the power sector demonstrating that, properly structured, private generation
projects can represent feasible and financially attractive investments for foreign investors in
the restructured and competitive power sector. Depending o n the Government’s evolving
priorities and approach as well as market appetite, IFC would also consider pre-privatization
support through convertible loans or equity financing-with
a view to increasing the
valuation o f assets by providing additional comfort to potential investors. Dialogue and
analytic and advisory work will focus o n achieving an efficient, sustainable and secure
supply o f energy to meet Turkey’s growing energy demand, as well as strengthening the
financial viability o f the sector, enhancing the role o f the private sector, improving the
functioning o f the electricity market, and mitigating adverse environmental and social effects.

14.
Infrastructure, especially transport, i s expected to be a priority area for I F C
financing, while IBRD support for the railway sector i s expected to continue. IFC will
work in tandem w i t h the Bank as a partner with Turkey in moving toward an effective mix of
private and state infrastructure services. Specifically, I F C w i l l look for opportunities to
support private sector investments in ports, airports and logistics facilities. IFC plans to
make a number o f investments to support private sector entry into the transport sector. The
Bank will provide continued support for the restructuring o f the railway sector to help
alleviate the fiscal burden o f subsidies and reduce transport logistics costs to improve
competitiveness. However, such additional Bank support hinges o n the creation o f a proper
legislative framework for the railway sector, and the implementation o f initial restructuring
actions as envisaged under the ongoing Railways Restructuring Project. In addition, I F C w i l l
seek opportunities for financing urban transport projects o n a commercial project-finance
basis at the sub-sovereign level through structures acceptable to the Government in the
overall context o f sub-sovereign borrowing. In addition to financing, I F C will offer decisionmakers its expertise in infrastructure privatization and road sector concession transactions.
15.

I F C will continue its focus on supporting credit-worthy second tier Turkish
companies to become more competitive through implementing modern technology,
helping them to diversify risk through increased exports. In the past, IFC has supported
restructuring and re-capitalization o f Turkish companies through periods o f severe economic
volatility. N o w private Turkish companies are quickly facing up to new challenges,
including rising competition from the global economy. I F C will continue to support Turkish
companies to invest outside Turkey. I F C will continue to target new clients in a proactive
way to expand the network o f i t s existing clients with emerging good second tier companies
and to reach out to less privileged parts o f the country. IFC will target equity investments,
especially in creditworthy second tier companies, to leverage i t s role in helping the
companies improve corporate governance and social and environmental standards. In
addition, IFC w i l l explore co-investments with private equity funds.

Annex 3
Page 6 o f 7

16.
IFC i s currently active in working with various financial intermediaries to
strengthen their funding capacity and ability to channel credit to the private sector. I F C
has been instrumental in institution building and support for activities such as leasing, SME
and housing finance. During FY08-11, IFC’s strategy i s to contribute to sustainable growth
supporting financial institutions whose specific strengths are o n the critical path o f Turkey’s
economic development agenda such as SME lending, housing finance and financial
intermediation in underserved regions o f the country. IFC will look for opportunities to
entering Turkey’s housing sector by offering i t s support to primary mortgage market through
long-term financing to banks. In the area o f sub-sovereign financing, IFC w i l l look for
opportunities to support the government in fostering increased participation o f commercial
lenders in municipal finance, to complement the limited pool o f available concessional
resources, to increase access to credit for 2nd tier municipalities especially in Central and
Eastern Turkey, and to build up local credit appraisal capacity, while contributing to the
commercialization o f public sector domestic banks which currently dominate the municipal
finance market. Bank financing w i l l also be mobilized in the case o f sub-sovereign entities
that continue to depend upon the guarantee provided by central government to access the
international financial markets.

17.
IFC will continue to support local banks to broaden their reach and market
penetration and to improve their financial products delivery in particular to SMEs,
microfinance enterprises and low income household, while addressing regional
inequalities. T o this end, a crucial part o f IFC’s strategy i s to work with banks that have
clear reach into these underserved market segments. There are significant opportunities for
I F C to increase i t s contribution in the microfinance sector if a proper legal framework i s put
in place. To start addressing the paucity o f finance for micro enterprises in Turkey, IFC
supported a local bank to expand its lending operations to microfinance borrowers. IFC will
also focus o n improving environmental and social sustainability in Turkey with programs
delivered through the financial sector that improve energy efficiency, reduce pollution and
provide greater access to education, especially for women. Improving the social safety net
through programs focused o n the insurance and pension industries will be another I F C
priority in the financial markets.
18.
IFC i s keen to continue supporting private provision of traditionally public
services such as in health and education in order to reduce the Government’s budgetary
pressures, to improve the quality and access to services, and to generate greater
employment opportunities in the services sector. Based o n i t s previous experience in the
health sector, I F C w i l l focus o n supporting: (i)companies that plan to become national
healthcare service providers or expand their domestic or foreign operations; (ii)
companies
seeking to establish specialized centers o f excellence; (iii)smaller hospitals and clinics,
through a wholesale approach in cooperation w i t h domestic banks. IFC expects to continue
promoting high quality private education at the tertiary level, and it may support vocational
and technical education that i s better linked to the needs o f the private sector. Accordingly,
IFC w i l l consider financing the establishment o f private universities and the introduction o f
university student loans.

Annex 3
Page 7 of 7

19.
I n addition to the Bank and IFC, M I G A also envisages continued support of
Turkey’s private sector development. Since 2000, MIGA has provided guarantees to
several Turkish investors and facilitated investment into neighboring countries (Azerbaijan
Iran, Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan,) in
the agribusiness and manufacturing
MIGA’s presence has been
sectors.
considered essential for both the equity
investors and the banks providing crossborder loans. Over the coming four years,
MIGA i s well positioned to support
foreign investment into key infrastructure
sectors that the Government continues to
privatize; and where assistance to the
energy sector will be o f particular interest.
As noted above, MIGA will coordinate i t s
involvement in the energy sector with
IBRD and IFC. MIGA i s interested in offering support to investments that w i l l strengthen
and deepen the critically important financial sector in Turkey, consistent with country
priorities as outlined in Section I1 o f the CPS. MIGA also recognizes the growing
importance o f Turkish companies in the region and in other regions, and i s interested in
continuing to support Turkish investors, both large and small investors that are looking to
invest abroad, Finally, MIGA i s interested in exploring investment opportunities in the
agribusiness, manufacturing and services sectors that will promote the development o f SMEs.

Annex 4
Page 1 o f 59

Annex 4: TURKEY COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FY04-07
Completion Report

Ankara, January 10,2008

Annex 4
Page 2 of 59

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA
ARIP
BEEPS
BRSA
CAE
CAS
CASCR
CCT
CEDPL
CEM
CIR
CIT
CPS
DIS
DPL
ECA
EFIL
EGDPL
ERL
ESS
EU
FDI
FX
FY
GDP
GEF
GFS
GNP
HTP
IAC
ICA
ICT
IDF
IEG
IFC
IMF
IPA
JPPR
LI
MEER
MIGA
MOH
OECD
PEM
PFMC
PFPSAL
PIT
PPDPL

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Agriculture Reform Implementation Project
Business Environment and Enterprise Survey
Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Conditional Cash Transfer
Competitiveness and Employment Development Policy Loan
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Impact Review
Corporate Income Tax
Country Partnership Strategy
Direct Income Support
Development Policy Loan
Europe and Central Asia
Export Finance Intermediary Loan
Employment Generation Development Policy Loan
Economic Reform Loan
Education Sector Study
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Exchange
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Government Financial Statistics
Gross National Product .
Health Transition Project
Investment Advisory Council
Investment Climate Assessment
Information and Communication Technology
Institutional Development Fund
Independent Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Investment Promotion Agency
Joint Portfolio Performance Review
Local Initiatives
Marmara Earthquake Emergency and Reconstruction
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry o f Health
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Public Expenditure Management
Public Financial Management and Control
Programmatic Financial and Public Sector Adjustment Loan
Personal Income Tax
Programmatic Public Sector Development Policy L o a n

Annex 4
Page 3 of 59

R&D
SDIF
SEE
SME
SOE
SPO
TEMAD
UN
UNDP
UNICEF
WBI
WHO

Research and Development
Savings Deposit Insurance Fund
State Economic Enterprise
Small and Medium Size Enterprise
State Owned Enterprise
State Planning Organization
Turkish Emergency Management Agency
UnitedNations
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Children’s Fund
World Bank Institute
World Health Organization

Annex 4
Page 4 o f 59

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Objectives and Methodology............................................................................................ 5
Turkey’s Long-term Strategic Goals ................................................................................ 6
Progress and CAS Results................................................................................................
9
Bank Performance during the CAS Period..................................................................... 24
Key Considerationsfor the New CPS ............................................................................ 29

Table 1: Turkey’s Strategic Goals and CAS Framework ......................................................... 8
Table 2: Sound Macroeconomicsand Governance - Key Expected Outcomes and World
Bank Benchmarks .....................................................................................................................
9
Table 3 : Equitable Human and Social Development- Key Expected Outcomes and World
Bank Benchmarks ...................................................................................................................
15
Table 4: Attractive Business Climate and Knowledge- Key Expected Outcomes and World
Bank Benchmarks ................................................................................................................... 18
Table 5: Environmental Management and Disaster Prevention- Key Expected Outcomes and
World Bank Benchmarks ........................................................................................................
22
Table 6: Turkey Portfolio Overview, FY04-06 ...................................................................... 25
Figure A: FY06 Turkey Portfolio Performance Indicators vs . World Bank and ECA ...........26
ANNEX 1: Key Outcomes and Bank Group Benchmarks .....................................................
ANNEX 2: Turkey .
Country Assistance Strategy Matrix ....................................................
ANNEX 3: Original, Revised and Actual CAS Lending Program.........................................
ANNEX 4: Original, Revised and Actual Non-lending Program...........................................
ANNEX 5: IFC in Turkey FY04-06.......................................................................................
ANNEX 6: Developmentsin FY07 ........................................................................................

31
35
49
50
51
58

Annex 4
Page 5 o f 59

1. Objectives and Methodology

1-1.The Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR) assesses the
effectiveness o f the FY04-07 Country Assistance Strategy for Turkey. I t measures the
achievement o f the expected results, and highlights key lessons learned. The assessment
focuses o n the FY04-06 period, even though the original CAS was extended to include FY07
in order to bring the Turkey CAS in line with the other CASs covering four years. This was
driven by the need to utilize the CAS C R findings as inputs for the new Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS), whose preparation began in early FY07. K e y developments that occurred
during the last year o f the CAS are summarized in Annex 6.

1-2.While the C A S itself was not formally results-based, it was centered on two results
matrices. One includes the key outcomes and World Bank benchmarks (see Annex l),
while
the other, more detailed matrix, contains country performance indicators and more
comprehensive Bank Group benchmarks (see Annex 2). Outcomes refer to broader
achievements at the country level, while benchmarks refer to more specific areas o f
contribution from the World Bank. Overall, both outcomes and benchmarks have been
relevant in capturing the key strategic objectives o f the country and the ways in which the
World Bank could contribute towards them.'
1.3. The preparation of the C A S C R benefited from a broad range of resources,
including:
0
0

Inputs from World Bank teams, including periodic updates o f the C A S results matrices;

Inputs from main counterparts, particularly the Undersecretariat o f the Treasury and
State Planning Organization (SPO), in addition to relevant line ministries;

The annual Joint Portfolio Performance Review (JPPR), which in Turkey has taken o n
an increasingly strategic focus, moving into the assessment o f CAS results in addition to
the coverage o f portfolio performance indicators. The JPPR itself i s the result o f a joint
cooperation with the Treasury, the SPO, and all the line ministries and implementing
agencies involved in Bank-financed projects and analytical work; and

A Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE)2 and a Country Impact Review (CIR)3,
prepared by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG), assessing the effectiveness o f the
Bank and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) assistance programs, respectively,
during the FY 1994-2004 period. These reports, completed and made available to -the
Board in October 2005, provided useful insights o n the initial implementation o f the
current CAS.

'

The results framework for this CAS was designed at a time when results-based CASs were in a pilot
stage. Therefore, this results framework i s not entirely consistent with the guidelines which currently
govern results-based CASs.
2
The World Bank in Turkey, 1993-2004, Country Assistance Evaluation, Independent Evaluation Group,
December 20,2005, Report No. 34783.
Turkey: IFC Country Impact Review, IEG Findings No.4, Independent Evaluation Group, January 1,
2006, Report No. 35307.

Annex 4
Page 6 o f 59

1.4. Criteria used to assess the progress and results of the C A S include:
0

0
0

0

0

Relevance of the CAS main development objectives in the context o f Turkey’s
development agenda;
Relevance o f the C A S key outcomes and W o r l d Bank benchmarks;
Extent to which the CAS key outcomes and W o r l d Bank benchmarks have been
achieved;
Impact o f W o r l d Bank lending and analytical instruments o n the achievement o f key
benchmarks; and
Bank performance and other relevant factors contributing to, or influencing the
achievement o f key outcomes and benchmarks.

2. Turkey’s Long-term Strategic Goals

2.1. Turkey’s long-term agenda has been articulated in the 23-year National
Development Plan (2001-23). In addition, priorities o f the Government, which took office
following the 2002 elections, have been spelled out in i t s program presented t o Parliament
and in the Urgent Action P l a n 4 The long-term development goals, as defined in these
documents, include:
0

0
0

0
0
0

Transforming the country’s economic and social structure in order to become an
influential regional power;
Raising the level o f health and education in the society;
Improving the income distribution;
Strengthening scientific and technological capacity;
Enhancing effectiveness in infrastructure services;
Protecting the environment.

2.2. The vision that Turkey has for itself i s of a modern and secular participatory
democracy, fully integrated in the European community, playing a critical role in i t s region,
with an export-oriented, technology-intensive production structure. Turkey sees the EU
accession process as an important opportunity for harmonization with international norms
and standards. Also, Turkey’s geo-strategic position offers a unique opportunity to reach i t s
true economic growth potential.

2.3. Consistent with i t s long term goals, Turkey’s development agenda has been
centered around four major themes: (a) sound macroeconomics and governance; (b)
equitable human and social development; (c) attractive business climate and knowledge; and
(d) strong environmental management and disaster prevention. These themes, albeit t o
varying degrees depending o n the Bank’s comparative advantage and the role o f other
development partners, have also been the areas o f focus for the C A S (see Table 1).

2.4. The long-term goals, described above, have not changed during the C A S period and
the four clusters of development themes have remained relevant. Changes in emphasis,
however, have occurred. First, the EU’s decision to open accession negotiations with Turkey
has increased the priority o f reforms necessary for EU accession. This resulted in an
A new strategic document, the 7-year 9’ Development Plan was approved by Parliament in June 2006,
and the priorities defined in this plan w i l l be reflected in the new CPS.

Annex 4
Page 7 o f 59
however, have occurred. First, the EU’s decision to open accession negotiations with Turkey
has increased the priority o f reforms necessary for EU accession. T h i s resulted in an
adjustment of the Bank Group program, in the context o f the CAS Progress Report o f late
2005, to align i t with Turkey’s EU accession agenda. Second, employment creation has
become a higher priority during the course o f the CAS period. Despite sustainable strong
economic growth, l o w labor participation and high levels o f unemployment, in part due to
labor shedding in agriculture, continue to constitute a key economic and social issue. The
Bank has responded to this emerging priority by producing some critical analytical work,
including the investment climate assessment, the labor market report and the education sector
study, as well as by designing with the authorities a set o f development policy loans (DPLs)
which have been added to the program under the CAS Progress Report.

Annex 4
Page 8 o f 59
Table 1: Turkey’s Strategic Goals and CAS F r a m e w o r k

social structure

and Governance

0

0

Stabilization o f public
creditworthiness indicators
at sustainable levels
Less volatile economic
growth in the range o f 5%
Single digit inflation

0

0

0

Social Development

Climate and Knowledge

L o w extreme poverty
( 1.8%) maintained and
vulnerability reduced from
15% in 2001 to 12% in
2006
Net enrollment rate in
basic education maintained
at not less than 99%; girls’
enrollment increased,
especially in secondary
education: male/female
ratio improved from 1.20
to 1.15 by 2006
Child mortality reduced
and maternal health
improved

Exports growth rate
exceeds GNP growth rate
Foreign Direct Investment
reaches USSl.5 billion o n
average during the CAS
period
Stability o f financial
markets improved

A

0

0

0

0

Achieved
Satisfactory
macroeconomic and fiscal
framework consistent with
the key outcomes
Implementation o f public
sector reforms

0

0

0

0

Public expenditure o n
health, education and
social protection sustained
at pre-crisis levels
Implementation o f (i)
the
Conditional Cash Transfer
(CCT) program to benefit
over 1 million children,
at least 1,500 local
and (ii)
initiative (LI) projects to
support vulnerable people
Renovation and
modernization o f schools
Improvements in access
and quality o f basic health
provision

0

0

0

0

Increase in export capacity
o f enterprises
Improvements in the
overall investment climate,
implementation o f the new
FDI law, establishment o f
an Investment Promotion
Agency (PA)
Continued independence of
financial markets
regulatory agencies
Completion o f
privatization o f state
banks; passage o f new
Bankruptcy L a w and
Commercial Code;
implementation o f nonnancial institutions

Management and
Disaster Prevention

0

0

Significant convergence
with EU environmental
standards
Disaster prevention and
management system
improved

I Partially Achieved
1

0

0

Environmental sector
priorities updated in the
EU context
Introduction o f mandatory
insurance cover o f private
housing units; creation o f a
strict and enforced
construction code
enforcement system, and
strengthening o f
emergency preparedness

Annex 4
Page 9 o f 59

3. Progress and CAS Results
3.1. Important progress towards achieving Turkey’s long-term goals has been made
during the CAS period. This CAS was designed at the beginning o f Turkey’s recovery from
the 2001 crisis. This was no longer a crisis-management program but one which focused o n
consolidating the results o f crisis management and o n laying the foundation for sustainable
high economic growth to help Turkey meet i t s long-term goals. Turkey’s economy has
produced a spectacular turn-around during the CAS period. Macroeconomic stability has
improved greatly since 2001, while per capita GNP increased from about US$2,900 in 2000
to about US$5,500 by 2006. There has also been progress in social development, although
somewhat less than expected. On the positive side, extreme poverty remained almost
negligible and poverty, more broadly defined, has declined considerably. However, s t i l l
about one out o f five Turkish citizens would be considered poor. In health and education,
access has improved. However, limited access to higher education remains a problem, and
the quality and cost-effectiveness o f education and health services require h r t h e r
improvements.
3.2. Following i s a summary o f Turkey’s progress and Bank actions. K e y outcomes and
World Bank benchmarks, derived from the program results matrices (see Annex 1, 2) are
grouped into the four development themes o f the CAS.
a. Sound Macroeconomics and Governance

Table 2: Sound Macroeconomics and Governance - K e y Expected Outcomes and
W o r l d Bank Benchmarks

0

0

0

Stabilization o f public
creditworthiness
indicators at sustainable
levels
Less volatile economic
growth in the range o f 5%

Single digit inflation

Achieved

Satisfactory
macroeconomic and fiscal
framework consistent with
the key outcomes

Achieved
0

Achieved

Achieved

Achieved
Implementation o f public
sector reforms, focusing
on: (i)
the tax system; (ii)
public expenditure
the
management; (iii)
social security system; (iv)
the c i v i l service; (v) local
government; and (vi) anticorruption.

Annex 4
Page 10 o f 59
Outcomes

3.3. The consequences o f Turkey’s economic crisis o f 2001 were devastating: depreciation o f
the currency by some 50%, a jump in nominal interest rates to loo%, the virtual collapse o f
the banking system and the bankruptcy o f scores o f enterprises. At the end o f 2001, Turkey
registered a 10% decline in GNP, inflation was o n the order o f 70%, and the net public debt
to GNP ratio exceeded 90%. Five years later, following a remarkable economic recovery, the
picture looks quite different. Economic growth has been strong, with average GNP growth
close to 8% between 2003-05, and inflation was brought down to single digits by 2004, the
first time for more than thirty years. In 2006, economic growth, while decelerated, continued
to be robust at 6 percent. While high o i l prices and the consequences o f fluctuations in
emerging markets in the summer o f 2006 have reversed the declining trend o f inflation, the
Central Bank and the Government were able to keep i t to single digit this year. Turkey’s debt
situation has improved substantially over time, as the net public debt to GNP ratio was
reduced from over 90% in 2001 to 45% in 2006. Nevertheless, and despite growing exports,
the current account deficit reached 6.4% o f GNP in 2005 and 8.2% in 2006. External factors,
such as the regional political context and potential political difficulties in the EU accession
process, add uncertainty as to Turkey’s ability to continue such a generally strong economic
performance.
Status of K e v Benchmarks
3.4. Satisfactory macroeconomic and fiscal framework consistent with key outcomes:
Turkey’s remarkable macroeconomic performance has been due to several factors, including
a solid agenda o f structural reforms and strong fiscal discipline. The fiscal policy targeted
the achievement o f large primary surpluses o f the public sector on the order o f 6.6% to
enable a reduction o f the public debt burden. The Government’s macroeconomic and fiscal
framework has been supported by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) through
consecutive stand-by arrangements and significant Bank adjustment lending.
3.5. Strong fiscal performance has been the cornerstone o f Turkey’s economic program, with
an overarching aim o f achieving sustainable fiscal balances, while improving stability,
transparency and equity o f the tax system. The Government’s focus o n fiscal adjustment,
however, has been more o n revenue-increasing rather than expenditure-controlling measures.
Social spending has been kept well above the agreed benchmark o f 14.5% o f GNP. However,
concerns remain over the social security deficit, which i s to be capped at 4.5% o f GDP in
2006 and 2007. A major positive step has been the approval, in M a y 2006, o f a landmark
social security and universal health insurance legislation, which aimed at the creation o f an
institutionally unified, fiscally more sustainable system with a universal coverage o f health
insurance.’ In addition, an agriculture framework law6 was approved in April 2006, and the
follow-up regulation institutionalized the non-distortionary Direct Income Support (DIS) for
farmers.

3.6. The U S $ l billion Programmatic Financial and Public Sector Adjustment Loan
(PFPSAL) 111, the third in a series o f programmatic loans, supported the Government’s
comprehensive reform o f the financial and public sectors. The Health Transition Project
However, in December 2006, the Constitutional Court invalidated several provisions o f the Law and the
Government decided to postpone its implementation while i t i s trying to address the Court’s concerns.
6
Agriculture Law No. 5488

Annex 4
Page 11 o f 5 9
(HTP) has supported broad reforms o f the health system, including the introduction o f a
unified health insurance system. Finally, the Agricultural Reform Implementation Project
(ARIP) assisted the Government in reducing agricultural subsidies which ultimately declined
by 70% (excluding direct income support) between 2001 and 2005.
3.7. On the non-lending front, the program was supported by two Country Economic
Memoranda (CEM) o n Macroeconomic Stability and EU Accession, delivered in FY03 and
FY06, respectively. Fiscal reforms towards increased tax efficiency, expanded employment
and higher labor productivity, expenditure rationalization, more favorable market
environment, financial sector reform, industrial innovation, and promotion o f social policies
were some areas o f focus. Additionally, the analytical work o n policy and investment
priorities for agricultural and rural development took stock o f recent policies and investment
patterns in the agricultural and wider rural sector in Turkey, helping to form the basis for the
Agriculture Framework Law. Finally, a Public Expenditure Review (PER) focusing o n
quality o f public expenditures was delivered in December 2006.

3.8. Implementation of public sector reforms, focusing on: (i)the tax system; (ii) public
expenditure management; (iii) the social security system; (iv) the civil service; (v) local
government; and (vi) anti-corruption.

3.9. (i) Tax system: A medium-term strategy for improving the tax system in Turkey has
been in place since 2000, based o n a review carried out jointly with the World Bank. The
overarching objective o f the strategy i s to improve the stability, transparency and equity of
the tax system through measures to minimize tax distortions, broaden the tax base and
improve the efficiency o f tax administration. Implementation o f the tax strategy has
progressed reasonably well. In 2003, a legislative package was enacted under the direct tax
reform designed to simplify and consolidate the direct tax regime, in line with the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) standards and
international best practice. A second package was enacted in 2004 to minimize geographical,
sectoral and other reinvestment incentives, including rationalizing the benefits in Free Trade
Zones. The first stage o f personal income tax (PIT) reform has been implemented by the
enactment o f the law reducing the number o f brackets and unifying the wage schedules in
March 2006. Turkey has also initiated reforms for simplifying the corporate income tax (CIT)
as well as reducing i t s rates. The C I T rate was reduced from 33% to 30% for corporate
income earned in 2005 and further to 20% in 2006 with a competitiveness consideration
consistent with the developments and the trends in the European U n i o n and OECD countries.
In addition, the Revenue Administration Law, which established a semi-autonomous revenue
administration within the Ministry o f Finance, was enacted in 2005. A new unit responsible
for determining the Government revenue policy under the Ministry o f Finance was
established in 2006.
The PFPSAL I11 supported the design and implementation o f the Government’s
3.10.
tax strategy as part o f the broad public sector reform program implemented in the context of
this adjustment operation.
3.1 1. (ii)Public Expenditure Management (PEM): Improved P E M i s a crucial element o f
Turkey’s broader public sector reform strategy. It focuses, inter alia, o n improved budget
preparation and execution, the operational performance o f public agencies, and upgrading
public accounting, procurement, and audit standards. The PFPSAL TI1 assessed the

Annex 4
Page 12 o f 59

underlying problems o f Turkey’s PEM, pointing to a lack o f modernization in the procedures
and institutions governing decision-making and resource allocation. In this context, the
passage of the Public Financial Management and Control (PFMC) Law, enacted by the
Parliament in December 2003, represents an important step. The law constitutes the
cornerstone o f the legal framework for modem P E M in Turkey. It introduced modern public
management principles by clarifying accountability o f public officials, by delegating
managerial responsibility, and by putting in place an internal control and audit framework
that i s compatible with EU and international practice. Budget transparency increased through
the application o f Government Financial Statistics (GFS)-consistent budget classifications,
allowing a comprehensive and consistent presentation o f the budget across all general
Government agencies with a complete functional breakdown o f expenditure. Through the
2006 budget, the P F M C law has been implemented in k e y areas including: (a) improving
budget formulation processes to enable a medium-term fiscal strategy to guide fiscal
aggregates and enable sector budgets to be linked to policy priorities; (b) expanding budget
coverage to all central Government entities; (c) expanding the GFS-consistent economic and
functional budget classification to the entire central budget entities and social security
institutions; (d) delegating more responsibility (with related accountability) to spending
agencies through reforming the internal control regime and abolishing central-level ex-ante
control; and (e) improving accounting through implementation o f accrual-based accounting
for the entire general Government.
’

3.12. Under the P E M umbrella, the enactment o f a new Public Procurement L a w was a
condition for continuous Bank support. A new Public Procurement Law, effective since
2003, has subsequently been amended for increased consistency with EU requirements.
However, other laws have brought several other amendments to the Public Procurement Law,
mainly to provide exemptions to various agencies and to exclude procurement o f certain
services from the scope o f the law. Later, it was decided to hold all amendments to the law
until after the Procurement Screening Process with the EU i s complete.

3.13. The lending program, through the PFPSAL 111, was complemented by an Institutional
Development Fund (IDF) grant o n public liability management. The grant assists the
Government in adopting best international practices and technical tools in public liability
management, including financial and fiscal risk management. Another IDF grant supported
the introduction o f the new Public Procurement Law.
3.14. (iii)Social Security system: Strong fiscal performance has been the cornerstone o f the
economic program since 2001. The public sector primary surplus exceeded 6% o f G N P in
the last three years. In addition, the overall budget deficit came down to below 1% o f G N P
by 2005 and i s estimated to have stayed around 1% in 2006. The transfers from the budget t o
cover the deficit o f the social security institutions (pensions and health services) were,
however, equivalent to 4.8% o f G D P in 2005 and such deficit would have increased rapidly
in the absence o f reform. Therefore, continued fiscal adjustment clearly requires action t o
address the structural imbalances in the social security system which currently originates
largely from (a) deficits in the pay-as-you-go pension system, (b) deficits in the provision o f
publicly financed health services, and (c) unexploited efficiency gains in the operation o f the
social security institutions. In response, the Parliament passed a social security and universal
health insurance law with the following components: (a) parametric reform for the pension
system that will ensure the system’s long term sustainability, (b) establishment o f a universal
health insurance system which w i l l provide access t o health insurance for all citizens. In

Annex 4
Page 13 o f 59
addition, a law aimed at reforming the administrative dimensions o f social security by
unifying the existing three social security schemes was enacted in M a y 2006. However,
implementation o f the social security reform has been delayed due to a Constitutional Court
decision in December 2006.
’

3.15. In addition to the PFPSAL 111, which included important measures to support Turkey’s
fiscal adjustment, the Programmatic Public Sector Development Policy Loan (PPDPL) and
the accompanying Health Transition Project have supported the reform o f the social security
system. One key objective o f the H T P i s the fiscal sustainability o f the healthcare system, by
supporting the implementation o f systemic health reforms aimed at increasing efficiency in
production and delivery o f health services. These include the establishment o f a single health
insurance fund by consolidating the five existing health insurance schemes, including the
Green Card system, the introduction o f family medicine as an organizational model for the
provision o f outpatient or primary health care services, and the development o f an effective
patient referral system. In addition, with the support o f the Bank-financed Privatization
Social Support Projects, labor redeployment and j o b placement services are being provided to
workers who have lost their jobs as a consequence o f State-Owned Enterprises (SOE)
privatizations.
3.16. (iv) Local government: Financial autonomy o f Turkish municipalities i s extremely
limited. On average about 60% o f municipal revenue i s derived f r o m intergovernmental
fiscal transfers, while another 20% are derived from own-source taxes and fees. Profits o f
municipal commercial enterprises, rental income from municipally owned real estate, and
various types o f fines provide for the remaining 20% o f revenue. Almost all tax rates are set
by the Government and municipalities have little ability to improve their income or reduce
their dependence o n fiscal transfers as the main source o f revenue. Capital investments
represent o n average about 30% o f municipal expenditure. Improvements in the delivery o f
local services have begun but progress has been uneven. With 70% o f the Turkish population
living in urban areas, the need for core municipal services, such as water, wastewater, solid
waste management and urban transport, i s an increasing priority. One o f the medium-term
challenges will be the ability to meet the high costs o f service provision in the context o f high
urbanization and EU environmental directives, especially as municipalities suffer from
inadequate resources and financial management at the local level, and from an
underdeveloped municipal debt market that does not allow them to access long-term credit.
The approval o f several laws o n local government paved the way to more efficient resource
and financial management at the local level, but many o f these are not yet effective. The
Government also committed to reform I l l e r Bank, a Government agency which operates as a
conduit for inter-governmental fiscal transfers and a financier and an implementing agency
for infrastructure investments, into a more effective and financially sound institution. This i s
relevant to Turkey’s broader EU agenda, as Iller Bank i s expected to be a key player in the
implementation o f upcoming EU projects. The W o r l d Bank Institute (WBI) provided
extensive capacity-building support to Government officials o n intergovernmental fiscal
transfer designs as part o f i t s multi-year Capacity-Building Program for responsive and
accountable local governance.
3.17. The Municipal Services Project supports the Government’s plans t o provide technical
assistance to municipalities o n financial and institutional strengthening and to reach financial
viability and target investments for water supply, sanitation and solid waste management. As
the implementing agency o f the project, I l l e r Bank’s capacity to assess sub-projects i s also

Annex 4
Page 14 o f 59
being strengthened. The Bank’s contribution to improvements in local service delivery also
came from a program o f analytical work and capacity building activities, supported by the
WBI. The Municipal Sector Report provided key suggestions for municipal sector
improvements, which have been taken into account in the formulation o f the draft Public
Administration L a w and amendments to the Iller Bank Law. The Water and Wastewater
Report assisted the Government in improving governance at the municipal and central
Government levels, improving the efficiency o f water supply and wastewater investments,
and increasing the operating efficiency o f the water sector. Finally, the IDF grant o n the
Development o f Performance Monitoring Systems supported the Government’s efforts to
strengthen the public oversight o f the public funds allocated to Turkey’s local government
sector, improve the public accountability o f the local authorities, and improve the sector’s
public expenditure management.
3.18. (v) Civil service and anti-corruption: Public sector governance has been improving.
Among a comprehensive set o f substantive actions was the enactment o f the L a w o n
“Freedom o f Information for Citizens” in October 2003 and the issuance o f the follow-up
regulation on the implementation o f the law in April 2004. The law provides an important
basis for enabling citizens to monitor the performance o f the public sector. In this context,
public agencies have provided an opportunity to citizens to request information on-line,
through their websites. A law o n the establishment o f an Ethics Board for civil servants was
enacted in June 2004. Subsequently, in September 2004, the Ethics Board was established
and in April 2005 the regulation o n the Code o f Conduct for c i v i l servants was issued.
Further, the new Penal Code contains provisions concerning bribery, trading in influence,
abuse o f power and embezzlement and punishes corruption-related crimes more ~ e r i o u s l y . ~
The Code also introduces the concept o f liability o f legal persons in cases o f corruption and
contains provisions concerning corruption in public procurement. The authorities have
drafted a c i v i l servants law, to replace the existing one. The draft law seeks to address several
major objectives including: (i)improving efficiency; (ii)eliminating discrepancies in
remuneration across similar positions within the public sector; (iii)
making i t easier to ensure
a fiscally sound wage bill; and (iv) providing competitive opportunities for entry into the
public administration. According to international indicators, Turkey’s ranking has improved
in terms o f the level o f corruption. The World Bank recently launched i t s new report, entitled
“Governance Matters V I : Governance Indicators for 1996-2006” which contains an updated
and expanded set o f worldwide indicators for 212 countries o n governance issues. The data
related to Turkey in the report show that the country’s performance over time has
These
significantly improved in most indicators, including “control o f corruption”.
improvements are indicated by higher percentile ranks for Turkey o n most o f the selected
governance indicators. On “government effectiveness”, Turkey’s estimated percentile rank
has improved significantly since the mid and late nineties, and particularly since 1998. In
terms o f “regulatory quality”, Turkey’s estimated percentile rank has slightly improved since
2002, although values for this indicator were stronger in the late nineties. Finally, after a
noticeable decline in 2000/2002, Turkey’s percentile rank for “control o f corruption’’ has
significantly improved, with the estimated percentile rank going from 40% in 2002 to 58.7%
in 2006. Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index also ranks Turkey as 64th
(out o f a total o f 180 countries) in the 2007 edition, compared to the rank o f 77‘h (out o f a
total o f 145) in 2004. In addition, the Business Environment and Enterprise Survey (BEEPS)
jointly conducted by the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and
7

2005 European Commission Progress Report on Turkey.

Annex 4
Page 15 o f 59
Development*, provide information about the views o f entrepreneurs and business executives
about taxes, macroeconomic and Government policies, corruption, anticompetitive practices
and financing costs. Comparing the results with those o f the 2002 survey, Turkey has
significantly improved in many aspects, such as reducing red tape, improving i t s business
environment and reducing corruption. However, the surveys also show that there i s room for
improvement in areas such as customs, business permits and taxes.
b. Eguitable Human and Social Develoument

Table 3: Equitable Human and Social Development - Key Expected Outcomes and
World Bank Benchmarks

L o w extreme poverty (1 -8%) Partially
maintained and vulnerability achieved
reduced from 15% in 2001 to
12% in 2006
Largely
Net enrollment rate in basic
achieved
education maintained at not
less than 99%; girls’
enrollment increased,
especially in secondary
education: male/female ratio
improved from 1.20 to 1.15
by 2006
Child mortality reduced and Largely
maternal health improved to achieved
make progress towards the
MDGs

Public expenditure o n health, education Achieved
and social protection are sustained at
pre-crisis levels. The benchmarks as
shares o f GNP are: (i)education:
health: 3.25%, and (iii)
4.25%; (ii)
social protection: 7.00%
Achieved
Implementation o f (i)
the Conditional
Cash Transfer (CCT) program to
benefit over 1 million children, and (ii)
at least 1,500 local initiative (LI)
projects to support vulnerable people
Partially
Renovation and modernization o f
achieved
schools, including in disadvantaged
areas, and implementation o f reforms
in secondary education
Improvements in access and quality o f Partially
achieved
basic health Drovision

Outcomes

3.19. The CAS period saw a reduction o f extreme poverty to a negligible level o f 0.01% in
2005, but one fifth o f the population in Turkey remained poor by the end o f 2005, when
measured by the food and non-food poverty concept.’ While regional disparities persist in
terms o f access to good quality education, there are encouraging signs o f improvements in
the reduction o f gender inequalities: girls’ secondary net enrollment increased from 42% in
2001/02 to 51% in 2005/06, while the male to female enrollment ratio decreased from 1.33 to
1.27 from 2003/04 to 2005/06. Net enrollment rate in basic education remained at around

*

The BEEPS covers all countries o f Central and Eastern Europe, the former Soviet U n i o n and Turkey. The
objective of the survey i s to evaluate the constraints o n investment and private sector growth.
9
The availability o f new, more reliable data as a result o f the recent poverty assessment and the education
sector work has necessitated the resetting o f the baseline information in some instances. The Joint Poverty
Assessment has redefined the poverty line and dropped the concept o f vulnerability used in the CAS. Thus
the vulnerability and poverty data are not comparable. In education, it appears that the situation at the time
o f the C A S was actually less favorable in terms o f net enrollment in basic education and the female/male
ratio in secondary education.

Annex 4
Page 16 o f 59
90% during the CAS period”, while the gross enrollment rate for secondary education
increased from 68% in 2001/02 to 85% in 2005/06. Important achievements in the health
sector include a significant reduction in infant mortality from 43 per 1000 live birth in 1998
to 24 per 1000 live birth in 2005. Nonetheless, Turkey ranks 105th o n the World Health
Organization (WHO) l i s t o f 192 countries with i t s current level o f infant mortality, an
unacceptable level for a middle income country aspiring for EU accession.
Status of K e v Benchmarks

3.20. Public expenditure on health, education and social protection are sustained at precrisis levels. The benchmarks as shares of GNP are: (i)education: 4.25%; (ii)health:
3.25% and (iii)social protection: 7.00%: Since 2001, social expenditure targets have been
broadly met, with a slight under-run in education in 2004-05. In 2006, however, education
spending was 4.33% o f GNP, health expenditures 5.31% o f GNP and social protection
expenditures 9.68% o f GNP. On the one hand, this shows the Government’s commitment to
maintainindexpanding social programs targeted to the poor to keep the levels at least at the
pre-crisis averages, while o n the other it points to the increased amounts o f social security
expenditures that have led to continued social security deficits. Going forward, the Bank’s
program in this area could be improved by refining the coverage o f “social expenditures” and
disaggregating the broad categories with a view to look into the quality o f the expenditures in
addition to the amount.
3.21. Implementation of (i) the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) program to benefit
over 1 million children, and (ii)at least 1,500 local initiative (LI) projects to support
vulnerable people: The US$500 million Social Risk Mitigation Project aimed at alleviating
the impact o f the 2001 economic crisis o n poor households, and at improving their capacity
to withstand such risks in the future. The C C T component o f this loan, which provides
incentives for positive family behavioral change with respect to education and health, has
benefited 2.6 m i l l i o n o f Turkey’s poorest children in poor households in Turkey, vs. a
benchmark o f 1 million. Under the same project, the Local Initiatives component has
financed 7,500 sub-projects, vs. a benchmark o f 1,500. These sub-projects are proposed by
the provinces and local communities, to enhance employment opportunities aimed at poverty
reduction. Key pieces o f analytical work, including a labor market study and poverty-focused
reports provided a broad assessment o f poverty-related issues, and important policy
indications, particularly in the area o f labor market reform.
3.22. Renovation and modernization of schools, including in disadvantaged areas, and
implementation of reforms in secondary education. Human capital i s and will continue to
be a key factor in allowing Turkey to meet i t s ambitions o f becoming a modem economy,
fully integrated in the EU. In this respect, access to high quality education i s a critical issue.
3.23. A series o f education projects have promoted improved access to quality education,
with special focus o n vulnerable groups such as girls and disadvantaged children. However,
implementation o f these operations has been slow due to lack o f counterpart funds allocation
in 2003, several personnel changes in the Ministry o f National Education, and
implementation capacity problems. Construction and renovation works are underway in
more than 300 school sites and a significant increase in civil works i s being undertaken.
Reforms in secondary education have begun with an EU-financed project, while the Bank10

The assessment o f the achievement o f expected outcomes was based o n reset baseline indicators.

Annex 4
Page 17 o f 59
financed project to support secondary education became effective in the spring o f 2006, but
implementation has been limited. I F C has also provided financing for investments in the
education sector for the establishment o f a business school, including the distance learning
for adult education through satellite learning centers across the country, as w e l l as
supporting the expansion o f a pioneer vocational training school in the area o f IT training
and software systems.

3.24. The Education projects have been supported by an Education Sector Study (ESS),
which contributed to the dialogue among policymakers, researchers, and other stakeholders
regarding the development o f a coherent, sector-wide strategy for improving Turkey’s preuniversity education system. The studies commissioned under the ESS address a range o f
educational challenges, from access to pre-school to the equity implications o f the existing
high school entrance examination.

3.25. Improvements in access and quality of basic health provision: While Turkey has
made considerable progress in improving key health indicators and in expanding access to
health care services w i t h the introduction o f a universal health insurance, i t continues to rank
far behind most middle-income and EU accession countries in terms o f health status and
access to healthcare. Some o f the issues s t i l l facing the Turkish healthcare system include
inequalities in the access to health services, inefficiencies in resource allocation, and
inadequate governance. There has been, however, some progress o n building MOH’s and
relevant institutions’ capacity in regulatory functions such as monitoring the quality o f care in
public hospitals and the collection and analysis o f health sector data for evidence-based
policy-making. New departments (Performance Assessment in the health sector and
Monitoring and Evaluation) have also been established. Finally, high levels o f health public
spending remains an issue, and requires further and more comprehensive steps by the
Government, focused, inter alia, o n hospital reform (reorganization o f hospital network,
autonomy from the Ministry o f Health), strengthening the referral system, pharmaceuticals
cost containment, and expansion o f the family medicine model.
3.26. Although with mixed results, the Health I1 and Health Transition Projects have
supported the health sector in Turkey. While both the Bank-financed projects and the overall
health system would benefit from strengthened capacity o f the Ministry o f Health (MOH), i t s
institutional reform, particularly with regards to the reorganization and autonomization o f
public hospitals, has been limited. On a positive note, the important burden o f disease study
was completed, national health accounts were established to track expenditures, patientrecord keeping was established, and a comprehensive health reform effort i s underway, to
achieve increased efficiency and financial soundness. IFC’s financing o f private health care,
and W B I ’ s flagship program o n health sector reform, have been an integral part o f the Bank
Group’s assistance to the sector. Senior health systems managers and key public and private
sector stakeholders benefited from a series o f WBI-sponsored capacity building events o n
health systems organizations and decentralization intended for them to better assess the
strengths and weaknesses o f Turkey’s health systems.

Annex 4
Page 18 o f 59

c. Attractive Business Climate and Knowledge

Table 4: Attractive Business Climate and Knowledge- Key Expected Outcomes and
World Bank Benchmarks

0

Exports growth rate
exceeds GNP growth rate
Foreign Direct Investment
reaches US$1.5 billion o n
average during the CAS
period
Stability o f financial
markets improved

Achieved

0

Achieved

0

Achieved

0

0

Increase in export capacity
o f enterprises financed
through lines o f credit
provided by the World Bank
Group
Improvements in the overall
investment climate,
implementation o f the new
FDI law, and establishment
o f an Investment Promotion
Agency (IPA)
Continued independence o f
financial markets regulatory
agencies
Completion o f privatization
o f state banks; passage o f
new Bankruptcy L a w and
Commercial Code, and
implementation o f non-bank
financial institutions reform

4 chieved

Achieved

Achievei

Partially
Achieved

Outcomes

3.27. The outcomes related to the overall improvement o f Turkey's business climate have
over-performed the CAS' original targets. In 2003, 2004, 2005 and 2006 real GNP grew by
5.9, 9.9, 7.6% and 6%, respectively, while real export growth was as high as 16.0% in 2003,
12.5% in 2004, and 8.5% in both 2005 and 2006."
3.28. Increased confidence level, mostly due to continued macroeconomic stability and the
official start o f membership negotiations with the EU in October 2005, improved the
structure o f capital flows towards more long-term financing, including Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI). A fter remaining l o w at US$1.3 billion in 2003 and US$1.9 billion in
2004, net FDI inflows into Turkey increased to a historical high o f US$19 billion in 2006. On
a commitment basis, FDI i s projected at US$22.5 billion in 2007.
3.29. Finally, the stability o f the financial sector has substantially improved. The open
foreign exchange (FX) position o f the Turkish banking system decreased after the volatility
o f May-June 2006, and the sector had a long FX position o f US$184 m i l l i o n in end-2006. In
addition, Turkish households had small FX-linked liabilities. All Turkish banks continued to
II

Data from Turkstat's National Accounts Database.

Annex 4
Page 19 o f 59
protect themselves by proper provisioning against their problem loans, with the system in
total having loan loss reserves equaling 91% o f their non-performing loans. Capitalization o f
most banks has been sound, although it has declined as banks have grown their balance
sheets. The capitalization as measured by the capital adequacy ratio fell to 22.4% in
December 2006 from 24% in December 2005 for the banking system. Capital adequacy has
been trending downwards for a few years as banks have shifted assets from non-risk
weighted Government bonds to loans to the private sector and as the stabilizing economic
conditions gave banks comfort to operate with greater leverage. On the policy front, reform
o f regulation and supervision o f the banking sector has continued.
Status of Key Benchmarks

3.30. Increase in export capacity of enterprises financed through lines of credit
provided by the World Bank Group. The second and third in a series o f Export Finance
Intermediary Loans (EFILs), worth around US$600 million, have provided medium and
long-term working capital and investment finance to private exporters, and contributed to
further facilitating export growth in Turkey. The Export Finance Intermediary Loan (EFIL)
I1 reached over 230 exporters representing a wide spectrum o f firm sizes, industrial sectors,
and geographical regions. Their exports grew by an impressive 28% in US$ terms between
2004 and 2006. The repeater EFIL I11 became effective in FY06, but already disbursed
almost one quarter o f i t s hnds by the end o f the fiscal year, signaling a strong demand for
continued export support. A recently approved project will focus o n providing increased
access to finance, specifically to small and medium size enterprises (SMEs) throughout the
country, including regions with l o w access to credit (Le., the East and South East).
3.3 1. Improvements in the overall investment climate, implementation of the new FDI
law, and establishment of an Investment Promotion Agency (IPA): Key investment
climate reforms implemented during the CAS period include: a) reduction o f administrative
barriers to business entry and operation; b) improvement o f market contestability; c)
improvement o f corporate governance; d) increased public investments in research and
development (R&D) and ongoing review o f Intellectual Property Rights legislation to ensure
consistency with EU requirements; e) increased harmonization o f quality standards and
regulations with EU requirements; f) improvement in infrastructure; g) acceleration o f
privatization; and h) increased focus o n SMEs. Additional reforms are needed in all o f these
areas to further increase investment and productivity levels. They should be complemented
by microeconomic reforms aimed at reducing tax evasion and informality, improving labor
market flexibility, increasing firms’ (particularly SMEs’) access to finance, increasing private
investment in R&D and firms’ adoption o f quality standards and technology (including
Information and Communication Technology), and better aligning the skills o f the labor force
with the needs o f the private sector.
3.32. The new FDI law, passed by the Government in 2003, established a more liberal FDI
environment, although implementation in some areas i s pending. Key features o f the new law
include: a) more flexibility for investors, by dropping all former FDI-related screening,
approval, share transfer and minimum capital requirements; b) reassurance o f existing
guarantees to foreign investors o f their rights in one transparent and stable document; c)
upgrading, to accepted international standards, definitions o f “foreign investor” (broadened to
include Turkish national residents abroad and international organizations) and “foreign direct
investment” (broadened to include all possible types o f assets); and d) a policy shift from ex-

Annex 4
Page 20 o f 59
ante control to a promotion and facilitation approach with minimal ex-post monitoring to
continuously improve an investor-friendly climate for growth and development. The law for
the establishment o f the Turkish Investment Promotion Agency was enacted in July 2006.

3 -33. The Bank-financed Industrial Technology Project contributed to improving
productivity by assisting the Government in the harmonization o f Turkish technology
infrastructure with European Customs U n i o n standards, and assisting f i r m s in upgrading their
technological capabilities. The Bank also played an important role in encouraging SOE
privatizations, particularly through the Economic Reform Loan (ERL). In the broad context
o f creating a more attractive business climate, the Bank has assisted the authorities, through
technical assistance and significant new lending, in the formulation and implementation o f
energy policy reforms that focus on reducing Government liabilities, achieving private
ownership, and utilizing natural resources in a more sustainable manner. Infrastructure
improvement i s also being supported through a Railways Restructuring Project aiming at
increasing efficiency o f the transport sector, and through several energy loans aimed at
rehabilitating and expanding the electricity transmission system. A key project in the natural
gas sector i s financing underground storage, which i s essential to improve security and
reliability o f natural gas supply, especially in peak winter months.
3.34. In terms o f Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA), the Bank carried out an
assessment o f progress-to-date and actions to improve Turkey’s business environment in the
most recent Country Economic Memorandum. A more in-depth analysis i s included in the
FY07 Investment Climate Assessment (ICA). As part o f the preparation process of the ICA,
the Bank has also delivered a note on the Movable Asset Regime in Turkey and i t s relevance
to improve access to finance. An IDF grant has also been provided to the Ministry o f Justice
for strengthening caseload management and the court administration system, and for
providing implementation measures for the Execution and Bankruptcy Law. The Bank has
been a driving force, together with the authorities, in preparing annual meetings o f a high
level international advisory group, the Investment Advisory Council (IAC), which i s chaired
by the Prime Minister and includes key members o f the Cabinet, CEOs o f a select number of
international companies with an interest in Turkey, the Turkish business associations, and
senior representatives o f international financial institutions. The I A C takes stock of
improvements in the business climate o n an annual basis and provides advice to the
Government o n future priorities for reform. The Bank also conducted a Knowledge
Economy Assessment in preparation for an investment project aimed at improving f i r m s ’ use
o f knowledge and ICT. Ultimately, the project was dropped because the Government
preferred to carry out the activities proposed under the project through i t s own resources and
private external partners. The energy projects have also been complemented by extensive
analytical work, including the provision o f advice on the renewable energy law, approved in
2005. Additionally, an international panel o f experts, financed by the Bank, regularly advises
the Government o n the introduction o f competition and increased private participation in the
electricity sector.
3.35. Continued independence of financial markets regulatory agencies: A set of
comprehensive amendments to the legal framework for banking regulations are being
implemented after the new Banking A c t was enacted in late 2005. The new Banking A c t
substantially broadened and clarified the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency’s
(BRSA) scope o f responsibilities including various o f i t s core competencies, such as: (a)
licensing banks; (b) defining related parties; (c) establishing new limits o n the credit

Annex 4
Page 21 o f 59
exposure o f related parties; (d) specifying corrective measures to be taken against bank
owners and directors; (e) establishing explicit legal protection for BRSA staff in the
performance o f their duties; and (0 expanding the legal basis o f BRSA staff to examine
banks. The W o r l d Bank and other international financial institutions (IFIs) provided
significant comments and technical assistance throughout the drafting o f the Banking Act.
Implementation o f the new Banking A c t i s underway, and BRSA has adopted, published, and
i s implementing 24 o f the required regulations. Effective implementation w i l l enable BRSA
to better fulfill i t s responsibilities as a modern financial supervisory authority. The BRSA,
the SDIF and the Capital Market Board remain independent entities, while the insurance
sector i s supervised by the Treasury.

3.36. Under its financial sector umbrella, the PFPSAL I11 focused specifically o n banking
reform. Key priorities included strengthening the regulatory framework for banking and
building institutional capacity at the B R S A and SDIF.
3.37. Completion of privatization of state banks; passage of new Bankruptcy Law and
Commercial Code, and implementation of non-bank financial institutions reform: State
banks have been restructured, and their privatization process, albeit after some delay, has
begun. A minority stake in V a k i f Bank was successfully floated in an Initial Public Offering
in November 2005, and the Government has engaged a financial advisor to sell H a l k Bank.
The Execution and Bankruptcy L a w has been amended, and supporting regulations were
issued and published in April 2004. The Commercial Code has been amended t o facilitate
the setting up o f new companies, and a new Commercial Code has been drafted and
submitted to Parliament.
3.38. The PFPSAL I11 supported the restructuring and privatization o f state banks, and
improving the corporate insolvency regime. Non-bank financial institution reforms w i l l be
addressed through an upcoming series o f DPLs.

3.39. In support o f Turkey’s efforts t o create an attractive business climate and strengthen i t s
financial and enterprise sectors, a comprehensive IFC program has been implemented in
coordination with the Bank. In the financial sector, IFC has been working with mid-sized
banks to strengthen their capital structure and balance sheets. Also, IFC has been supporting
institution building, banking sector consolidation, and introduction o f new products including
development o f the leasing, reinsurance sector, mortgage finance, and local currency finance.
In the manufacturing sector, IFC has been supporting restructurings and re-capitalization o f
i t s portfolio companies, has increasingly supported Turkish companies to become more
competitive and diversify risk through increased exports and outward investments, and to
develop into regional players

3.40. In infrastructure, IFC has supported post-privatization o f a cruise ship terminal assisting
in the upgrading o f Turkey’s tourism sector, and provided financing for gas distribution
investments to help bring lower energy costs to consumers and industry and reduce
environmental emissions by displacing more polluting fuels. Finally, in information and
technology, I F C supported a mobile company to promote greater competition and make
cellular communications more affordable and available to larger segments o f the population.
In addition, I F C supported expansion o f IT solutions for Government agencies and private
sector corporations.

Annex 4
Page 22 o f 59
3.41. In the past, IFC’s investments by volume have been seen to have concentrated on
Turkey’s large companies. This was mostly a response to market demand and the investment
climate at the time. IFC provided financing to companies, which, even if in first tier, did not
have access to long t e r m funding. I t was also at a time when Turkey was faced with a
chronic l o w level o f FDI. IFC’s support was important to help the vanguards o f the Turkish
industry and financial sector through periods o f severe economic volatility. They have
emerged successfully to help Turkey recover from the crises. Also, IFC financing has
supported their expansion, especially in a number o f cases outside Turkey, therefore putting
them (and Turkey) o n the map as significant economic players in the wider region. The
Turkish business community recognizes IFC’s important role during the crises in light o f the
fact that IFC was the only institution which did not abandon Turkish businesses at the times
o f severe difficulty. I t i s nevertheless recognized that I F C needed to diversify i t s client base
and reach out to more sectors and avail i t s products (including equity) to a wider group o f
clients. With the improved macro conditions and more long term financing availability in the
market, during the last one to two years IFC has been diversifying i t s sector and client base in
a proactive way, including targeting emerging good second tier companies, reaching to more
underprivileged parts o f Turkey. The improved economic climate and further maturing o f the
domestic private sector has provided more opportunity for IFC to offer alternative financing
instruments and direct shareholding through equity investments as w e l l as help Turkish
companies implement best corporate governance and business practices. Such efforts are
showing promise through for example important investments in the southeast o f the country,
in equity o f new players in leasing and auto parts as well as in new funding for emerging
clients in private health, education and telecom sectors.
d. Stronp Environmental Manapement and Disaster Prevention

Table 5: Environmental Management and Disaster Prevention - Key Expected
Outcomes and World Bank Benchmarks

0

0

Significant convergence
with EU environmental
standards
Disaster prevention and
management system
improved

Partially
achieved
Partially
achieved

0

Partially
Environmental sector
priorities updated in the EU achieved
context
Partially
Introduction o f mandatory
achieved
insurance cover o f private
housing units; creation o f a
strict and enforced
construction code
enforcement system, and
strengthening o f emergency
preparedness
,

Outcomes
3.42. In terms o f environmental management, some progress has been made towards meeting
specific EU directives, primarily the Nitrates, Birds, and Habitats Directive, as well as
Directives on Environmental Assessment, Waste Management, and Large Combustion
Plants. More specifically, draft legislation on nature protection has been prepared to bring
Turkey into closer conformity with requirements o f the EU Birds and Habitats Directives,

Annex 4
Page 23 o f 59
while an amendment to the Environmental L a w has been adopted by Parliament to introduce
stricter sanctions for violations o f environmental regulations.

3.43, Progress towards disaster prevention and management has been mixed, particularly in
relation to insurance coverage and strengthening national and local institutions responsible
for disaster preparedness and response.
Status of Key Benchmarks
3.44. Environmental sector priorities updated in the EU context. The dialogue with the
authorities in this area did not materialize at the beginning o f the CAS period, but has
improved over time. In this context, ongoing cooperation with the EU in the environment
sector includes a dialogue in the context o f the Global Environment Facility (GEF)-funded
Biodiversity and Natural Resource Management Project, as w e l l as work o n nitrate
management which i s being pioneered in Turkey under the Anatolia Watershed Project.
These are areas where the Bank could further strengthen i t s assistance, specifically in relation
to nitrates management and nature protection, as well as pollution control.
3.45. Ongoing environment operations include the Anatolia Watershed Rehabilitation
Project, and one Montreal Protocol and one GEF grant, supporting the phase-out o f ozonedepleting substances and preservation o f Turkey’s biodiversity, respectively. As a result o f
increased sector synergies, and consistent with IEG’s recommendations, the Bank has
recently approved other operations with an environmental focus, including the Municipal
Services and the Renewable Energy Projects. Under the Anatolia Watershed Rehabilitation
Project, community-based soil and water management activities are being implemented in 28
microcatchments, w i t h the multiple objectives o f raising incomes amongst poor households
in upland catchments, rehabilitating degraded soils, forests and rangelands, and putting in
place measures t o control agricultural pollution (particularly nitrate pollution associated with
livestock production). The Government intends eventually t o scale up these activities to
achieve more extensive impacts.

3.46. On the non-lending front, the Bank conducted analytical work o n the forestry sector
and industrial pollution, as well as a cost-assessment o f environmental compliance with EU
requirements.

3.47. Introduction of mandatory insurance cover of private housing units; creation of a
strict and enforced construction code enforcement system, and strengthening of
emergency preparedness. Progress towards these benchmarks has been limited. The l a w o n
mandatory insurance has not been passed, while the Turkish Disaster Insurance Pool i s fully
operational and thus far has sold about 2.5 m i l l i o n policies, however fewer than expected.
Advancements in the enforcement o f building codes have also been uneven. Some progress
has been achieved in strengthening national and local Government institutions responsible for
disaster preparedness and response, but the Turkish Emergency Management Agency
(TEMAD) continues to lack a full mandate t o coordinate disaster response in case o f a major
catastrophe. On a positive note, TEMAD’s new headquarters were completed, and systems
for emergency information management and emergency communications were designed and
implemented in 2006.

3.48. B o t h the Marmara Earthquake Emergency Reconstruction (MEER) loan and the
Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project (ISMEP) advance the

Annex 4
Page 2 4 o f 59
agenda o f enforcement o f building codes and land use plans. The latter also finances seismic
risk mitigation in Istanbul’s critical public facilities, through retrofitting o f hospitals, schools
and other priority public facilities. In terms o f disaster response, the MEER Project financed
the construction o f 12,000 housing units, along with supporting school and healthcare
facilities, for the communities affected by the 1999 Marmara earthquake. Finally, WBI
provided broad base capacity building support to national and local institutions in disaster
management throughout Turkey, in particular targeting central and local government
officials, businesses, industries, NGOs and community leaders in specific aspects o f hazard
risk management.

4. Bank Performance during the CAS Period
a. Prowam Overview

4.1. The original, FY03-06 CAS envisaged a low-case scenario with a lending volume of
up to US$1.3 billion and a high-case scenario with a lending program of US$4.5 billion.
Having met the relevant macroeconomic, structural and social triggers, Turkey has
consistently stayed in the high case lending program. Under the CAS Progress Report, at the
end o f 2005, an additional year was added to the program and the overall envelope was
increased to US$6.6 billion for the four-year period (see Annex 3). The robust lending
program has been supported by an active AAA program which has responded to the
Government’s needs for knowledge and technical assistance. A t the end o f FY06, 18 AAA
activities were delivered under the current CAS. Six more were completed in FY07.

4.2. I n order to support the achievement of the CAS objectives, a strong IFC program
has been designed and implemented. During FY04-06, I F C has committed over US$917
m i l l i o n for its o w n account and mobilized US$405 million through syndicated banks,
compared to US$443 million and US$112 m i l l i o n during FYO1-FY03 respectively. IFC’s
investments have been well diversified across sectors with projects in manufacturing, the
financial sector, information technology, o i l and gas, health and education, and infrastructure.
IFC has increasingly supported Turkish companies to become more competitive, diversify
risk through increased exports and outward investments, and to develop into regional players.
During FY04-06, IFC has financed about US$150 m i l l i o n with Turkish companies engaging
in south-south investments, including in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Egypt, Georgia
and Russia. Annex 5 provides a detailed overview o f IFC’s program in Turkey
4.3. Finally, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) has also been
active in Turkey. I t has provided guarantees both for investments in Turkey and to Turkish
investors investing abroad, including under the newly established Small Investment Program.
A t end-FY06, MIGA’s portfolio in Turkey consisted o f one project in infrastructure, with a
gross and net exposure o f US$135 m i l l i o n and US$68 million, respectively.

Annex 4
Page 25 o f 59

6. Portfolio Performance

4.4. Largest active portfolio in Turkey’s history: At end-FY06, the Turkey portfolio
consisted o f 24 active projects, with total commitments o f over US$6 billion.I2 The Turkey
portfolio accounts for approximately 37% o f the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region and
6% of World Bank total active lending.
4.5. Portfolio management has been a priority throughout the CAS period. The annual
JPPR has become a key instrument for cooperation w i t h the Government and implementing
agencies on all aspects o f portfolio management. The JPPR, drafted in conjunction with the
periodic CAS assessments, has been looking at the program’s overall development impact
and contribution to CAS outcomes and benchmarks, in addition to the portfolio performance
indicators. This approach has strengthened the Government’s and the Bank’s focus o n results
in portfolio reviews.
Table 6: Turkey Portfolio Overview, FY04-0613
i
I

Number of Active Projects
Net Commitments (US$ml)
Undisbursed Balance at FY start (US$ml)
Approved during FY (US$ml)
Disbursed during FY(US$ml)
Disbursement Ratio (investment)
Cancellations during PI (US$ml)
Proactivity Index
Realism Index
Projects at Risk
Problem Projects

FY04
16
4,307
2,552
1,593
854
18%
169
0%
100%
25%
0 Yo

FY05
21
5,965
3,126
1,800
1,034
25%
10
100%
100%
5%
0%

FY06
24
6,057
3,836
1,526
1,060
17%
28
100%
100%
4%

4%

4.6. Portfolio performance during the CAS period has been strong, and consistently
better than, or in line with, that of E C A and the Bank as a whole. The disbursement ratio
has been, on average, higher than during the previous CAS period, with a peak o f 25% in
FY05. In FY06, the ratio decreased to 17%, largely due to new projects entering the portfolio
in FY05 but only becoming effective in the second h a l f o f FY06. In terms o f proactivity,
Turkey has consistently performed better than E C A and the Bank as a whole (see Table 6,
Figure A), except for FY04, when efforts to improve the performance o f Basic Education I1
were ongoing, but no formal action could yet be taken to reverse i t s proactivity rate.
Following intense efforts to improve portfolio quality, the ratio o f problem projects decreased
substantially since FY04, when several older projects suffered from implementation issues.
l 2 These include a $500 m i l l i o n D P L and two grants. The GEF Watershed Rehabilitation grant is not
considered a project per se, because i t i s an integral part o f the Anatolia Watershed Rehabilitation Project.
The portfolio composition, for the purpose o f the annual portfolio review, does not include any loans that
closed during FY06. As a result, PFPSAL I11 is not part o f the 24 active projects.
l3The portfolio composition, for the purpose o f the annual portfolio review, does not include any loans that
closed during FY06. As a result, PFPSAL I11 is not part o f the 24 active projects .GEF and Montreal
Protocol grants are included.

Annex 4
Page 26 o f 59

The indicator measuring the realism o f projects’ risks assessment has consistently been
loo%, while there was no net disconnect with IEG’s project ratings in both FY04 and
FY05.l4
4.7. Between F Y 0 4 and FY06, eight investment and two development policy loans exited
the Turkey portfolio. O f the nine projects evaluated by IEG so farI5, 78% received
satisfactory outcome ratingsI6, while sustainability was rated likely in 88% o f the projects for
which this indicator has been assessed.” B o t h Bank and Borrower performance were also
rated satisfactory in 78% o f the evaluated projects.”
Figure A: F Y 0 6 Turkey Portfolio Performance Indicators vs. W o r l d Bank and ECA

%

4.8. The Turkey program, overall, has been a cost-effective operation. Turkey has been
the third largest borrower after India and China, measured by net commitments, since the end
o f FY04, and i t was, o n average, the second largest borrower with over US$I.6 b i l l i o n in new
commitments between FY04-06. Nonetheless, the Turkey country budget available for work
program agreements was smaller than several large country programs Bank-wide in the past
two fiscal years. This was in part possible because o f the large average size o f the
operations, a deliberate strategic choice to respond to the budget limitations, which resulted
in relatively l o w average preparation and supervision cost per dollar lent.
c. Countrv Dialogue

4 . 9 . I n the summer of 2002, when the CAS was already in an advanced stage of
preparation, early elections were called. In view o f this situation, it made sense to wait for
the input o f the new Government before the CAS was finalized. Understandably, i t took
several months before the new Government could begin to focus o n the collaboration with
the Bank. Given the Bank’s strong involvement in supporting the previous Government to
manage the 2001 crisis, the Bank’s image was also associated w i t h measures that were not
IEG evaluation results for P F P S A L I11 are not yet available.
IEG Project Evaluations.
The Cesme Water Supply and Sewerage and the Industrial Technology projects were rated Moderately
Satisfactory.
17
The percentage o f projects for which Sustainability was rated L i k e l y refers to a sample o f eight projects.
For the Industrial Technology Project IEG did not rate sustainability, but a “risk to development objective”,
as Moderate.’
Moderately Satisfactory for Industrial Technology.
j4

l5Through
16

’*

Annex 4
Page 27 o f 59
popular. Thus there were some initial questions about the social impact o f the Bank’s
involvement as well as the applicability o f i t s advice in Turkey. The new Government was
also very keen o n demonstrating that any reform actions taken by the Government are
“home-grown” and not dictated by international financial institutions, a clear sign o f
ownership o f reforms.

4.10. Under these circumstances, the Bank had to rise to the challenge. I t had to prove
i t s usefulness by responding to the emerging priorities as defined by the new Government,
producing the best possible analytical work based on relevant international experience, and in
general, engage the Turkish counterparts fully in every step o f the Bank’s operational work.
During the CAS period, the confidence in the Bank as a trusted development partner has
grown rapidly and consequently a dialogue has opened up o n some politically sensitive
issues, such as education and labor market reforms. The current close collaboration bodes
well for a fully participatory preparation o f the new CPS.

4.11. The Country Office, which has strong sectoral representation and a full
complement of fiduciary staff, has played a major role in furthering the policy dialogue
and ensuring the effectiveness of the implementation of the assistance program. The
three major policy-based operations, the PFPSAL 111, the PPDPL and the Competitiveness
and Employment D P L (CEDPL), have been task managed by staff in the Ankara office,
ensuring full continuity o f the dialogue. Supervision o f the majority o f the operations has
been delegated, and the Ankara-based portfolio team has managed an essentially rolling
process o f joint portfolio reviews. Finally, the procurement, financial management and
disbursement staff have provided continuity and prompt service to the clients and the Bank’s
task teams.

4.12. Consultations with non-governmental organizations on the C A S program during
the C A S period were limited. W h i l e there was extensive dialogue with the authorities
during the preparation o f the CAS and there were consultations with other stakeholders,
including with civil society representatives at the design stage o f the program, these latter
consultations did not continue o n a systematic basis during the implementation o f the CAS.
The preparation o f this completion report and the new CPS provides a good opportunity to
renew the dialogue with the non-governmental stakeholders o n the Bank’s overall program.
d. Workinn With Other Develoument Partners

4.13. The Bank has been working very closely with the IMF, particularly in the areas of
public sector and financial sector reforms. The work o n public sector management and
governance has focused on strengthening the public expenditure management system while
maintaining fiscal discipline. The Fund has taken the lead in the short-term measures needed
for the fiscal adjustment such as incomes policy, urgent revenue and expenditure measures,
and budget monitoring. T he Bank has taken the lead in assisting the Government o n the
medium-term public expenditure management strategy, rationalization o f the public
investment program, public procurement reform, accounting reform, and public liability
management. In the financial sector, the collaboration focused o n assisting the Government
to address the consequences o f the banking crisis and putting in place an appropriate legal
and regulatory framework that would minimize the risk o f future crises. The Bank has taken
the lead in assisting the reform o f the legal framework and regulations for bank supervision,
institutional development o f BRSA and SDIF, and the structural reforms required to guide
the restructuring and eventual privatization o f state banks. The Fund has taken the lead in

Annex 4
Page 28 o f 59
assessing the soundness o f the banking system and where there was an immediate fiscal
impact. On the state banks agenda and resolution o f private banks, the Fund and the Bank
have worked closely as a team.

4.14. The Bank has also established close collaboration with the EU and has become
more fully engaged with the members of the United Nations (UN) system. The role o f
the EU in Turkey i s particularly important because o f Turkey’s accession aspiration and
because o f i t s significant financial assistance o n grant terms. Collaboration between the
Bank and the EU has been strong, and the Bank has adjusted i t s assistance program, in
coordination w i t h the European Commission, to respond to Turkey’s accession priorities.
The most recent C E M focused o n Turkey’s EU accession priorities and it was complemented
by a series o f leadership seminars o n specific aspects o f the accession process, supported and
organized by WBI using a peer-to-peer format w i t h senior government officials and EU
negotiators from various European countries. Programming o f Bank and EU assistance i s
coordinated o n a regular basis, and strategic joint agendas include environment, education,
financial and public sector reforms, including governance and anti-corruption. Partnership
w i t h the UN system has been particularly close in the social sectors (UNICEF, WHO) and in
poverty alleviation and local development/participation (UNDP). The Bank has been a
regular participant in the UN thematic groups, including gender issues and youth.

4.15. Consultations with the European Investment Bank and bilateral donor agencies,
such as the French Development Agency, KfW, the Japan International Cooperation
Agency and USAID, have been frequent. These consultations aimed at exploring
opportunities o f collaboration or co-financing and ensuring the synergy o f externally
financed assistance programs. The A v i a n Influenza and Human Pandemic Preparedness and
Response Project, resulting from a coordinated effort between the Bank, the EU, and USAID,
i s a concrete example o f close cooperation within the international donor community.
Finally, the Turkey program has received significant support from the Japanese Government,
through several trust funds administered by the Bank, in the areas o f enhancing Turkey’s
capacity for development operations financed by the Bank, testing new approaches in the
social sectors, and supporting business innovation.
e. Bank Performance

4.16. There appear to be four key factors contributing to satisfactory Bank
performance during the CAS period. First, a close collaboration with the authorities,
based o n mutual trust, has developed over time. Second, the timeliness, quality and proper
dissemination o f some flagship analytical work have been m u c h appreciated by our
counterparts. Third, the Bank’s readiness t o adjust the C A S program and respond flexibly t o
newly emerging priorities in the context o f the CAS Progress Report has demonstrated the
Bank’s responsiveness. Even more flexibility in terms o f the lending volume and the use o f
country systems, though, would have been appreciated by the authorities. Finally, strong
field presence and a generally strong country team have enabled the Bank to deliver the C A S
program largely as planned.
4.17. The section below summarizes the key considerations for the next CPS based o n the
lessons learned during the CAS period. As mentioned earlier, this CAS formally was not a
results-based CAS but it did include a fairly detailed results matrix, key outcome indicators
and benchmarks. W h i l e the choice o f result indicators and more broadly the results
framework appear to have been appropriate, some o f the baseline data have turned out to be

Annex 4
Page 29 o f 59
unreliable. In designing the results framework for the new CPS, the team will assess which
elements o f the current framework should be retained, consistent with the main objectives o f
the new CPS, and how to ensure that the baseline data are accurate and the progress i s
monitorable.

5. Key Considerations for the New CPS

5.1. The new CPS should further strengthen the ownership of the authorities in defining
the CAS program and should allow sufficient flexibility both in terms of lending levels
and content to respond to emerging priorities. The current CAS program went through a
rather thorough vetting by the authorities, but because the Government was new when the
CAS was finalized, i t took some time to build full ownership o f the program. With the
deepening o f the collaboration with the Government during the CAS period and the
adjustments made to the program in the context o f the CAS Progress Report, there i s a good
basis for a truly collaborative formulation o f the new CPS which would be guided by the
recently adopted gth Development Plan. I t w i l l be also important to enhance the civil
society’s engagement in the consultation process.
5.2. The Bank Group’s future assistance program should envisage greater support for
private sector development to help create jobs and alleviate poverty. Consistent with the
recommendations o f the recent CAE, such a program should be designed in close
collaboration within the World Bank Group. The extensive analytical work o n the
investment climate, o n the labor market as well as o n education, and inclusion o f the
Programmatic Employment Generation Development Policy Loans in the CAS program in
the second part o f the CAS period have already paved the way for a more intensified support
in this area.
5.3. The new CPS should also try to deepen the Bank’s engagement in environment
protection. This i s an important issue for sustainable development and one which requires
significant investments to meet the EU requirements. The ongoing analytical work o n
industrial pollution and the dialogue in the context o f the GEF-fbnded Biodiversity and
Natural Resource Management Project provide an entry point to an enhanced level o f
collaboration.
5.4. The programmatic approach to development policy lending has proven useful in
light of the (longer term and institutional) nature of the reforms supported by the DPLs
and the fact that the authorities are keen to maintain full ownership of these reforms.
Perhaps the CAS program was too ambitious expecting four DPLs (two tranches each o f the
two D P L series) in the last two years o f the CAS period but this decision reflected the
ambitions o f the authorities at the time to move ahead simultaneously with the fundamental
social security reform and reforms supporting employment generation, especially in the labor
markets. In retrospective, this has turned out to be overly ambitious. Because o f the number
o f DPLs in the program and the overall limitation o n the amount o f development policy
lending within the C A S envelope, the average size o f the DPLs envisaged in the CAS was
smaller than i t could have been if fewer DPLs had been planned for. This was somewhat
corrected in FY06 by the increase in the size o f the PPDPL given the strength o f the reform
program supported by the operation and the slippage o f the CEDPL to the following fiscal
year.

Annex 4
Page 30 o f 59

5.5. Finally, high quality analytical work has been critical for helping the policy
dialogue in-country on such key issues as education and labor market reforms and for
assisting the authorities to prioritize the economic agenda for Turkey’s EU accession.
Of course, this analytical work also provides the basis for Bank support. Collaborative
preparation o f economic and sector work, wide and participatory dissemination o f findings,
as well as the combination o f the dissemination o f analytical work w i t h workshops of
international practitioners, supported by WBI, have proven particularly effective.

Annex 4
Page 3 1 o f 59
ANNEX 1: Key Outcomes and Bank Group Benchmarks
Status of Key Outcomes and Bank Grow Benchmarks

Macroeconomics
and Governance

Key Outcomes

Bank Group Benchmarks

Stabilization o f public creditworthiness indicators
at sustainable levels. The net public debt to GNP
ratio has declined from about 79% in 2002 to
about 45% i n 2006.

Satisfactory macroeconomic and fiscal framework
zonsistent with the k e y outcomes. A satisfactory
macroeconomic and fiscal framework has been
maintained, supported by consecutive Fund
urograms and Bank adjustment lending. The primary
surplus of the consolidated public sector reached
6.2%, 7.2%, 6.8% and 6.6% of GNP in 2003, 2004,
2005 and 2006, respectively.

Less volatile economic growth in the range o f 5%.
GNPgrowth has been strong, 5.9% in 2003, 9.9%
in 2004, 7.6% in 2005 and 6% i n 2006.
Single digit inflation. End-year C P I was reduced
to 9.3% in 2004, reaching single digits the first
time for more than 30 years. I n 2005, inflation
further declined to 7.7% but it accelerated again
in 2006 due to higher oil prices and emerging
markets volatility.

Equitable Human
and Social
Development

Low extreme poverty (1.8%) maintained and
vulnerability reduced f r o m 15% in 2001 to 12% in
2006. Extreme poverty has declined to a
negligible level of 0.01% in 2005. The concept oj
vulnerability has changed; the poverty rate oj
27% in 2002 declined to 20.5% in 2005.

N e t enrollment rate in basic education maintained
at not less than 99%; girls' enrollment increased,
especially in' secondary education: maleifemale
ratio improved from 1.20 to 1.15 by 2006. Due to
more accurate data, the baseline and the expected
outcomes have been reset. Net enrollment in
basic education remained about 90% during the
CAS period. Girls' secondary net enrollment rate
increased from 42% in 2001/2002 to 51% in
2005/2006, and the male/female ratio in
secondary education decreased from 1.33 in
2003-04 to 1.27 in 2005-06.

Implementation o f public sector reforms, focusing on:
(i)
the tax system; (ii)
public expenditure management;
(iii)the social security system; (iv) the c i v i l service;
(v) local government; and (vi) anti-corruption.
Implementation of public sector reforms has been on
track, including: (9 tax policy reforms and a new
revenue administration law; (io enactment and
implementation of the Public Finance Management
and Control Law; (iii) enactment of the social
security administrative law, and of the social security
and universal health insurance legislation (execution
of the social security and universal health insurance
law was suspended at the end of 2006, as Turkey's
Constitutional Court ruled that some of its provisions
were unconstitutional; the Government submitted a
revised law to Parliament in November 2007); (iv)
drafting of a new law on civil service; (v) enactment
and implementation of local government laws,
including the Local Government Associations Law
and the Municipality Law, and preparation of a fiscal
decentralization law; and (vi) enactment of laws on
freedom of information and code of conduct for civil
servants; and establishment of the ethics board.
Public expenditure o n health, education and social
protection are sustained at pre-crisis levels. The
benchmarks as shares o f GNF' are: (i)education:
4.25%; (ii)
health: 3.25%, and (iii)
social protection:
7.00%. Aggregate social expenditures reached agreed
targets with a slight underage in education i n 200405. I n 2006, the education expenditure as was 4.33%
of GNP, health expenditure 5.31% of GNP, and
social protection expenditure 9.68% of GNP. One key
issue in health is to contain costs and derive better
health outcomes for expenditures. I n social
protection the issue is to curtail the pension deficit
over the medium to long-term. The combined social
security deficit (health and pensions) has been
capped at 4.5% of GDP over theperiod 2006-07.
Implementation o f (i)the Conditional Cash Transfer
(CCT) program t o benefit over 1 m i l l i o n children, and
(ii)at least 1,500 local initiative (LI) projects tc

Annex 4
Page 32 o f 59
Development
Themes

K e y Outcomes

B a n k Group Benchmarks

support vulnerable people. CCT reached 2.6 million
C h i l d mortality reduced and maternal health children, representing the poorest 6%, and 7,500 LZ
improved t o make progress towards the MDGs. sub-projects were completed at end-FYO6.
There has been signijicant reduction i n infant
mortality from 43 in 1998 to 24 per 1,000 live Renovation and modernization o f schools, including in
births in 2005. A t the moment, there are data disadvantaged areas, and implementation o f reforms in
secondary education. Implementation of the Banklimitations to assess change in maternal health.
financed basic education projects has been slow due
to lack of counterpart funds allocation in 2003,
several personnel changes in the Ministry of
National Education, and implementation capacity
problems.
Reforms in secondary education have
begun with an EU-financed project. The Bankfinanced project to support secondary education
became effective in spring 2006.

.

Attractive
Business C l i m a t e
a n d Knowledge

Exports growth rate exceeds GNP growth rate. I n
2003, 2004, 2005 and 2006, real GNP grew by
5.9%, 9.9%, 7.6% and 6%, respectively, while real
exports growth averaged 11% over the same
period.
Foreign Direct Investment reaches US$1.5 b i l l i o n
o n average during the C A S period. After
remaining low at USS1.3 billion in 2003 and
USS1.9 billion in 2004, net FDI inflows into
Turkey increased to USS8.6 billion in 2005 and
USSI9 billion i n 2006.

and universal health insurance legislation was
enacted. The legislation introduced a universal
health insurance program which will dramatically
increase access while unifying and rationalizing
health financing, albeit with considerable increase in
public outlays if necessary efficiency measures are
not taken. (Execution of the social security and
universal health insurance law was suspended at the
end of 2006, as Turkey's Constitutional Court ruled
that some of its provisions were unconstitutional; the
Government submitted a revised law to Parliament in
November 2007).
Increase in export capacity o f enterprises financed
through lines o f credit provided by the W o r l d B a n k
Group. EFIL I Z has disbursed around 95% of its
USS300 million credit line to exporters, strongly
ahead of the original disbursement forecasts. Zt has
reached over 230 exporters of different f i r m sizes and
from a variety of industrial sectors and geographic
regions. The repeater EFZL ZIZ has started
disbursing in 2006. Zt mostly has leasing companies
as financial intermediaries which will allow the
project to broaden the universe of participating
exporters. A recently approved operation will provide
increased access to finance specifically for SMEs.

Stability o f financial markets improved. The
financial sector has substantially stabilized, Improvements in the overall investment climate,
although the recent turbulence has created losses implementation o f the n e w FDI law, and establishment
in banks. CapitaVrisk weighted assets ratio for o f an Investment Promotion Agency (IPA).
private deposit banks was Z4.0% in June 2006 Substantialprogress has been made in simplijication
(18.6% for the system) and has been trending of business registration. Firms' start-up time has
downwards as banks have shifted assets from decreased significantly but registration cost is high.
non-risk weighted Government bonds to loans to Procedures related to business closing are sill

Annex 4
Page 3 3 o f 59
Development
Themes

Key Outcomes

Bank Group Benchmarks

the private sector. A new banking law was passed
in late 2005, and supporting regulations and a
revision of supervisory processes are underway.
Implementation of the new banking law started
as of December 2006. A minority stake in
VakiJbank was successfully floated in an IPO in
November 2005, and the Government has taken
initial steps to privatize H a l k Bank through a
block sale on the recommendation of the
investment banks engaged to bring the bank to
the market.

cumbersome. A new FDI law and related legislation
have been enacted. The law for the establishment of
the I P A was enacted in July 2006. I n addition to
reducing administrative barriers to business entry
and operation, other key investment climate reforms
implemented during the CAS period include:
improvement of market contestability; improvement
of
corporate governance;
increased public
investments i n research anbl development (R&D) and
ongoing review of Intellectual Property Rights
legislation to ensure consistency with EU
requirements; increased harmonization of quality
standards and regulations with EU requirements;
improvement in infrastructure; acceleration of
privatization; and h) increased focus on SMEs.
These areas should be complemented by
microeconomic reforms aimed at reducing tax
evasion and informality, improving labor market
flexibility, increasing firms’ (particularly SMEs ’)
access to finance, increasing private investment in
R&D and firms’ adoption of quality standards and
technology (including ICT), and better aligning the
skills of the labor force with the needs of the private
sector.
Continued independence o f financial markets
regulatory agencies.
BRSA and CMB remain
independent entities, while the insurance sector is
supervised by the Treasury.
Completion o f privatization o f state banks; passage o f
n e w Bankruptcy L a w and Commercial Code, and
implementation o f non-bank financial institutions
reform. VakiJbank successfully completed an I P O for
22% of its equity in late 2005. I n preparation for
their privatization, both Halk Bank and Ziraat Bank
have restructured their staffing and branch networks
and they have been given separate boards. The
Government engaged Goldman Sachs and a local
investment bank, CAIB-Is Yatirim, to bring H a l k
Bank to the market. On the recommendation of the
investment banks, the Government has taken initial
steps towards a block sale of the bank. The execution
and bankruptcy law has been amended; supporting
regulations were issued and published in April 2004.
The Commercial Code has been amended to simplifi
procedures for setting up a company; a new
Commercial Code has been drafted. Non-bank
financial institution reforms w i l l be addressed
through an upcoming series of development policy
loans (Employment Generation DPLs). Reforms will
be related to insurance supervision, credit
infrastructure and access to finance.

Annex 4
Page 34 o f 59
Development
Themes
Strong
Environmental
Management and
Disaster
Prevention

Key Outcomes

Bank Group Benchmarks

Significant convergence with EU environmental
standards. Progress has been made in specific
directives, primarily the Nitrates, Birds, and
Habitats Directive, as well as the Directives on
Environmental Assessment, Waste Management,
and Large Combustion Plants. A n amendment to
the Environmental Law has been adopted by the
Parliament to introduce stricter sanctions for
violations of environmental regulations.

Environmental sector priorities updated in the EU
context. I n coordination with significant E U
assistance i n environment, the Bank has been
conducting ES W focused on industrial pollution
control.
Several Bank-financed projects with
environmental focus have been approved, including
the Municipal Services Project and the Renewable
Energy Project.

Disaster prevention and management system
improved. The Turkish Emergency Management
Agency (TEMAD) does not yet practically have a
full mandate to coordinate disaster response i n
case of a major catastrophe butprogress is being
made in the integration of disaster related
services.

Introduction of mandatory insurance cover o f private
housing units; creation o f a strict and enforced
construction
code
enforcement
system,
and
strengthening o f emergency preparedness. The
Turkish Disaster Insurance Pool is fully operational
and thus far has sold about 2.5 million policies
@ewer than expected) but the law on mandatory
insurance has not been passed. I n addition to the
MEER, the Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and
Emergency Preparedness Project (ISMEP) will
advance the agenda of enforcement of building codes
and land useplans. Someprogress has been achieved
in strengthening national and local Government
institutions responsible for disaster preparedness and
response. TEMAD’s new headquarters were
completed, and systems for emergency information
management and emergency communications were
designed and implemented in 2006.

i

n

I

I

Ir.

I-

I

I

u-

i

C E
O
J

Annex 4
Page 49 o f 59
ANNEX 3: Original, Revised and Actual CAS Lending Program

Health Transition
Renewable Energy
Micro Watershed

900
300
200
202
37

1650
200
Railway Restructuring
200
Seismic Risk Mitigation
400
200
Secondary Education
PPSAL (moved to FY06 and 500
renamed PPDPL I)
100
Knowledge Economy (dropped)
1600
Total
PPSAL I1 (moved to FY07.
renamed PPDPL 11)
PFSAL (moved to FY07, renamed
PEGDPL)
SME Finance
Energy
Rural Development

400
400
100
100
250

1250

PFPSAL 111
EFIL I 1
Health Transition
Renewable Energy
Anatolia Watershed

1000
303
61
202
20

1586
Total
Municipal Services
275
Railway Restructuring
185
Istanbul Seismic
Risk 400
Mitigation
104
Secondary Education
305
EFIL I11
465
PSSP I1
66
ECSEE A P L I1
1800
Total
400
PPDP.L I
PEGDPL
(renamed 400
CEDPL)
150
SME Development
200
325
Energy Liberalization
125
Gas Sector Development
ECSEE APL I11
1600
Total

PPDPL I 1
PEGDPL I1 (renamed
CEDPL 11)
Electricity Distribution
Infrastructure (tbd)
Social Dev. & Empl.
Promotion

400
400
3 00
250
250
1600

PFPSAL I11
EFIL I1
Health Transition
Renewable Energy
Anatolia Watershed

1000
303
61
202
20

1586
Total
Municipal Services
275
Railway Restructuring 185
Istanbul Seismic Risk 400
104
Mitigation
Secondary Education
305
EFIL I11
465
66
PSSP I1
ECSEE APL I1
1800
Total
PPDPL I
5 00
Access to Finance for 180
336
SMEs
Electricity Generation 325
150
Rehabilitation
Gas
Sector 34
Development
1525
ECSEE APL I11
Avian Influenza and
Human Pandemic
Total
CEDPL
Access to Finance for
SMES~~
Electricity
Distribution 23
Istanbul
Municipal
Infrastructure 23

500
67
269
3 22

1158

High-case scenario.
Revised as part o f CAS Progress Report, November 2005.
With the inclusion of a US$7 million GEF grant in support of the Anatolia Watershed Project, the total delivered amount in
FY04 was US$1,593 million.
22 Additional financing o f €50 million, following a loan amendment approved in FY07.
23 Loan has not been signed yet
l9

2o

Annex 4
Page 50 o f 59

ANNEX 4: Original, Revised and Actual Non-lending Program

I

Total

24

I 21

CAS
Impact o f Agriculture Sector
Reforms
Knowledge Economy Assessment
Gas Sector Note
Caspian O i l and Gas Dialogue
N G O Outreach

CAS
Impact o f Agriculture Sector Reforms
Knowledge Economy Assessment
Gas Sector Note
Caspian O i l and Gas Dialogue
N G O Outreach
Forestry

Modeling RealiFinancial Sector
Interaction
Poverty Assessment
Rural Sector Study
Education Sector Study
Environment/Forestry
Energy
Labor Market Study
CAS Progress Report
PER
CEM
Investment Climate Assessment
Regional Poverty Update
Rural Finance Study
Tertiary Education Review
Accounting and Auditing ROSC
CAS
Financial Sector Assessment
Private Sector Development
EnvironmentAndustrial Pollution
Irrigation Sector Review
C E M Follow-up
Fiduciary Assessment

Modeling Reaminancia1 Sector Interaction
Poverty Assessment
Rural Sector Study
Education Sector Study
Energy
Labor Market Study

28

Revised as part o f CAS Progress Report, November 2005

CAS Progress Report
CEM
Rural Finance Study
Public Administration (background note)
Accounting and Auditing ROSC

Investment Climate Assessment
PER
Irrigation and Water Resources
Environmental Management (Industrial
Pollution)
Higher Education Policy Study
Environmental Aspects in the Privatization
o f Electricity

Annex 4
Page 51 o f 59

ANNEX 5: IFC in Turkey FY04-06

During FY04-06, IFC has committed over US$917million for i t s own account and mobilized
US$405 million through syndicated banks, compared to US$443 million and U S $ l l 2 million
during FYOl-FY03 respectively. Also, IFC financed US$150million with Turkish
companies outside Turkey.

Annex 4
Page 52 o f 59
Development Themes and IFC's Cross-cutting Objectives
Objectives

Completion

pitable Human and Social Development
hpport social sectors

Support expansion o f higher educational
services;
Increasingly take an active role in the
health sector and support provision o f highquality health services.

1

IFC expanded its support for private sector health and education
projects. IFC assisted with financing to improve access to high quality
services through modernization and expansion programs.
Extended first Turlush lira loan to Yuce, a K - 1 2 school and I T training
institute in Ankara, to help it meet the growing demand for vocational
training in the I T sector.
Committed a loan for the lira equivalent o f U S 4 0 m i l l i o n t o the
Acibadem Healthcare group t o expand in Istanbul and into smaller
cities in Turkey, where high-quality health care i s less readily
available

dtractive Business Climate andKnowledPe
Support the reform of thefinancial sector;

Working w i t h mid-sized banks to
strengthen their balance sheets and to use
them as a platform in the consolidation
process
Continuing with efforts aimed at institution
building and expand the range o f financial
intermediation in Turkey (e.g. insurance
sector; mortgage finance; contractual
savings institutions; private equity)
Supporting the privatization o f state owned
banks that had been taken over by SDIF,
and in the sale o f their NPLs.

Committed over US$330 m i l l i o n (US$275 m i l l i o n expected in FY07)
in the financial sector.
Provide term funding to Turkish banks at a time when term funding
was particularly scarce.
Supported development o f leasing industry through several transaction
Supported development o f reinsurance industry through the first
facility for earthquake risk;
Supported SMEs through lending to the local banks;
IFC was unable to invest in pension funds due to a weak regulatory
framework.
With the delayed passing o f the mortgage l a w there was a limited
opportunity for I F C to expand its activities in mortgage finance. In
2007 the Parliament expects to approve the mortgage law. Going
forward IFC expects mortgage finance to be one o f key areas for
growth.
There has been limited progress with the privatization o f the state
owned banks. A sale o f a block o f shares o f Halkbank (rather than an
outright sale to a strategic investor) i s expected in 2007. The
Government i s expected to accelerate the process after the 2007
elections.
I F C expects to support Turkey's first private equity fund and will alsc
support, through an equity investment, the acquisition o f Finansbank
by the National Bank o f Greece in F Y 0 7
M o s t o f the banks taken over by the SDIF are not resold but rather
merged into another failed bank that s t i l l remains under the control o f
SDIF. Although IFC approached and offered support to the K o c
Financial Services (jointly owned by Unicredit o f Italy and K o c Group
o f Turkey), the sale o f Y a p i K r e d i by the SDIF went through without
IFC.
Although I F C offered its support t o a l l bidders participating to the
NPL auctions, this resource was n o t tapped by the winners. SDIF has
sold most o f the N P L s held by it.

Annex 4
Page 53 o f 59
!. Support Infrastructure as the privatization
process gains momentum
Provide advisory and direct lending in the
transactions in the infrastructure sector.
Considering the financing o f the BakuTbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) Pipeline.
Stimulate foreign investor interest in the
privatization o f some o f the most visible
projects in infrastructure.

*

Financed post privatization support o f Kusadasi Port as well as two gas
distribution project with substantial environmental benefits.
Financed the construction o f B T C o i l pipeline.
Supported an I T company focused o n I T solutions for Government
agencies, state-owned enterprises, and large and medium-sized private
sector corporations.

*

1.

Supported the network capacity growth and coverage expansion o f a
telecommunication company to promote greater competition and make
cellular communications more affordable and available to larger
segments o f the population.
IFC supported the privatization o f a cement plant. However, given
limited progress with the privatization o f strategic sectors, IFC
couldn’t play i t s role in supporting flagship privatization, attracting
foreign interest and stimulating the f l o w o f foreign direct investments
in privatization deals.

1. Support Corporate SectorBMEs

Continue to pursue new investments o f
projects with strong operating intrinsic as
w e l l as o n highly visible interventions with
strong demonstration effects and positive
impact o n market psychology.

Supported the expansion and modernization programs o f Turkish
companies in manufacturing sectors such as steel, white goods,
aluminum processing, auto parts, cement, paper packaging products,
textile, and garment industry.
Supported second tier companies through debt financing.

Address the scarcity o f equity financing
and the lack o f access to capital markets by
developing model transactions.

Supported SMEs through developing o f leasing industry (eg. TLF
Garanti, Turkish Leasing, Intercity, Finans Lease).
Invested equity in 2 second tier companies as w e l l as in a private
equity fund. Also, I F C made a substantial equity in vestment o f
US$275 m i l l i o n in a bank.
Widened i t s client base by investing in a number o f good second tier
companies. During FY04-06, more than 213 o f IFC’s operations in the
real sector in Turkey were w i t h second-tier companies.

Support Turkish projects in Central and
Eastern Europe and Central Asia.

Developed and provided appropriate financing instruments, such as
local currency funds, in supporting creditworthy second-tier
companies. Offered long-term local currency loans and disbursed its
first Turkish lira loan to a second tier client in the education sector
(YUCE).
Continued to support Turkish companies engaging in south-south
investments including in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Egypt,
Georgia and Russia. During FY04-07 has financed about US$200
m i l l i o n with Turkish companies outside Turkey.

Annex 4
Page 54 o f 59

IFC’s Committed Projects in Turkey, FY04-07
(US%million)

FY
Approved

Project
IFC
Original
Commit

2004

2 1665 - Turkish Leasing

30

2004

209 1 1 - Oyak Bank I1

50

2005

21759-TSKB Sub L o a n

50

2005
2006

23285- Intercity
24974- Intercity I1

20.0
44.7

2005

24 109-TEB I V Sub Loan

50.0

2006

24475-Finans Lease A S

25.5

Project Description

Turkey
Support the leasing companies emerging from the
consequences o f the 200 1 financial crises
Lengthen the average maturity o f Bank’s liabilities and
strengthen its balance sheet enabling i t to fund longer term
assets, at a time when long term funding is not available
locally.
Expand TSKB’s financial capacity and thereby enhance the
availability o f long term credit to Turlush enterprises. Suppc
TSKB’s efforts to diversify its funding base to a broader rani
commercial fund uroviders. assist T S K B t o develop best pral
with regard to en;ironmental management policies.
Support a leading fleet management and vehicle leasing
company in Turkey, to fund its rapidly expanding business
actiGities.
Provide capital to the Turkish banking sector; help TEB
provide much needed financing to Turkish companies.
Expand i t s leasing operations to the Turkish private sector,
particularly Small and M e d i u m Enterprises that often face
more difficulties in accessing term finance.
Support the growth o f a leading Turkish reinsurance
company by increasing its capacity to underwrite more
earthquake risk and hence meet the growing domestic
demand.
Private equity fund which will make equity and equity
related investments in companies located primarily in
Turkey and in neighboring countries o f Southeastern Europe
and Central Asia
Support through an equity investment the acquisition o f
Finansbank by the National Bank o f Greece, one o f the
largest ever transactions involving Greek and Turkish
interest.

h
i
2006

24299-Milli R e I11

50.0

25504 -Turkish PEF I1

2007

25000 - NBGiFinansbank

275.0

GENERAL MANUFACTURING
2005
23 858-Arcelik-Reg . E x p

103.4

2005

23 182-Assan I V

30.0

2006

24079-Eren Expansion

40.0

2006

24454-TDD-Expansion

29.8

Support o f Arcelik’s investment program that includes
modernization and capacity increases, investments in
research and development and product development, and thc
construction o f a greenfield washing machine plant in
Russia.
Help the expansion and modernization program o f an
aluminum processing plant as w e l l as refinancing o f shortterm debt o f the company
- - with medium- and long-term loan
and cash injection.
Support the company to produce containerboard at lower
costs than imports utilizing locally available wastepaper,
competitive wages, economies o f scale, m o d e m technology
and strategic location.
Help TDD meet the increasing demand for panel radiators
and combination boilers in Turkish and European markets.
The Project will also support the development o f Turkey’s
small and medium enterprise (SME) sector by fostering
indirect employment, through forward and backward
linkages related to outsourced components, transport,
installation and after-sales service activities.

Annex 4
Page 55 o f 59
2006

24940-Standard Profil

22.7

Support a local market leader in the Turkish auto parts indus
growing into a leading player in the European market expanc
its product range and enhancing i t s already competitive posit
in the European auto parts sector.
Finance a new cement capacity with a state-of-the-art
technology. In embracing leadership in environmental and
social policies the Group is acting as a role model for others
to implement. The greenfield project will create new jobs in
one o f Turkey’s least developed regions.
Support the company to set up an operation in Egypt, which
is in line with IFC’s South-to-South strategy. The
investment will reduce the overall manufacturing cost and
improve its access to traditional markets.
Garment industry. H e l p the company diversify its business
model and revenue streams through new technologies,
brands and marketing techniques t o the marketplace. The
Project will allow Unitim to set up an operation in Egypt.
Support a family-owned company specialized in the
manufacture o f tin cans. The Project is expected to improve
the competitiveness o f an established supplier to the food
sector, and an important Turkish exporter.
Support o f the Turkish auto parts sector and South-South
investment through the Company’s new Bulgarian facilities
well as potential future investments in Russia and Iran.
T o expand and modernize company’s existing broiler and
feed milling operations, and construct a hatchery in
Romania. The project is expected to generate about 270 n e a
direct employments at the Company, o f which 45 will be in

:
24757-Sanko Cement

2007

25946 - K.C. Textiles

10.0

2007

25832 - Unitim

30.0

25740- Sarten

26098-Standard Profile I1
2007

257 1 1 - Banvit I1

35.0

EALTH AND EDUCATION
20.0

r
2005

Increase access to high quality medical care through
supporting expansion o f Acibadem Healthcare Group, a
leading healthcare provider, in Istanbul and other parts of
Turkey. The Project includes the construction o f an 80-bed
specialty (oncology and neurosurgery) hospital located in
Istanbul and a 200-bed general hospital to be located in
Bursa.

122-YUCE

4.5

Support Y U C E to expand i t s campus capacity by 40 percent,
participate in a growing vocational training market and
penetrate the software educational segment.

220-Bilgi I1

15.0

Support the company to increase i t s student capacity by 36
percent and consolidate its successful e-learning platform.

10.0

2005

23 785-PALEN

2.0

2005

22608-Palgaz

10.0

2004

20468-Meteksan

8.5

Finance post privatization support o f Kusadasi Port to
attract additional cruise lines and make Kusadasi their port
o f choice. Furthermore, the project would ensure that the
port i s operated in an environmentally sound manner.
Support a gas distribution project with substantial
environmental benefits through the substitution o f more
efficient and cleaner-burning natural gas for other fuels
such as o i l and lignite.
Implement natural gas distribution projects w i t h substantial
environmental benefits through the substitution o f more
efficient and cleaner-burning natural gas for other fuels
such as o i l and lignite.
Support company’s business expansion, financial
restructuring, and strengthening its corporate governance
practices. The Company’s focus i s to provide turnkey I T
solutions for Government agencies, state-owned
enterprises, and large and medium-sized private sector
corporations.

2006107

11726-Avea

120.0

Support the Company’s network capacity growth and
coverage expansion. Promote greater competition and
make cellular communications more affordable and
available to larger segments o f the population.

OIL AND
GAS
2006

BTC

76.0

Support construction o f a dedicated crude o i l pipeline
system, which will extend from the ACG field through
Azerbaijan and Georgia to a terminal at Ceyhan o n the
Mediterranean coast o f Turkey. IFC’s investment in the
B T C pipeline consists o f a loan up to US$125 m i l l i o n
(US$76 m i l l i o n in Turkey).

’

I F C has supported one o f its client companies, Modern Karton, to set up a collection system to tap households
and small shops and possl:bly extend the system beyond greater Istanbul by introducing a more formal collection
system and raising the awareness o f waste generators. The project helped to grow employment opportunities by
increasing the f l o w o f recycled waste paper, formalizing the role o f informal sector participants and integrating
them into the recycling supply chain, and creating an environment for growth o f SMEs in the waste paper
recycling industry. In addition, the project helped to bring waste collection practices and standards in Turkey in
line with European U n i o n norms.
I F C conducted a market study o f Turkey’s electricity sector. The objective was to better understand the
potential o f Turkey’s electricity wholesale market and ultimately to support the entry o f foreign and domestic
privates investors into a currently government dominated sector.

FIAS has supported the Government o f Turkey with a competition policy study o n h o w to attract FDI and
strengthen the competitiveness o f private sector as the primary engine for sustainable private sector l e d economic
growth. The objective o f the project was to identify institutional bottlenecks and discussed with the authorities
necessary measures to strengthen institutional capacity to further develop and implement a comprehensive
competition policy based o n international best practices.

Annex 4
Page 57 o f 59
ANNEX 6: Developments in FY07
T h e C A S Completion Report i s based on a detailed results framework covering the
FYO4-06 period, even though the original C A S was extended to include FY07 as well.
The FY04-06 coverage o f the CAS C R was driven by the need to utilize i t s findings as inputs
in the formulation o f the new Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), whose preparation began
in early FY07. The following sections summarize the key developments that occurred during
FY07.
Good overall economic performance continued in FY07. Economic performance
continued to be strong despite the political uncertainty caused by twin elections. In 2006,
economic growth, while decelerated, continued to be robust at 6 percent. Annual growth
reached 5.2 percent in the first half o f 2007, compared to 7.5 percent in the corresponding
period o f 2006. This slow down was mainly due to deceleration o f private consumption
caused by the monetary policy tightening in the summer o f 2006. Inflation remained in
single digits at 9.7 percent in end-2006 but exceeded the original 5 percent target by a
significant margin. Annual CPI inflation at 8.6 percent as o f June, 2007 was higher than the
year-end target o f 4 percent. The primary surplus o f the public sector reached 6.6 percent o f
GNP, resulting in a further decline in the net public debt to GNP ratio to about 45 percent in
2006. Nevertheless, the fiscal outlook deteriorated in the second half o f FY07 as the
cumulative primary surplus o f the central government budget reflected almost 50 percent
decrease on an annual basis in this period. This fiscal underperformance was in part because
o f policies and expenditures that were perceived to be associated with the general election.
In addition, slowing economic activity and declining domestic sales placed significant
pressure on tax revenues.
T h e high current account deficit continues to b e a concern-although i t s growth slowed
in the second h a l f o f FY07 after reaching 8.2 percent o f GNP in 2006 and there has been
a significant improvement in the quality o f i t s financing. The share o f non-debt creating
inflows (FDI plus net errors and omissions) increased to 64 percent as o f August, 2007 from
49 percent in end-2005. In particular, 12-month rolling net FDI inflows reached a record
high o f $20.2 billion in June 2007, corresponding to almost 5 percent o f annualized GNP and
covering 61 percent o f the current account deficit.
T h e Government’s commitment to continue with i t s structural reforms agenda led to
further improvements in many areas although legal challenges a n d the upcoming
elections have slowed down the process. K e y developments are summarized below:
In late 2006, the Constitutional Court declared some o f the key provisions o f the Social
Security and Universal Health Insurance (UHI) Reform Law unconstitutional, especially
those that relate to civil servants. Following the Court’s ruling, the Government decided to
postpone the effectiveness o f the Law to allow time for addressing the Court’s concerns
through amendments to the legislation. The Government also confirmed i t s commitment to
the implementation o f the reform through the publication o f a W h i t e Paper in May 2007.
The W h i t e Paper provides options to address the Court’s decision while preserving the fiscal
improvements o f the system. The administrative aspect o f the reform, i.e. the unification o f
the three social security institutions, is under implementation. Databases have been merged,
0

software has been adopted, and all staff has been placed under common management. The

Annex 4
Page 58 o f 59
Government reiterated i t s commitment to implementing the Social Security Reform in i t s
Urgent Action Plan published in October 2007, and the revised reform law was submitted to
the Parliament in November 2007. Full execution o f this law i s expected to start in July 2008.
Reform of the tax system continued through the adoption o f new laws on the corporate
income tax and the personal income tax with the overarching objectives o f broadening the tax
base, simplifying the tax structure and strengthening enforcement. The Government’s recent
announcement o f VAT tax cuts in the tourism and food sectors raises some concerns
although the authorities have confirmed publicly their intention to meet the 2007 fiscal target.
Reform of the tax administration was deepened by the completion o f the functional
restructuring o f the Revenue Administration and finalization o f the establishment o f a Large
Taxpayers Unit within the Revenue Administration.

Implementation o f the enterprise privatization program continued, resulting in US$8.1
billion in revenues in 2006. Combined privatization revenues in 2005-06 (exceeding US$17
billion) were almost twice as high as those collected in the previous 18 years. Over the
course o f FY07, the Government became more selective in pursuing the privatization
program, proceeding with transactions that enjoyed broad political economy support, while
postponing others until after the elections.
There was also progress in the privatization of state banks. Halk Bank completed an
Initial Public Offering for 25 percent o f i t s shares in M a y 2007 which was heavily
oversubscribed.
The Banking Regulatory and Supervisory Agency (BRSA) adopted and started the
application o f 24 o f the regulations required for the effective implementation of the Banking
Law.

A landmark Mortgage Law was approved by Parliament in early 2007. The law
established a legal framework for an efficient and financially stable mortgage lending
system, including the emergence o f mortgage finance institutions, securitization o f housing
loans, and the introduction o f variable mortgage rates.
Twin elections were held. The outcome o f the general elections in July was in line with the
expectations. The ruling party AKP took 341 out o f 550 seats in Parliament. The AKP
formed the new government and the new Cabinet won a vote o f confidence in Parliament.
The new government i s expected ensure the continuation o f most o f i t s policies, particularly
Turkey’s EU membership bid and economic reform. In August, Mr. Abdullah Gul, former
Minister o f Foreign Affairs, was elected as Turkey’s 11th President.
T h e political developments h a d a relatively limited impact o n the delivery o f the Bank
Group’s FY07 program. Three o f the five planned new operations under the high case
scenario (Electricity Distribution and Rehabilitation Project, Competitiveness and
Employment Development Policy Loan, and the Istanbul Municipal Infrastructure Project)
moved forward. Following delays in the implementation o f the social security reform as
noted above, the second phase o f the program supported by the Public Sector Development
Policy Loan series has been moved to FY08. The planned Social Development Project
(SEDP), a follow-up operation to the successful Social Risk Mitigation Project, did not
materialize in FY07, as domestic resources were available for the continuation o f the

Annex 4
Page 59 o f 59
conditional cash transfer program--the key component o f the proposed SDEP. In sum,
including a €50 million increase in the loan amount for the already approved SME
Development Project, total new commitments in FY07 amounted to about U S $ l .16 billion.
Several key AAA products were delivered, including a Public Expenditure Review, an
Investment Climate Assessment, a Higher Education Policy study and other pieces o f
economic and sector work, including on industrial pollution and irrigation. Performance o f
the Bank’s portfolio remained sound, with most o f the performance indicators in line with, or
better than those in the region and the Bank as a whole. During FY07 only, IFC has
committed U S $ 5 5 l million for i t s own account and has mobilized US$413 million through
syndicated banks, the highest IFC financing ever in Turkey. In addition, in FY07, IFC has
financed about U S $ 5 0 million with Turkish companies outside Turkey.

Page 1of 3

Turkey a t a glance

9/28/07

Key Development Indicators
Turkey

Europe 8
Central
Asia

Upper
middle
income

Age distribution, 2006

(2006)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. kin)
Population growth (%)
Urban population ( % of total population)

72.9
784
1.2
68

460
24,114
0.0
64

810
41,460
0.7
75

393.9
5,400
9,060

2,206
4,796
9,662

4,790
5,913
10,817

6.1
4.8

6.8
6.8

5.6
4.9

Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

3
19
71
26
4

1
10
69
28
5

Adult literacy, male ( % of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female ( % of age group)

95
60
96
91

99
96
103
100

94
92
106
104

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities ( % of population)

96
88

92
85

93
81

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

Female

70-74
60-64
50-54

40-44
30-34

20-24

10-14
c-4

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

I

15

10

5

5

0

10

15

percent

(most recent estimate, 2000-2006)
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
70
26

1900

1995

DTurkey

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2005):
France
Austria
SDain

1980

1990

2000

2006

953

1,202

327

464

33
27

65
8
0

8
11
4

115
22
12

1.3
21

0.8
21

0.2
5

0.1
6

2000

2005

OEurope 8 Central Asia

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

T

l5
10

5

Ald (Yo of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

0
5

Long-Term Economic Trends

-10

88.1

60.3
56.3

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

73.8
63

2,608.9
93

54.9
49.9

9.6
11.5

00

95

90

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

+GDP

05

-

GDP per capita

623,700 1,431,110
100
92

1980-90 1990-2000
2000-06
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

72.9
402,710

2.3
5.3

1.8
3.8

1.3
5.6

14.7
24.3
20.0
61 .O

9.7
26.8
22.2
63.5

1.2
7.2
7.3
5.4

1.3
4.6
4.7
3.9

1.6
6.4
6.7
5.2

68.7
11.0
24.5

68.9
14.1
24.5

70.7
13.1
23.9

3.4
4.9
5.0

4.9
1.o
11.8

13.4
17.6
24.3

24.0
31.5
20.2

28.2
35.9
16.5

11.6
11.o

11.3
12.9

44.5
70,903

56.2
150,661

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

26.5
19.6
17.3
53.9

18.1
26.4
22.7
55.5

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

77.0
11.6
18.2

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

5.2
11.9
16.1

67.4
199,749

(% of GDP)

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2006 data are preliminary,
a. Aid data are for 2005.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

.. indicates data are not available,

Page 2 of 3

Turkey
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2006
Governance Indicators, 2000 and 2006

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

30,721
54,398
-10,585

91,937
138,973
-27,877

Voice and accountability

4,560

a51

Regulatory quality

Current account balance
as a % o f GDP

-9,823
-4.9

-32,774
-8.1

Rule of law

Reserves, including gold

26,106

60,705

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

Political stability

Control of corruption
0

2006

Central Government Finance

25

0 2000

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

27.3
24.4
42.7

27.9
24.3
37.7

Overaii surplusldeficit

-1 1.7

0.0

Highest marginal tax rate (YO)
Individual
Corporate

30

35
30

1

50

75

1w

Country's percentile rank (0.100)
higher values imp/y better ratings

Source. Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruui, World Bank

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

35.3

2005

512

868

4.8

1.5

53
13.1

54
13.2
2.6

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

ii7,ioa
20,731

171,059
41,920

Total debt ( % of GDP)
Total debt service (YOof exports)

58.6
39.1

47.1
39.1

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

902
409

9,805
5,669

Composition of total external debt, 2005

1

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal ( % of internal resources)

3.3

3.1

GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

5.7

6.1

1,142

1,151

IMF' 14E46208

Short-term
38218

Other multi4824 638

v

105732.375
Pnvate,

US$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
( % of managers surveyed who agreed)
Tax rates
Economic and regulatory policy uncertainty
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2006

-

6
26.5
6

..

37.6
31.1

-

I.

34.9
6.1

40.3
13.5

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2006 data are preiiminary.
.. indicates data are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

3,150
16.5

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

IDA. 71 186
IBRD, 5828487-

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

Page 3 of 3

M i IIen n i um Develop ment Goa Is

Turkey

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

-

Education indicators (%)
100

75
50
25

-

ii
i

Measles immunization (% of I-year olds)

ICT indicators (per 1,000 people)

750

5w
250

0
2000

2002

2005

0
1990

+Primary
+Ratio

1995

2000

2W5

2000

2002

2005

net enrollment ratio

of girls to boys in primary &
secondary education

OTurkey

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

0 Europe 8 Central Asia

.. indicates data are not available.

OFixed +mobile subscribers
0 Internet users

9/28/07

-

CAS Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 0110812008

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a , c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (YO)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2005

2006

2007

2008

21
2.7
4.8
5.0
4.8
5.0
24.8

24
2.7
4.2
1.o
4.2
1.o
11.8

24
3.2
8.3
7.6
8.3
7.6
19.7

20
3.2
15.0
12.7
20.0
13.4
9.1

Yes
2093
100

Yes
2453
102

Yes
2624
109

Yes
2125
106

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eva1 by IEG by Number
112
10
Proj Eva1 by IEG by Amt (US$ millions)
13,506.9
2,370.7
28.2
20.0
YOof IEG Projects Rated U, MU or HU by Numbc
YOof IEG Projects Rated U, MU or HU by Amt
27.9
16.8

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U, MU or HU on development objectives (DO) andlor implementation
progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex 83

IBRDllDA Program Summary
As Of Date 0110812008

Proposed IBRD Lending Program a
Fiscal year

Proj ID

US$(M)

1) Programmatic Public Sector

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

H

H

H
H

H
H

Development (PPDPL2)
2) Competitiveness and Employment (CEDPLP)
3) Energy

b 500 - 800

1) Programmatic Public Dev. Series
2) Competitiveness and Employment (CEDPL)
3) Energy

b 600 900

H
H
H

H
H
H

Private Sector Renewable Energy Eff.
Energy Investment Loan
Energy Supply Security Sector Investment

b 700-900

M
M
M

M
M
M

M
H

M
H

Health (UHI Implementation)
Health Reform and Social Security

FY 10111

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

-

b 200-300

DPL in areas such as public sector reform
competitiveness and employment

b 1000-1400

human capital dev. & social protection
and environmental protection
SME Productivity & Competitiveness (credit line)
Environment & Natural Resources
Energy Efficiency/Supply Security
Railways APL II
Municipal Infrastructure: Metropolitan Cities
Irrigation SWAP
Education
Social Inclusion & Employment Program

Result
Overall Result

2,600.0
6,200.0

a/ This table presents the proposed program for the next four fiscal years.

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L).
Template created on 01/31/2008.

Annex 83

Turkey: IFC Investment Operations Program
2005
2006
**Commitments [US$m)
Gross
Net
Net Commitment by Investment Instrument (%)
Equity
Loan***
Total Commitment

2007

2008*

290
290

463
462

551
538

292
298

2 Yo
98%
100%

1Yo
99%
100%

56%
44%
100%

0Yo
100%
100%

0Yo
0Yo
41 yo
46%
8Yo
4%
0%
0%
100%

0Yo
0Yo
26%
36%
12%
0Yo
26%
0%
100%

6Yo
6%
50%
16%
0Yo
0Yo
22%
0Yo
100%

0Yo
0Yo
52%
17%
0Yo
15%
0%
15%
100%

Net Commitment by Industry (%)

Agriculture
Funds
Financial Markets
General Manufacturing
Health & Education
Infrastructure
IT and Telecom
Oil, Gas, Mining & Chemicals
Total
Note: *2008 is as of December 2007
**Commitment from IFC’s own account
*** Loan includes quasi equity and quasi loan

MlGA Guarantees
MlGA Outstanding Exposure (Gross Exposure, $ milllion)
As of end of fiscal year

Sectoral Distribution
Finance
Infrastructure
Mining
Oil & Gas
Agri business/Manufacturing/Services/Tourism
Total
MIGAs Risk Profile
Transfer Restriction
Expropriation
War & Civil Disturbance
Breach of Contract

MIGAs Gross Exposure in Country
YOShare of MIGAs Gross Exposure
MlGA Net Exposure in Country
YOShare of MIGAs Net Exposure

FY2005

FY2006

FY2007

FY2008
as of
12/31/2007

0
135
0
0
0
135

0
135
0
0
0
135

0
135
0
0
0
135

0
135
0
0
0
135

135
135
135
135

135
135
135
135

135
135
135
135

135
135
135
135

135
2.60%
67.5
2.20%

135
2.50%
67.5
2.00%

135
2.50%
67.5
2.10%

135
2.30%
67.5
2.00%

Annex 6 4
Turkey
Summary of Nonlending Services
Product

ComDletion FY

cost (US$OOOl

Recent Completions
CAS PR
CEM EU Accession I
Regional Poverty Update (TA)
Rural Finance Study
PSD Policy Dialogue and Capacity Building (TA)
Infrastructure Invst. & Fin.
Public Administration Reform
Pension and Health (TA)

FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06

Public Expenditure Review
Investment Climate Assessment (ICA)
Financial Sector Assessment TA
Environmentlindustriai Pollution
Environmental Aspects in Privitization of Electricity
irrigation Sector Review
Higher Education Review
Energy Policy (TA)
Report on Observances of Standards & Codes (ROSC) Follow-up TA
Policy Dialogue with new Government
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) Ii
Underway/Ongoing
CEM iI
CEM on selected growth issues (eg., informality)
investment Climate Assessment (iCA) follow-up
Youth Policy
Health Sector Integrated Fidicuary Assessment
Youth Employment (JOBS)
Programatic Social Insurance (TA)
PPP Advisory Work + TA
ESMAP supporting electricity market
Istanbul Municipal Development
Programmatic Energy Sector Work (incl. expert panel)
Financial Sector Assessment Follow up (TA)
Policy Notes

-

Planned
Technology adoption, research development, and innovation
Country Economic Work selected issues
Programmatic Welfare 8 Social Policy
Female Labor Force Participation
Health Sector Assessment (joint with OECD)
Education Quality
PPP implementation of legislation
Municipal Financing & Regional Development-Selected issues
Natural disaster risk assessment
World Water Forum
Public Expenditure
Programmatic Energy Sector Work (ctd.)
Judicial Reform AAA
a/ Government, Donor, Bank, Public dissemination.
b l Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Audience a/

Obiective b/

150
740
100
190
100
50
130
100

GDPB
GDPB
GDPB
GPB
GDPB
GB
GPB
GB

KG
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG, PS
KG, PD,PS
KG,PS
PD,PS
KG,PD,PS

FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY08
FY08

460
680
370
190
30
380
450
80
20
50
450

GDPB
GB
GB
GDPB
GB
GB
GPB
GPB
GB
GB
GDPB

KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
PS
PS
KG,PD,PS

FY08
FY08
FYOB
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FYO8
FY 08
FY 08
FY08
FYOB
FY 08

525
308
62
103
105
187
82
130
Trust Fund
350
256
51
46

GDBP
GDBP
GDBP
GDBP
GB
GDBP
GB
GB
GDBP
GDBP
GB
GB
GB

KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD, PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD,PS
KG,PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS

FY 08/09
FY 09/10/11
FY08109110
FY 06/09
FY06/09
FYOB
FY 06/09
FY 08/09
FY 09 or FYI0
FY 09
FYO9
FY 09
FY 09

tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd

Annex B5

Turkey Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (Oh annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1980-85

1990-95

1999-2005

Europe &
Central
Asia

50.3
2.5
52.4
3.8

61.7
1.9
62.1
2.8

72.1
1.4
67.3
2.2

471.8
-0.1
63.7
1.6

599.8
0.6
72.0
1.9

28.3

27.0
22.0
34.5

2,750
6
6

4,750
329
336

4,143
127

5,634
116

41.5
5.8
47.7

43.6
5.3
49.7

2.4

5.2
4.0

4.5
4.4

3.8
4.6

89
93
85

89
92
87

91
92
90

94
94
94

85
92
74

96
98
93

92
99
80

94
98
82

61
55

65
67
10

91
90
4

96
95
5

93
94

63
61
66

68
66
70

71
69
74

69
65
74

70
66
74

83
105

52
63

26
29

27
32

22
27

76

186
115
70
83

320
136
58
94

289
159
91
92

POVERTY
(% ofpopulation)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)

1,320
0

0

INCOMElCONSlJMPTlON DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (YOof income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (Oh of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an Improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (O/O under 5 years)
Llfe expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same regionlincome group

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 27 April 2007.

Uppermiddleincome

Annex B6

-

Turkey Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

2002

Actual
2004

2003

2005

2006

Estimate
2007

2008

Projected
2010

2009

2011

2012

Industry

26

26

100
12
26

Services

62

62

62

27
63

100
10
27
63

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

80
17
5
11

80
15
4
11

19
18
4
14

81
20
4
15

80
21
4
17

79
21
4
17

78
22
4
17

77
22
4
17

76
22
4
17

75
22
5
17

74
22
5
17

E X ~ O (GNFS)~
~ ~ S
Imports (GNFS)

29
31

21
31

29
35

27
34

28
36

28
34

29
34

29
33

29
33

30
33

31
33

Gross domestic savings

20

20

21

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

Gross national savingsC

20

19

21

20

21

21

22

23

24

25

26

184,332

240,955

302,678

363,370

400,046

490,646

564,380

606,547

651,123

698,730

749,818

2,520

2,820

3,790

4,750

5,350

5,860

6,280

6,630

6,900

7,260

7,620

Real annual growth rates (?A,calculated from 87 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
7.9
Gross Domestic Income
4.7

5.8
6.2

8.9
10.2

7.4
7.1

6.1
4.3

5.0
6.7

5.5
5.8

5.5
5.1

5.0
5.0

5.0
5.0

5.0
5.2

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 87 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
6.5
4.4
1.1
Total consumption
4.2
Private consumption
5.2
0.7

7.5
7.6
8.6

6.0
6.8
7.4

4.8
4.3
3.9

3.7
2.2
2.1

4.7
3.2
3.1

3.8
3.0
3.0

3.8
2.6
2.7

3.9
2.6
2.7

3.9
2.7
2.8

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$,Atlas method)

100
12

100
12

100
11

100
9

100
9

100
8

27

27

27

27

100
8
27

64

64

65

65

65

100
9

100
9

27
64

Balance of Payments (US%)
EXPOITS

(GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB

54,155
40, I 2 4

69,158
5 1,206

89,988
67,047

103,589
76,949

116,427
91,937

130,625
104,235

144,253
1 15,474

158,203
127,499

173,800
141,059

191,552
156,579

211,110
173,751

Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

53,553
47,407
602
2,433
-1,521

72,657
65,216
-3,499
1,020
-8,036

101,069
90,925
-11,081
1,117
-1 5,60 1

12 1,847
1 10,479
-18,258
1,454
-22,603

144,304
133,175
-27,877
1,687
-32,774

156,810
145,605
-26,185
1,820
-36,000

171,556
159,642
-27,304
2,050
-43,800

184,547
172,164
-26,343
1,917
-4 1,600

198,607
185,572
-24,807
1,915
-41,885

214,825
201,067
-23,272
1,917
-42,186

232,819
218,28 1
-21,709
1,917
-42,803

Net private foreibm direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. mors & ommissiom)

962
6,622
226
6,397
90
-6,153

1,253
-1,277
-1,210
-67
12,107
-4,047

2,024
8,570
510
8,060
5,831
-824

8,725
17,590
-980
18,570
14,135

19,136
33,870
710
33,159
- 1 6 3 12

16,000
24,101
584
23,517
1,197

16,500
23,392
285
23,108
11,757

-17,847

-3,720

-5,298

-7,849

13,319
18,507
-349
18,856
15,254
-5,481

13,380
18,338
-733
19,071
15,324
-5,157

14,627
18,868
-969
19,837
16,789
-8,099

16,131
17,270
-1,107
18,377
19,622
-10,220

0.3

-1.5

-3.7

-5.0

0
-6.9

0
-5.9

0
-5.9

0
-5.3

0
-4.7

0
-4.2

0
-3.7

18.9
26.2

13.3
22.4

12.6
19.0

8.6
11.2

15.0
10.0

9.3
6.2

10.1
8.2

10.2
7.9

9.9
7.6

9.7
7.7

9.5
7.6

Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR87 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIQ

Annex 86

-

Turkey Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

2002

Public finance (as YOof GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
28.9
Current expenditures
39.6
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
-10.7
Capital expenditure
3.5
Foreign financing
4.3
Monetary Indicators
M2iGDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price Indices( YR87 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index
Real exchange rate (US$ILcU)'
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

Actual
2003
2004

2005

Estimate
2006

2007

2008

28.2
36.3
-8.1
2.9
-1.3

25.8
32.4
-6.6
2.8
2.4

28.5
29.5
-1.1
3.2
-0.3

29.9
27.2
2.7
3.5
-1.5

29.2
28.2
1 .O
3.0
-0.9

49.7
29.0
10.3

43.9
14.6
56.1

44.8
22. I
71.5

54.8
38.5
73.7

57.0
23.0
115.8

58.2
14.8
59.8

89.1
86.4
103.2
137.7

100.5
97.4
103.1

123.4
120.0
102.8
179.6

128.3
130.6
98.2
179.8

133.0
134.9
98.6

133.8
136.7
97.9

151.7

116.8
112.1
104.2
162.1

177.9

45.0
44.1

25.3
22.5

8.6
9.9

8.2
5.4

9.6
11.5

8.4
7.0

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use o f IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCUdenotes appreciation.

2009

Projected
2010

2011

2012

135.0
136.9
98.6
165.8

136.6
137.8
99. I

138.4
139.1
99.5

169.7

134.1
136.6
98.1
168.3

163.3

160.8

5.2
5.5

4.0
4.5

4.0
4.0

4.0
4.0

4.0
4.0

Annex 87

Turkey - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt'outstanding and

CY

2003

Actual
2004
2005

Estimate

2006

2007

2008

Projected
2009
2010

144,399 160,974 169,239 207,764 245,146 297,010 331,590 360,335

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

-545

7,448

17,185

32,055

17,662

23,071

17,814

18,757

27,492

30,593

36,397

37,774

46,748

40,945

48,345

54,094

200.2

172.3

156.5

169.8

168.7

159.3

155.2

150.3

TDOiGDP

59.9

53.2

46.6

51.4

51.7

52.3

52.0

52.1

TDSiXGS

38.1

32.7

33.7

31.0

34.1

27.0

29.1

29.7

N e t disbursements (US$m)a

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)'
Debt and debt service indicators
("/)
TDO~XGS~

IBRD exposure indicators (%) c
IBRD DSipublic DS
Preferred creditor DSipublic d
IBRD DSiXGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)e
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

IDA TDO (US$m)e

4.9

4.4

4.7

3 .O

2.4

2.5

2.3

2.3

22.3

37.2

47.0

51.6

40.9

26.6

28.8

20.2

1.o

0.8

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

5,214

6,153

5,830

6,854

7,392

9,280

10,159

11,240

4.5

5.5

5.6

6.9

7.4

9.3

10.2

11.0

82

77

70

65

73

82

89

93

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-

term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Exposure projections assume Bank financing equivalent to new commitments up to US$ 6.2 billion during FY08-11,

with an expected share of around half in development policy lending (DPLs).
d. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
e. Figures in Table are on calender-yearbasis. IBRD TDO at end FY07 (beginning of CPS period) was US$ 6,874
million. IBRD TDO at end FY11 (end o f CPS period) i s projected to be U S $ 11,388 million.

Annex 88 (IFC)
Turkey
Committed and Outstanding Portfolio
As of 12/30/2007
(In USD Millions)

200512006

Acibadem

60 00

0 00

0 00

60 00

0 00

60 00

0 00

0 00

60 00

2008

Arkas Group

0.00

0.00

45.00

0.00

0.00

45.00

0.00

Assan

0.00

0.00
10.00

45.00

19951 19971 19981
20021 20051 2006
2008

45.00
30.00

40.00

30.00

30.00

0.00

10.00

40.00

30.00

Atateks

25.00

0.00

0.00

25.00

0.00

25.00

0.00

0.00

25.00

0.00

2002

Atilim

1.69

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.69

0.00

0.00

1.69

20061 2007

Avea

120.00

0.00

0.00

1.69
120.00

300.00

0.00

0.00

115.96

0.00
289 90

200112007
20011 2006

Banvit

35.00
3.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

25.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3.00

0.00

Borcelik

3.64

3.64

0.00

0.00

3.64

0.00

19901 199412002

Conrad

1.05

0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00

3.00

19951 19961 1998

0.00
0.00
0.00

115.96
25.00

1.05

0.00

Delta Petroleum

45.00

0.00

0.00

22.50

22.50

0.00

EKS
Finans Leasing
Finansbank A S

4.61

0.00
0.00
275.00

45.00
4.61

0.00

4.61

4.61

29.02

0.00

275.00
5.08
3.13
55.79
10.37
5.50

0.00

29.02
0.00
5.08
3.13
50.79
10.37

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.05

2008
2002

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
259.19
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00

5.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.10
0.00
0.00
0.00

19971199812006
2007
2002
1999
20051 20061 2007
2007
19911199812006
199311996
2004
20021 2006
1998120021 2006
1992
199812004
2005
2005
19941 2000
199912000
20061 2007

Bilgl

0.00
22.22
0.30
9.34
1.88

0.00

0.00

0.00

75.00
20.00
52.24
24.67

0.00

0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
7.42
0.00
0.00
0.00
9.09

25.05
53.33

0.00

0.00
0.00

36.28
0.00

3.82
0.00
0.00

50.00

0.00

0.00

Turk Ekon Bank

0.00

Turkish PEF
Turkish PEF II
Unitim

Gunkol
lndorama lplik
Intercity
Kucukcalik
Kula
Medya
Meteksan Sistem
Milli Re
Modern Karion
NASCO
Oyak Bank
PALEN
PALGAZ
Pinar SUT
SAKoSa
Sanko Group
Sarten
Seker Bank

2007
2008
19931 199712002/ 2003 Sise ve Cam
1998120021 2008

Soktas

200612007

Standard Profil

199612006
TDD
19641 19671 19691
TSKB
19721 19751 19771
19801 19831 19901
199312005
19791 19831 19841
Trakya Cam
19891 19901 19911
19931 19961 199912005
19951 1999120031
20051 2008
2002
2007
2007

199912000
Uzel
19701 19711 1982'
Viking
1983119901 19931 1998
2005
1997/ 1998

0.00

YUCE
YaDi Kredi Lease

29.02
0.00
5.08
3.13
50.79
10.37
5.50
0.00

0.00
100.00
40.00

0.00
0.00

5.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

35.00
3.00
3.64
1.05

0.00

0.00
0.00

14.51
0.00

0.00

5.50
0.00
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

20.00
0.00
0.00

40.00
0.00
22.22

0.00

0.00
0.00

0.30
4.34

0.00

0.00

1.88
0.00
51.43
20.00
52.24
24.67

0.00

15.08
21.77

0.00

0.00
2.10
100.00

0.00

40.00
0.00
22.22
0.30
9.34
1.88
7.42

0.00

75.00
20.00
52.24

100.00
0.00
0.00

33.76

6.62

25.05
57.15

0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
7.42

0.00
40.00
0.00
22.22
0.30
4.34
1.88
7.42

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

51.43
20.00
52.24

0.00

9.09

33.76

0.00

3.82
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00

0.00
0.00
14.51
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
20.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
68.57
0.00
0.00
6.62

50.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0 00

165.00

165.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

12.00

4.58
2.32

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

6.27
3.47
29.00
4.58
2.32

0.00

0.00
17.00

6.27
3.47

0.00

0.00

4.66
18.75

0.00

0.00

4.66

0.00

0.00

0.00

18.75

0.00

36.28
50.00

36.28
0.00

-0.00

-0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

165.00

165.00

0.00

0.00

8.45

0.00

0.00

0.00

8.45
36.18

2.32

36.18
0.00
0.00
0.00

12.00
0.00
0.00

30.00
4.58
2.32

4.66

0.00

0.00

18.75

0.00

0.00

4.66
18.75

18.00
4.58

0.00

259.19
5.08
3.13
55.79
10.37
5.50
0.00
2.10

25.59
36.28
50 00

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00

0.00

29.02

0 00

0.00 *

2.20
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00

15.08

0.00
0.00

2.20
0.00

0

5

3

L
a

6
a

*

a

E
w

2

m

TU R K E Y
PROVINCE CAPITALS*
NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

TURKEY

MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS
PROVINCE BOUNDARIES*
This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

26°E

28°E

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
*Province names are the same as their capitals.

30°E

32°E

BU
L G ARIA
ULG
UL
A R IA
42°N

34°E

36°E

Blac k Sea

0

To
Burgas

To
Kurdzhali

CE

EE
GR
40°N

Bartin

rus
spo
Bo

Tekirdag
s
anelle
Dard

Sea of
Marmara

Çanakkale

Ku

Zonguldak

Istanbul
Kocaeli
(Izmit)
Yalova

Kastamonou

Karabük

50

Sakarya
(Adapazari)

Bolu

zey

Çankiri

il
Kiz

Ana

100

G E OR GI A
GE

150 Miles

Dag

Amasya

Çorum

Tokat

Sakar ya

Eskisehir

42°N

Aksehir
Gölü

38°N
Aydin

Tuz
Gölü

Baysehir
Gölü

GR

u

EE

JUNE 2007

o
To r

s

yh

ri

Adana

32°E

r
Euph

Hatay (Antakya)

34°E

Gaziantep

ates

Lake
Van

To Ladhiqiyah

To
Aleppo

Batman

Van

To
Salmas

Tigris

Siirt

Sanliurfa
To
Al Hasakah

ISLAMIC
REP. OF
IRAN

Sirnak

To Damir
Kabu

To
Dahuk

I R AQ
SY RIA N A R AB
REPUBL
REPUB LII C

AZER.

To
Oroumieh

Hakkari

Mardin

Kilis

Icel
(Mersin)

Mediterranean Sea
30°E

Mus

t

40°N

42°E

44°E

IBRD 33501R1

C
36°N

Ce

Adiyaman

Kahraman
Maras
an

Osmaniye

Karaman

la

ra
Mu

Diyarbakir

Isparta

g
Da

Agri Dagi
(5166 m)

Bitlis

Nigde

Gulf of
Antalya

Igdir

Malatya

Mugla

E

Bingöl

Elazig

Aksaray

Gö
ks

Agri

Erzurum

AR MENIA
ARMENIA

To
Maku

Tunceli

Konya

Antalya

s
Ara

Bayburt

t
Fira

Kayseri

Se
yha
n

Burdur

Kars

ruh
Ço

Gümüshane

zil
Ki

Nevsehir

Hoyran
Gölü

Denizli

¸

Sivas

Yozgat

Kirsehir

Afyon
Usak

Kelki
t

AZERBAIJAN

Rize
Giresun

Erzincan

Kirikkale

Kütahya

Manisa

lari

Ordu

To
Kirovakan

Ardahan

Trabzon

erek
Cek

ANKARA

a
Kur

Artvin

Samsun

dolu

Bilecik

Bursa

28°E

200 Kilometers

150

To
Batumi

ez
Devr

Düzce

Balikesir

Izmir

100

Sinop

Kirklareli

To
Komatini

50

0

Edirne

R US S I AN FE
FED
DE
I ON
E R AT ION

38°E

