Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 46509-IN

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY STRATEGY
FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA
FOR THE PERIOD FY2009-2012

November 14,2008

India Country Management Unit
South Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
South Asia Department

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by.recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The date o f the last Country Strategy Progress Report (No. 39796-IN) was May 9,2007

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
US$1 = Rupees (Rs.) 47 as o f October 1,2008
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
April 1- March 3 1
WORLD BANK FISCAL YEAR
July 1 - June 30

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
AP
CAS
DEA
DFID
DPL
FIAS
FY
GAAP
GDP
GSDP
GEF
Go1
HIV/AIDS
HP
IBRD
ICA
IDA
IFAD
IFC
IIFCL
IMR
INT
IT
JNNURM
MDG
MIGA
MP
MUTP
NGO
PPIAF
PPP
PRI
QAG
RBI
RCH
RWSS
SAIDP

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
Andhra Pradesh
Country Strategy
Department of Economic Affairs
United Kingdom Department for International
Development
Development Policy Lending
Foreign Investment Advisory Services
World Bank Fiscal Year
Governance and Accountability Action Plan
Gross Domestic Product
Gross State Domestic Product
Global EnvironmentalFacility
Government o f India
Human ImmunodeficiencyVirus/
Acquired ImmunodeficiencySyndrome
Himachal Pradesh
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Investment Climate Assessment
InternationalDevelopment Association
InternationalFund for Agricultural
Development
InternationalFinance Corporation
India InfrastructureFinance Co. Ltd.
Infant Mortality Rate
Department o f Institutional Integrity
Information Technology
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal
Mission
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Madhya Pradesh
Mumbai Urban Transport Project
Non-Governmental Organization
Public-Private InfrastructureAdvisory Facility
Public-Private Partnership
Panchayati Raj Institution
Quality Assurance Group
Reserve Bank of India
Reproductiveand Child Health
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
South Asia InfrastructureDevelopment Program

SDR
SHG
SSA
SWAP
TA
TB
TF
TN
UN
UNDP
UP
VAT
WB
WBG
WBI
WPI
WSP

Special Drawing Right
S e l f Help Group
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (Education for All
initiative)
Sector Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
Tuberculosis
Trust Fund
Tamil Nadu
United Nations
United Nations Development Program
Uttar Pradesh
Value Added Tax
World Bank
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
Wholesale Price Index
Water and Sanitation Program

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The World Bank Group appreciates the cooperation o f the Government o f India, in
particular officials o f the Ministry o f Finance, in helping to shape this strategy, providing
comments at various stages, and organizing extensive sectoral consultations. Valuable
comments were received by many line ministries and agencies, development partners, and
civil society representatives.

Within the World Bank Group, the Country Strategy was prepared by a team in the N e w
Delhi Offices of the World Bank and IFC with the support o f the South Asia Sector
Directors, Sector Managers, India Lead Specialists, and other staff from the South Asia
regional units o f the WE3 and IFC. We acknowledge and thank them for their contributions.

The World Bank
Vice President
Country Director (Acting)
Senior Manager, India Program
Task Team Leader
The International Finance Corporation
Vice President
Director, South Asia Department
Task Team Leader

Ms. Isabel M. Guerrero
Mr. Rachid Benmessaoud
Mr. Fayez S. Omar
Ms. Giovanna Prennushi

Ms. Farida Khambata
Mr. Paolo M. Martelli
Ms. Rita Bhagwati

I

I

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

COUNTRY STRATEGY
INDIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS

........................................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................

EXECUTIVESUMMARY
I. INDIA'S CHALLENGES

..................................................................
.......................................................................................
..........................................................................

A. SUSTAINING HIGH GROWTH AND MAKING I T INCLUSIVE..
B. ENSURING
DEVELOPMENT
I S SUSTAINABLE
C. IMPROVING THE DELIVERY
OF PUBLIC SERVICES.

................................................
.........................................................
..................................................................................
A. CAS PILLARS ...................................................................................................................................

11. H O W I S THE WORLD BANKGROUPBEING ASKED TO HELP?
111. LESSONS
LEARNED FROM THE WBG'S WORK IN INDIA
Iv. THE WORLD BANKGROUP'SSTRATEGY

.....................................
..................................................................................

B. A CROSS-CUTTING FOCUS ON EFFECTIVE PUBLIC SPENDING AND RESULTS
c. A DIFFERENTIATED APPROACH.......................

.............................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................................
............................................................................................................

V. THE WBG's PROGRAM
VI. R r S K S
VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

COUNTRY STRATEGY A N N E X E S
ANNEX1: PROGRESS TOWARDS THE MDGS-~NDIA-WIDE
ANNEX 2: PROGRESS TOWARDS THE MDGS-STATE-LEVEL
ANNEX3 : SUMMARY OF CONSULTATIONS
ANNEX 4: INDIA FY05-08 COUNTRY STRATEGY COMPLETION REPORT
ANNEX 5 : CAS OUTCOME MATRIX
ANNEX6: COMMUNICATIONS, CONSULTATIONS, AND OUTREACH STRATEGY
ANNEX 7: A DECADE
OF DEVELOPMENT
POLICY LENDING
ININDIA
ANNEX 8: STATUS OF WBG DIALOGUE
WITH SELECTED LOW-INCOME
STATES
ANNEX9: WORLD BAF EXPERIENCE
WITH CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES
ANNEX 10: INDIA PORTFOLIOMANAGEMENT
ANNEX 11: SECTORAL GUIDELINES FOR ENGAGEMENT
ANNEX12: CAS COSTING
ANNEX 13: COUNTRY FINANCINGPARAMETERS

BOXES
BOX 1: THEELEVENTH PLAN GROWTH STRATEGY
BOX 2: PRIORITY REFORMS IN THE WATER SECTOR
BOX 3: THE27 NATIONAL
TARGETS
OF THE ELEVENTH
PLAN

TABLES
TABLE1: FISCAL BALANCES,
2003-04 TO 2007-08
TABLE2: MAIN STATE GROUPS
BY PER CAPITA INCOME
TABLE3: FY09-12 OPERATIONS PROGRAM BY SECTOR AND BORROWER PROFILE
TABLE4: POSSIBLE ADDITIONAL LENDING
FY09-10

I

1
2
8
10

11
12
13
..14
17
21

27
37
38

ANNEXTABLES
ANNEX ~42. INDIA AT A GLANCE
ANNEX B2. IBRD IDA PORTFOLIO INDICATORS
ANNEX B3A. IBRD/IDALENDING
PIPELINE
ANNEXB3B. IFc AND MIGA PROGRAM SUMMARY
SERVICES FY09-10
ANNEX B4. SUMMARY OF NONLENDING
ANNEX B5. SOCIAL INDICATORS
ANNEX B6. KEYECONOMIC
INDICATORS
ANNEX B7. KEYEXPOSURE INDICATORS
ANNEX B8A. OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO (IBRD/IDA AND GRANTS)
ANNEXB8B. STATEMENT OF FC’S HELD
AND DISBURSED
PORTFOLIO

India FY09-12 Country Strategy
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
The World Bank Group’s FY09-12 Country Strategy for India provides a framework to deal
with the challenges o f achieving rapid, inclusive growth, ensuring sustainable development,
and improving service delivery, with a cross-cutting focus o n improving the effectiveness o f
public spending and achieving monitorable results, all o f which will help scale up the impact
o f World Bank Group (WBG) assistance. The elements o f the strategy are organized around
these three challenges:
Achieving rapid, inclusive growth: T o assist the government achieve rapid, inclusive
growth, the WBG will support activities aimed at addressing both cyclical and
structural impediments to growth and constraints to making growth more inclusive.
This includes dialogue, AAA, investments, and IFC activities to:
o support macroeconomic, fiscal, and financial policies conducive to inclusive
growth and stability at the central and state level (including in the aftermath
o f the global financial crisis);
o help remove infrastructure and skills constraints to growth in both urban and
rural areas, including through fostering private sector participation;
o improve agricultural productivity, rural connectivity, and rural livelihoods in
states and regions supported by WB operations.

Ensuring development i s sustainable: To help ensure that development is sustainable,
the WBG will help India to better manage its natural resources (particularly water)
and reduce the burden that environmental degradation imposes o n the population
(particularly vulnerable groups). The WBG’s assistance will also help to increase the
resilience o f people and the economy to nature-related and man-made shocks, in l i n e
with the priorities identified in the National Action Plan on Climate Change as well
as in support o f India’s comprehensive efforts to reduce the country’s vulnerability
to cyclones, earthquakes and other natural perils.
Increasing the effectiveness o f service delivery.
The WBG will support
improvements in the organization and delivery o f publicly-financed services that
would enhance the development effectiveness o f public spending, particularly in
education, health, social protection (which would acquire particular importance
should a period o f slower growth result from the global financial crisis), urban
development, and water supply and sanitation.
The emphasis will be o n
implementation procedures and institutional arrangements that focus on: i)getting
results (including demand-side accountability through beneficiary, c i v i l society and
community involvement): ii)strengthening capacity for publicly-provided services;
and iii)enhancing private sector participation. This implies working primarily o n
systems and the “how” o f good service delivery.
IFC’s FY09-11 strategy, centering o n improving inclusion, managing the impact o f climate
change, and promoting regional integration, is an integral part o f this overall WBG strategy.

1

India's size and diversity call for a differentiated approach wherein the level o f engagement,
instruments, and objectives take into account the stages o f development, capacity, and needs
o f states and the center, as well as their constitutionally-mandatedroles and responsibilities.
In low-income states and lagging regions o f more advanced states, the WBG's focus will be
o n poverty reduction and helping to achieve the MDGs, relying primarily o n IDA resources,
non-lending TA, and IFC's advisory services. In more advanced states and at the central
level, the focus will be removing constraints to sustaining high growth and o n helping to
strengthen institutions so they can deal with emerging middle-income challenges, relying o n
IBRD lending, cutting-edge analytical work and IFC activities for private sector clients.
Selectivity poses a particular challenge given India's size and diversity and yet remains an
crucial goal if the WB i s make the most o f i t s limited resources. The CAS acknowledges
that previous strategies have largely failed to make sufficient headway toward this goal. At
the sector level, IDA resources are targeted to MDG-related sectors: education, health, social
protection, water supply and sanitation, rural connectivity. IBRD lending has been and will
continue to be demand-driven. The CAS proposes that selectivity in IBRD lending therefore
be achieved through a more rigorous project selection process, to be implemented jointly
with the government. The k e y factors guiding this process will be strengthening institutions
for a middle-income India. Specific project criteria will include the strength o f measures to
ensure effectiveness o f project expenditures and an assessment o f exposure and risks
associated with the sectorhtate portfolio.
The volume o f WE3 lending to India will continue to be defined by the framework followed
under the 2004 CAS. Barring any dramatic unforeseen deterioration in performance, it i s
expected that, based on the total amount o f the IDA15 replenishment, IDA will provide SDR
2,937 m i l l i o n (US$4,405 million equivalent at the current exchange rate) over FY09-11.
The availability o f IDA past FY11 will depend o n India's growth performance as well as
decisions to be taken in the IDA16 replenishment. Under current IDA graduation policies, if
a country's GNI per capita exceeds the IDA operational cutoff for at least two years in a row,
a case-by-case determination i s made by IDA management. India's per capita GNI, at $950
in FY09, could potentially exceed the IDA cutoff o f $1,095 in FY10 or FY11, although this
prospect appears less likely if growth falls below 7-7.5% as a result o f the current global
crisis. IBRD lending will be subject to the Single Borrower Limit, which at the moment is
debt outstanding o f US$15.5 billion. This will support a program with an upper bound o f an
average US$2.9 billion o f commitments a year in this CAS period, provided quickdisbursing lending is limited to less than 10% o f the total. Within the ceiling, actual IBRD
investment lending will be driven by the W B ' s capacity to implement the existing portfolio
combined with the need to respond in the short term to the financial crisis. India i s IFC's
second-largest country exposure in terms o f disbursed and outstanding portfolio with
investments (as o f October 31, 2008) in over 112 companies totaling $1.6 billion for IFC's
own account and $606 million for the account o f participants. IFC made its largest
commitments o f $1.05 billion in India in FY07 and again in FY08 and expects to maintain a
significant investment and advisory program while remaining within Country Exposure
Limits.

..

11

In line with the approach to selectivity discussed above and the W B ’ s goal to become a
stronger knowledge partner, the AAA program under the CAS will focus o n a limited
number o f multi-year, cross-sectoral analytical themes covering important issues
confronting policymakers (such as poverty and exclusion, skills and j o b creation, lowcarbon growth, the challenges o f rapid urbanization, the management and development o f
water resources) complemented by on-demand policy and implementation advice (such as
o n land acquisition, resettlement and rehabilitation, or social security for the unorganized
sector), and by due-diligence reviews (such as work o n strengthening procurement in the
health sector).

The W strategy faces risks linked to the impact o n India’s economy o f the global economic
slowdown and to a lesser extent political developments. While India may have been
relatively insulated from global trends until recently, thanks to the size o f i t s internal market
and i t s high savings ratio, this “de-coupling” from trends in developed economies has
reached i t s limits given the depth o f the evolving global crisis. The risk o f a major domestic
crisis in India i s not substantial, but the implications o f the probable slowdown in India’s
growth will need to be monitored closely. In the event o f a prolonged global recession, risks
will escalate and the strategy will need to be reassessed. O n the political side, national
elections are due by M a y 2009 but, whatever the outcome o f the elections, the Eleventh
Plan’s main policy directions and the government’s expectations for WBG support to the
Plan are unlikely to change.

In terms o f implementation o f the W B ’ s program, at the level o f outcomes, risks are related
to institutional weaknesses in delivering programs, unclear policies, and inadequate attention
to results, risks which are likely to be higher in low-income states. So an increase in the
share o f the portfolio going to low-income states i s likely to raise the overall risk profile
(while at the same time offering the possibility o f higher returns in terms o f progress in
poverty reduction). The risk that implementing agencies will not focus sufficiently o n results
can be mitigated by working o n monitoring and evaluation frameworks in close partnership
with government counterparts and by investing in capacity building, as well as working with
beneficiaries and civil society to strengthen demand for accountability.

Misuse o f public resources, including those provided by the WB, affects the probability that
the necessary inputs will be available for project/program implementation and that outputs
will actually be delivered; however pursuing a strategy o f ring-fencing all WB operations
could lead to irrelevance. For interventions that can make a significant impact in India, the
solution must lie in stronger country systems. Strengthening country systems requires
working in close partnership with government counterparts as well as strengthening citizens’
capacity to demand transparency and accountability. This takes time and committed
counterparts, and in the meantime there will be implementation risks. The W B ’ s response
will be swift and thorough when fiduciary risks do materialize.
Finally, there i s a risk that project preparation and supervision costs will turn out to be
significantly higher than in the past, because o f additional time and resources needed to
ensure broad agreement o n governance measures. This risk i s substantial and can only
partly be mitigated in the short term by relying o n additional resources. Over time,

...

111

improving project design to include demand-side accountability measures and M&E systems
that provide reliable information o n project performance should help move f l o m high-cost

transaction-based supervision to a more efficient outcome/risk-based implementation
support.
The overarching objective o f this CAS i s to help India achieve the long-term vision
encapsulated in the Eleventh Plan o f a country free o f poverty and exclusion. T o this effect,
the WBG will assist India in dealing with the intertwined challenges o f achieving rapid,
inclusive growth, ensuring that development i s sustainable, and increasing the effectiveness
o f service delivery. The WBG will seek to deploy i t s various tools-dialogue, analytical
work, lending, engagement with the private sector, capacity building-in the most effective
and efficient manner to help enrich the lives and fulfill the dreams o f the people o f India,
especially the poorest, and move closer to achieving the goals that India has set itself.

iv

India FY09-12 Country Strategy
I.

INDIA'S
CHALLENGES

1.

A country with many poor but not a poor country.' In the past decade, India has
accelerated economic growth, improved most MDGs, and maintained a vibrant democracy.
I t has also emerged as a global power-the fourth largest economy in purchasing power
parity terms-and
a leading player in information technology, telecoms and business
outsourcing. The Government's Eleventh Five Year Plan's objective i s to achieve a GDP
growth rate o f 9% and double per capita GPD within ten years. Such a doubling for a
country as populous as India will be equivalent to creating fifty East Asian miracles. As with
China in the past decade, the scope and speed o f India's transformation are key questions for
the next decade. Will i t be able to achieve its promise while avoiding i t s possible
downsides?

2.
Unity in Diversity. India has the dimensions and diversity o f a continent. Among its
more than one billion inhabitants, there are some 300 m i l l i o n people living o n less than the
official poverty line, four o f the world's eight richest billionaires, and a huge middle class in
between. Poverty and plenty live side by side in the major cities, and images o f the lives o f
the rich enter the remotest villages through television and movies. Mobile phones are
ubiquitous, but 40% o f India's villages are not connected to a road. Millions o f farmers still
toil under the sun with only the most rudimentary farm implements, while some Indian
entrepreneurs and companies are taking center stage o n global markets-Tata Motors
recently bought Land Rover and Jaguar from Ford. In government hospitals, 53% o f
pediatrician posts are unfilled, but Indian private hospitals install heart valves and replace
hips for "medical tourists'' from developed countries. There are Indians living on islands
that will disappear if sea levels rise and Indians at the foot o f some o f the tallest mountains
in the world, where glaciers are shrinking. Some Indian women s t i l l never leave their homes
unaccompanied while others pilot commercial flights and fighter jets.
3.
There i s also a remarkable unity in India-in i t s democratic traditions, its sense o f a
national destiny, and in a massive young population that has common aspirations and goals
and the potential and confidence to achieve them. Even as social, ethnic, and religious strife
persists and often seems worse today than at India's Independence, some o f the economic
barriers that divided Indians are slowly falling. The top c i v i l service in India, the Indian
Administrative Service (IAS), now draws from a much more diverse pool, including not just
the metropolitan elites but people from small towns. Social mobility i s rising, including in
rural areas where local communities are becoming more empowered through local
government and self-help groups, which cement the sense o f national unity. Any support
the Bank Group provides to India needs to be tailored to different situations and different
needs, while leveraging the strengths o f India as one country.

H i s Excellency Mr. M H a m i d Ansari, Vice-president o f India.

1

4.
The Government's Vision. The Government o f India's (GoI) recently laid out i t s
vision in the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-2012):
"The central vision of the Eleventh Plan is to build on our strengths to trigger a
development process which ensures broad based improvement in the quality of
life of the people, especially the poor, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes,
Other Backward Classes, minorities and women. This broad vision of the
Eleventh Plan includes several interrelated components: rapid growth that
reduces poverty and creates employment opportunities, access to essential
services in health and education especially for the poor, equality of opportunity,
empowerment through education and skill development, employment
opportunities underpinned by the National Rural Employment Guarantee,
environmental sustainability, recognition of women 's agency and good
governance."

The challenges o f inclusive, sustainable growth and service delivery are at the center o f the
government's priorities. Action, which i s less on policy formulation and the passage o f laws
and more on implementation and enforcement, lies as much with the Union as with the state
governments.
A. Sustaining high growth and making it inclusive
5.
India's GDP grew at more than 9% per annum over the past four years with high
rates o f investment and savings and strong export growth, and rapid growth generated
substantial public and private resources for investment and development programs. But
India has made less progress than other countries in reducing poverty and resentment about
the unequal distribution o f the benefits o f growth contributes to social conflict. Moreover,
structural factors and now the slowdown and volatility o f the global economy constrain
future growth. The Eleventh Plan establishes 9% as the target for GDP growth for 20072012 (see box 1) and states that "the target is not just faster growth but also inclusive
growth, i.e. a growth process which yields broad based benefits and ensures equality of
opportunity for all".

Growth and inclusion

Rapid growth will not be sustainable if it is not inclusive. W h i l e there has been
6.
progress in reducing economic poverty, it has been slower than in other countries (see
Annexes 1 and 2 for summaries o f progress towards the MDGs for India overall and at the
state level). Recent WB analysis shows that the number o f people who lived below a dollar
a day in 2005 PPP dollars (a threshold which i s close to the official poverty line) came down
from 296 million in 1981 to 267 million in 2005. However, the number o f poor people
living under $1.25 a day in 2005 PPP dollars increased from 421 million in 1981 to 456
million in 2005. This indicates that there are many millions o f people living just above a

Government o f India, Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-2012), Volume I:
Inclusive Growth, p. 2.

2

dollar a day and their numbers are not falling.3 Inequality among households i s also rising,
primarily due to increasing income disparities within urban areas and between rural and
urban India.

Box 1: The Eleventh Plan's growth strategy

GoI's Eleventh Plan (2007-2012), published in December 2007, sets a GDP growth target o f 9% per
year. T h i s growth rate, which i s higher than the Tenth Plan target (7.6%), i s premised o n a
significant increase in investment, from an average o f 32% o f GDP in the Tenth Plan t o an average
o f 36.7% o f GDP. Reflecting the increasing importance o f private investment since the early 1990s,
the Eleventh Plan aims at an increase in investment in the private sector from an average o f 24.1% o f
GDP in the Tenth Plan to 28.7%. Public investment i s also projected to increase from 6.7% (average
FY03-FY07) to 8% o f GDP. The rise in investment projected in the Plan i s expected t o be supported
by a substantial increase in domestic savings to almost 35% o f GDP.

Tenth Plan

Eleventh Plan

D o m s t i c Savings Rate f"?o f GDPmp)

32.05
30.77

36.72
34.84

Current Account Deficit f% o f G D b )

1.28

1.88

1.
2.

Investment Rate ("A of GDPmp)

3.

Recognizing inadequate infrastructure as a crucial constraint to faster growth and inclusive
development, the Plan foresees an increase in total investment in infrastructure to about 7.65% o f
GDP during the plan period. At the exchange rate used in the Plan (Rs 40/US$), this amounts to a
total o f US$515 billion, o f which US$l55 billion, or 30%, expected to come from the private sector.
The Eleventh Plan identifies as one o f the r i s k s a downturn in the global economy. This risk has
n o w materialized and growth and investment projections are being revised downwards.

Tenth
Plan
(-4nticipated

2007-08

2008-09

2009-10

2010-11

2011-12

Total

Eleventh

Plan

Share

("/I

Espdr.)
Total (US%

bn)@RsAV
$

217.86

67.68

80.60

97.74

120.61

148.42

s1s.os

PUbhC

174 81

4X.14

57.03

68.81

83.92

10224

360.15

69.93

Private

43.05

19.54

2356

28.93

36.69

46.17

154.90

30.07

F o r more information o n the W o r l d Bank poverty estimates, please see
http://go.worldbank.org/LJ5H6LXZ60. In the rest o f this note, we will use the official Go1 estimates.

3

7.
Exclusion has geographic and social dimensions. O f the 300 million people who
lived below the official poverty line in 2005, nearly 60% were in the seven so-called
"lagging" (or low-income) states-Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,
Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh. The richest states in India already have incomes that are five
times higher than those o f the poorest states-a gap higher than in most other democratic
societies. Rural areas are on average poorer than urban areas, and the leftist Naxalite
movement has been growing in some o f the marginal rural areas.4
8.
Indians from "scheduled" castes and tribes, women, and people with disabilities are
overrepresented among the poor.5 Scheduled tribe-dominated districts are among the worsto f f in terms o f supply o f services and outcomes such as infant mortality and malnutrition.
Scheduled castes are historically marginalized. Gender inequalities are endemic despite
considerable progress in outcomes for women and girls. Inmany states, the ratio o f females
to males at birth i s declining-India is the only country in the world where t h i s i s the caseand provides the starkest testimony to women's disadvantage. The worst outcomes for
women are in the states with the highest per capita income, indicating that growth by itself
will not bring about gender equality. Achieving growth with inclusion-as for instance in
developing mining or hydropower-is a crucial and unavoidable challenge.
Structural constraints to sustainable growth
On the structural side, the three main constraints to continued growth are
9.
infrastructure and skills shortages, both exacerbated by the fast growth o f recent years, and
slow agricultural growth. On the infrastructure side, inadequate power supply remains a
critical constraint to India's sustained growth; over the last five years, while GDP growth
averaged about 8% per year, growth in electricity generatiodsupply averaged only 4.9% per
year. The national and state highway networks have failed to keep pace with the
tremendous growth in demand for road transport: only about 30% o f state highways are twolane, more than 50% are in poor condition, and the average travel speed is about 30-40
km/h. Urban infrastructure i s a severe constraint to the expansion o f key growth centers.
India needs to continue addressing i t s infrastructure gaps with major investments in power,
transport, water, and urban development, while at the same time containing the fiscal deficit.
The Eleventh Plan foresees a major role for the private sector through PPPs, but these may
not materialize to the extent hoped for in the aftermath o f the global financial crisis and
there may be a shortfall in private sector initiatives.
10.
As to skills, nearly 44% o f India's labor force i s illiterate, only 17% o f it has
secondary schooling, and higher education enrollment i s just 11%. These figures compare
unfavorably with, for example, China's, where access to secondary education i s almost
universal and enrollment in higher education exceeds 20%. Moreover, the quality o f Indian
graduates is poor and employers offer very little skills upgrading (16% o f Indian
The spreading Naxalite insurgency n o w affects close t o 170 o f India's 602 districts. In April 2006, the
Prime Minister said: "It would not b e a n exaggeration t o say that Naxalism is the single biggest internal
security challenge ever faced by our country."
"Scheduled" castes and tribes are those enumerated in the Indian Constitution, which provides for
compensatory entitlements and privileges.

4

manufacturers offer in-service training to their employees, compared to over 90% o f
Chinese firms). The informal sector employs over 90% o f the workforce, but there is very
little investment or opportunity for formal ‘skilling’ for informal workers and enterprises.
The result i s a major “skills gap”, which must be overcome if India is to achieve rapid,
inclusive growth.

11.
Over the last decade, agriculture, which accounts for around a fifth o f GDP, grew at
only 2.5% per year. Agricultural growth was faster over the last five years (4.7% per year),
facilitated by very good monsoons, greater production o f high-value agricultural products
(fruits, vegetables, and dairy products), an increase in the minimum support price for grains,
and the sudden increase in global prices for agricultural products. But sustaining this level o f
performance over the longer term will be difficult without addressing several policy and
structural constraints, including a myriad o f restrictions, subsidies, support prices, sector
governance issues, as w e l l as tiny landholdings and years o f underinvestment. Weaknesses
in basic rural infrastructure-from roads to electrification-have constrained the growth o f
off-farm activities. With 60% o f the population depending o n agriculture, faster agricultural
growth is also crucial for poverty reduction.

12.

I t i s clear to policymakers that the private sector i s an essential partner in releasing
these binding constraints to growth, but policy changes are required for the private sector to
play this role. These include reforms in the hnctioning o f land, labor, and financial markets,
as well as the removal o f restrictive regulation, for instance o n higher education institutions.
H o w politically difficult some o f these changes are was vividly illustrated recently by the
difficulties experienced by Tata at i t s West Bengal Nan0 car plant, which eventually led the
company to abandon the site and relocate to another state after considerable investments had
been made.

Recent external shocks and growth

13.
In addition to structural constraints, recent global shocks are having an impact o n
India’s growth prospects. The rise in o i l prices, and to a lesser extent in food and other
commodity prices in the first part o f 2008, hit India hard. India relies o n o i l imports for over
70% o f consumption. A s a result o f the sharp hike in prices in the course o f FY08, the
import bill for o i l jumped from about $41 billion in the previous fiscal year (FY07) to about
$77 billion, a rise equivalent to about 3% o f GDP. On other commodities, India i s not
nearly as dependent o n imports: it is a net exporter o f foodgrains and a large importer o f
fertilizers, metals and other commodities, with gains in one offsetting some o f the losses in
the other.
14.
Impact of commodityprice shocks. The impact o f higher commodity prices was felt
primarily through three main channels: the current account, fiscal balances and inflation.
Thus far, the current account impact has been modest. While the recent decline in o i l and
other commodity prices will help to moderate pressures, the current account deficit i s
expected to widen from about 1.4% o f GDP in FY08 to about 2.7% o f GDP in FY09 (down
from earlier estimates o f 3.6% o f GDP) and then gradually decline over the next few years.
The impact o f higher commodity prices on fiscal balances has, o n the other hand, been

5

substantial. M u c h o f the rise was cushioned by the Government by escalating off-budget
subsidies. As a result, the consolidated fiscal deficit o f the general government i s estimated
to have increased sharply from 7% o f GDP in FY08 to about 8.5% o f GDP in FY09.6 While
the incomplete pass-through o f price increases protected producers and consumers to some
extent, it did not fully insulate them from rising energy and raw material costs, and the
average WPI inflation rate jumped sharply from a historical level o f about 5% annually to a
peak o f about 12.6% in August 2008.
15.
The Go1 and the Reserve Bank o f India (RBI) responded promptly to rising
commodity prices. While not fully passing on the price increases, which was considered
politically too risky with approaching state and national elections, the Government did make
some small adjustments to domestic o i l prices. The RBI repeatedly raised interest rates in
small increments, simultaneously tightening the cash reserve ratio requirements (CRRs),
thus signaling the intent to reduce rapid monetary and credit expansion, which had earlier
been rising because o f massive inflows o f capital from the rest o f the world. In a tight
balancing act, interest rates and higher CRRs targeted inflation, while greater flexibility in
exchange rate policies and the relative degree o f tightness o f capital controls were used to
manage capital flows. So, when the financial crisis hit, India found itself in a position o f
comparative weakness, with a sizeable and growing current account deficit and a large fiscal
deficit, a tight monetary policy in place to control inflation and very limited fiscal space (but
at least with comfortable reserves).
16.
Impact ofthe globaljhancial crisis. The global financial crisis is having an impact
on India primarily through three channels: trade, capital outflows, and investment. On trade,
exports, which had been growing in real terms at an average o f around 15% over the last few
years, are likely to weaken. Sectors that are already facing a sharp slowdown include
traditionally buoyant sectors such as cut diamonds, textiles and garments, and business
process outsourcing. Export growth in nominal U S $ slowed to 10% in September 2008 on
an annualized basis compared to 35% over the previous five months. Consequently, exports'
contribution to GDP growth i s likely to drop sharply.
17.
Additionally, India i s now facing a tightening o f credit markets. India's financial
system, which i s largely state-owned, is relatively well-capitalized, regulated, and well-run,
with little or no direct external exposure. Stress tests suggest that banks are in a strong
position to handle the shocks. Moreover, India does not face problems with private external
debt and currency mismatches on the balance sheets o f corporates, commercial banks, and
households to the extent o f other emerging countries. But credit markets are tightening up
because o f capital outflows. Much o f the massive net capital inflows recorded in FY08
($108 billion) was reflected in increasing reserves, but indirectly i t encouraged faster
domestic growth because o f the exchange rate appreciation, which lowered the cost o f
capital imports and external financing for investment, and incomplete sterilization by the
central bank, which helped accommodate domestic financing and faster credit growth. N o w
the situation is reversing, with huge net capital outflows during the past few months, as
f i r m s and pension funds rework their investment decisions in a global environment
characterized by credit rationing and a widening o f spreads. The Bombay Stock Exchange
This includes off-budget liabilities such as o i l and fertilizer bonds.

6

index, the Sensex, has fallen by more than one-half from i t s peak early in the year, mirroring
these developments.
18.
The RBI again acted promptly, accommodating a depreciation o f the rupee to
increase export competitiveness and using i t s large reserves (about US$253 billon as o f Oct.
31, 2008, down from a peak o f US$316 billion in M a y 2008) to supply adequate foreign
exchange to the markets. Reserves are s t i l l very comfortable at over 8 months o f imports
and well over three times short-term debt ~ o v e r a g e .Further,
~
the Indian economy does not
face the same degree o f risks from high private external debt and currency mismatches o n
the balance sheets o f corporations, commercial banks, and households that have led to
serious vulnerability in other emerging markets. Nevertheless, under pressure from large
outflows and a widening trade and current account deficits, the rupee depreciated by about
25% between April and October 2008. W h i l e monetary tightening was an effective tool to
control inflation (which was and remains a key objective), the sudden pressure o n domestic
liquidity, massive declines in equity markets, and concerns about a possible growth
slowdown have since led the RBI to concentrate o n protecting the liquidity and safety o f the
banking system, similar to what other central banks have done. I t has therefore injected
large additional liquidity (estimated at US$50 billion as o f Nov. 5, 2008) into domestic
markets to fence o f f a freezing o f inter-bank credit markets through cuts in the Cash
Reserve Requirements and the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR), extension o f special
refinance facilities, and related measures. I t also adjusted i t s capital controls and policies,
liberalizing the external commercial borrowing policy to allow infrastructure companies to
borrow up to $500 million a year, as against the previous limit o f $100 million, for rupee
expenditures, and further relaxing its terms and limits.* The widening o f spreads in the
international markets and the liquidity crisis will increase the cost o f capital by at least 2030% for domestic investors, while the falling equity values reduce their net worth, thus
slowing down investment spending and growth. During the last five years, the contribution
o f investment growth to overall GDP growth increased from less than 1 percentage point to
nearly 4 percentage points. India benefited from a virtuous cycle o f large capital inflows,
l o w interest rates, and high investments. This virtuous cycle has n o w been broken by the
global financial turmoil, the loss in global appetite for risk, and large internal imbalances.
Effects on growth. The effects o f slowing growth are becoming evident: from
19.
slowing consumption due to wealth effects o f losses on equity markets, to falling industrial
production indices, large declines in air passenger traffic, declining excise tax collections,
slowing export sales and falling corporate sales and profitability. In the short run, the decline
in energy prices and subsidies has provided a measure o f opportunity for the government to
support aggregate demand. However, the space for domestic policy responses to slowing
growth is limited by the large twin deficits, especially the fiscal deficit, and s t i l l high,
though declining, inflation. The ratio o f general government debt to GDP i s exceptionally
high and a severe constraint on the ability o f Go1 to act as a shock absorber, in addition to
7

*

Even using the BIS less-than-12-months-remainingmaturity definition o f short-term debt, rather than
contracted maturity, which is very small.
As o f Nov. 5, 2008, the RBI has reduced policy interest rates by a cumulative 150 basis points t o 5.5%
since September 2008, the CRR (by a cumulative 350 basis points t o 7.5%) and the SLR (by 100 basis
points to 24%).

7

constraining fiscal space for infrastructure. The debt-to-GDP ratio has declined slowly from
87% in 2003/04 to about 80% in 2007/08-less than 2 percentage points a year-when
growth was high, revenues increasing, and interest rates l o w (see table 1). The reduction in
the debt-to-GDP ratio took place thanks more to real GDP growth than to the adjustment in
the primary balance. Had a larger reduction in government indebtedness been achieved
during this period o f high growth, low interest rates, and increasing revenues, the fiscal
space for both public infrastructure investment and countercyclical spending would have
now been much greater. Because o f tighter credit markets and the slowdown in global
growth, private investment and consumption growth may be cut substantially and overall
GDP growth i s likely to slow from 9% in FY08 to about 7.0% in FY09 and 6-6.5% in FY10.
The economy i s thereafter expected to recover gradually to the faster trend growth o f 8% in
the medium term. W h i l e a much more pessimistic scenario i s possible, in which capital
outflows continue, the stock market keeps losing value, reserves are substantially reduced,
and exports shrink, leading to growth below 5-6%, this i s at present considered unlikely.
Sustaining infrastructure investment will be crucial for both growth and inclusion.

-

Table 1: Fiscal Balances, 2003-04 200: -08
Percent o f GDP

I

2003-04
8.4
18.8
-2.7
6.4
87.4

Annual Real Growth Rate (%)
General Government Revenue and Grants
Primary Balance
Interest Payments
General Government Debt

I 2004-05
8.3
19.5
-1.2
6.1
86.5

2005-06
9.2
19.7
-1.1
5.7
84.1

I

2006-07
9.7
21.1
0.2
5.5
80.5

I 2007-08
9.0
23.1
0.5
5.6
79.9

20.
The global financial crisis has highlighted the importance o f addressing some longstanding policy reforms. W h i l e India’s medium- and long-term growth prospects rest on the
strong fundamentals o f high investment and savings rates o f more than a third o f GDP, India
will need to complete the unfinished fiscal reform agenda, especially in expenditure policies,
to create greater fiscal space for development spending and strengthen open economy
management to deal with greater volatility abroad and higher inflation at home. If growth i s
to be inclusive as envisaged in the Eleventh Plan, the efficiency and equity o f the existing
food, fuel and fertilizer subsidies needs revisiting, especially as maintaining these expensive
subsidies will cut into public investment in infrastructure. India will also need to deepen
structural reforms in trade and investment policy as well as make regulatory improvements
in the functioning o f finance, labor and capital markets. Developing domestic capital
markets will become ever more important in a world where access to foreign capital has
dwindled, and policies for financial inclusion will also gain importance if growth slows and
the poor become more marginalized.
B. Ensuring Development i s Sustainable
21.
Economic expansion in India has been accompanied by rising demands on already
scarce and often degraded natural resources (soils, energy, watersheds, and forests) and a
growing pollution footprint that impacts negatively on human health and growth prospects.
Most environmental indicators exhibit negative trends, suggesting that growth is having a

8

negative impact upon the country’s natural resources. There i s a danger that resources
depleted for current growth jeopardize future development prospects. W h i l e India needs to
grow to reduce poverty and create employment, it has an opportunity to do so in a way that
i s sustainable and preserves the country’s natural heritage.
22.
Environmental problems, particularly urban and indoor air pollution, industrial and
toxic contaminants, and lack o f water supply, sanitation and hygiene are associated with
increased morbidity and mortality and reduced productivity. Vulnerable groups tend to be
exposed to higher pollution levels and are more susceptible to their effects due to
complementary risks, such as malnutrition and poor health. Environmental health challenges
are also associated with chronic malnutrition, which may limit children’s cognitive
development. Reducing environmental health risks i s therefore crucial to ensure that
vulnerable groups can lead healthy lives and have greater chances o f escaping poverty.
23.
Sound environmental management and sustainable use o f natural resources have the
potential to strengthen India’s competitiveness. Compliance with environmental
requirements is increasingly becoming a condition to compete in global market^.^ Increased
efficiency in the use o f energy, water and other inputs can strengthen industrial
competitiveness while also improving local environmental conditions. Moreover, India’s
unique endowment o f natural resources could be used as a source o f competitive advantage
to meet the demands o f niche markets. Taking advantage o f these opportunities will require
the establishment and transparent enforcement o f an environmental management framework
that reduces the cost o f doing business and provides clear incentives for the adoption o f
sound environmental practices.
24.
High levels o f population density and poverty, stressed ecological systems, and a
substantial dependence o n natural resources have made much o f India’s population highly
vulnerable to climate change. M a n y o f the major cities-Mumbai,
Kolkata, Kochi,
Chennai-are located in low-lying coastal areas. Rising sea levels could disrupt the lives o f
some 100 million people living along the large coastal belt, as well as economic activity.
The hydrological environment i s unique, with a monsoon associated with high inter- and
intra-annual variability in rainfall and runoff. Indeed, climate change will impact people
first and foremost through water resources. Large natural disasters are already happening
with increasing frequency, as cyclones, floods, and droughts hit cities, towns and rural areas,
and as the Himalayan glaciers that feed India’s largest rivers show clear evidence o f retreat.
In addition, increasing average and extreme temperatures will have potentially significant
impacts o n agricultural yields, forestry assets, marine and coastal biodiversity. India needs
to ensure that i t s people, particularly the most vulnerable, can adapt to climate change and
that the governance structures for energy and natural resource management can adequately
respond to the challenge o f climate change.
25.

Reflecting the size o f its economy India’s total greenhouse gas emissions are large,

but its per capita emissions are among the lowest in the world at around 1.5 tons o f COz per
capita per year. So far the economy has been o n a low-carbon trajectory, with greenhouse

9

This i s for example the case on global produce markets.

9

gas emission intensity (GHGs per unit o f GDP) 20% below the world average." However,
emissions have grown by 65% between 1990 and 2005, albeit at a slower rate than GDP,
and are expected to continue rising as power generation increases to keep up with demand
and electrification i s expanded to reach the more than 400 million rural dwellers who now
have no electricity. Because o f i t s size and its growth pace, what happens to emissions in

India matters globally as well as locally.
C. Improving the Delivery o f Public Services
26.
The fast growth o f recent years has greatly expanded the resources available for
public programs. Much progress has been made on primary education enrollments and
progress in learning outcomes has now become central to the public debate and to
government policies. O n the other hand, significant improvements on the ground have been
elusive in other sectors, particularly in health. While some progress has been made on
communicable diseases-deaths from TB have fallen from 500,000 in 1997 to fewer than
370,000 in 2007, and polio cases are down dramatically in 2008 as India creeps towards
eradication-much less has been achieved on other MDG indicators. Billions o f dollars
have been spent on nutrition programs but nutrition levels are worse than Sub-Saharan
Africa's. While mobile phone networks have rapidly spread throughout the country, no
Indian city provides water 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, only half the population has access
to safe drinking water, less than a third has access to sanitation facilities and 40% o f India's
600,000 villages are not connected to a road.

27.
This failure o f public services to keep up with people's expectations is largely due to
program design and delivery mechanisms that focus on inputs, have l i t t l e or no
accountability to the ultimate client, and suffer from deeply embedded political economy
constraints. Accountability for service delivery i s recognized as weak, as a result o f
entrenched bureaucracies, systemic corruption, and an incomplete process o f
decentralization. Moreover the public financial management system has not kept pace with
the rapid growth, and i s therefore not able to provide relevant and in-time information for
decision making. These issues are particularly acute in centrally sponsored schemes
(CSSs), which are designed and b d e d by the central government but implemented by the
states and lower tiers o f government. Given the importance o f these schemes, systemic
improvements in design and governance are crucial to get results from this spending.''

The unfolding global crisis lends new urgency to strengthening safety nets. Existing
28.
programs are manifold: the public distribution system, which involves the sale o f foodgrains
at highly subsidized prices to the poor in the country; food-for-work programs; mid-day
meal schemes in schools and feeding programs for children and pregnant women; various
state-level food-based welfare schemes; and the national rural employment guarantee
scheme (which guarantees 100 days employment for labor in rural areas. All helped
Little Green Data Book (2007) reports India's C02 emissions per unit o f GDP at 0.4 kg per 2000 GDP
at PPP$ compared to the world average o f 0.5 kg per GDP at PPP$. Se also Climate Change Mitigation in
India, International Brief 2, Fact Sheet, Pew Centre on Global Climate Change and the Energy and
Resource Institute (TERI), September 2008, p. 1.
The budget for centrally sponsored schemes was about $17 billion in 2007-08, approximately 1.8% o f GDP
and 10% o f total central government spending, and was projected to increase substantially over the
Eleventh Plan period.

lo The

11

10

considerably to mitigate against the impact o f food price increases. But factors such as
social exclusion, weak institutional capacity, and the near-absence o f accountability reduce
the effectiveness o f these schemes and need to be addressed urgently to avoid that the most
vulnerable bear the brunt o f the growth slowdown.

H O W I S THE WORLD BANKGROUP
BEING

11.

ASKEDTO HELP?

29.
Different Views on the World Bank Group's Role.12 Over the last year, WBG staff
have held extensive consultations both internally and with partners. External consultations
have included interactions with the government at various levels, with development partners,
and with c i v i l society organizations in August-September 2007, April and SeptemberNovember 2008 (see Annex 3 for a summary).
30.
The central government provides a strong counterpart for the WB. Top government
officials know the WB well. They appreciate the WB's expertise and external perspective,
especially when it comes with an appreciation o f Indian circumstances. The WB i s viewed
as bringing value to the table when it helps with the design and implementation o f projects
and programs, particularly o n tracking financial flows and progress, monitoring and
evaluation (M&E), and piloting new approaches. But it i s clear that the resources the WB
brings to the table are small compared to government funds. The WBG i s also seen as a key
partner in addressing difficult issues, such as how to spur development in low-income states
and forge the institutions needed to help India transition into a middle-income country.
During consultations, the Finance Ministry requested the WBG to place a special emphasis
in the CAS on: (i)
low-income states and agriculture; (ii)
centrally sponsored schemes that
aim to achieve the MDGs; (iii)
infrastructure investment, including support to government
agencies to strengthen capacity to design and manage public-private partnerships (PPPs);
(iv) greater coordination between IFC and the WB, particularly in low-income states.13
After the financial crisis, the Prime Minister asked the WBG to stand ready to step in,
should the crisis result in a shortfall in both public and private financing for infrastructure.
31.
Several states laid out their expectations on WB support at a workshop o n External
Assistance organized by DEA in Ranchi, Jharkhand in June 2008. Representatives o f lowincome states made i t clear that they see external assistance as critical to filling funding
gaps, particularly in infrastructure. Officials who have been involved with the WB over the
long term expressed appreciation for the knowledge and global expertise that accompany
lending (for example on rural livelihoods in Andhra Pradesh).
India's vibrant and entrepreneurial private sector sees the Bank Group as a reliable
partner, especially in areas where risks are high and long-term financing i s needed, such as
in pursuing the opportunities presented by the large number o f people that form the "bottom

32.

l2
13

Throughout this document, World Bank Group" (WBG) refers to IBRD, IDA, and IFC, while "World
Bank" (WB) or "Bank" refers to IBRD and IDA.
Interventions by Dr. Subbarao, then Finance Secretary, in April 2008 at the Washington CAS retreat and in
May 2008 during the EDs' visit to India.

11

o f the pyramid”. The private sector sees the WB’s role as providing independent policy
advice and analytical work, and the IFC’s as providing technical assistance and financing.
33.

The views of civil society organizations cover a large spectrum. Some organizations

partner with the WB in research, advocacy, and program implementation, and provide a

critical sounding board on WB- and IFC-supported projects and policies (examples o f
partnerships are those with P A C P A F in Bangalore on public services and the SelfEmployed Women’s Association (SEWA) on linking producers to markets).
Other
organizations, owing to differences in perception and position, criticize the WB for i t s
approach to development. A World Bank Independent Tribunal took place in September
2007, with the motto “World Bank out o f India”, showing the strong feelings against the
WB coming out o f the structural adjustment experience and the view o f privatization as a
panacea for all public sector ills.
34.
The World Bank Group will be relevant in India if it can play a catalytic role in
India’s success. I t will need to meet the needs o f the poorest states by being a reliable
partner and a catalyst for private sector investment in coordination with other donors. Inthe
middle-income states, the WBG will need to adapt to the needs o f an increasingly
sophisticated client so that i t s IBRD lending can remain relevant and I F C can provide
cutting-edge support. The WBG will need to support selected institutions and firms that
have the potential o f becoming global players in emerging markets; bring to the table in
complex situations development solutions that can have a demonstration effect throughout
the country; and provide state-of-the-art advice through analytic work, selecting a few
complex areas with no clear solutions, where the WBG can bring together multi-sector
teams to develop new options. IFC’s value addition comes from its ability to provide longterm debt and equity not easily available from domestic financial markets to private
companies in a range o f sectors including infrastructure, general manufacturing and services
and financial markets. I F C also brings added value to i t s private sector clients in the areas
o f global best practice, international partnerships, entering new markets, environmental and
social sustainability and corporate governance.
111.

LESSONS
LEARNED
FROM THE WBG’S WORK IN INDIA

The WBG has been engaged with India for nearly 60 years, and i t s presence in many
sectors and states has generated much mutual learning. Several recent documents, including
the 2006 Development Policy Review and the Completion Report for the FY05-08 CAS,
35.

which complements this CAS (Annex 4), discuss lessons from recent experience.

In

SUmmary:

The main objectives o f the 2004 CAS-improving
government effectiveness,
investing in people and empowering communities, and promoting private sector-led
growth-were
appropriate and remain largely valid, but a greater focus on the
sustainability o f development and on equity i s needed. This CAS lays greater
emphasis than the previous one on sustainability and inclusion.

12

0

India is large for the WB, but the WB i s small for India. India was I B R D ' s secondlargest borrower in F Y 0 7 and IDA'Slargest borrower; IFC's India portfolio i s IFC's
second-largest disbursed outstanding exposure, and the $1.05 billion in commitment
in FY08 was the largest in any country for IFC. Even so, in terms o f gross
disbursements the WB contributes only 3.3% o f India's central development budget
and less than 0.2% o f GDP (though WB lending is significant at the state level- the
first DPL to Bihar ($225 million) accounted for over 20% o f state's o w n revenues).
Strategic relevance and selectivity will be critical to achieving results and having an
impact in the coming CAS period. IFC's annual commitments in FY07 and FY08
amounted to almost 5% o f total FDI into India in each year. Monitoring systems
show that larger I F C projects tend to have greater development impact.
Engaging in low-income states i s important to help India achieve the MDGs and
make growth more inclusive, but it i s difficult and resource-intensive. The buildup
o f lending in low-income states envisaged during the 2004 CAS period did not take
place to the extent foreseen, and results are only beginning to show. The current
CAS reaffirms the importance o f this engagement, devotes more resources to
engaging with low-income states, and stresses the importance o f accepting a higher
degree o f risk in low-income states than in more advanced states.

WB support has been most effective where i t s engagement with institutions has been
long-lasting. An example is WB-IFC work over the last 15 years with PowerGrid,
which operates the world's largest electricity transmission system. Through this
long-term partnership, PowerGrid has developed management skills, information and
financial management systems, procurement capacity, and advanced social and
environmental procedures. Building institutions for a middle-income country i s one
o f the key thrusts o f the current CAS.
0

Iv.

There are big challenges and opportunities for WB interventions in design,
implementation, and monitoring and evaluation. The Detailed Implementation
Review o n the health sector completed in January 2008 strongly stressed the need to
focus on how well fiduciary and M&E processes are implemented rather than what
needs to be done (see the box on the DIR in the CAS Completion Report). A
stronger focus o n implementation and monitoring and evaluation i s a key feature o f
this CAS.

THEWORLD BANKGROUP'S
STRATEGY

36.
The overarching objective o f this CAS i s to help India achieve the long-term vision
encapsulated in the Eleventh Plan o f a country free o f poverty and exclusion. To this effect,
the WBG will assist India in dealing with the intertwined challenges o f achieving rapid,
inclusive growth, ensuring that development is sustainable, and increasing the effectiveness
o f service delivery. A cross-cutting focus on improving the effectiveness o f public spending
and achieving demonstrable results will help scale up the impact o f WB assistance. The
diversity that characterizes India and the different, and complementary, roles o f the Centre

13

and states will require a differentiated approach across counterparts and reliance o n the
various tools the World Bank Group employs in different country contexts-in countries
with weak institutions, low-income countries, and middle-income countries. The India
strategy i s fully consistent with the updated S A R Regional Strategy presented to the W B ' s
Board o f Executive Directors in September 2008. IFC's FY09-11 strategy, centering o n
improving inclusion, managing the impact o f climate change, and promoting regional
integration, is closely aligned to the WB's.
A. CAS pillars

37.
CASpillars. In line with the challenges and objectives laid out in the Eleventh Plan,
and consistent with the themes that have emerged from internal and external consultations,
the WBG's support to India will be organized around three pillars: rapid and inclusive
growth, sustainable development, and service delivery, with a cross-cutting focus o n
improving the effectiveness o f public spending and achieving results.
0

Achieving rapid, inclusive growth. To assist the government achieve rapid, inclusive
growth, the WBG will support activities aimed at addressing both cyclical and structural
impediments to growth and constraints to making growth more inclusive. This includes
dialogue, AAA, investments, and IFC activities to support macroeconomic, fiscal, and
financial stability at the central and state level (including in the aftermath o f the global
financial crisis, see below); help remove infrastructure and skills constraints to growth in
both urban and rural areas, including through fostering private sector participation;
improve agricultural productivity, rural non-farm growth, and rural livelihoods; increase
access to finance; and address the often interrelated dimensions o f rural, regional,
gender, and social exclusion.

0

Ensuring development i s sustainable. T o help ensure that development i s sustainable,
the WBG will help India to better manage i t s natural resources (particularly water, see
box 2) and reduce the burden that environmental degradation imposes o n the population
(particularly vulnerable groups). The W B G s assistance will also help to increase the
resilience o f people and the economy to nature-related and man-made shocks, in line
with the priorities identified in the National Action Plan o n Climate Change as w e l l as in
support o f India's comprehensive efforts to reduce the country's vulnerability to
cyclones, earthquakes and other natural hazards. The WBG support will also target
sectoral interventions where the integration o f environmental considerations will
enhance the country's competitiveness. The WB will assess the carbon footprint o f a
few o f the interventions it supports on a pilot basis.

0

Increasing the effectiveness o f service delivery. The WB will support improvements in
the organization and delivery o f publicly-financed services that would enhance the
development effectiveness o f public spending, particularly in education, health, social
protection (which would acquire particular importance if growth slowed down
considerably), urban development, and water supply and sanitation. T o achieve this, the
WB program will focus on supporting the creation o f governance and institutional
arrangements that promote an enabling environment for results (including through

14

demand-side accountability mechanisms such as beneficiary and civil society
involvement), strengthening capacity for publicly-provided services, and enhancing
private sector participation. T h i s i m p l i e s working on systems and the “how” o f good
service delivery-not
h e l p i n g to fix the pipes but the institutions that should b e fixing
the pipes.

Box 2: Priority reforms in the water sector
Water permeates the cultural, social, economic and political fabric o f India. A massive concentration
o f people compounded with high poverty rates and a monsoonal climate creates susceptibility to
hydrological shocks as well as potential for the productive development o f water resources. The
scale o f this susceptibility and o f this productive potential creates unusually complex challenges as
well as major opportunities.
Today India’s water i s deeply under stress. T h i s i s due, in part, to: (1) natural scarcity and a highly
variable hydrology; (2) inadequate service delivery and weak management institutions and policies;
and (3) newer developments such as population growth, economic development, urbanization, and
climate change. Through its operations and advisory activities, the WB seeks to assist the
Government o f India in addressing each o f these three sources o f stress.
Common problems and common solutions cut across the W’S
assistance in irrigation, water supply,
energy, transport, and water resources. B o l d reforms are needed to improve performance, reduce
water-related shocks, and increase resilience and adaptation to growth and change. Cross-cutting
priority reforms where activities are already underway include:
Enabling water policies and institutional and legal frameworks to improve stewardship o f the
resource base and service delivery for end users, and to facilitate inter-jurisdictional management
and development.
Inter-sectoral approaches at the basin level that integrate surface water with groundwater, urban
with rural, quantity with quality, and minimum flows and ecosystem services with river
regulation for hydropower and flood management and abstractions for water supply and
irrigation.
Restructuring o f public sector institutions (including through capacity building and the strategic
realignment o f incentive structures and s h l l s mixes) and the establishment o f new institutions
(including regulatory authorities, water users associations, river basin agencies, and publicprivate partnerships).
Decentralized and participatory service delivery mechanisms, with a particular focus on
improving customer/user service, enhancing accountability and transparency, and extending
service to the poor.
M o d e m management practices and technology applications, including improved operations and
maintenance through asset management planning, and the development o f a comprehensive
knowledge base and decision support tools.
Financial sustainability o f resource management and service delivery through rational charges
and tariffs and improved financial management, including removing distorting subsidies and
moving towards user charges that reflect at least O&M costs.

15

38.
Sector strategies. Activities in the various sectors will contribute to helping address
these challenges and achieving the k e y outcomes identified in the Eleventh Plan (see box 3).
A s the challenges are interlinked-improving service delivery to the poor will contribute to
making growth more inclusive, for instance-and achieving the outcomes requires crosssectoral inputs, the WBG sectoral interventions inevitably deal with multiple challenges.
Box 3: The 27 National Targets of India's Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-2012)
Income & Poverty
(i)Average GDP growth rate o f 9% per year in the EleventhPlan period
(ii)Agricultural GDP growth rate at 4% per year on average
(iii)
Generation o f 58 million new work opportunities
(iv) Reduction o f unemployment among the educated to less than 5%
(v) Twenty percent rise in the real wage rate o f unskilled workers
(vi) Reduction in the head-count ratio o f consumption poverty by 10 percentage points
Education
(i)Reduction in the dropout rates o f children at the elementary level from 52.2% in 2003-04 to 20% b y
2011-12
(ii)Developing minimum standards o f educational attainment in elementary schools, to ensure quality
education
(iii)Increasing the literacy rate for persons o f age 7 years or more to 85% by 201 1-12
(iv) Reducing the gender gap in literacy to 10 percentage points by 201 1-12
(v) Increasing the percentage o f each cohort going to higher education from the present 10% to 15% by
2011-12
Health
(i)Infant mortality rate (IMR) to be reduced to 28 and maternal mortality ratio (MMR) to 1 per 1000 live
blrths by the end o f the Eleventh Plan
(ii)Total Fertility Rate to be reduced to 2.1 by the end o f the Eleventh Plan
(iii)
Clean drinking water to be available for all by 2009, ensuring that there are no slip-backs by the end
o f the EleventhPlan
(iv) Malnutrition among children o f age group 0-3 to be reduced to half i t s present level by the end o f the
Eleventh Plan
(v) Anemia among women and girls to be reduced to half i t s present level by the end o f the Eleventh Plan
Women and Children
(i) Sex ratio for age group 0-6 to be raised to 935 by 201 1-12 and to 950 by 2016- 17
(ii)Ensuring that at least 33 percent o f the direct and indirect beneficiaries o f all government schemes are
women and girl children
(iii)
Ensuring that all children enjoy a safe childhood, without any compulsion to work
Infrastructure
(i)T o ensure electricity connection to all villages and B P L households by 2009 and reliable power by the
end o f the Plan
(ii)To ensure all weather road connection to all habitations with population 1000 and above (500 and
above in hilly and tribal areas) by 2009, and all significant habitations by 2015
(iii)
T o connect every village by telephone and provide broadband connectivity to all villages by 2012
(iv) T o provide homestead sites to all by 2012 and step up the pace o f house construction for rural poor to
cover all the poor by 2016-17
Environment
(i)T o increase forest and tree cover by 5 percentage points
(ii)T o attain WHO standards o f air quality in all major cities by 201 1-12

16

(iii)T o treat a l l urban waste water by 201 1-12 t o clean river waters
(iv) T o increase energy efficiency by 20 percentage points by 2016-17

Outcomes. In a country as big as India the W B G s influence i s very small, whether
39.
in terms o f resources or ability to influence policies and outcomes, so attributing progress
towards any o f the k e y Go1 outcomes solely to the W B ' s actions would not be sensible.
Nevertheless, if the WBG focuses i t s efforts on a relatively small number o f key areas, i t can
hope to contribute to processes, intermediate outcomes, and local results, as indicated in the
CAS Outcome Matrix (Annex 5).

B. A cross-cutting focus on effective public spending and results
40.
Scaling up development impact, not just inputs, i s at the center o f this strategy, in
line with the government's efforts. Improving the value for money from public spending and
the delivery o f public services are k e y elements o f the Government's overall strategy. The
Eleventh Plan recognizes the need to continue to improve governance as a prerequisite for
inclusive growth and poverty reduction. The governance program proposed under the Plan
builds o n the reform agenda initiated during the Tenth Plan period. The key achievements
o f the Tenth Plan included in particular the enactment o f the Right-to-Information Act (RTI)
in 2005 which requires "suo motu" ("on their o w n initiative") disclosures and foresees
universal access to information wherever in the public interest. The RTI constitutes a major
policy shift toward greater transparency and accountability throughout the public sector.
Other key reforms included: (i)
the amendment o f the All India Service Rules, providing a
certain fixed tenure for specified position at the management level to ensure continuity o f
decision-making and (policy) implementation ~versight;'~
(ii)
the reform o f the electoral
funding system, promoting greater transparency about financial contributions to electoral
campaigns; (iii)
the introduction o f a new Value Added Tax regime which fundamentally
overhauled the old tax system; (iv) various initiatives to improve stakeholder participation in
the delivery o f public services, e.g. under the rural employment and rural health programs,
and the revised National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy o f 2007, which strengthens
significantly stakeholder consultation and livelihood-based compensation requirements. The
Go1 has also promoted the use o f information technology and e-governance applications to
streamline administrative services and cut red tape in areas such as procurement.
Conceptual support for the reform program is being provided (inter alia) by the Thirteenth
Finance Commission and the Second Administrative Reforms Commission.
Several Indian states have introduced significant reforms in governance. Andhra
41.
Pradesh has emerged as a leader in e-government; Bihar has focused o n decentralization as a
way o f improving the delivery o f public services especially in education, health, and roads;
Orissa has experienced a remarkable fiscal turnaround combined with measures to deal with
corruption more effectively; Karnataka has adopted important measures to improve human
resource management in the c i v i l service along with bolstering c i v i l society participation in
the delivery o f public services; and Madhya Pradesh has expanded the autonomy o f health
service providers and strengthened teacher accountability through greater local control.
l4The

new rules have been implemented t o varying degrees in the states.

17

Other states, such as Himachal Pradesh, have focused on hnctional rationalization to
complement impressive achievements in the delivery o f social services. A ban o n
recruitment combined with attrition has helped restrain the growth o f the civil service in
most Indian states, thereby cushioning the impact o f pay increases.
42.
The Government recognizes the need to enhance and further deepen the ongoing
reform program. While it i s widely recognized that the country has put in place key
legislation and institutions to promote good governance, the bureaucracy continues to be
perceived, as noted by the Second Administrative Reform Commission, as “inefficient and
unresponsive”. Corruption remains a major problem throughout the public sector,
“undermining economic growth, distorting competition, and negatively affecting the
p ~ o r ” . ’ As
~ a consequence, the Eleventh Plan accords priority to providing access to quality
public services, to promoting the rule o f law and to reducing corruption. The Plan foresees
major governance reforms such as improving the effectiveness o f Centrally Sponsored
Schemes (CSS), further strengthening o f local governments and participation o f communitybased organizations, improving the focus on results and development outcomes, and a
scaled-up e-government program for better service delivery.
43.
The Detailed Implementation Review (DIR) o f five health sector operations,
conducted by the World Bank’s Institutional Integrity Department in 2007, highlighted the
need to address governance issues more systematically to improve the effectiveness and
development impact o f WB-sponsored programs. In response to the DIR, the Go1 has
intensified the dialogue with the WB on how to promote greater accountability and
transparency through WB programs and projects. Some opportunities are opening up to
work with central and state government institutions to mainstream measures aimed at
improving the effectiveness o f public spending and the delivery o f public services and to
strengthen India’s own country systems to implement programs.
44.
This approach will require a new way o f doing business in the WB India program.
Greater efforts up front in project design and preparation will be necessary to identify and
assess risks that may reduce development impact and integrate proper mitigation measures.
Stronger forms o f implementation support that rely on India’s own country systems will be
required. Broader support to strengthening those systems at the central and state levels and
close collaboration with India’s accountability institutions will be essential. This approach
will also mean stronger partnerships with India’s active civil society to enhance participation
in project design and to build better independent monitoring and evaluation systems for
implementingprojects.
45.
To support the Government’s overall objective to improve the effectiveness o f public
spending and the delivery o f public services, the CAS foresees WB engagement with the
central and state governments in a selective and strategic manner. In order to catalyze
limited WB resources most effectively, the CAS will primarily support:

l5

Quotes are taken from the Approach paper t o “Reforms in Governance and Administration” o f the Second
Administrative Reforms Commission.

18

a.

A dialogue in selected states which have expressed interest in systemic reforms, e.g.
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, and Orissa. The objective i s
to support reforms in close collaboration with other development partners. In line
with the Government’s overall strategy, such reforms would focus o n k e y issues such
as the need to improve transparency and (expenditure) accountability and to
strengthen the delivery o f public services (also by leveraging the demand-side
pressures to enhance accountability o f service providers and improving efficiency
and monitoring). Other states would benefit from these reforms through knowledgesharing events.

b. Selected cross-cutting reforms at the central level which are considered critical for
the overall implementation o f the Government’s reform program or which are
considered core competence areas o f the WB (e.g. public procurement, the
strengthening o f the fiduciary system and the support for institutions o f
accountability). The Go1 i s planning to develop a robust monitoring system to track
actual expenditures and outcomes in centrally sponsored schemes; this work i s being
led by the Office o f the Controller General o f Accounts (CGA) with advisory support
from the WB. Continued WB support is envisaged for the implementation o f eprocurement reforms at the central government and state levels by focusing in
particular o n defining an overall e-procurement strategy, supporting the creation o f
guidelines and technical standards, assisting in the piloting o f state-wide eprocurement systems, and building the capacity o f public officials to design, manage,
and monitor e-procurement implementation

46.

The W B ’ s engagement with both the central and state governments o n these
governance issues will continue to be driven by country demands and priorities. To date, the
main instruments for carrying out this dialogue have been state-level DPLs as well as
analytical work and technical assistance. In both Orissa and Andhra Pradesh, state-level
DPLs have played an important role in fostering improvements in anti-comption strategy
and enforcement. Andhra Pradesh, for example, introduced e-procurement o n a wide scale
resulting in significant savings for the government, while Orissa has embarked o n an
ambitious strategy to put in place preventive measures to check corruption and strengthen
enforcement by the state’s Vigilance Department, including through fast-track courts. Bihar
intends to set up an autonomous State Vigilance Commission to combat corruption more
effectively and has introduced several other major reforms including bolstering Panchayati
Raj Institutions, effectively implementing RTI, and improving public service delivery in
roads, health, education, and social protection. Karnataka has encouraged the use o f
community monitoring - through report cards, for example - to benchmark service quality
more effectively and stimulate public pressure for change, and has also put in place
measures to control premature transfers o f key c i v i l servants. In addition, DPL-supported
fiscal reforms encouraged states to pass their own fiscal responsibility laws setting the
groundwork for the adoption o f a national Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management
Act in 2003. State financial accountability assessments (SFAAs) and state procurement
assessment reviews (SPARS)have provided the analytical underpinning for reforms that aim
at improving expenditure management. Karnataka has improved its audit management
procedures and adopted a procurement law. Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Orissa and Tamil

19

Nadu are implementing SFAA and SPAR recommendations in areas such as budget
transparency, public procurement and treasury modernization.
47.
Technical assistance provided to central government institutions o f accountability
like the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) has helped modernize the external audit
function. Similarly, the Controller General o f Accounts (CGA) has received support for
piloting accrual accounting, strengthening o f internal audit function and modernization o f
chart o f accounts. The Department o f Expenditure in Ministry o f Finance i s also undertaking
further steps to improve debt management (including cash management and contingent
liabilities), to strengthen the role o f Financial Advisors (CFOs at Union level), and to use
Public Financial Management Indicators in the monitoring process. At local government
level, there are activities underway associated with devolution to both rural and urban bodies
which are aimed at improving budgeting, accounting, transparency and public oversight
arrangements including social auditing and quality o f reporting. W B I ' s capacity building
programs in both urban service delivery and in social accountability contribute to this effort.
48.
The WB will continue to support central government institutions and states to
develop and refine government-owned strategies to improve the efficiency o f public
spending and the delivery o f public services. These activities will seek to promote
government ownership for reforms through dialogue with all relevant stakeholders and
through strengthening o f countryhtate systems. They would aim at developing new or
deepening existing partnerships with civil society organizations and think tanks to identify
key issues that merit special attention, develop adequate strategies to address existing
governance problems, monitor the implementation o f the relevant programs and disseminate
the results.
49.
The CAS will also support the strengthening o f the W B ' s ability to design,
implement and monitor the country program in line with the comprehensive DIR Action
Plan prepared as a follow-up to the DIR and submitted to the WB's Board o f Executive
Directors in March 2008. This includes the continuation o f efforts to mitigate fiaud and
corruption in projects and programs through changes o f work processes, team building,
implementation support, and quality assurance, as well as staff training and capacity
building efforts along with improved program management, monitoring and evaluation o f
results and development impact.
50.
Under the CAS, the World Bank will continue to strengthen its ability to assess and
address fiduciary risks in project design and project supervision. This will include efforts to
(i)
simplify and streamline fiduciary arrangements across projects by using country systems,
(ii)provide greater attention to operational and management controls in the design and
implementation o f projects, and (iii)
enhance financial accountability and transparency in
projects, for example by expanding the disclosure o f accurate, timely, and clear project
information (see Annex 6 on the W B ' s communications strategy), and by mobilizing
community and independent monitoring o f transactions and outcomes.
Addressing the challenges o f better M&E in the WB's program and, more
51.
importantly, in India, will require a comprehensive approach. First, the WB will make it a
priority to help build demand for M&E both in government and in civil society by using

20

“monitoring” to foster public debate and using “evaluation” to inform policy. Second, while
demand for M&E i s necessary, i t is certainly not sufficient. Weak capacities can constitute a
serious constraint to the development o f stronger M&E systems. However, the WB must be
conscious o f its own limitations in seeking to build capacity for M&E in a country as large
and sophisticated as India. Trying to do too much may lead to not doing enough. WB
efforts will therefore be focused o n activities with a high ‘public good’ content and for
which it currently has a technical advantage vis-a-vis other actors (private sector, other
donors, etc.). For example, two such areas are the production o f household surveys and the
application o f program evaluation methods (including impact evaluations). Third, neither o f
the two previous actions could conceivably be implemented without stronger internal
incentives and WB staff capacity to deliver o n the results agenda.

C. A differentiated approach
52.
India’s diverse context and counterparts’ views call for a differentiated approach
where the level o f engagement, instruments, and objectives take into account the stages o f
development, capacity, and needs o f states and the center, as w e l l as their constitutionallymandated roles and responsibilities. So the WB’s approach will be tailored differently to
low-income and more advanced states, and central agencies and entities (see table 2 for a
classification o f Indian states based o n income). In low-income states and lagging regions o f
more advanced states, the focus will be o n helping to achieve the MDGs, relying primarily
on IDA resources, non-lending TA, and IFC’s advisory services. In more advanced states
and at the central level, the focus will be on helping to strengthen institutions so they can
deal with emerging middle-income challenges, relying o n IBRD lending, cutting-edge
analytical work and I F C activities for private sector clients.16
Low-Income States
53.
At the request o f the government, in the new CAS period the WBG will intensify its
engagement with low-income states.17 In low-income states where there i s commitment to
reforms, the WBG will have an intensive engagement. Given the large size o f some o f these
states, this can only be done in a few selected states and in partnership with all donors
working in these states. The WBG’s engagement will include:

Current Go1 procedures establish that, regardless o f their income level, states avail themselves o f external
assistance o n the same terms as it i s received. Special Category States are an exception t o this rule, in that
they receive a 90% grant-10% loan blend, with the central government absorbing any resulting difference
in interest payments. Go1 procedures also mandate that IDA resources be allocated t o MDG-related sectors
(health, education, drinlung water, rural sanitation, rural roads, etc.). Blend IBRD-IDA operations are
possible in some sectors, with shares generally pre-determined (e.g., Development Policy Loans are onethird IDA, two-thirds IBRD; community-managed tank (surface water and reservoir) projects are 50%
IDA-50% IBRD).
Based o n income (see table l),
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh and Uttarakhand can be classified as low-income states; Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,
Karnataka, Kerala, and West Bengal as middle-income states; Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Maharashtra, Punjab
and T a m i l Nadu as higher-income states. The Government o f India classifies the Northeastern states plus
Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, and Uttrakhand as Special Category States.

21

Cross-sectoral, programmatic Development Policy Loans (DPLs), built on an
dialogue and underpinnedby analytical work, to address systemic issues and support
cross-cutting reforms in public finance/public expenditure management, procurement
practices, governance, investment climate and the framework for public-private
partnerships. In complex political conditions, DPLs provide a tool to enhance
ownership o f reforms (Annex 7 reviews the WB's experience with DPLs). Technical
assistance to strengthen capacity and implementation would be provided as a
complement to DPLs.

0

0

Sector investments to support sustainable, inclusive growth (in sectors such as
health, roads, rural livelihoods, social protection), improve service delivery
(including through strengthening local governments), manage water resources, and
help states make effective use o f funds provided through centrally sponsored
schemes, where there i s strong ownership, adequate implementation capacity, and
commitment to achieving results

0

Intensive technical assistance to help develop and deepen the needed capacity in the
state administration
IFC's efforts to increase private sector operations and improve the investment climate
in low-income states, through its Lagging States Initiative.

54.
Among the low-income states, this degree o f engagement is envisaged in Bihar,
Orissa, and possibly Uttar Pradesh. In Bihar, WBG engagement takes place in the context
o f donor collaboration, as external agencies (including the ADB and DFID) work together
through the Bihar Strategic Partnership and a joint Bihar strategy to support the government;
a Development Policy Loan was approved in December 2007. The W B ' s engagement in
Orissa dates back to the second half o f the 1990s, when the state began undertaking in-depth
reforms; a second DPL is under implementation. In Uttar Pradesh, where the WB did i t s
first sub-national Structural Adjustment Loan in India, it i s re-engaging after a gap o f some
years; a state strategy i s under preparation and a D P L i s being considered. In both Bihar and
Orissa trust funds, especially the DFID-WB trust fund, have played an important role in
supporting capacity building, and are expected to continue to do so.18
55.
With other relatively more advanced low-income states, such as Madhya Pradesh
and Rajasthan, the WB will have some sector investments with clear poverty-reducing
objectives. This could include rural roads, livelihood projects, and small water projects. In
Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand, the WB's engagement has been more limited and significant
problems have emerged in implementing existing projects, so the WB will continue the
dialogue o n the systemic issues that hinder the implementation o f projects and programs and
discourage private sector involvement. Annex 8 summarizes the status o f WB dialogue with
key low-income states.

56.
IFC is active in various ways in low-income states, particularly in Bihar and in UP,
Orissa and Rajasthan through the Business Enabling Environment initiative, which supports
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

''

Examples o f DFID-trust funded work in Bihar and Orissa are the development o f a Management
Information System to track flooding in some districts in Bihar and work on social accountability in Orissa.

22

investment-promoting facilitation, small business taxation reform, inspection and licensing
reform, and SME startup support. IFC, WBI and FIAS launched an investment climate
reform project in Bihar in November 2007, focusing o n the agribusiness and tourism sectors.
I F C i s also in discussions with existing clients o n programs to expand linkages with
producers in low-income states. For example, I F C i s planning to assist Idea Cellular to
launch a village program o n public call offices in Madhya Pradesh and i s in preliminary
discussions with a potential dairy client to strengthen the supply chain o f milk procurement
in UP and with a poultry player to expand i t s feed procurement from Orissa.
57.
States classified by the Go1 as Special Category States-which are mainly in the
hills-also
require a differentiated approach. Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand have
better development outcomes and greater capacity than the low-income states, but face
challenging issues on the management o f natural resources, particularly water. In North
Eastern states, which face significant capacity constraints, the WB would engage in capacity
building, analytical work, and possibly lending in selected priority sectors and dialogue o n
regional issues (see below). This will require time and will be resource-intensive, so
involvement will need to be phased and closely coordinated with other donors, such as

ADB .
Opportunities in Middle-Income States
58.
As table 2 shows, India’s middle-income states are already at income levels
comparable to lower MICs. The WBG will support middle-income states o n two fronts:
fighting poverty in lagging areas, and addressing the complex challenges emerging from
rapid growth.

I LIS:

Table, Main State Groups 1 Per Capita Income
Income

SCS: Special
Category States

M I S : Middle-Income
States

Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Jharkhand
Madhya Pradesh
Orissa
Rajasthan
Uttar Pradesh

Arunachal Pradesh
Assam
Himachal Pradesh
Manipur
Mizoram
Meghalaya
Sikkim
Uttarakhand

Andhra Pradesh
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Karnataka
Kerala
Maharashtra
Punjab
Tamil Nadu
West Bengal

Nominal GSDP per
Capita (Rs, 2005/06,
current prices)

Relative GSDP per
capita compared t o
M I S (=loo, current
price)
45
51
100
73

Population 2001
(million)

LOW

States

I I
Groups
State

LIS

scs
MIS
India*

15,798
17,981
34,918
25.460

23

45 1
47
498
996

Share o f
Population in
India (“h)

45
5
50
100

Note: * Only states for which 2005/06 GSDP data are available are included in the table (they represent 97%
o f India's 2001 population).

59.
First, the WB will support initiatives in the lagging regions o f middle-income states
that aim at reducing poverty and achieving the MDGs. M I C states provide opportunities to
develop cutting-edge solutions for the poor. Thirty-eight percent o f India's poor (116
million in 2005, based on the official poverty figures) live in middle-income states,
particularly Maharashtra (32 million), West Bengal (21 million), Tamil Nadu (15 million),
Karnataka (14 million), and Andhra Pradesh (13 million), often concentrated in backward
districts. Because these states have stronger policy and implementation skills, they offer an
opportunity to explore innovative approaches to reducing poverty. Andhra Pradesh's Indira
Kranti Patham (formerly Velugu), which helps empower millions o f poor women through
self-help groups, i s one example.
60.
Second, the WBG has begun to build a "middle-income country'' type o f engagement
to strengthen institutional capacity to deal with the complex challenges faced by a middleincome country-be i t the intertwined roles o f the public and private sectors, financial
sustainability o f services, responsible management o f natural resources, providing social
security to the vast unorganized sector, improved capacity to handle resettlement and
rehabilitation, or new approaches to property rights and tenure security for slum dwellers.
This engagement relies on various tools:
0
multi-year analytical work on complex development issues, intended to position the
WB as a valued knowledge partner;
state-of-the-art international expertise for prograndproject support in areas in which
the WB can add value;
investments and technical assistance, building long-term engagements with the
institutions needed to support a middle-income economy.
Examples o f how the WBG can assist India in dealing with complex challenges
61.
include:
The WB and IFC are collaborating closely to bring India cutting-edge expertise to
deal with emerging issues in Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs), tailored to India's
needs. The WB i s working on the policy framework, fiscal management, and
viability gap funding, while the IFC i s helping to ensure that PPP frameworks work
for private companies and supports private sector companies in preparing
transactions. This work, which has so far been strongest in infkastructure (power
transmission, roads, irrigation and rural infrastructure, urban development), will be
extended to agribusiness, health and education, and renewable energy.lg The WB
and IFC are working together on long-term finance: through the proposed India
Infrastructure Finance Co. Ltd. Project (IIFCL) (which is one o f the pipeline projects
being tracked and supported by the I D N I F C Secretariat), the WB plans to provide a
credit line to I I F C L India for on-lending longer-term resources to private sector
19

For instance, IFC has signed an MOU with BP Alternate Energy t o pilot small rural biomass gasificationbased distributed generation.

24

infrastructure projects, while IFC and I I F C L have agreed to co-finance infrastructure
projects on a case-by-case basis; IDA would finance training for I I F C L staff on
environmental and social safeguards.
O n financial sustainability o f urban services, the WB is preparing a Technical
Assistance loan to support capacity building in Urban Local Bodies, while the IFC's
sub-national group, a joint IBRD-IFC group focused o n financing creditworthy local
and state government entities, i s exploring the possibility o f using Special Purpose
Vehicles to finance municipal investments.

In the water sector, there i s potential to change h o w water i s managed and regulated,
watersheds and ecosystems protected, resources allocated between uses and users,
supplies delivered to farms, households and industries, and beneficiaries participate
in management and development. The creation o f water resources regulatory
authorities to establish and administer water entitlements and regulate bulk tariffs is
an example o f this shift in approach.

WB technical assistance and lending are supporting stronger procedures to deal with
land acquisition and resettlement and rehabilitation in urban centers such as Mumbai
and demand-based improvements o f systems in Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, and
Himachal Pradesh.
62.
Most WB financial assistance to middle-income states i s likely to be in the sectors
reserved for IBRD lending. Since IBRD lending is at market rates and to a large degree
demand-driven, the challenge will be to apply the criteria o f exploring innovative solutions
and strengthening institutions to ensure that the WB program in middle-income states is
selective and effective.
Engaging at the Center

63.
At the central level, the WB will continue its engagement with both central
ministries and agencies and national entities. A strong emphasis will be placed on
supporting policy and institutional changes through a combination o f comprehensive
Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) focused o n a few key themes and on-demand
advisory services, drawing o n best practices and lessons adapted from global experience to
the India setting, in addition to investment lending.
64.
The WB has been supporting centrally sponsored schemes (CSSs) for decades,
particularly after their rapid expansion during the Tenth Plan period and their association
with some o f the key MDGs. WB support has taken various forms: support at the national
level, initially o f schemes already designed and then increasingly with an input into scheme
design (for example, the Sawa Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) Education for All scheme); support to
individual states participating in a national scheme (for example on rural roads); support to
states in parallel to the national scheme (for example o n rural water supply and sanitation)
(see Annex 9 for a fuller discussion o f the W B ' s experience with CSSs). Where the WB has
been able to contribute to improvements in the management o f funds, transparency, and

25

tracking o f results for the scheme as a whole, i t s impact has gone much beyond i t s relatively
small funding (in the second phase o f SSA, covering 2008-2010, the WB's contribution was
$600 million out o f a total o f about $10.5 billion). Future engagements will only take place
if they can similarly leverage improvements in the effectiveness o f the overall schemes. The
WB i s also helping the government launch a new CSS for statistical strengthening, using for
the first time a national DPL approach which, if successful, may be replicable.

Regional and South-South Collaboration
65.
India's agenda on inclusive growth and sustainable development cannot be fully
addressed without active regional cooperation in South Asia, as many lagging areas are
located in border areas and are heavily impacted by cross-border issues (as powerfully
exemplified by the August 2008 Kosi flood). The political climate for cooperation within
the region has improved, as exemplified by recent meetings between the Indian and
Pakistani Prime Ministers (that paved the way to some trade across the Line o f Control
dividing the two countries) and between the Indian and Nepali Prime Ministers (that
covered, among other things, cooperation o n cross-border water issues). The World Bank
South Asia Region business plan for Regional Cooperation and Partnerships envisages two
sets o f activities, both o f which will involve India: (a) investments and technical assistance
interventions in the energy, trade, and water sectors (such as regional transport and transit
facilitation, with an initial focus on improving the functioning o f sea ports-and the
establishment o f a sub-regional energy grid); and (b) knowledge partnerships and analytical
work (on food security, water resources and water supply, global public goods, technology).
A regional transit and trade facilitation project for the S A R countries in the North-East is
under discussion. This could be f h d e d under the IDA15 allocation for regional integration
projects. A trade and transit project i s also under consideration for the North-West
(involving Afghanistan, India, and Pakistan). In addition, as part as the W B ' s regional water
resources management support, a multi-states and multipurpose water resources project for
the Northeast is under discussion. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that regional
projects may face difficulties in planning and execution.
66.
Regional integration i s one o f the pillars o f IFC's strategy. The focus i s on
facilitating cross-border regional South-South investments and intra-regional trade. I F C will
seek to support cross-border infrastructure projects including power, ports, inland clearance
depots, and roads (e.g. development o f hydropower in Nepal with power sales to Bangladesh
and India). IFC will continue to use i t s services for trade facilitation as well as invest in
trade finance facilities to foster regional trade.

67.
A s India's role on the international arena increases, so does its role as a provider o f
experience, expertise, and assistance. African countries, for instance, look to India as a
source o f technology that i s appropriate to countries at their level o f development. The first
grant o f the recently launched South-South Experience Exchange Facility aims to repeat
India's dairy revolution in Africa. The regional South Asia program includes work o n South
Asia-Africa cooperation on themes such as ICT, trade logistics, agriculture,
entrepreneurship, that have emerged from the South. Asia-Africa regional cooperation
GDLN dialogue carried out in FY08. Also, the WB's Global Facility for Disaster Reduction

26

and Recovery established a strategic partnership with India for the new South-South
Cooperation Program o n Disaster Risk Mitigation which was launched in Delhi in October
2008.20

V.

THE WBG’SPROGRAM

The W B ’ s program in India i s large by WB standards. The portfolio currently
68.
comprises 61 projects under implementation; the pipeline includes about 20-23 new projects
a year, and between 25 and 35 AAA, including about ten major reports a year, have been
completed in recent years. As part o f an ongoing self-evaluation, the WB is making major
changes in i t s way o f doing business to address weaknesses in implementation (such as
those identified in the health sector DIR), increase selectivity in initiating new lending, and
manage AAA more strategically.

69.
Program-wide Action Plan to follow up on the DIR. The DIR acted as a catalyst to
re-examine WB business practices in India. With the full collaboration and input o f the GoI,
the WB went back over the five health projects covered by the DIR (four o f which had
already closed) and the nine on-going operations in the health sector and adopted stringent
measures to ensure proper use o f WB resources. Next, recognizing that the weaknesses
revealed in the DIR were likely systemic and could well have occurred in other sectors, the
WB developed a Program-wide Action Plan. The Action Plan, which aims to achieve
realistic behavioral change in a number o f areas rather than just introduce check lists and
boxes to tick, has a bearing on several aspects o f WB activities:
Business plan: The WB i s refocusing the India Program to concentrate o n
implementation by explicitly balancing risks and rewards in the portfolio, while
being more selective in new lending and more realistic about capacity to deliver.

Risk assessments: The WB i s introducing a new project-based COS0 assessment
tool which helps assess risks and the control environment. All project team members
collectively assess risks and opportunities for different project designs as well as
identify opportunities for innovation in supervision. In addition, a new risk
fkamework has been applied to the whole portfolio to systematically and uniformly
measures risks at the state, sector, and project level as well as strengthen cross-sector
collaboration.
Contract and supply chain management: Work is underway to understand better
where the “bottlenecks” are during project implementation, h o w supply chain
management tools can add real value by highlighting and preventing major risks and
how to build in safeguards and quality assurance. It i s expected that these tools can

20

India has a globally recognized leadership role in disaster risk management. Effective responses t o major
catastrophic events and the establishment o f a comprehensive legislative, institutional, and policy
framework for proactive risk mitigation are some o f its outstanding achievements. The a i m o f this
initiative i s to facilitate collaboration among low- and middle-income countries to mainstream disaster risk
reduction and recovery, including climate change adaptation, into development planning.

27

aid efforts o f staff and managers to monitor implementation and address issues
encountered at critical moments o f project implementation.
0

0

Use o f information: The WB i s exploring how to incorporate in its business
processes the powerful demand-side tools o f social accountability, independent
monitoring and evaluation, and complaint mechanisms, along with the ability to react
to this information. This will have an impact on project design and the use o f
appropriate systems and technology.
Staffing and capacities: WB staffing in the fiduciary areas had lagged behind the
recent rapid growth o f the India program and has been increased, while other skills,
such as contract management and forensic accounting, are in short supply. Task
teams need training in detecting fraud and corruption, just-in-time support, and
clarity on roles, responsibilities, and accountabilities.

Portfolio Management. Overall portfolio performance was mixed over the 2004
70.
CAS period, with impressive results in the first h a l f o f the period and less than satisfactory
in the second half. Due to intensive efforts by Go1 and the WB, portfolio performance first
improved significantly on all fronts, with the disbursement ratio reaching 25.3% in FY06,
which was above the WB average o f 24%, but also the highest for India over the last 20
years. Since then, the ratio has been declining and is projected to reach its pre-2004 CAS
level o f around 17%, reflecting the impact o f the scaling-up in lending, the entry o f new,
slow-starting projects in the portfolio, and greater risk aversion in implementation support.
The percentage o f commitments at risk, down to 9% in FY05, touched a five-year high o f
23% in FY08, again above the WB average. In addition to the program-wide changes that
will be undertaken as part o f the DIR follow-up, key measures under the new CAS to
strengthen portfolio management and improve performance include: (i)carrying out a
baseline risk assessment o f the entire portfolio, monitoring identified risks, and updating the
baseline established; (ii)
shifting more resources to supervision, particularly those areas
classified as high risk; (iii)
proactively following up on mitigation measures including
through restructuring and cancellation actions as needed; (iv) encouraging development o f
demand-side accountability measures, such as third party mechanisms; (v) stricter adherence
to the “Implementation Readiness Filters” during project preparation even if this means
slowing down new lending; (vi) annual joint WB /DEA sector and state portfolio
performance reviews; (vii) extension o f the use o f the procurement tracking system across
the portfolio; (viii) closer scrutiny o f implementation status reports to ensure realism o f
ratings, especially for fiduciary, safeguard and M&E aspects; (ix) pre- and post-mission
briefings with WB country management for high-risk, complex projects; (x) greater use o f
the external communications team to pick up early warning signs o f problems as well as to
disseminate good practices; and (xi) thematic supervision, either by sector (e.g. livelihoods,
transport) or theme (e.g. financial management, environment). (See Annex 10 on portfolio
issues.)

71.
Lending. A greater focus on supervision within a given budget envelope and staffing
complement will mean relatively fewer resources to be invested in lending preparation and
analytical work. This will call for greater selectivity and leveraging o f limited WB

28

resources for greater impact. The scope to increase selectivity i s limited. The Go1 asked the
WBG to focus o n low-income states, but also stressed that other states should not be
excluded from the WB program. At the sector level, IDA resources are targeted to MDGrelated sectors: education, health, social protection, water supply and sanitation, rural
connectivity. IBRD lending has been demand-driven. The CAS proposes that selectivity in
IBRD lending be achieved through a more rigorous project selection process, to be
implemented jointly with DEA. The key factor guiding this process will be strengthening
institutions for a middle-income India. Specific project criteria will include the strength o f
measures to ensure effectiveness o f project expenditures and an assessment o f exposure and
risks associated with the sectorktate portfolio. For example, in sectors where current
exposure is high and there are large undisbursed amounts (e.g. health or roads), or where
competition i s l o w and contractor performance historically poor, new lending would be
restricted over the CAS period. The guidelines for engagement in Annex 11 lay out further
sub-sector-specific criteria that would guide decisions related to inclusion in the WB
operational program. Based on these overall criteria, the WB and the Go1 will together
screen existing and new project proposals carefully before they are included in the program.
Over-programming will be brought down to about 20% during FY10-12, resulting in a
pipeline o f 20-23 projects per year. In FY09 management and staff will define and develop
a new business model for project preparation and supervision, and intensify engagement
with low-income states to build up a program for the later years, even as a number o f
projects designed under the previous CAS are finalized. The WB and Go1 will explore the
use o f innovative instruments, such as output-based disbursements, for use in the outer years
o f the CAS period.

72.

Annex B 3 A lists 28 projects/programs that are likely to be approved in FY09-10. In
addition to these, another 66 projects have been tentatively identified and included in the
operations program and are at different stages o f preparation. Two-thirds o f all these
projects have been requested by the government; all will be subject to the selection process
outlined above. Table 3 summarizes the total identified operations program by borrower
profile, type o f instrument, and sector. In line with the request by Go1 to invest more in lowincome states, approximately 30% o f projects n o w being considered would be in lowincome states, 30% in other states, with the balance for central agencies and national
entities, based o n current plans. This represents a significant shift towards low-income
states with respect to the previous CAS and will inevitably depend o n a number o f statespecific factors.

29

By Sector

DPL (incl. statistics)
HNPMealth
Education
Agriculture & Rural Development (incl. rural
roads, rural finance)
Infrastructure (incl. power, roads, PPP)
Climate Change & environment
Urban
Rural Water Supply & Sanitation
Government effectiveness (incl. egovernance, decentralization)
Total
By Borrower Profile
Low-Income States
Other States
CentraVPublic Undertakmgs
Total

Previous CAS Actual for FY05-08
9%
15%
8%

Current pipeline for
N09-12
10%
10%
~.
5 yo

30%

30%

21%
4%
9%
3%

20%
12%
6%
3%

1%

4%

100%

100%

-

Previous CAS
Actual for FYO5-08
9%
3 6%
54%
100%

Current pipeline for
FYO9-12
29%
27%
44%
100%

73.
The global financial crisis has resulted in a tightening not only o f international credit
markets but also o f domestic credit markets in India, an increased cost o f debt (by at least
20-30% compared to earlier this year) for domestic investors, and a reduced availability o f
both debt and risk capital for infrastructure projects. Against this backdrop, the Eleventh
Plan targets for increased private sector investments in infrastructure, including through
PPPs, may not materialize to the extent desired. Even sovereign-backed entities such as
I I F C L and PowerGrid are likely to face difficulties in accessing longer-term financing.
These developments pose important challenges, but also opportunities for India’s
development partners, like the WBG, to come up with creative solutions in a timely and
selective manner to scale up funding in support o f India’s efforts to bridge i t s infrastructure
financing gap. The key principles for this scaling up will be to invest in: (i)sectors
characterized by better governance, and (ii)PPP projects which (a) improve service
delivery, and where (b) design reflects appropriate risk sharing between the public and
private sectors and improved cost efficiency, (c) PPP contracts are awarded through a
transparent and competitive bidding process, and (d) environmental and social sustainability
are built into project design.

74.
Opportunities for scaling up financing do exist in the infrastructure, power, and
railways sectors, as well as for small and medium enterprises , which have been hard hit by
the financial crisis. A potential aggregate financing o f up to US$3 billion in IBRD lending
30

can achieved within the FY09-10 program through: (i)additional financing to existing
operations such as Small and Medium Enterprises Financing or PowerGrid (subject to GoI's
increasing the guarantee limit to PowerGrid) and topping up financing in operations in the
pipeline such as IIFCL, which could be prepared relatively quickly; and (ii)
topping up
financing o f the dedicated freight corridor and new operations to be requested such as a
multi-state power transmission facility, which would require 3-6 months for preparation.
Discussions with the Government o f India on these scaling-up opportunities are underway.

b:
a/ Includes 35% over-programming.
b/ Subject to confirmation from the Government of India.

75.
In terms o f instruments, the WE3 projects DPLs to remain at about the current share
o f 10% (roughly two a year). DPLs are a useful instrument to support reforming states; o n
average states with WB-supported DPLs have performed better not only in terms o f fiscal
performance, but more importantly in terms o f growth, poverty reduction, public sector
reforms, and governance (see the review o f the experience with DPLs in Annex 7).
Opportunities to expand development policy lending beyond state-level DPLs to, e.g.,
sector-level in a state and national-level DPLs, do exist and will be considered.

At the sector level, support to India will continue to concentrate o n infrastructure
76.
(transport, power, urban development, urban and rural water supply and sanitation,
irrigation, and water resource management), human development (health, nutrition, primary
education, secondary education, vocational and technical education, skills development, and
social protection), agriculture and rural development (state agriculture competiveness, state
rural livelihoods, and state service deliveqddecentralization), and natural resource
management and climate change. Work to further strengthen the financial sector and to
promote private sector development will continue. Based o n projects currently in the
pipeline, agriculture and rural development would account for about 30% o f new operations,
infrastructure for 20%, and climate change and environment for 12%. Other shares are
shown in table 3.

77.
The health, nutrition and population (HNP) sector poses some particular challenges.
The last three years have seen significantly increased policy and political attention to HNP
outcomes in India and the launch o f the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) as a
flagship vehicle for accelerating progress. The NRHM contains a number o f innovative

31

elements intended to improve weak service delivery processes, especially in the low-income
states, thus opening up avenues for improving sector governance, systems and institutions.
At the same time, implementation capacity and systems are weak, and India i s far from the
target on the four MDGs directly related to health and nutrition. In addition to the national
implications o f slow progress, India's achievements will have a major bearing on the world's
achievements o f the MDGs. So, from the perspective o f need, there i s a strong argument for
continued WB engagement in HNP, but the changed set o f circumstances calls for a new
approach. Under this CAS, the WB proposes to pilot, initially in one or two states,
programmatic lending (such as Adaptable Program Lending) to build capacity and
strengthen systems, so as to be able to support investments, once state systems can be relied
upon to translate expenditures into results. At both center and state levels, the WB would
emphasize collaboration on an enhanced AAA agenda which would deepen understanding
o f the improvements needed in the health network to get better results o n India's key health
challenges. In parallel, lending could also be used to support national programs that are
important to achieve the MDGs, such as immunization campaigns.
As mentioned at the end o f section IV.B, strengthening the WB's ability to address
78.
fiduciary risks in design and supervision will be particularly important. Across borrowers,
instruments, and sectors, the WB will continue to (i)
simplify and streamline fiduciary and
monitoring arrangements across projects by using country systems, (ii)provide greater
attention to operational and management controls in the design and implementation o f
projects (including by planning supervision effort that i s commensurate with project risks),
and (iii)
enhance financial accountability and transparency in projects. Each new project
will have a tailor-made Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP), which
incorporates right-to-information and transparency provisions in project design. To oversee
and guide these efforts, a Delhi-based Advisory Committee on Governance and
Accountability (ACGA) will monitor and help project task team leaders on mitigation o f
fraud and corruption, implementation o f GAAPs across the portfolio, and learning from best
practices in demand-side governance.
79.
The volume o f WB lending to India will continue to be defined by the framework
followed under the 2004 CAS. Barring any dramatic unforeseen deterioration in
performance, i t i s expected that, based on the total amount o f the IDA15 replenishment, IDA
will provide SDR 2,937 million (US$4,405 million equivalent at the current exchange rate)
over FY09-11.. The availability o f IDA past F Y l l will depend on India's growth
performance as well as decisions to be taken in the I D A 1 6 replenishment. Under current
IDA graduation policies, if a country's GNI per capita exceeds the IDA operational cutoff
for at least two years in a row, a case-by-case determination i s made by IDA management.
India's per capita GNI, at $950 in FY09, could potentially exceed the IDA cutoff o f $1,095
in FYlO or FY11, although this prospect appears less likely if growth projections are
reduced to below 7-7.5%. IBRD lending will be subject to the Single Borrower Limit,
which at the moment i s debt outstanding o f US$15.5 billion. This will support a program
with an upper bound o f an average US$2.9 billion o f commitments a year in this CAS
period, provided quick-disbursing lending is limited to less than 10% o f the total.21 Within
Should DPLs increase substantially beyond the 10% share, the lending program would need to be
reassessed to ensure exposure remains within the limit.

32

the ceiling, actual IE3RD investment lending will be driven by the W ' s capacity to
implement the existing portfolio combined with the need to respond in the short term to the
financial crisis.

80.
The Guidelines for Engagement developed under the 2004 CAS proved to be helpful
tools for ensuring that projects were well designed and incorporated the lessons o f
experience. However, the guidelines did not facilitate greater selectivity, nor were they
intended to enforce strategic shifts. Under this CAS, the guidelines have been strengthened
to capture selectivity criteria and will supplement the broader criteria for including projects
in the program discussed above. The guidelines will be reviewed periodically in light o f
implementation experience (Annex 11 contains the revised guidelines). DPL lending will
continue to be driven by the Guidelines for Development Policy Lending adopted by GoI,
which will evolve as appropriate in the context o f center-state fiscal relations.
Analytical and Advisory Activities. Selectivity will be crucial in the choice o f
81.
analytical and advisory work. A review o f the India's AAA program undertaken in June
2007 identified a number o f issues to be addressed, including fragmentation; inadequacy o f
filters in the CAS or by DEA for consolidatiodintegration o f AAA; linkages with lending
perceived as biasing the analysis o f policy options toward those addressed in possible WE3
operations; timeliness; and collaboration with local research institutions. The review
suggested that AAA could be better organized based o n objectives rather than by type o f
task (e.g., report, policy note, non-lending technical assistance or NLTA). This could be
done by distinguishing:
0

high-visibility cross-sector studies, delinked from lending and aimed at informing
discussion and identifying policy options on k e y issues in India's development
agenda;

0

on-demand policy and implementation advice, to respond quickly to urgent, specific
client demands, bringing in international experience; and

0

operational support and diagnostic reviews, to carry out due-diligence functions, take
stock o f progress towards outcomes, and contribute to and learn from WB operations
and/or GOVState programs.

82.
In line with this recommendation, the FY09-10 AAA program under the CAS
includes a small number o f multi-year, cross-sectoral analytical pieces o n important issues
confronting policymakers, including poverty and exclusion, skills and j o b creation, lowcarbon growth, the challenges o f rapid urbanization, the management and development o f
water resources, and a Development Policy Review (see Annex B4).22 These will be
complemented by on-demand policy and implementation advice, such as o n land
acquisition, resettlement and rehabilitation, or social security for the unorganized sector, and
by due-diligence reviews, such as work o n strengthening procurement in the health sector
and quarterly macro-financial reviews. Other changes suggested by the June 2007 AAA
22

Funding f r o m Trust Funds will be important in delivering the AAA program, especially in the initial years
o f the CAS. Annex B4 identifies activities for which TF are expected t o provide the majority o f the
funding.

33

review will also be taken o n board, including managing AAA with a clearer focus o n
outcomes and strengthening l i n k s with local institutions (see Annex 6 o n the dissemination
and outreach aspects o f the W B ’ s communications strategy). The FY11-12 AAA program
will be defined subsequently to ensure timeliness and relevance, keeping in mind the lessons
o f the June 2007 review.

83.
IFC’s strategy andprogram. IFC’s vision i s that people should have the opportunity
to escape poverty and improve their lives. A s a result, IFC places an important focus o n
IDA countries and frontier markets, where i t s operations can have the greatest impact on
reducing poverty. The extent and depth o f poverty in India, coupled with its large private
sector, makes it is an important client country for the IFC, and one where it can reach scale
and have significant development impact.
IFC’s strategic focus in India remains o n
improving economic inclusion (through increasing private sector investment in low-income
states, bridging the infrastructure gap, improving access to finance for the underserved, and
accelerating rural growth); addressing climate change through renewable energy investments
and projects which focus o n clean energy; and supporting intra-regional trade and
investment. Impact will be scaled up by clustering investments by region or sector and
partnering with existing and new strategic clients, and by combining investment and
advisory services wherever possible.
0
IFC’s infrastructure strategy includes a combination o f investments in infrastructure
projects, in infrastructure funds, and in dedicated infrastructure finance institutions.
IFC will continue to support pioneering private and public-private partnerships
infrastructure projects through direct investments, resource mobilization and
advisory services. IFC’s recently established multi-donor-funded $20 m i l l i o n South
Asia Infrastructure Facility will continue to help sustain demand by creating
bankable infrastructure projects and developing PPPs both at the state and central
government levels.
In support o f the economic inclusion agenda, IFC will provide support to a range o f
market players in the microfinance sector including collective investment vehicles
that in turn support the emergence o f microfinance institutions (MFIs), as w e l l as
invest directly in some larger M F I s that have viable business models and need funds
to transform into financially sustainable institutions. IFC will also continue to focus
on the innovative application o f technology by backing I T companies whose
products offer the potential to address a large m e t demand for financial services in
India.
0
In the general manufacturing and services sectors, IFC will provide equity and longterm debt not otherwise easily available to medium-sized companies that are
developing new products and markets, modernizing to become internationally
competitive, and expanding and moving towards a regional or global presence. The
focus will remain on labor-intensive, knowledge-based, globally competitive,
second-tier companies in growth sectors such as IT, pharmaceuticals, and new
sectors such as agribusiness, electronics, hotels/tourism, construction materials,
engineering, chemicals. IFC will continue to promote South-South investments by
taking Indian companies abroad, and financing their international expansion.
0
IFC’s advisory staff work seamlessly with investment teams and continue to focus
o n linkage programs, with rural development initiatives as important priorities to

34

implement IFC’s rural strategy. The goal of these initiatives is to support private
sector-led growth in rural India, complementing WB rural development projects.
IFC will also explore opportunities for partnerships with the private sector and other
donors to create rural impact through chosen projects in distributed generation, micro
finance, farm forestry, and agribusiness.

84.
As a result o f the current global financial crisis, the Indian corporate sector’s ability
to raise both domestic and international debt and equity i s likely to remain difficult for some
time. Inthis environment, IFC expects to be able to play a counter-cyclical role by focusing
on the provision o f equity, risk capital and long-term debt financing to certain portfolio
companies. IFC will also consider supporting other companies that have a sustainable
competitive advantage but are facing stress on account o f changed market and financial
conditions, national and/or regional corporate leaders with temporary balance sheet distress,
food supply chain companies with rural linkages in order to limit the impact o f the down
turn on rural employment, and infrastructure projects that are facing financing difficulties.
85.
The WB and I F C will continue to work towards an increased number o f successful
partnerships, building on their relative strengths. An important step in improving
collaboration i s the support provided by the IDA-IFC Secretariat, currently focused on two
activities: (a) support to the proposed India Infrastructure Finance Co. Ltd. Project (IIFCL)
on, among others, how to apply IFC and WB environment and social systems; and (b)
advice on best practices o f joint WB-IFC strategy formulation to inform work on a shared
WB-IFC strategy to scale up rural electrification initiatives. IFC’s advisory team will also
continue to work closely with the World Bank, especially on the investment climate agenda
and competition policy.
86.
IFC’s investment and advisory program in India has grown rapidly in recent years,
recognizing the scale o f India and i t s importance in achieving progress on the M D G s at a
global level. I F C made commitments o f $1.05 billion in India in FY07 and again FY08.
India i s now IFC’s second-largest country exposure in terms o f disbursed and outstanding
portfolio with investments (as o f September 30, 2008) in over 112 companies totaling $1.6
billion for IFC’s own account and $606 million for the account o f participants. IFC expects
to maintain a significant investment and advisory program in India while remaining within
Country Exposure Limits.
87.
Partnerships. Looking forward, the Bank Group will seek to leverage i t s resources
through closer collaborations with partners and foundations. A good example o f exploiting
synergies with partners i s the W B ’ s work with DFID. WB and DFID staff work particularly
closely in Bihar and Orissa, building on a shared vision o f the development process and the
primacy o f client ownership. DFID will continue to provide trust fund resources to the WB
to work on common priorities. The ADB i s in the process o f preparing i t s Country
Partnership Strategy for 2008-2012 and has worked with other donors, including the WB, on
a Donor Coordination Matrix. The ADB and WB will continue to exploit complementarities
in several sectors, including finance, power, railways, and roads and avoid overlap, under
the guidance o f the GoI. Greater efforts than in the past will be devoted to forging

35

partnerships with foundations, partly to ensure that grant resources are available to India
over the long term.
88.
Trust Funds. Trust funds are one aspect o f partnerships. They constitute an
important resource for the India program. At the end o f FY08, there were 96 active trust
funds, with grant amounts totaling $218 million. The largest share o f these (35 grants worth
$198 million) were recipient-executed grants.
Important sources o f funds were the
Montreal Protocol (2 grants, $138 million), Carbon Finance (4 grants, $39 million), Japan
Social Development Fund (10 grants, $6.9 million) and Japan Policy and Human Resource
Development (14 grants, $6.5 million). In addition, IFC had 29 active grants worth $12
million, all WB-executed.
89.
The DFID TF stood out for providing significant resources in a flexible way to
support implementation o f the 2004 CAS. The TF was established in September 2005 with
an initial allocation o f GPB 19.5 million. Since i t s inception, the TF has funded a total o f
186 activities (174 WB-executed and 12 recipient-executed) and total disbursements are
expected to be about $19 million (the recipient-executed window remained largely
unutilized). Two evaluations conducted in 2007 showed that the additional DFID funding
was aligned to the 2004 CAS and enhanced the quality o f WB project design and
implementation and strengthened poverty analysis. However, the broad allocation across all
sectors made it difficult to track TF-specific impacts, which raised issues o f accountability
for DFID. Building on these lessons, the new DFID TF being set up will focus efforts o n
five thematic areas o f strategic importance, finance fewer, larger interventions, with
expected results more clearly specified and annual monitoring to assess progress.
Management arrangements involving DEA will be established to enhance ownership. Other
TF resources, notably funds f i o m the Governance Facility, will also be used strategically to
support key knowledge activities and project implementation.
Program implications. I t is important to recognize that the proposed approach will
90.
result in a more expensive business model. Both project preparation and supervision costs
are likely to increase as the WB works with counterparts to strengthen design, focus on
capacity building and institutional changes, and develop better governance measures. The
Go1 looks to the WB to help on the most complex development questions and in the poorer,
riskier states that require extensive capacity building. Annex 12 presents a costing o f the
CAS, which reflects an increase in overall supervision costs o f between US$1.7-US$3.6
million per year over the FY07-08 actual average. Providing additional financing to India in
response to the global financial crisis is expected to raise costs by an additional US$1.3
million in FY09-10 and US$700,000 in FY11-12. W h i l e in the short term the WB could rely
on a more strategic use o f trust hnds to ensure that key analytical work gets funded
adequately and on Project Preparation Facilities to prepare operations, the response to the
crisis will require additional resources, and over time strengthening the W B ' s role as
knowledge provider, which is essential in a middle-income country, will require spending
more on AAA and additional resources for the program, o f the order o f US$4-5 million over
the FY09 base. Should additional funding not be available, lending and AAA would have to
be reduced commensurately at significant cost in terms o f the quality o f WB advice.

36

VI.

RISKS

91.
The WBG strategy faces risks linked to the impact o n India's economy o f the global
economic slowdown and to a lesser extent political developments. While India may have
been relatively insulated from global trends until recently, thanks to the size o f i t s internal
market and i t s high savings ratio, this "de-coupling" from trends in developed economies has
reached its limit given the depth o f the evolving global crisis. The risk o f a major domestic
crisis in India i s not substantial, but the implications o f the probable slowdown in India's
growth will need to be monitored closely. In the event o f a prolonged global recession, risks
will escalate and the strategy will need to be reassessed.
92.
O n the political side, national elections are due by M a y 2009. State elections to be
held during November-December 2008 in Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram,
and Rajasthan will provide an indication o f voter sentiments. I t is however important to
stress that, whatever the outcome o f the elections, the Eleventh Plan's main policy directions
and the government's expectations o n WBG support to the plan are unlikely to change.
In terms o f implementation o f the W B ' s program, at the level o f outcomes, risks are
93.
related to institutional weaknesses in delivering programs, unclear policies, and inadequate
attention to results. Institutional weaknesses are likely to be more serious in low-income
than in middle-income states. So an increase in the share o f the portfolio going to lowincome states i s likely to raise the overall risk profile (while at the same time offering the
possibility o f higher returns in terms o f progress in poverty reduction). While this increase
in riskiness can to some degree be counterbalanced by supporting a few large investments in
low-risk sectors or through repeater financing for tested approaches, the overall risk profile
is nevertheless likely to increase.

94.
The risk that implementing agencies will not focus sufficiently o n results can be
mitigated by working o n monitoring and evaluation frameworks in close partnership with
government counterparts and by investing in capacity building, as well as working with
beneficiaries and c i v i l society to strengthen demand for accountability.
The central
government i s committed to strengthening the monitoring o f the h n d s i t transfers to states
and lower-tier authorities, as a step towards increasing development impact. This creates
welcome opportunities to engage. Still, being more modest about the WB's contribution to
development impact will be an important factor in project design, including when supporting
CSSs. Ensuring continued progress in strengthening the focus (by the WE3 and GoI) o n
results i s an ongoing challenge.
95.
Misuse o f public resources, including those provided by the WB, affects the
probability that the necessary inputs will be available for project/program implementation
and that outputs will actually be delivered. The India Health Sector DIR highlighted how
serious these risks were in the five health projects examined. Subsequent discussions with
counterparts underscored the difficulties in engaging on a comprehensive governance
agenda. Implementation risks can be mitigated by ring-fencing WE3 projects and enhancing
supervision; the WB could support few, simple interventions in which flows o f hnds and
implementation mechanisms could be closely controlled. But in the end ring-fencing can

37

work only on a small scale, so that pursuing a strategy o f ring-fencing all WB operations
could lead to irrelevance. Significant development impact will require stronger country
systems. Strengthening country systems requires working in close partnership with
government counterparts as well as strengthening citizens' capacity to demand transparency
and accountability. This takes time and committed counterparts, and in the meantime there
will be implementation risks. Strengthening project preparation and supervision will not
fully eliminate fraud and corruption from WB-financed projects. Significant residual risks
will remain. In fact, i t i s likely that, as a result o f these actions, the reported level o f fraud
and corruption in the portfolio will rise in the short term, warranting adjustments to the
proposed approach in light o f experience. The challenge will be to achieve some balance
between riskier operations and simpler, more easily supervised and repeater operations.
When fiduciary risks do materialize, the W B ' s response will be swift and thorough.
96.
Specifically in the health sector, i t i s important to recognize that the W B ' s
relationship with health counterparts has been strongly affected by the DIR and i t is possible
that there may be no new lending for health projects for some time. In this case, the WE3
team would focus on rebuilding trust, strengthening systems, carrying out analytical work,
and preparing a pipeline for the future.
97.
Finally, there is a risk that project preparation and supervision costs will turn out to
be significantly higher than in the past, because o f additional time and resources needed to
ensure broad agreement on governance measures. This risk i s substantial and can only
partly be mitigated in the short term by relying on additional resources. Over time,
improving project design to include demand-side accountability measures and M&E systems
that provide reliable information on project performance should help move from high-cost
transaction-based supervision to a more efficient outcome/risk-based implementation
support.
98.
Exposure risks will be monitored. JBRD exposure to India will need to remain below
the Single Borrower Limit o f US$15.5 billion a year. This would be feasible with planned
commitments averaging US$2.9 billion a year, provided quick-disbursing lending stays
below 10% o f the total, as has been the case historically and as foreseen in the current
strategy. The lending planned in FY09 and FY10 may reach US$7.3 billion due to the need
to respond to the global financial crisis, which would be higher than the average. Exposure
at the end o f the CAS period would rise to US$13.5 billion in this case. A higher proportion
o f quick-disbursing lending would lead to exposure rising rapidly and, given the large size
o f the overall envelope, would call for a reassessment o f the lending program to ensure
exposure remains within the limit.
VII.

CONCLUDINGREMARKS

99.
The overarching objective o f this CAS i s to help India achieve the long-term vision
encapsulated in the Eleventh Plan o f a country free o f poverty and exclusion. To this effect,
the WBG will assist India in dealing with the intertwined challenges o f achieving rapid,
inclusive growth, ensuring that development is sustainable, and increasing the effectiveness
o f service delivery. The WBG will seek to deploy its various tools-dialogue, analytical

38

work, lending, engagement with the private sector, capacity building-in the most effective
and efficient manner so as to help fulfill the dreams o f the people o f India, especially the
poorest, and move closer to achieving the goals that India has set itself.

39

3

..

4

3

India Country Strategy Annex 3, Page 1 o f 2

ANNEX 3 : SUMMARY OF CONSULTATIONS

Beginning in the summer o f 2007, M s Isabel Guerrero, who was then the World Bank India
Country Director and i s now South Asia Vice-president, consulted widely with government
counterparts, civil society organizations, think tanks, research organizations, donor partners,
and staff o n what the World Bank should do in India in the next few years. At the
consultations with civil society in New Delhi in August-September 2007, participants
suggested that further consultations be held in some states. C i v i l society consultations were
thus held in April 2008 in Mumbai, Maharashtra and Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh and in
September 2008 in Bhubaneswar, Orissa. Consultations with line ministries were held in
September-October 2008. Consultations with state authorities were held in Orissa in Sept.
2008.

CSO Consultations
Many CSOs aim to "democratize" the development process by supporting rigorous systems
o f accountability and empowering the poor to participate in decision making. From the WB,
they look for a long-term strategic partnership that gives them proactive encouragement and
support through policy advice and resources-the latter preferably made available to them
directly. At civil society consultations, CSOs expressed a need to develop collaborative
ways o f working jointly with the WB in monitoring, evaluating and assessing the impact o f
projects. They also expressed a desire to be considered as 'private' entities when it comes to
thinking about public-private partnerships in service delivery.
The CSOs made several recommendations regarding the WB's strategy:
The World Bank should increase its focus on the poor and vulnerable, particularly o n
existing pockets o f poverty, exclusion and deprivation in both lagging and more
advanced states.
Greater emphasis should be placed on the governance agenda with appropriate systems
o f accountability to improve the delivery o f services.
Space should be created for proactive participation by CSOs in all WB projects to ensure
accountability and transparency. Monitoring o f projects through third-parties should be
considered, and evaluations and impact assessments should be shared with key
stakeholders in multi-stakeholder consultations.
To reduce poverty in the rural areas, the World Bank should promote agriculture and
related activities, and engage with small and marginal farmers, their associations, as well
as civil society organizations working with them.
The World Bank should factor in the impact o f climate change on poor people while
developing and committing to any initiative for adaptation to and/or mitigating the
impact o f climate change in the country.
The CSOs were o f the opinion that the World Bank should increase its knowledge sharing
interactions with grassroots organizations. I t i s important for the Bank to learn from those at
the grassroots as many innovative practices in agriculture and water management are based
upon local knowledge. The Bank can then help scale up these innovations and disseminate
this knowledge globally.

India Country Strategy Annex 3, Page 2 o f 2

Consultations with government
In addition to discussions with Ministry o f Finance officials, which took place throughout
the CAS preparation, consultations with line ministries were held in Sept.-Oct. 2008. These
consultations were generally held with the relevant secretary and hisher staff, and focused
on both the overall WBG strategy and the sector strategy. As o f end-October 2008,
consultations had been held with nine l i n e ministries and the Planning Commission, with
several more planned in November 2008, to be focused on issues related to implementing
the CAS (should any major issue emerge from the remaining consultations, it will be flagged

to the Board).
At the state level, the WBG team presented the emerging thrusts o f the strategy to
representatives o f five eastern states (Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, West Bengal)
at a workshop organized by the MoF's Department o f Economic Affairs in June 2008 in
Ranchi, Jharkhand. The strategy was also discussed with top officials o f the Orissa
government in Sept. 2008; similar consultations with Bihari officials were postponed
because o f the August 2008 floods.

I
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

,

--

.-roe
I

N

L

0
"
0
v)

t

o

o

0

0

0

0

p

0

2

s

o o o o o o o g

3
2

n
v

3

0

0

U

C

.-

Q)

G
0

c

QJ

E

0

U

v)

0

t
I

r r m N N m O N r r r m m r r

r r r m m m m m r r r m m m m N N

r r r m m r

O N -

0

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

o o o o o m
0

'5
r

6
0

m

N -

s
r

m

m

v m

m

~

o
m
d

r

0

0

Y

$$!
N

m

a

V

I

a

::

a

Qo

0

t

r N N N - m - r -

0

r m r r r m m o r

r r m - r

N

c
v)

0

t
I

0
h

0)

E

z

e:

F

t

z

P

8

5

0

.r

8
N

22222222

p

~

In0

o w

$?'

0.2

In0

0 0

:*

In0

2-

N h h

G W 8

0 0

o w

N N

r r

"r!

N N h

VI
L

z

3; E

N - N

r . - N N m r N r

m - N

Lo

.-6m

O *
N
N

P

88

zz

nn

E

8

d

3

I

1

1

!

l

l

/

I

t

7

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 1 of 29

ANNEX4: INDIA
FYOS-OS COUNTRY
STRATEGY COMPLETIONREPORT
I.Introduction
1.

This Completion Report i s a self-assessment o f the India Country Strategy (CAS)
for FY05-08 (henceforth referred to as the 2004 CAS or the CAS).’ The 2004
CAS was presented to the Board in August 2004, shortly after national elections
at a time when the Indian economy was beginning to grow at a rapid pace. The
new government was successful in accelerating rapid growth through mid-2008
with high levels o f investment; but progress towards the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) was slower than hoped-for. More recently the
international context o f high commodity, fuel, and food prices followed by severe
instability in global financial markets with the likelihood o f global recession i s
threatening the continuation o f India’s growth performance. Section 11 reviews
India’s progress towards i t s long-term goals.

2.

In this context o f rapid growth but s t i l l high levels o f poverty and human

deprivation, the objective o f the 2004 CAS was to “maximize and leverage the
diverse resources o f the World Bank Group (WBG) to dramatically scale up our
impact ... [to] help India move closer to achieving the MDGs.” To scale up
impact, the World Bank (WB) strategy shifted from the previous “focus state”
strategy, which had targeted support to only those states willing to adopt
comprehensive major reforms, to a broader and more inclusive strategy aimed at
providing in-depth support to India’s 12 poorest states. The expanded state
approach was to be complemented by greater support at the national level,
including an emphasis on analytical work. To scale up impact, the CAS adopted
three strategic principles: (i)
a stronger focus on outcomes; (ii)
selectivity in
applying resources to maximize aid effectiveness; and (iii)an expansion o f the
WBG role as knowledge generator and provider. Section I11 discusses the 2004
approach in the context o f the W B ’ s strategy in India over the previous decade
and a half, and reviews the effectiveness o f the three strategic principles.
3.

While the geographical focus o f WB assistance shifted somewhat, the WBG’s
program priorities, aligned with India’s own priorities and development goals,
remained unchanged from the 2001 India CAS: (i)improve government
effectiveness; (ii)
invest in people and empower communities; and (iii)
promote
private sector-led growth. Progress against CAS outcomes is discussed in
Section I V and WB performance vis-$vis its instruments i s reviewed in Section
V.

4.

The main conclusion o f this Completion Report i s that the WB was successful in
increasing lending (primarily in states in which the WB had already established a
working relationship) and in deepening i t s engagement in selected low-income

’ India Country Strategy for FY05-08 (India 2004 CAS), Report no. 29374-IN.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 2 o f 29

states while continuing to work with national-level programs and entities and
development partners. It effectively supported central and state efforts to
strengthen fiscal management, expand key programs aimed at reaching the MDGs
(particularly primary education and rural empowerment programs), and encourage
private sector-led growth. However in spite o f some notable WB achievements
(particularly in drawing attention to the key role o f service delivery, supporting
fiscal adjustment in selected states, helping to empower communities in several
states, and contributing to financial sector strengthening through timely AAA)
broad progress in scaling up impact across the whole range o f sectors in which the
WB i s engaged remained moderate. Experience during the 2004 CAS period
offers important lessons for the design o f the FY09-12 CAS. These are
summarized at the end o f Sections I1and I11and integrated in the text in Sections
I V and V.

5.

This Completion Report is based o n substantive inputs from the country team as
well as reviews o f Government o f India (GoI) documents, WB assessments
including the 2007 CAS Progress Report,’ and external studies. The findings o f a
survey o f stakeholders and extensive consultations with c i v i l society
organizations held in the fall o f 2007 also informed the r e p ~ r t . ~

6.

Two caveats o n establishing a linkage between interventions and results are in
order at the start. First, attributing impact to WB interventions in a context as
large and complex as India’s, where the WB i s but a small player, is extremely
difficult, and rigorous evaluations are few. So this report makes an informed
judgment based largely on qualitative information.
Second, even where
successfd, interventions rarely produce results within the short time span o f a
single CAS, so the outcomes observed are to a great extent the result o f earlier
interventions or are intermediate outcomes in the context o f an extended results
chain.

11. Progress towards India’s Long-Term Strategic Goals
7.

What were the goals that India was aiming to achieve over the CAS period, and
how much progress was made? India’s development goals are set out in i t s Five
Year Plans, comprehensive development frameworks that reflect key priorities
and strategies based o n current development thinking, on-going reviews o f
progress under previous plans and consideration o f political economy issues. The
Plan periods do not correspond with legislative and executive mandates, thus
providing some continuity through political cycles. India’s Tenth Plan (20022007), which also served as India’s Poverty Reduction Strategy, provided the
basis for the 2004 CAS. The CAS identified four key priority goals from the
Tenth Plan to which the World Bank (WB) would contribute:

~~~

’India Country Strategy Progress Report 2007 (Report no. 39796-IN)
The findings o f the civil society consultations are available on the India country website.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 3 o f 2 9

(i)accelerate growth with increased public investment and fiscal adjustment;
(ii)
significantly enhance provision o f infrastructure services
(iii)reduce poverty, with special emphasis on the lagging states and on education
and health outcomes; and
(iv)improve governance, including accountability, transparency, service delivery
and anti-corruption.
8.

These goals proved to be both robust over time - they have largely been carried
over into the Eleventh Plan (2008-2013) - and sufficiently flexible to
accommodate evolving circumstances and experiences. An extensive array o f
policy and program initiatives was implemented during the 2004 CAS period to
make progress towards these goals (Attachment A4.2 lists key Go1 initiatives
during the CAS period). The remainder o f this section reviews India's progress to
achieve these goals.

Accelerate growth

9.

India's recent overall growth performance exceeded expectations. Aggregate
growth accelerated from 6.8% per year average during 2002-04 to about 9.2% per
year during 2004-08. This acceleration was associated with a significant increase
in the rate of investment, from around 28% to 36% o f GDP. Industry,
manufacturing, and services all averaged 10-11% annual growth from 2005
onwards. This marks a particular acceleration for manufacturing, which had been
lagging other industry and the services sector.

10.

Clouding this bright picture is the lackluster performance o f agriculture, which
has grown at less than 3% per year during both the 9* and loth Plan periods
(although with good rains since 2006, recent growth has been at the high end o f a
quite volatile range). This performance heightened concerns about the linkages
between India's growth process and poverty reduction, in terms o f generating
incomes for the rural poor, who are overwhelmingly dependent on agriculture.
While there have been many success stories in the rural sector, it seems
increasingly clear that the policies needed to achieve sustained higher overall
agricultural growth are not f i l l y in place , suggesting that there may be both
analytical and implementation gaps. With this caveat, India made very strong
progress toward the goal o f accelerating growth, with fiscal adjustment providing
the space for increased investment and expenditure restructuring supporting
growth oriented reforms and programs. .

Enhanceprovision of infrastructure

11.

Major efforts went into improving India's roads, railways, ports, power
availability, and communications and progress was significant, but not sufficient
to keep up with demand, so a large gap still remains. In the energy sector, the
Tenth Plan targeted an increase in power generating capacity o f 41,100 MW, an

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 4 o f 2 9

ambitious 40% above installed capacity in 2001. In the event, only about 25,000
M W were brought o n stream. W h i l e this still represents the largest increment in
capacity under any five year period in India's history, i t s inadequacy relative to
the demands o f a rapidly growing economy is apparent. Peak shortages
deteriorated over the period and were estimated to be 14% in 2006. The
inadequacy o f electricity supply i s confirmed by the 2007 Investment Climate
Assessment (ICA): power shortages were identified as the most severe constraint
to firms in 2006. Go1 analysis suggests that delays in technical tie-ups by the
main (public sector) equipment supplier, BHEL, were one major cause o f delays
in capacity coming o n board; other factors were delays in clearances for
hydropower projects and poor sequencing in project planning. In addition to
shortfalls in planned capacity increments, there was l i t t l e improvement in
aggregate efficiency across State Electricity Boards.

12.

Progress in transport has been somewhat better. During the Ninth and Tenth
Plans combined, India added almost 35,000 k m s to the national highway network,
effectively doubling i t s size. The most significant achievement during the more
recent period was the substantial progress toward completion o f the "golden
quadrilateral" four-lane network connecting India's main commercial centers.
Railway traffic (both passenger and freight) also grew at unprecedented rates, and
there were significant efficiency gains both in the utilization o f wagons and
engines and in the productivity o f manpower. The 2007 I C A confirmed that
fewer f i r m s than two years earlier (7% versus 12%) indicated transportation as a
severe constraint.
Rural road connectivity also registered significant
improvement during the CAS period, but s t i l l fell w e l l short o f the ambitious
goals set out in the Tenth Plan under the Bharat Nirman program and the
accompanying PMGSY program for rural road upgrading and construction.

13.

Overall, progress in the provision o f infrastructure services was moderate with the
improvements in transport services offset by a widening gap between demand for
and supply o f energy. In addition, the extension o f road infrastructure to rural
habitations lags behind. India's longer term goals for infrastructure remain
appropriate; but issues o f implementation, especially project and program
management, will need greater attention.

Reduce poverty

14.

The most recent data o n poverty and several MDGs date back to around 2005, so
progress over the CAS period cannot really be assessed. Nevertheless, i t is
important to review the trends over the period from the mid-1990s to the mid2000s, as this provides the baseline for the current policy debate and strategy
design. Over the decade from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s, India made less
progress in reducing poverty and achieving the M D G s than was hoped for. The
latest available data from the 2004/05 N S S indicate a decadal rate o f poverty
reduction o f about 2% per year during a period in which GDP was growing at
about 6% annually. This i s relatively weaker performance than was anticipated in

C A S ANNEX 4: FY05-08 C A S Completion Report
Page 5 of29

the 2004 CAS. The 2004/05 N S S data do confirm the high incidence o f poverty
in those states identified in the CAS as being the poorest.

15.

Data from the 2006 N D H S and other sources show that some human development
indicators improved: An impressive 25 million additional children enrolled in
school between 2002 and 2006; infant mortality declined markedly from 68 per
thousand in 1998 to 57 in 2005. Other indicators did not show improvement:
dropout rates remained high and there was little evidence that learning outcomes
improved; immunization rates and child malnutrition barely improved during this
period. For these latter outcomes, , improvements in the lower-income states
exceeded those in several middle and higher income states, although the richer
states s t i l l out-performed the poorer states on average,. This suggests that
problems o f access to and quality o f public services are by no means confined to
l o w income states and that poor families in middle- and higher income states are
affected in the same way as the commensurately larger number o f poor families in
the lagging states.

Improve governance

16.

Governance indicators improved significantly during the CAS. The basis for this
improvement lay, inter alia, with the passage o f the Right to Information Act in
2005, the amendment o f the All India Service Rules to provide for fixed-term
appointments in specified posts, tax simplification with the introduction o f the
VAT; and revisions in policies governing voluntary organizations which
recognize the importance o f their role in promoting participatory systems. Partly
as a result o f these actions, several governance indicators improved:
India significantly improved i t s average rating in Transparency
International’s Corruption Perceptions Index, from 2.8 (with a confidence
range o f 2.6-3.0) in 2004 to 3.4 (with a confidence range o f 3.2-3.6) in
2008. India’s relative ranking also improved although i t fluctuated
considerably due to a clustering o f countries at i t s rating level. In 2008
India’s rating was just 0.1 below Brazil and 0.2 below Mexico and China,
three other large (and richer) nation^.^
The World Bank’s governance indicators indicated substantial
improvement in India’s percentile ranking between 2003 and 2006 in five
o f six categories, with the largest relative improvements in control o f
Only government effectiveness
corruption and regulatory quality.
registered a (slight) deterioration.

4

India’s ranking deteriorated slightly between 2006 and 2007 although its rating improved. In 2008 India,
Brazil and Mexico a l l suffered 0.1 drops in their respective ratings, which however caused greater
dispersion in relative rankings. Nevertheless all, along with China, remain within the same broad
confidence interval.

C A S ANNEX 4: FY05-08 C A S Completion Report
Page 6 of29
0

Evidence from the 2007 I C A indicates a decline (from 37% in the
previous ICA) to 28% in the proportion o f f i r m s reporting corruption as a
major obstacle. Similarly significant declines were recorded in policy
uncertainty, licensing, crime, and anti-competitive behavior.

17.

These improvements notwithstanding, governance shortcomings remain a major
obstacle to achieving better development outcomes in India. The government's
own review o f experience during the Tenth Plan acknowledges that, in spite o f
relative improvements, the scale o f the remaining governance challenges remains
daunting, particularly as they relate to delivering services to the urban and rural
poor.

18.

Overall, India's mixed record on progress towards long-term goals suggests that
two aspects o f implementation warrant hrther attention. The first aspect i s the
role and effectiveness o f centrally-sponsored schemes (CSSs) as a prime
mechanism to influence outcomes in matters that are primarily or partially the
responsibility o f state g ~ v e m m e n t s CSSs
.~
have mushroomed during recent years,
growing from $7 billion in 2002-03 to $20 billion in 2007-08. The Eleventh Plan
itself presents a critical assessment o f the performance o f CSSs, noting the lack o f
integration, with even mutually conflicting aspects, rigidity, multiplicity o f local
delivery structures, inadequate professional and technical support and a lack o f
outcome-based evaluation (but even so goes o n to propose a major expansion o f
CSSs). In addition to the shortcomings identified in the Eleventh Plan, CSSs
make very inadequate use o f local government structures in engaging
communities in their o w n development and indeed may even work to undermine
local capacity. CSS funds also increasingly bypass state treasuries, presenting
significant fiduciary risks and lack o f accountability. Given this analysis, the
effectiveness o f CSSs in scaling up development impact in India's increasingly
decentralized political and institutional environment needs carehl consideration
and monitoring. Nevertheless, CSSs have proved to be the primary vehicle by
which the national government intercedes in key areas affecting India's poor
families (and thereby promotes the MDGs as well).

19.

The second aspect o f implementation that warrants attention i s the virtual absence
o f any effective monitoring and evaluation o f development programs at both
center and state levels. Again, the Eleventh Plan provides a clear diagnosis,
identifying the lack o f baseline data, failure to identify appropriate process and
outcome indicators, inadequate mechanisms for data analysis, and failure to
follow-up when M&E does occur. An unavoidable challenge for the next CAS i s
how to introduce outcomes-based M&E in a scaled-up, sustainable manner.

20.

Before moving on to assessing the World Bank's role in helping India achieve its
long-term goals, i t i s important to note a challenge confronting India's long term
development that has only recently begun to receive significant attention and will

Centrally-sponsored schemes are programs designed and financed by the central government but
implemented by state and local governments.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 7 o f 2 9

require greater emphasis in future planning, namely the vulnerability o f India’s
population to the impact o f both climate-induced and man-made changes in
ecological systems. Heavy dependence o n the availability o f natural resources,
growing gaps in the demand and supply balance for water, an increase in the
frequency and severity o f natural disasters, and consideration o f options and
trade-offs involved in defining a viable low-carbon growth path all form part o f
an emerging long-term challenge. These elements will need to be increasingly
integrated in India’s strategic framework.

21

K e y lessons drawn from this review o f India’s recent performance in relation to
its long-term goals include the following:
0

0

0

0

The modest record o n poverty reduction confirms the relevance o f the
focus o n lagging states while the mixed results in human development
indicators suggests that service delivery issues (both access and quality)
are pervasive and persistent nationwide.
Progress across several dimensions o f governance during the CAS period
has both served to underscore the extent o f the remaining challenges and
created a positive environment for increased attention to implementing
systemic reforms.

The mixed record o f achievements in infrastructure draws attention to
issues o f implementation, especially program and project management; on
the financing side PPPs have proved to be a more complex instrument to
bring in substantial incremental resources than anticipated in the Tenth
Plan
The burgeoning growth in CSSs suggests the need for a critical evaluation
o f their architecture in an increasingly decentralized political and
administrative environment with issues o f compatibility with local
institutions, transparency and accountability, and fiduciary risk.

0

The absence o f effective “outcomes-based” systems o f monitoring and
evaluation i s a major analytic and implementation gap

0

While India’s long term strategic goals remain valid as a basis for aligning
the new CAS, one k e y analytical gap has emerged in terms o f the
significant and increasing vulnerability o f India’s population to the impact
o f both climate induced and other changes in ecological systems given the
heavy dependence, especially among India’s poor, o n the availability o f
natural resources, especially water.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 8 of 29

111. Strategic Objectives and Principles o f the 2004 CAS
22.

The main objective o f the 2004 CAS-to “maximize and leverage the diverse
resources o f the World Bank Group to dramatically scale up our impact ... [to]
help India move closer to achieving the MDGs’-should be seen in the context o f
the evolving strategy o f the WB in India over the past decade and a half.

23.

In the early 1990s, the WB helped India stabilize i t s economy through policy
reforms supported by IDA adjustment lending and investments in power, water,
and the social sectors. With the success o f stabilization measures, complemented
by exchange rate adjustments and industrial, trade, and financial sector
liberalization, in restoring growth, the scope for WB engagement in the policy
formulation and implementation process at the national level naturally shrank.
But it was apparent to both the WB and Go1 counterparts that significant
adjustments were still required at the state level to lay the basis for sustained rapid
growth.
However, the WB had had very limited experience engaging state
governments in policy dialogue supported by policy-based and investment
lending.

24.

Beginning in the mid-l99Os, the Bank began supporting state-level interventions
in those states that were willing to engage in comprehensive policy dialogue and
reform, thus demonstrating that it could work effectively at the state level and that
comprehensive state-level reforms were associated with improved outcomes in
terms o f fiscal performance, growth, poverty reduction, and, less uniformly,
public sector performance and governance. The state-level approach also
provided clear lessons o f experience in the political economy o f linking WB
assistance with comprehensive reform packages. The concentration o f WB
programs in a few reforming states (Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh,
and later Tamil Nadu) carried with i t the predictable risks of portfolio
concentration in a highly politicized context, which resulted in significant swings
in the volume o f lending and spending on analytical work. Especially during the
early years o f the shift t o state-level engagement, the residual role o f the WB at
the national level was not well-defined and dialogue with the center suffered.

25.

The 2001 CAS reinforced the “focus state” emphasis with a commitment to
support reforming states with sizable packages o f policy-based lending linked to
investment lending in key sectors. Reflecting Go1 concerns, there was a stronger
commitment to give preferential access to poorer, reforming states. In the event,
the substantial step up in WB lending foreseen in reforming states did not occur,
given the ups and downs o f political commitment, with the result that no ‘lagging’
states were able to satisfy the criteria for engagement. WE? policy dialogue and
new lending therefore concentrated on the three southern states, which, although
home to large numbers o f poor households, were generally regarded as having
good prospects.

26.

The implementation review o f the 2001 CAS, prepared in 2004, drew four lessons
from the experience with state-level engagement: i)CAS goals had been achieved

C A S ANNEX 4: FYOS-OS C A S Completion Report
Page 9 o f 29

in the focus, reforming states; ii)the ‘‘focus state” approach was too narrow and
left the bulk o f the poor unaffected by WB activities; iii)measures were needed to
deal with the unpredictability o f engagement; and iv) a concern with growth and
poverty reduction required involvement with central Go1 programs, especially in
infrastructure and human development. Contemporaneous developments in India
and globally reinforced this reassessment o f the WB’s approach. Center-state
relations had been significantly affected by a renewed emphasis o n
decentralization and strengthening the Panchayati Raj institutions, by the
provisions o f the 12th Finance Commission, and by changes in the on-lending
terms to the states for external financial support. By the early 2000s, the pace o f
national reform had slowed and growth rates appeared to have plateaued w e l l
below India’s perceived potential, giving rise to renewed interest in national
policy dialogue and engagement. Finally the development o f the MDGs and the
adoption by India o f ambitious targets led to the realization that improving the
performance o f those lagging states with large concentrations o f poverty would be
essential to achieving the MDGs, a goal to which both India and the WB were
strongly committed.
27.

As a result o f this alignment o f national and global developments with the W B ’ s
own assessment o f the 2001 CAS implementation experience, the core strategic
issue for the 2004 CAS became how to scale up impact in a national context
bearing in mind that, even with a significant step up in lending, WB resources
would continue to be a tiny portion o f the whole. The 2004 CAS proposed that
the WB tackle the challenge o f ‘scaling up’ through four measures:
0

0

modify the ground rules for enga ement with the states and center in order
to increase lending opportunities

F

apply three strategic principles: selectivity, knowledge provision and
generation, and a focus on outcomes

0

work with external partners, and

0

increase the use o f country systems.

The remainder o f this section takes stock o f the lessons learned in applying these measures
as a means o f scaling up impact.
Engagement with states and center

28.

6

In their recent retrospective, Howes, Mishra and Ravishankar (2008) summarize
the 2004 CAS approach to the states as follows: “The 2004 CAS proposed two
main new ways to give more emphasis to poor states. First, to dedicate greater
resources to engagement with them, and to provide technical assistance.

Although increased lending was not the metric for increased impact, an increase in lending volume was
perceived as necessary t o maintain a significant presence in India.

C A S ANNEX 4: FY05-08 C A S Completion Report
Page 10 o f 29

Regardless o f performance, more resources for these activities were promised for
the four poorest states o f Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh. Second, a
greater spread o f resources was promised for states that could develop reform
plans or meet good practice guidelines for at least the sector concerned. N o longer
would decisions on investment projects take into account the ‘general policy
framework’ o f the state; rather proposals from all states would be considered on
their own merit^."^ In addition to the focus on the four poorest states, the 2004
CAS also marked a hrther shift away from a limited number o f focus states in
favor o f opening up dialogue with all twelve o f India’s largest and poorest states
on the cross-cutting policy issues that constitute the basis for state-level
adjustment.

29.

This approach had some success. The engagement with Orissa deepened during
the CAS period, and from 2007 the WB engagement with Bihar began to develop
more strongly (in partnership with DFID and ADB), leading to a Development
Policy Loan (DPL). After a political breakthrough in UP in 2007, there has been
some uptake in the dialogue after a long hiatus, and discussions are currently
underway on a possible DPL. The emphasis on DPLs in the poorest states has
reinforced the benefits o f sub-national policy engagement as described in greater
detail in CAS Annex 6 and has generated a separate set o f lessons from this type
o f engagement (stretching back over the last three CAS periods). In Jharkhand,
the Bank prepared an economic report, but there has been little interest in
discussion or follow-up, partly as a result o f political instability. Despite these
achievements, by June 2008 about 10% o f the W B ’ s portfolio was accounted for
by single-state loans to the four poorest states (see Attachment Table A4.3) in
contrast to 14% o f the portfolio in June 2004.’
In contrast, the stock o f
outstanding commitments directed to the three previous focus states o f TN,
Karnataka and AP increased from 22% to 24% between these two dates. As o f
June, 2008, 12% o f single-state loans were directed toward states not among the
12 largest and poorest (a slight increase over the June 2004 figure). A notable
example o f the latter i s the significant increase in WB policy lending and
operational engagement in Himachal Pradesh, a state neither large nor poor.
Authorities have pressed the WB to increase i t s involvement in the more fragile
small states at the periphery. These states pose a clear development challenge but
could push the program hrther from i t s goal o f scaling up in relation to poverty
impact.

Howes, Stephen, Deepak Mishra, and V. J. Ravishankar (2008). A Decade of World Bank Sub-National
Policy-Based Lending to India: a Retrospective. Mimeo.
T h i s was dnven largely by a decline in the UP portfolio reflecting the hiatus in dialogue until 2007.
Among the four states, the WB’s portfolio increased only in Bihar. Outstanding loans t o Orissa and
Jharkhand remained roughly the same.
T h i s comparison o f stocks at the beginning and end o f the 2004 C A S has an arbitrary element inthat
loans approved just weeks following the end o f FY08, such as Orissa D P L I I are not included among the
single state loans although a l l the preparation and development o f the DPL program occurred within the
C A S period. The inclusion o f the Orissa DPL I1would raise the stock o f outstanding commitments in the
four poorest states to 12%.

*

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 11 o f 2 9

30.

The clear lesson i s that a change in emphasis (e.g. toward the four poorest states)
i s easier said than done. The inertia in the WB program i s considerable (given
analytical gaps in new areas, project preparation lead times, established
relationships, etc); therefore it takes determined effort and time to implement new
priorities. There will also be, in the political economic context o f India, pressures
to deviate from any limited set o f priority states, often for good reasons. The
opportunity costs o f such deviations should however be more explicitly identified
rather than simply accommodated through spreading the available resources
across an inevitably larger number o f activities.

31.

The 2004 CAS explicitly recognized that the goal o f scaling up necessarily
entailed not just expanding into the poorest states but also increasing operations at
the national level, particularly in infrastructure and human development. M u c h o f
this operational engagement was linked to the significant expansion o f CSSs
during the Tenth Plan. The impact o f WB involvement in national level schemes
i s difficult to document. Partly this i s due to variation in the way in which the
WB has engaged with CSSs and partly to great variability in the availability o f
data from the CSSs themselves. Some schemes are achieving considerable
success in terms o f outcomes, for instance primary education, HIV-AIDS, TB and
leprosy control; others are not (including the Integrated Child Development
Scheme and the scheme to reform state power utilities). The overall questioning
o f the effectiveness o f CSSs discussed under national strategies above suggests
that success in scaling up impact through support for national-level CSSs cannot
be assumed and that institutional issues related to decentralization and
implementation issues related to fiduciary control and management pose
significant risks. In the event the share o f the portfolio supportin CSSs declined
between the ends o f FY04 and FY08 (Attachment Table A4.3).
CAS Annex 8
describes in greater detail the different modalities o f WB involvement with CSSs
and the particular issues which have been identified as a result. Overall this
experience suggests that a differentiated approach is necessary. CSSs vary greatly
and the WB engagement should reflect the needs o f the particular sector and the
variety o f state experience and needs. However i t does seem clear that certain
generic criteria need to be in place: an ability to track the money down to the level
o f service provision and verify outputs, satisfactory frameworks for governance,
accountability and M&E, and a rigorous assessment o f financial and institutional
sustainability taking account o f the convergence o f multiple CSSs at the district
level. Where these elements are not h l l y in place the WB should be cautious
about involvement unless its engagement i s clearly linked to strengthening these
aspects.

’

32.

10

The CAS also envisaged that collaboration at the national level would be
expanded through AAA activities, particularly in the form o f “flagship” reports,
which would highlight key development challenges. Conceptually this makes

As with state shares, this comparison i s sensitive to time lines o f particular operations supporting CSSs.
In this case the US$521m operation supporting Vector Born Disease Control approved in July, 2008 would
increase the CSS share by over 6 percentage points to about the same level as June, 2004.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 12 of29

sense: scaling up impact must entail bringing increased knowledge to bear o n the
development challenges India faces and flagship reports are an obvious
mechanism to fulfill this goal. Certain reports clearly qualify: for example, the
2006 Development Policy Review (DPR), with i t s emphasis o n service delivery,
had a paradigm-shifting impact on how this issue was perceived in India and
therefore o n a broad range o f government as w e l l as WE3 programs. In this case
the process began with the 2004 World Development Report o n service delivery
which had a special focus o n South Asia with several key staff actually posted to
the Region (and located in the Delhi office). This enabled a strong engagement
with local stakeholders that was followed up in the DPR and consequently had
exceptionally broad synergy with Indian thinking on this issue (as reflected in the
llth
Plan for example) Similarly the reports on disability and safety nets
significantly affected the awareness o f these issues among policy-makers, WB
staff, and citizens at large. These notable successes suggest that even more
attention needs to be given to identifjmg topics for multi-year thematic AAA as
free standing WB outputs independent o f lending and linked to a set o f
monitorable outcomes. A more explicit results focus to AAA, including flagship
reports, would facilitate the dissemination and follow-up o f key findings that
characterized the DPR and social protection reports.

Strategic principles: selectivity, knowledge provision, and focus on outcomes

33.

Selectivity. Although ‘selectivity’ i s a mantra in WB strategy documents, there i s
often too l i t t l e attention to what selectivity means in a particular country context
at a given point in time, how selectivity i s intended to be achieved, and how
selectivity will contribute to the strategic objective. The 2004 CAS did define
how selectivity would operate geographically, by identifying the four ‘lagging’
states and the twelve large, poor states as priorities for WE3 activities, but it left
open the possibility o f lending in other states as long as certain criteria were met
and it also included support to national programs as a priority. As a result there
were no binding geographic constraints o n the WB program.

34.

In terms o f sectors, support to infrastructure and the M D G s was prioritized, but no
sectors were excluded. The primary mechanism to achieve this rather broad
degree o f selectivity involved the application o f guidelines or “rules o f
engagement”. The rules o f engagement were meant to ensure that that lending
(and to a lesser extent AAA) in each sector took place under those conditions
which were, given existing knowledge, considered necessary to achieve the
intended outcomes. Thus, by ensuring that WB activities would not go forward
unless the (presumed) conditions for success were in place, the guidelines were
intended to contribute to scaling up impact. The implicit assumption was that the
application o f the guidelines would limit the number o f successful lending
proposals by raising the entry bar and thereby provide a “self-enforcing”
mechanism to achieve higher impact through more selective lending.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 13 o f 2 9

35.

Experience with the guidelines has been mixed. In the absence o f more
systematic M&E than currently exists at the project level, it i s difficult to draw
general conclusions about the contribution o f the guidelines toward better project
outcomes. However, i t does appear that the guidelines have had greater impact o n
the quality o f the operations when they have covered specific elements o f project
design than when they focused on more generic sector-wide factors. In those
sectors with high client demand for operations (especially at the state level), WB
staff have pointed to the value o f the guidelines in ensuring project readiness and
quality at entry. Indeed some proposed projects were not taken up because they
did not meet the guidelines (e.g. rural electrification and rural water supply and
sanitation (RWSS)). In those sectors with a small number o f operations or
operations developed in response to special “one-off’ challenges, the usefulness
o f sector specific guidelines has been less clear.

36.

Guidelines were also developed by Go1 for DPLs, to ensure that states wishing to
access policy-based lending had in place appropriate fiscal management programs
in line with national fiscal goals. This set o f guidelines did function effectively to
ensure that state DPLs achieved their goals, especially in terms o f improved
fiscal performance, but did little to prioritize across activities or states in relation
to the CAS poverty objectives (as the HP program attests).

37.

In a program as broad as the India program, selectivity i s usually taken to imply a
reduction in the number o f activities with the presumed intention o f achieving a
greater concentration o f resources to enhance design and implementation and
thereby achieve higher quality operations. The guidelines have made only a
limited contribution to such a result.
Incentives for inclusion in the work
program have continued to dominate mechanisms for selectivity resulting in a
large number o f projects under preparation at most points in time during the CAS
period. Delivery ratios also declined (for AAA, for instance, 77% o f tasks planned
in 2005 were completed, while in 2007 the ratio was 58%). In some cases, the
guidelines could have actually worked in a perverse manner as staff “nursed”
along potential activities in anticipation that they would eventually qualify. If the
goal o f selectivity i s in fact to free up resources to improve implementation, fund
M&E adequately, strengthen dissemination and follow-up, then the key lesson
from the experience with guidelines would seem to be that there i s little substitute
for more explicit and transparent gate-keeping for the operational and AAA
program.

38.

Knowledge provision. The principle of knowledge provision and generation has
had notable successes in the approach to scaling up. The role o f flagship reports
has been noted above. In addition, there have been notable synergies between
AAA and lending-e.g., the state economic reports and DPLs, the AAA on credit
and financial markets followed by related lending and TA. WBI also made
contributions to knowledge provision and generation in a diverse set o f areas
including the sensitive link between CSSs and RTI, benchmarking India in the
context o f the 2005 Knowledge Assessment, and enhancing the quality o f training
through, e.g. capacity certification programs. With the expansion o f the W B ’ s

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 14 of29

involvement across states and at the center, demand-driven policy advice has also
assumed a more significant role in the form o f both policy notes and NLTA. The
latter has grown dramatically during the CAS period, from 7% o f AAA in 2005 to
33% in 2008. QAG’s assessment o f the India AAA program in 2006 rated the
overall program as satisfactory but pointed out several areas for improvement,
focusing particularly o n a lack o f coherence in the overall program. Further
analysis by the C M U suggested that this was due in part to the lack of a
systematic outcome-based approach to the identification o f AAA activities, lack
o f a clearly defined AAA product mix linking audience and purpose, and muddled
relationships between lending and AAA which can taint policy recommendations.
In addition, Q A G suggested better application o f international experience, more
explicit attention to follow-up, greater use o f local research capacity, and greater
attention to cross-sector knowledge sharing. These factors have limited the
contribution that the AAA program has made to scaling up impact. Ultimately,
transferring and generating knowledge and applying it through effective
implementation is the key to scaling up impact. Experience during the
implementation o f the 2004 CAS indicates that achieving this goal is mutually
dependent o n i t s sister principles o f focusing on outcomes and selectivity.

39.

Focus on outcomes. To what extent did the implementation o f the C A S indeed
focus o n development outcomes, as anticipated in the CAS outcomes matrix?
The 2007 Portfolio Review analyzed in detail the degree to which WB activities
could be linked in a results chain to monitorable outcomes and found marked
differences across sectors in defining CAS outcomes, identifying indicators, and
recording progress. W h i l e most sectors had identified elements o f a results chain,
roughly half the sectors failed to distinguish clearly between outcomes and
outputs and to identify how activities under the CAS contributed to outcomes.
This was particularly a shortcoming o f activities which focused o n policy
dialogue, capacity building, analytic work and other forms o f formal and informal
support. These types o f activities were often misconstrued as outcomes in their
own right rather considered as outputs which then required further steps in the
results chain to lead to intended outcomes. Even if outcomes had been well
identified, there was often very little reporting on outcome indicators. Overall the
Portfolio Assessment exercise confirmed that the degree to which the focus on
outcomes had been implemented was unsatisfactory.

Work with external partners

40.

A third measure proposed in the CAS to scale up impact was working more
closely with external partners. The WB did engage with several partners in the
implementation o f the CAS, primarily DFID. Based o n their shared objectives,
the WB and DFID entered into a Strategic Partnership in 2005. The Partnership,
whose main instrument was a $35 million Trust Fund, was explicitly geared to
support implementation o f the CAS, especially in lagging states, and in particular
Bihar, which was a focus state for both the WB and DFID. An independent
evaluation o f this partnership concluded that the TF resources executed by the
WB had played a significant role in enhancing WB analytical work, but that they

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS CompletionReport
Page 15 o f 29

could have been deployed more strategically rather than spread quite broadly and
unevenly across dozens o f WB activities (see Attachment Table A4.7 which
shows the breakdown o f DFID TF support to AAA tasks). Even though DFID and
the WB shared the overall strategy o f the CAS, a more strategic use o f partnership
resources across fewer activities would likely have made a greater contribution to
the scaling up the CAS impact. A second window o f DFID TF resources was
intended for recipient executed activities. These remained almost entirely
unutilized within the time frame o f the TF and those few activities which did
develop required extensive WB implementation support which had neither been
foreseen in planning the implementation o f the TF nor in allocating WB budget
resources.
Use of country systems

41.

Finally, the CAS anticipated that the enhanced use o f country systems would
facilitate scaling up impact through the increased use o f SWAps and other
instruments. The CAS was correct in its identification o f both SWAps and greater
reliance on country systems as important parallel instruments to promote scaling
up. However, it significantly overestimated how extensively and rapidly a shift to
pooling WB resources with the government budget under a common framework
could be made and therefore the degree to which SWAps could be used. SWAps
were in the end used only in education (SSA1 and 2) and RWSS (Uttarakhand and
Punjab). The parallel shift to greater reliance on country systems proved even
more problematic. While the education SWAP has performed well using country
systems for both procurement and financial management, indicators o f corruption
affecting several operations in the health sector (all o f which pre-dated the 2004
CAS and which were not in fact relying on country systems) led the WB to carry
out two investigations by the WB Department o f Institutional Integrity (INT) in
health and transport and one Detailed Implementation Reviews (DIR) in health.
Significant implementation gaps and capacity issues related to all aspects o f
project management, but emerged especially in financial management and
procurement.

42.

The findings o f the DIR helped define a broad agenda o f changes related to
project design, WB project implementation support, procurement, financial
management, and analytical work on supply chain management and the
competitive environment in which project contracting takes place (Box A4.1
outlines the key findings o f the DIR). As a result, by the end o f the CAS period, a
modified business model for WB operations in India began to emerge, one which
places much greater emphasis on up-front identification o f project management
risks including those o f fraud and corruption and looks to a broad-based systemic
response to manage those risks. This process, beginning with the DIR itself and
carrying over to the DIR follow-up action plan, i s intended to result in a
significant strengthening o f WB support to building effective country systems.
But initially at least, the process has reinforced a degree o f risk aversion in project
implementation leading to further delays in the use o f existing country systems.
Overall the process o f helping to build systems capacity in order to scale up

CAS ANNEX 4: FY0.5-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 16 o f 2 9

impact has become m o r e t i m e consuming and resource intensive than had been
anticipated in the 2004 CAS.
Box A4.1: Lessonsfrom the Detailed Implementation Review of the Health Sector

The India Program extracted many lessons from the Detailed Implementation Review (DIR)
o f five operations in the health sector. Although none o f these operations were initiated in the
2004 CAS period (indeed four o f them had closed by 2005), the DIR was conducted during
the CAS period and released in January 2008. An exhaustive review o f the DIR and i t s
implications for WB activities in the health sector and more broadly in India has been
conducted with GoI. In parallel, the WB also undertook an in depth internal review o f i t s
business practices in India. Some o f the key lessons that have emerged out o f these initiatives
are:
There are major weaknesses in India’s fiduciary systems that were not adequately
addressed as part o f project design or implementation. In a federal country as large and as
diverse as India is, ring-fencing o f Bank-financed projects i s not a viable or sustainable
solution and undermines the potential development impact o f that support. Therefore the
emphasis must be o n systemic improvements.
WB r i s k assessments have been partial and did not systematically take into account fraud
and corruption. Moreover, they have not been integrated nor linked to project design.
There are gaps understanding the extent o f competition, structure o f costs and quality
standards in the sectors that supply Bank-financed operations.
The WB has not adequately monitored c o n t r a c t s 4 r alternatively, has not ensured that
reliable systems were in place to do this-from contract award to delivery to end users.
The vulnerabilities and critical points o f supply chains have not been identified.
Information on project implementation progress and performance was lacking,
fragmented, or not shared among teams. There was reliance o n too few sources o f
information. Even when beneficiaries and users voiced their complaints, those voices
were not necessarily heard and, when audits and post-reviews cited anomalies, those
observations may have gone unheeded.

43.

S u m m i n g up, this section argued that the strategic objective o f scaling up impact
made sense in the context o f the WB’s strategy in India over the previous decade;
but that the measures identified to achieve scaling up, although conceptually
appropriate, encountered unanticipated implementation obstacles in some critical
aspects. K e y lessons which have emerged on the W B ’ s strategy include:
Implementing a shift in p r i o r i t y to lagging states takes patience and
perseverance g i v e n political economy considerations, institutional
m o m e n t u m and countervailing client pressures. Strong management
guidance and f l e x i b i l i t y in instruments are required with results u n l i k e l y to
emerge inj u s t one CAS period.
Selectivity needs to b e clearly defined in terms o f fewer activities and
implemented through management guidance; indirect mechanisms
(guidelines for engagement) are too easily subverted by the p o w e r f u l
incentives for task proliferation. Guidelines for engagement can however
b e an useful tool to enhance operational quality if they incorporate

C A S ANNEX 4: FY05-08 C A S Completion Report
Page 17 of29

conditions for success linked to both project design and project context (at
the sector or macro level).
0

Successfully focusing on outcomes will require a business model that fully
incorporates M&E as a core implementation activity

0

Increasing the use o f country systems as a means to scale up impact must
occur in a context o f increased attention to project and program
management risks, including fraud and corruption, which require
increasing the fiduciary robustness o f those systems.

0

Analytic work can raise the profile o f key issues in India’s development
agenda (thereby contributing to scaling up) if it i s organized so as to bring
both global expertise and global experts into sustained interaction with
Indian circumstances and stakeholders

IV. Progress towards CAS Outcomes

44.

How well did the WB contribute to India’s long-term goals? The 2004 CAS
program was organized around three pillars: improve government effectiveness;
invest in people and empower communities; and promote private sector-led
growth. These were further subdivided into nine program areas, with twenty
specific outcomes, which were meant to be “intermediate outcomes” with respect
to the long-term goals. These intermediate outcomes were considered to be
subject to WB influence even though the overall role o f the WB in India was
minor.’
This section briefly reviews progress in the nine program areas and the
main lessons learned from this review. The ratings assigned by staff to each
program area are in line with those reported in the 2007 CAS Progress Report.
This summary draws on a very rich body o f learning from experience: Attachment
A4.4 documents the detailed responses from the India Country Team in the
format o f the 2004 CAS Outcomes Matrix while Attachment A4.5 provides a r i c h
inventory o f lessons extracted from IEG’s reviews o f project ICRs during this
period.

’

A. Improving Government Effectiveness

45.

Strengthening Fiscal Management and Reallocating Public Resources to Priority
Areas for the Poor
0

Achievements. Strong progress was made: After adopting the Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management Act, the central government made
significant progress in reducing the fiscal deficit, from about 8% o f GDP

l1Some supposedly intermediate outcomes were clearly well beyond the WB’s influence, such as
“maintain financial stability” under the 9” goal, Fostering the Competitive Economy.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 18 o f 29

during 2002-04 to 4.5 % by the end o f the CAS period (2007-08)12 Some
23 state governments adopted similar fiscal responsibility legislation,
committing themselves to make progress toward the goal o f a 3% overall
fiscal deficit. W h i l e the fiscal situation has deteriorated somewhat in 2008
(initially because o f increased fuel subsidies subsequently compounded by
a slowdown in growth related to the global credit crisis) the Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management Acts remain a key step towards
stronger fiscal management. The Bank has played a key role in DPL
states through dialogue and capacity building. The allocation o f public
spending for social sectors has generally increased.
Emerging lessons. At the state level, high-level political support i s critical
to the ownership o f reforms, and an overall fiscal reform strategy achieves
better results than a narrow or exclusive focus on the contribution to fiscal
imbalances o f one or two sectors (such as power or water tariffs). There is
considerable and largely untapped potential for learning across states.
46.

Improving Governance and Service Delivery

0

Achievements. Moderate progress. The WB contributed to the national
dialogue on accountability through the 2006 Development Policy Review,
as well as capacity building at the central, state, and community level
through livelihoods and decentralization projects. Social audits and
community scorecards have been established in AP, MP, and Rajasthan
making use o f the space created by the RTI Act. . The RTI implementation
mechanism has been strengthened and is being monitored in 7 focus states
through DPLs, AAA reports, and policy dialogue. However, service
delivery remains extremely weak, especially in low-income states.
Improvements are underway in public procurement and financial
management in several states, assisted through analytical work, but much
remains to be done.
Emerging Lessons. RTI cannot be overestimated as a core accountability
reform but its effective use requires on the ground capacity. A systems
approach i s essential to improve financial management and procurement at
the state level

B. Investing in People and Empowering Communities
47.

Empowering Communities
0

Achievements. Strong progress. In addition to the five ongoing rural
livelihood programs (in AP, Chhattisgarh, MP, Rajasthan, and Tamil
Nadu) two new ones for Orissa and Bihar were approved in FY09, and
new, expanded programs are being designed for MP, and possibly the
Northeast. The focus o f the approach i s through group formation (such as
self-help groups) and their federations, facilitating access to productive

'*The average fiscal deficit during the whole CAS period was 6.4%.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 19 o f 2 9

0

48.

Educational Attainment for All
0

0

49.

assets and linking up with business opportunities. The WB played a
crucial role in supporting scaling up in Andhra Pradesh, where
government commitment i s strongest, and disseminating lessons o f
experience across states (an example i s a recent presentation o f the AP
program at a workshop for Eastern low-income states). Social and
economic empowerment approaches were also implemented through
watershed and forestry projects in AP, HP, Karnataka, and Uttarakhand.
Emerging Lessons. Linkages with microfinance service providers and the
banking sector can be very important in expanding credit available to
group members beyond consumption needs to economic activities, but
training and group strengthening are essential for success. Experience
suggests that impact can be augmented when WB-supported livelihood
activities and government programs are managed in a coordinated way at
the grassroot level. Successful scaling up also requires an M&E approach
tailored to the demand-driven aspects o f livelihoods programs.

Achievements. Moderate progress, as the historic achievement o f
reducing the number o f out-of-school children from 25 m i l l i o n in 2003 to
7.6 m i l l i o n in 2007 was tempered by lack o f significant progress o n
learning achievements. The WB participated with other donors in
supporting the primary education scheme SSA. While the W B ’ s financial
contribution was small, it played a catalytic role in bringing about
improvements in tracking performance on expenditures, outputs, and
outcomes.
Emerging Lessons. A holistic, comprehensive approach under SWAP
arrangements contributed to greater efficiency and harmonization o f multidonor participation in the SSA and to improvements in country systems.
Decentralized, flexible planning with alternative modes o f service delivery
linked to local conditions mitigated the risks generally associated with
Centrally-Sponsored Schemes, as did a strong emphasis o n M&E, capacity
building and an effective use o f donor TA for a strong MIS system with
accountability to decentralized institutions. The role o f c i v i l society
organizations in increasing public awareness, changes in the legal
framework and political priorities and public funding a l l contributed to
program success. On the negative side, inputs to improve quality had
limited impact due to mechanistic implementation. Learning assessment
systems have been slow to provide data.

Reducing the Health Risks o f the Poor
0

Achievements.
Limited progress. Gains on infant mortality rate,
institutional births, family planning, and understanding o f A I D S have been
accompanied by declining immunization rates, persistently high maternal
mortality, and unacceptable and stubbornly high levels o f malnutrition.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 20 o f 29

0

50.

The Bank invested heavily in health and achieved notable success in the
programs for TB and H I V / A I D S (see below), but poor performance in
implementation in both state and central programs, as documented by the
DIR clouded successes.
Emerging Lessons. Weak project management systems to track the supply
chain from issuing a contract to delivery o f services and weak
accountabilities to deliver results need to be addressed systemically.

Controlling Infectious Disease
Achievements. Moderate progress. Capacity and management o f AIDS
programs at national, state, and district level have been strengthened; the
target to eradicate leprosy was largely achieved; TB treatment i s available
in 80% o f the country; but polio, which i s heavily concentrated in UP, i s
not yet fully eradicated.
Emerging Lessons. CSSs, such as those used to fight infectious diseases,
must take a decentralized approach with community participation;
knowledge dissemination and dialogue play an important role in
improving service delivery; WB support to CSSs should de-link financing
and knowledge/TA.

C. Promoting Private Sector-Led Growth

5 1.

Provision o f Adequate Infrastructure
0

0

52.

Achievements. Moderate progress was achieved: the national highways
and rural roads networks were developed further with Bank support,
yielding improvements in road conditions and reductions in travel time
and cost but road safety failed to improve. Ineffective competition in
supply industries hampered progress. D P L operations yielded satisfactory
outcomes for expanded access to electricity in rural areas in AP and
Orissa. PowerGrid, the transmission operator, continued to strengthen i t s
operations.
Emerging Lessons. Upstream just-in-time TA support can help improve
the project planning process; institutional development and governance
(e.g. separation o f resource planning from service delivery) are critical to
sector management; stakeholder consultations need to be broad-based to
ensure that all affected interests are taken into account.

Accelerating Rural Growth
0

Achievements. Moderate progress was achieved: available information
shows that crop yields went up substantially in areas covered by some
Bank projects (for instance on land reclaimed under the UP Sodic Lands
project). Water use efficiency increased in some o f the areas covered by

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 21 o f 29

irrigation projects, with higher cropping intensity. The supply o f credit to
rural households also increased in some project areas.
Emerging Lessons. Agricultural policy reform i s highly politically
sensitive. Continuity in policy dialogue, supported by high-quality AAA
that provides evidence and documentation o f the impact o f existing
policies i s essential to build consensus for reform.
53.

Fostering the Competitive Economy
Achievements. Strong progress was achieved in financial markets:
deposits and credit expanded and banks’ non-performing loans were
reduced.
The third round o f the Investment Climate Assessment,
conducted in 2007, documented significant improvements.
Emerging Lessons. Selective investment to support credit institutions can
improve sustainability and system stability; benchmarking exercises create
strong traction for reform; high-quality AAA buys a seat at the table and
creates demand for further services. The WB can play an important role in
peer-to-peer learning among counterparts.

V. Bank Performance

54.

Lending and AAA. The targets set out in the 2004 CAS for lending and AAA
were achieved, with average lending o f U S $ 2.6 billion per year during the CAS
period. The 2004 CAS did not put any limits on the growth o f lending (other than
those imposed by IDA availability and the Single-Borrower Limit for IBRD) and
lending expanded from US$7.6 billion under the 2001 CAS to US$10.2 billion.
However the CAS implementation experience suggests that, while scaling up
lending was necessary to ensure a continuing “seat at the table”, there is no
necessary link between scaling up lending and scaling up impact. There will need
to be a continuing strong emphasis on removing other constraints to scaling up
impact.

55.

The lending and AAA programs as executed were filly consistent with the
priorities set in the CAS. While there were considerable delays in project
preparation, these were, in many cases, linked to the application o f the “guidelines
for engagement” which, as discussed, encouraged project teams to maintain
projects in the portfolio in anticipation that the guidelines would eventually be
met. In terms o f numbers, dropped projects were concentrated in the first year o f
CAS implementation as the new focus on states with high concentrations o f poor
families took hold. Lack o f actual state demand relative to the initially anticipated
state uptake in priority areas also played a role as did delays in the
implementation o f the Government’s infrastructure program and in the emergence
o f an operational dialogue around climate change and environmental issues.
Finally the program o f urban lending that had been foreseen in the CAS was set
back by the controversy which erupted around the W B ’ s proposed loan to the
Delhi Water Board early during the CAS period. This episode underscored the
importance o f the political economic context for WB operations and resulted in

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 22 o f 29

several important lessons for WB operations which are described in B o x A4.2.
The AAA program totaled about US$32 million o f which about a third was
contributed by trust funds. The program was executed largely as planned.
Attachment Tables A4.6 and A4.7 provide details on the composition and costing
o f lending and AAA during the 2004 CAS period.
Box A4.2: Political Economy in Project Development: Lending for Urban
Water Supply during the 2004 CAS-the Delhi Water Board

In 2004, allegations from a number of. NGOs regarding the W B ’ s role in
reforming the Delhi water supply resulted in the WB withdrawing the Delhi
Urban Water Supply Project from its lending program. The allegations which
received extensive media coverage misrepresented the role o f the WB in
relation to the introduction o f cost recovery; but the resulting controversy led
to a public distancing from the project by the Delhi government. As a result
the ability o f WB to engage with other cities in water supply operations was
significantly set back. W h i l e this episode reinforced the importance o f
ensuring clear progress towards full cost recovery, strong autonomy o f service
providers and a poverty focus through targeted subsidies and project design,
the unsatisfactory operational outcome highlighted several important lessons
which have broad applicability to the W B ’ s activities in India: (i)
the necessity
o f a full and transparent consultation process between the borrower and key
stakeholders before finalizing project design; (ii)agreement among
stakeholders on measures to protect the poor consistent with efficiency and
sustainability as underlying principles for arriving at appropriate project
design; (iii)an explicit treatment o f the political economic context, assessing
commitment and ownership as part o f project risks; (iv) willingness and
preparedness by the WB to take full and public responsibility for i t s technical
recommendations while ensuring a similar upfront commitment to
transparency and disclosure by the borrower.

56.

Portfolio performance.
Portfolio performance improved considerably during
FY05-06 and deteriorated subsequently. As shown in Chart A4.1 below,
disbursements improved at the beginning o f the CAS period, touched a record
high o f 25.3% in FY06, but then declined to a 5-year l o w o f 18.3% in FY08, and
are now lagging behind the WB average. The downturn in disbursement in FY08
was due to a combination o f poor performance in some sectors (Agriculture &
Rural Development, Finance, Health, and Urban), in some states (Himachal
Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, and Uttarakhand), and in some CSSs
(e.g. R C H 2, NAP) and financial intermediaries (notably, the $600 million Rural
Credit Cooperatives project, which has had a slow start).

57.

Portfolio riskiness, in terms o f net commitments at risk, has increased over the
CAS period, touching a 5-year high o f 23% in FY08, again above the WB
average. Overall, the Transport and Urban sectors constitute about half o f total

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 23 of29

net commitments at risk. State-wise, three out o f seven projects in Karnataka and
two out o f five in Tamil Nadu are problem projects.
58.

While the level o f riskiness in FY08 may reflect a more realistic rating by task
teams in the aftermath o f the Health Sector DRYthe combined l o w disbursement
ratio and high riskiness at end-FY08 are a serious cause for concern. Efforts have
been on-going to turn around portfolio performance during the CAS period. These
have included periodic portfolio reviews in major borrowing states (e.g. Uttar
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Rajasthan) and the annual joint DEA / Bank
sector portfolio reviews. Other steps have included: (i)
monitoring portfolio
performance through monthly portfolio performance indicators (circulated both
within and outside the Bank), (ii)
a more rigorous review o f implementation
support objectives, including timing and outputs (e.g. letters / aide memoires), and
(iii)
a ground-breaking study conducted by the India CMU o n aide memoires
intended to improve the quality o f these outputs resulting in a better follow-up o n
agreed actions. The bi-annual S A R regional portfolio reviews have been used to
refocus attention o n areas o f concern in the portfolio such as the focus o n results.
Nevertheless it seems clear that improving portfolio performance will need both
continued attention and, most likely, enhanced resources during the next CAS
period.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 24 o f 29

Chart A4.1: Summary Portfolio Performance Indicators
hdia: Summary Portfolio k r f o r m n c e Indicators
30.0

I

FY04

I+Rojects

59.

at risk

I

16.0

FY05

1

14.0

1
1

FY06
11.0

1
1

W 07
12.0

W08

1.

23.0

+Com’bwnts

at risk

22.0

9.0

15.4

18.0

23.0

+Disbursemnt

ratb

19.9

23.5

25.3

21.9

18.3

I

Two key issues arose during the implementation o f the portfolio: i)the DIR in the
health sector; and ii)an Inspection Panel case regarding resettlement under the
Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP). The DIR and its implications have
been discussed in para. 42 and Box A4.1 above.
Resettlement and
rehabilitation(R&R) under M U T P escalated to the Inspection Panel following a
series o f complaints particularly from larger shopkeepers who were being
relocated under the project. Their situation presented a heretofore unencountered
set o f R&R issues which had not been foreseen during project preparation.
Neither was the issue adequately addressed by the project authorities nor taken up
with sufficient urgency early-on as part o f WB implementation support. As a
result the situation on the ground deteriorated leading to the Inspection Panel
intervention and a brief period during which project disbursements were
suspended. The resolution o f issues raised by the Panel reflected intensive and
constructive involvement by WB staff. Box A4.3 presents the key elements o f this
case including several important lessons relevant to portfolio implementation.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 25 of29

Box A4.3
Mumbai Urban Transport Project - Inspection Panel and Resettlement Action Plan

The Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP) i s a landmark project in urban transport
and resettlement and rehabilitation (R&R) in India and worldwide. I t addresses urgently
needed rail and road infrastructure in Mumbai. I t was also the first attempt in a WB
project to resettle large numbers o f people in an urban area. The project was subject to an
Inspection Panel investigation primarily but not exclusively because project authorities
failed to consult with and address the resettlement needs o f larger shopkeepers. WB
disbursement was suspended partially during March-June 2006. The suspension was
lifted following the Government o f Maharashtra (GoM) having substantially addressed
implementation issues, including the resettlement procedures for shopkeepers with
medium- and large-size shops, restoration o f incomes, post-resettlement services,
baseline data, grievance redress mechanisms. The WB also intensified i t s implementation
support and established a local presence through an R&R expert based in Mumbai. The
media has acknowledged the W B ’ s developmental role.
Lessons Learned & Opportunities. The project has produced a number o f additional

benefits and lessons learned, particularly on the process o f institution building and the
restoration o f the livelihoods o f the affected persons, which can contribute to a more
inclusive, participative urban development process. It has given a good insight into the
challenges o f Urban India and the role that the Bank can play in this context. Specific
lessons learned include the following, many o f which have fed into the design o f
operations Bank-wide:
e

a

a

e

e

e

e

The WB can play a developmental role to foster a slow but gradual change from a
bureaucratic to a more sustainable and consultative approach to resettlement in
this case, making the transition from an administrative “compensation” oriented
approach towards a “win-win” negotiated, problem-solving approach in dealing
with shopkeepers;
Entitlement o f all affected persons i s a key aspect o f successful R&R: in the
MUTP case, almost 98% o f affected persons were non-title holders; now under
the project, they have received ownership title o f their resettlement houses or
shops, enhancing their living standards (e.g. better quality houses, access to water
and sanitation);
R&R must begin with a transparent l i s t o f eligible affected persons through a
baseline survey and public disclosure reduced scope for confusion among people;
A transparent and accountable grievance redress mechanism through recognized
committees enhances credibility and ownership;
The capacity o f both NGOs and government agencies to handle complex
resettlement issues and oversee the coordination with the civil works must be
rigorously assessed and strengthened as required;
Post-resettlement support to improve sustainable self management by the resettled
people in their new environment is important; and most critically,
Consultation and communication bv the relevant authorities throughout the

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 26 of29

project cycle must be an integral part o f implementation and routinely monitored
as part o f the WB’s implementation support.

60.

IFC.

India i s a focus country for IFC, and remains a priority for IFC in
delivering its mandate o f poverty reduction through private sector development.
India i s IFC’s second largest country exposure with investments in over 112
companies totaling $3.01 billion for IFC’s o w n account and $606 m i l l i o n for the
account o f participants (as o f August 31, 2008) - a substantial increase from the
US$ 1.3 1 billion in June, 2005. IFC made its largest commitments o f $1.05 billion
in India in FY07 and FY08, up from $412 m i l l i o n in FY05.

61.

The quality o f IFC’s loan portfolio improved with the health o f the corporate
sector and with lower interest rates which reduced the burden o f debt service o n
the corporate sector over most o f the CAS period (though interest rates have risen
in the recent past as the central bank has sought to control inflation). During
FY05-08, IFC investments were spread across a number o f major sectors, with
infrastructure becoming the largest exposure followed by the financial sector and
general manufacturing. IFC’s infrastructure exposure including energy (all power,
including captive power generation, gas transmission, renewable energy etc),
logistics, transport, water and sanitation and solid waste management) has
increased from 14% o f IFC’s portfolio at the end o f FY 2006 to 23% in 2007 and
33% at the end o f June 2008. While rapidly developing industrial sectors such as
pulp and paper, steel products and chemicals form a large part o f the
manufacturing portfolio, investments were increasingly made in sectors such as
infrastructure, IT, pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, in areas where regional
demand was growing or new businesses were being established (see Annex 1 for
more detail).

62.

Quality of products and services.
Overall the quality o f WB products and
services as measured by QAG and IEG during the CAS period can be assessed as
satisfactory and well in line with WB averages. Attachment Table A4.8
summarizes IEG ratings for India projects during the previous two CAS periods.
WB and borrower overall performance were rated somewhat more highly during
the later period. A more thematic overview suggests three areas in which WB
performance evolved significantly during the CAS period in relation to the quality
o f WB products and services, namely: i)the risk-reward trade-off; ii)the
specification o f results chains including M&E; and iii)the role o f knowledge.
Each o f these key quality issues opened up significantly during the CAS period
and remains to be resolved. Perhaps the most salient o f these is the reassessment
o f the risk-reward trade-off in individual operations and the portfolio overall. As
WB staff shifted their focus to lagging states and MDG-linked CSSs during this
CAS period, they became aware o f an increased set o f risks associated with weak
project management, fiduciary and procurement systems especially in the lagging
states and in those CSSs which used implementation arrangements lacking in
transparency and accountability.
The DIR heightened and sharpened this

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS CompletionReport
Page 27 o f 29

awareness with its analysis o f both borrower and WB shortfalls in project design,
management and supervision. This ratcheted up the whole risk side o f the
equation both at project and portfolio levels. At the same time, the potential
development outcomes linked to improved performance in lagging states (such as
Orissa and Bihar) and successes such as primary education enrolment and T B
eradication suggested that at least in some areas the CAS priorities were achieving
higher impact. Nevertheless it became apparent that program implementation
required a much more systemic approach to the new classes o f risk that had been
identified, including fraud and corruption. The WB responded with a significant
shift o f resources into FM and procurement support and a rethinking o f the basic
approach to project supervision contributing to a possible new business model.
However this process o f change and adaptation to new circumstances was not
altogether smooth. At certain points client responsiveness suffered as the basis
for reassessing risks in particular sectors or states was less well communicated
particularly at the early stages. During the next CAS period the WB will need to
integrate a revised risk-reward calculus into the overall WB strategy through new
ways o f doing business.
63.

While the CAS was clear that scaling up impact o f WB activities requires a more
systematic and rigorous identification o f the results chain running from WB
activities as inputs through to ultimate impact, the quality o f WB performance
was often affected by the fact that the WB role in India will often be at the
margins or in a supportive role to core processes. This seems particularly true for
advisory services and capacity building activities for which outputs have been
often confused with outcomes, as documented in the‘2007 Portfolio Review. The
inadequate specification o f outcome indicators and collection o f baseline data is a
serious compounding factor. In the absence o f a program- wide commitment to
developing and implementing an M&E system, this shortfall i s likely to persist
with a continuing negative impact on the W B ’ s overall development
effectiveness. Under the next CAS the WB will need to integrate M&E and a
more rigorous specification o f the results chain into i t s emerging business model
for WB operations.

64.

The third aspect o f WB performance with a strong link to quality i s the increasing
recognition o f the role o f knowledge as a key driver in the India-WB relationship
whether as embodied knowledge in the project portfolio or free-standing
knowledge products in the AAA menu. Based on operational experience during
the CAS period, WB staff perception o f the value potential o f knowledge services
has eclipsed the role foreseen in the 2004 CAS. But management systems for
identifying AAA priorities, providing follow-up and effective dissemination and
outreach to relevant stakeholders, promoting partnerships with Indian institutions,
ensuring quality and cost effectiveness held back this potential and at the same
time discouraged staff and counterparts/partners alike. The first corrective step
could be more proactive management o f knowledge inputs and outputs across all
product lines. Building on the progress made under the 2004 CAS toward a more
systematic knowledge-based program will be a key step in developing a more
“MIC” oriented relationship with India.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 28 o f 2 9

65.

Country Dialogue. At the central level, Go1 authorities continued to maintain
strong oversight o f the WB program through the coordination o f the Department
o f Economic Affairs (DEA). Working level relationships with central l i n e
ministries and the major states are comprehensive and detailed. This i s greatly
facilitated by the presence o f the C M U management and virtually all sector lead
specialists in Delhi along with a large contingent o f TTLs and team members.
Three aspects o f dialogue have particularly benefited from this high degree o f
decentralization:
0

The authorities have increasingly drawn o n “just-in-time” support from
WB staff to provide informal but technically demanding in uts into
Plan, 12th and 13t? Finance
important national processes such as the 1lth
Commissions and other high level bodies, such as the High Level
Committee o n Financial Sector Reforms. Such relationships enhance
immeasurably the effectiveness o f WB-Go1 collaboration.
The WB and authorities are better able jointly solve problems that could
otherwise hamper or even derail the relationship. During the CAS period
such problems arose in the context o f the DIR and the MUTP Inspection
Panel case. Through intensive dialogue that would have not been possible
without co-location, the authorities and WB management were able to
manage these difficult episodes so as to maintain a focus on achieving the
potential for positive development impact..
WBI decentralized i t s operations to South Asia during starting in 2005 in
an important departure from the norm, with emerging evidence o n the
difference that can make to the depth, reach, and effectiveness o f capacity
building support.

Consultation and engagement with c i v i l society stakeholders developed
significantly during the CAS period building, inter alia, on the lessons learned
from the Delhi urban water supply experience (see B o x A4.2) and the experience
o f working more closely with many state and local organizations in the
implementation o f operations supporting rural livelihoods, decentralization, and
human development. This has opened the possibility for an even richer
engagement with c i v i l society at the state and regional level during the next CAS
period.

VI. Conclusions
66.

The main conclusion o f this Completion Report is that the WB was successful in a
modest scaling up o f lending (primarily in states in which the WB had already
established a working relationship) and in deepening i t s engagement in selected
low-income states while continuing to work with national-level programs and
entities and development partners. I t effectively supported central and state efforts
to strengthen fiscal management, expand k e y programs aimed at reaching the
M D G s (particularly primary education and rural empowerment programs), and

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report
Page 29 o f 29

encourage private sector-led growth. There was also progress in scaling up
impact as foreseen in the 2004 CAS particular but this was more limited than
anticipated. The key lesson i s that initiatives in a large, complex and largely
client driven program take can have only incremental impact in a single CAS
period and need to be sustained over the long term to generate significant impact.
The strong focus on service delivery to which the WB made major contributions
during the 2004 CAS period has taken root broadly in India. If buttressed by
follow-through on the initial steps to enhance M&E, strengthen implementation
including project management and accountability, focus AAA services better, and
exercise greater selectivity around CAS goals, the 2004 CAS will have made a
strong start toward greater development impact in the context o f the intrinsically
modest role that the WE3 (and all external agencies) play in this latest phase o f
India’s “great experiment.”

Attachments:

Attachment A4.1:
Attachment A4.2:
Attachment Table A4.3:
Attachment A4.4:
Attachment A4.5 :

IFC Portfolio and Performance
GO1 Initiatives
State wise Composition o f WB Portfolio FY04 -FY08
CAS C R Outcomes Matrix

Attachment A4.6 :
Attachment A4.7:
Attachment A4.8 :

Costs Lending FY05 to FY08
Costs AAA FY05 to FY08
IEG ratings - FY05-08

IEG Evaluations for India FY05-08: Key Lessons Extractedfrom
ICR Reviews

CAS’ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report -- Attachment A4.1
Page 1 o f 6
Oct. 27,2008

Attachment A4.1: IFC Portfolio and Performance
IFC supported pioneering private projects and public-private partnerships in
infrastructure through investments, resource mobilization and advisory services to
facilitate the transfer o f public infrastructure assets and/or operations to the private sector,
with an additional focus o n the development o f rural infrastructure. I F C established the
multi-donor h n d e d $20 million South Asia Infrastructure Facility to help buttress the
demand side by creating bankable infrastructure projects and developing PPPs both at the
state and central government level. A field-based unit o f the facility was set up in August
2007 to scale up provision o f infrastructure advisory services in the region. I F C has been
actively involved in outreach activities in the region and has signed two key mandates in
India:
1. Andhra Pradesh: Development o f Vishakhapatnam-Kakinada Coastal Roads on
PPP basis. This project involves development o f both green-field roads as well as
improvement o f existing roads through private sector participation.
2. Maharashtra: Completion o f ongoing irrigation project through private sector
participation on a pilot basis. In addition i t i s providing assistance for the
development o f business plan for the Maharashtra Urban Infrastructure Company
so that it can perform the role o f a facilitator for development o f PPP projects in
the state, particularly in the urban sector.
In addition, IFC’s infrastructure strategy includes a combination o f investments in
infrastructure projects, in infrastructure funds, in dedicated infrastructure finance
institutions and working with government initiatives l i k e IIFCL.

IFC’s infrastructure exposure including energy (all power, including captive power
generation, gas transmission, renewable energy etc), logistics, transport, water and
sanitation and solid waste management) has increased from 21% o f IFC’s portfolio in
2006 to 25% in 2007 and 34% o n April 30,2008.

Sub-national finance operations have been constrained due to Government o f India
restrictions o n direct lending to municipalities in India. Over the past year the subnational finance group has focused o n state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the
infrastructure sector which are engaged in natural monopoly sectors such as electricity
and gas transmission and distribution. Discussions are underway with several SOEs for
debt and equity financing. Recently the Government o f India has requested I F C to
prepare projects for financing municipal investments through the SPV route - the same
will n o w be actively developed.
LFC invested in and provided technical assistance to private financial institutions that
expand financial services to underserved markets, including small businesses. However,
our ability to invest in private commercial banks i s dependent o n RBI permission. In
terms o f I F C investments in the sector, ECB regulations prohibit I F C debt in most cases.
I F C therefore invested equity in second tier regional banks, and provided upper tier I1

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report -- Attachment A4.1
Page 2 o f 6
Oct. 27,2008

capital to top tier banks to help local banks (including H D F C Bank, I C I C I Bank & Kotak
Mahindra Bank) to augment their capital base and diversify their long term fbnding
sources. In the non-bank finance sector, IFC invested in housing finance, leasing and
second tier securities companies. In order to address constraints posed by the supply o f
long term funding for infrastructure, I F C has worked through specialized financial
institutions with a focus on infrastructure finance such as IDFC. I F C started focusing on
microfinance in India by supporting a range o f market players using a variety o f financial
instruments. IFC also focused on the innovative application o f technology by backing I T
companies whose products offer potential for important contributions to economic
development.
Mid-sized companies (manufacturing, and services):
India experienced rapid
industrial growth with industry in an investment phase during the CAS period, with
improved international competitiveness stimulated by reduced tariffs and relaxation o f
FDI restrictions. In i t s support o f medium sized companies I F C invested in companies
developing new products and markets; (ii)
restructuring and modernizing
which were (i)
to become internationally competitive; and (iii)
expanding and moving towards a regional
or global presence. I F C provided these firms with long-term debt and equity which was
not easily available from domestic financial markets; added value in the areas o f global
best practices, creating international partnerships, entering new markets, environmental
and social sustainability and corporate governance.

IFC's strategy was to invest in labor-intensive, knowledge-based, export-oriented,
globally competitive, second-tier companies. I F C focused on companies achieving
international competitiveness in growth sectors such as IT, pharma, auto parts and
emerging sectors such as electronics, paper and packaging, retail, hotels/tourism,
construction materials, engineering, chemicals. IFC also sought to promote South-South
investments by taking Indian companies abroad, and financing their international
expansion. IFC increased i t s offerings o f investment-linked TA for industrial companies
for rural linkages, energy efficiency/renewables, HIV/AIDS..
Rural Strategy: I F C formulated a strategy for targeted interventions in rural India
focusing on: a) Agribusiness (including horticulture, processing, cold chains, fisheries),
linkages and rural services (including, warehousing, kiosks, etc); b) rural finance and c)
rural infrastructure. The objective i s to work along with the private sector in rural India
where IFC investments and technical assistance can help replicate or scale up viable
business models. IFC has established the Agriculture and Rural Linkage Program which
will support linkage projects that develop the agribusiness supply chains, address sectoral
issues that are necessary for market creation and growth by bringing in best practice
through IFC's advisory services.
Equity Strategy: In view o f the increased flows o f equity capital to India during the
CAS period, IFC focused on overlooked market segments:
0
2nd tier, medium sized companies;
Investment size o f less than $lorn, where private equity i s generally not
available;

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS CompletionReport -- Attachment A4.1
Page 3 o f 6
Oct. 27,2008

Emerging globally competitive companies with export led growth potential.
In addition, I F C pursued equity transactions where its ability to offer debt-equity
packages, i t s value added services, and reputation provided value which cannot be
obtained from private equity or public offerings. I F C also invested selectively in fbnds to
enable us to invest in segments (e.g. small deal size, specialist areas) which we cannot
effectively invest in directly. In doing so, I F C contributed to institution building o f the
fimd management industry; encouraged global best practices; and seed companies for
fbture I F C direct investments. Target Funds included early stage technology and
pharmaceuticals, SMEs and infrastructure.

Promoting FDI into India and South-South Investments by Indian companies: I F C
facilitated FDI into India in a range o f sectors including energy (Allain Duhangan, Cairn
Energy); building materials (RAK Ceramics, Italcementi, Soktas), and Continental
Carbon. It also facilitated South-South investments by Indian companies (TVS Motors in
Indonesia and LFFCO in Egypt).
Renewable EnergymnergyEffciency/CarbonFinance I F C focused on increasing
investments and providing advisory services which support both climate change
mitigation and adaptation, with a particular focus o n sustainable energy/distributed power
generation, carbon finance, cleaner technologies and energy efficiencyhe newable energy
investments. There are good prospects for promoting energy efficiency in our
infrastructure and industry and services projects in India. To encourage companies to
make energy efficiency investments, IFC provided incentives by mobilizing and
monetizing carbon credits. There are also good opportunities in renewable energy
generations. I F C invested in three such projects in India, including Allain Duhangan first merchant hydro IPP; MDC - small hydro IPPs; and Balrampur Chini - biomassebased co-generation
I F C provided Cleaner Production (CP) reimbursable grants to three Indian portfolio
clients in the pulp and paper sector to conduct energy and raw materials (e.g., water)
audits; a sector clustering approach was undertaken deliberately to enable dissemination
o f the audit results as ‘best practice’ examples to other firms in the sector, in an effort to
scale the impact o f these firm-level grants. Response from clients has been enthusiastic,
and we have targeted two cement sector clients and two chemicals clients for a second
clustered initiative.

Under IFC’s Cleantech investment programme, support to Turbotech, a manufacturer o f
innovative, l o w cost steam and gas turbines, has been instrumental in promoting the
adoption o f energy efficient co-generation by small and medium sized industrial users o f
saturated steam in India. The project has successfully showcased the potential o f
indigenous Indian technological innovations for the domestic and export markets.

IFC signed an M o U with B P in February 2008 for a project to demonstrate the
sustainability and scalability o f distributed generation (DG) projects in India which
would be led by the private sector. Such projects aim to provide reliable and clean
energy at affordable prices to rural consumers including communities, small businesses,

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report -- Attachment A4.1
Page 4 o f 6
Oct. 27,2008

etc. The project will aim to implement scalable models and establish the roles and
responsibilities o f different stakeholders that are necessary to make DG projects
sustainable. As part o f the BP partnership, 10 pilot plants will be set up in two clusters in
rural communities; each plant will have an approximate capacity o f 100 KW.
IFC signed i t s first carbon delivery guarantee agreement with Rain C I I Carbon (India)
Limited for the purchase o f 850,000 carbon credits until 2012. Under the carbon delivery
guarantee, IFC facilitates delivery o f carbon credits from companies in developing
countries to buyers in developed countries. I F C acts as an intermediary, selling
companies’ credits in the market and passing an attractive price back to the projects.
Clients profit from IFC’s AAA credit rating by gaining access to markets and benefit
from full price transparency. For buyers in developed countries, IFC also eliminates the
risk o f not receiving the promised carbon credits.
To facilitate market transformation and replication o f energy efficiency projects o n a
large scale in India, a recent linkages project in India developed, in partnership with the
Bureau o f Energy Efficiency and Alliance to Save Energy an Energy EfJiciency Manual
for Municipalities, for the use o f key stakeholders including municipalities, energy
service companies (ESCOs) and financial Institutions.
Technical Assistance and Advisory Services (TAAS)
IFC Advisory Services in the region worked seamlessly with investment teams and
continued to focus on linkage programs. Rural development initiatives are important
priorities. The Advisory team works closely with the World Bank to conduct investment
climate assessments and to advise government agencies on Competition Policy and
related areas in India’s case.
HIV/AIDS Awareness -All India: The mission o f IFC Against AIDS i s to protect
people and profitability by being a risk management partner and a catalyst for action
where HIV/AIDS is threatening sustainable development. The goal o f the program is to
accelerate the involvement o f private enterprises in the fight against HIV/AIDS, with I F C
playing a catalytic role in demonstrating the legitimacy o f the private sector engagement
in this area. IFC i s working with a number o f its investee clients l i k e Apollo Tyres, BILT,
Cairn Energy, Ambuja Cement, Usha Martin and A D Hydropower to design and launch
HIV/AIDS prevention programs. The project has benefited around 50,000 employees /
workers through over 80 training programs.
Cairns Linkage Program, Rajasthan: An important example o f integrated investment
and advisory work is the Cairn project in Rajasthan. In 2006,IFC supported Cairn with a
$150 million credit facility to support i t s o i l and gas project in Banner, Rajasthan. In
FY07, I F C invested $23 million in equity in the Indian subsidiary. In addition, I F C is
working with them on extending their leadership on environmental best practices and
social development. The establishment o f a strong linkages program involving a
healthcare program, a dairy project and setting up an Enterprise Centre as part o f IFC’s
Advisory support to Cairn India i s playing a catalytic role in economic and community

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report -- Attachment A4.1
Page 5 o f 6
Oct. 27,2008

development in one o f the poorest parts o f India. The program targets are to train 7,000
men/women/SME employees; ensure business and market development o f 300 micro
small and medium enterprises (MSMEs); reach 32 villages with a population o f 18,000
through the C M H program; and impact 600 households in 20 villages through the Dairy
development initiative.

Krishi Gram Vikas Kendra (KGVK) - Jharkhand: I F C i s working with the CSR arm
o f Usha Martin, KGVK, to provide capacity building and market access to 3000 small
and marginal farmers. I F C is also collaborating and providing financial support to
KGVK on innovative solutions for rural healthcare delivery. A paramedic training
school has been established and 10 paramedic clinics have been set up in rural Jharkhand.
Rural Business Hubs - North East India: I F C i s partnering with C I I and the Ministry o f
Panchayati Raj in developing Rural Business Hubs in N o r t h East India. The broad
components o f this partnership include facilitation o f private sector and rural community
linkages, establishment o f a capacity building expert network, and providing inputs o n
product design and market access. Seven RBH’s have been identified out o f which one i s
already operational in Nagaland benefiting 500 villagers.
Rural information and communications technology (ICT) - Assam, Bihar and UP:
I F C has supported the leading providers o f I C T to rural communities, such as Drishtee
which has a vast network o f kiosks in rural India. The companies supported by I F C have
a collective coverage o f over 3,000 rural kiosks covering 3,500 villages.

Self Employed Women’s Association (SEWA) - Gujarat: I F C has supported SEWA in
extending many o f i t s services to their rural women members. This includes a managers’
training school that has trained 80,000 grassroots cadre in technical and management
skills, and the SEWA Trade Facilitation Centre which has provided market access and
secure livelihoods for their 15,000 members. I F C i s also helping S E W A with the
restructuring o f their financial and accounting systems.

-

Tata Tea Land Value Optimization Program Assam: I F C has partnered with Tata
tea gardens to increase the incomes o f workers by introducing non-tea and other agrobased innovative activities in North East India. The program has benefited over 1000 tea
workers across 11 tea gardens by enhancing their income by over $1 a day. The
plantation business has been structured into a new company with 20% equity
participation o f workers.
Private Healthcare Hubs - Assam: I F C advised on the development o f a sustainable
business model for the Medishops business o f GNRC Ltd. (a private hospital). These
provide authentic medicines, diagnostics and referral facilities in outlying areas.
Innovations include a medical insurance scheme through which over 100,000 people have
gained health insurance benefits. In addition, 30 new Medishops have been opened in
Assam providing employment to over 500 people.
SME Toolkit - All India: I F C has collaborated with I C I C I Bank and IBM to launch the
SME Toolkit which i s available free to MSMEs. The toolkit, customized to local

CAS ANNEX 4: FY0.5-08 CAS Completion Report -- Attachment A4.1
Page 6 o f 6
Oct. 27,2008

requirements and translated into Hindi, provides on-line information such as updates o n
relevant laws and tenders, business planning advice, accounting and inventory tools etc.
This toolkit has been used by I F C in more than 25 countries and has been recently
launched in India.

Investment Climate Reform in Bihar: W h i l e India has emerged as one o f the fastest
growing countries in the world, Bihar - with a population o f 90 million and a per capita
income around $160 - is India’s poorest as well as one o f its slowest growing states At
the request o f the Government o f Bihar (GOB) in June 2007, FIAS/SASFP/WBI has
launched a TA program in November 2007 to improve the overall investment climate o f
the State, by removing policy and regulatory constraints that adversely affect the growth
o f the agribusiness sector and o f the private sector in general. The project will bring
together the regulatory simplification, industry competitiveness, and investment policy &
promotion practices o f FIAS/IFC in partnership with I F C Investment Departments as a
pilot for the I F C Inc. approach for South Asia.

.

CAS ANNEX 4: FYOS-08 CAS Completion Report -- Attachment A4.2
Page 1 o f 5
Oct. 27,2008

Attachment A4.2: GO1 Initiatives

Recent Government o f India Initiatives
During the period covered by the 2004 CAS, the Government o f India (GoI) has taken or
announced a number o f initiatives that, when fully implemented, could significantly contribute to
accelerating growth and improving access to basic services for l o w income groups throughout the
XIth Plan period. These include the following:

1. Value Added Tax (VAT): Go1 initiated the introduction o f VAT in April 2005. W h i l e a
number o f states declined to j o i n VAT at the outset, it i s now fully implemented in all states
except Uttar Pradesh which only adopted VAT in 2007. Evidence suggests sharply increased
tax revenues and decreased tax evasion which has helped sustain the fiscal FRBM (Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management) targets at state level.
2. Important measures have been taken to facilitate access to finance for undersewed segments
of the economy: (i) to improve access to finance for micro-enterprises and small and
medium enterprises (SMEs), and facilitate their development, two key pieces o f legislation
have been recently enacted: the “Credit Information Act” (May, 2005) and the “Micro, Small
and Medium Enterprises Development Act” (June, 2006); and (ii) a number o f initiatives
have also been announced to reform the rural financial sector,including: (a) lowering
restrictions on branch licensing in rural areas, allowing banks t o operate through
‘correspondents’, revising policies that restricted competition among banks in rural areas
through the “service area” approach, and introducing steps to expand micro finance
institutions; (b) policies to improve the management and mitigation o f risks in rural finance,
including revamping the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme to provide improved
coverage o f the risks faced by small and marginal farmers, fostering partnerships between
government and private sector to pilot weather-index insurance, developing a negotiable
warehouse receipt system with the submission to Parliament o f a Warehousing Bill, and
efforts to develop the commodities futures markets; and (c) a major reform package
(announced in January 2006) to revitalize India’s rural credit cooperative institutions, through
transforming the potentially viable institutions into democratically governed, efficiently
managed, financially sustainable, self-reliant entities that can provide a wider range o f
financial services to the rural poor o n more affordable terms.
3. In recent years, a series o f measures have also been introduced to gradually liberalize India’s
capital markets: further steps to liberalize capital controls may be o n the horizon following
the July 2006 Tarapore Committee Report o n Fuller Capital Account Liberalization. A s a
result, India’s financial markets, especially equity markets, are becoming increasingly
integrated with global marked3.
4. Go1 has sustained efforts to strengthen incentives t o states to improve their fiscal position.
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Acts have n o w been enacted by 23 states,
under which states are committed to reducing overall fiscal deficits to 3% o f GDP and
completely eliminating the revenue deficit by 2008/09. States are generally on track and
13

Annual portfolio inflows from abroad more than tripled from 2 0 0 M 5 to US12 billion; the correlation of Indian equity returns
with the world market has risen from near zero in the early 1990s to about 70%.

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report -- Attachment A4.2
Page 2 o f 5
Oct. 27,2008

those that perform on target with their medium-term fiscal plans are rewarded by waiver o f
debt servicing to Go1 for that year.
5. Go1 has placed considerable emphasis on investment in infrastructure and public private
partnerships (PPPs) as an important way o f meeting key infrastructure needs, especially for
large-scale infrastructure. To this end, Go1 has established a new financial institution IIFCL - to provide long-term debt financing t o infrastructure (with a focus o n PPPs),
established a Viability Gap Fund to encourage the broader use o f PPPs by state and local
governments and central agencies, and put greater efforts into developing a framework for
PPPs, for example through issuing guidelines o n the design, appraisal and approval o f PPP
projects, model bidding documents and model contracts.

6. Bharat Nirman (Building India): announced in 2005, this i s a program t o sharply increase
rural infrastructure investment. There are some design issues, and once these are addressed,
Bank assistance for this program i s likely to increase in a significant manner.
7. Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission ( J N N U . ) : aims to transfer
substantial resources from the centre to qualifying Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) based on the
performance o f states and ULBs in implementing reforms. However, there are some design
issues regarding performance requirements.
8. In the power sector, Go1 has (i)
begun to r o l l out an ambitious rural electrification program,
providing a grant to cover 90% o f capital costs to electrify all villages by 2009 and all rural
households by 2012. Through the ESMAP-hnded Distributed Generation and Supply, the
Go1 i s exploring private-sector led business models for sustainable renewable-based power
supply, building o n the domestic consumers' ability to pay and promoting a more productive
use o f electricity. (ii) launched several programs to build a secure, affordable and climatefriendly power generation capacity and supply (including a hydropower program with
national and regional components, and the private-sector-oriented Ultra-Mega Power Policy
to promote cleaner and more efficient generation options); (iii) continued to augment interregional power transmission capacity, including through a first-time PPP in the important
Bhutan (Tala)-Delhi transmission link; and (iv) completed the revamping o f the design o f the
existing Accelerated Power Development and Reform Program, which will provide
investment and incentive funds t o state power utilities to reduce their technical and nontechnical losses and improve services to end-users and industries, thus enhancing the
competitiveness o f the Indian economy. While there i s s t i l l a long way to go, the sector's
financial losses have started to show a declining trend (particularly in the reforming states),
driven by favorable changes in consumer mix, tariff adjustments, efficiency improvements
and timely payment by the state budgets for subsidized supply to specified consumer groups.
and (ii)
above, the Go1 has also taken steps to promote renewable energy.
Under items (i)
The Go1 adopted in March 2007 the Semiconductor Policy under its Special Incentive
Package Scheme (SIPS), which states that the Go1 or i t s agencies will provide 20% o f the
capital expenditure during the first 10 years for semiconductor industries, including
manufacturing activities related to solar PV technology located in Special Economic Zones
(SEZ) and 25% for industries not located in an SEZ. In the same vein, the Go1 has introduced
Generation Based Incentives (GBIs) for gnd-connected solar energy projects (up to Rs.15 per
unit). T h i s policy as well as the incentive regime for solar energy constitute the main pillars
o f the National Solar Energy Mission under the National Action Plan o n Climate Change
announced on June 30, 2008. In August 2008, the Go1 also announced Generation Based
Incentives (GBIs) for grid-connected wind power projects (up to Rs. 0.5 per unit).

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report -- Attachment A4.2
Page 3 o f 5
Oct. 27,2008

9. In the roads sector, in addition to the emphasis on PPPs for major highways, Go1 has placed
special emphasis o n lagging regions and states. For example, for the north-east states, a
Special Accelerated Road Development Program (SARDP) has been set up to improve
connectivity among the states and with the rest o f the country. In Bihar, Go1 i s also funding
the development ofboth highways and rural roads, under the National Sum Vikas Yojna
Nationally Pradhan Manti Gram Sadak Yojna (PMGSY - The Prime Minister's Rural Road
Program) was launched by the Government o f India in 2000 to connect all the habitations o f
population more than 500 (250 in case o f hilly, desert, and tribal areas). In 2005, P M G S Y
incorporated the Bharat Nirman targets for road connectivity. These targets are to connect
all habitations o f more than 1000 (500 in case o f hilly, desert, and tribal areas) by the year
2009 and include the upgrading o f 194,000 km o f rural roads by the year 2010. The
estimated expenditure o n rural roads to meet the Bharat Nirman targets amounts to R. 480
billion.
10. A series o f measures have been taken in agriculture: (i) amendments to state Agricultural
Produce Marketing Acts, based on the GO1 model act, have been adopted by 15,states,
helping to foster competition in agricultural marketing that should benefit poor producers;
(ii) approval by Pariliament o f the Food and Safety Standards A c t 2006 rationalizes the
overlapping regulations governing food products processing and aims at greater food safety;
(iii) repeal o f the Cess A c t in 2006 eliminates the cess o f 0.5% on agncultural and plantation
commodity exports; (iv) approval by Parliament o f the o f the Warehousing (Development and
Regulation) Bill in 2006, which will provide the legal framework for a negotiable warehouse
receipt system that i s expected to increase access to credit in rural areas, and (vi) submission
to Parliament o f the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill in 2006 that will
remove the ban on trading o f commodity options.

11. National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREG): adopted in February 2006 to
guarantee up to 100 days o f employment on public works per year per rural household on a
demand-driven basis. While the scheme has the potential to improve the life o f the poorest,
implementation risks need to be addressed even at this early stage. Indeed, the scheme has
been rolled out more quickly than anticipated at introduction and n o w covers all districts o f
India. The program features many innovations which constitute a significant design
improvement on previous public works schemes and h o l d lessons for a range o f anti-poverty
programs. The program has also achieved much higher employment generation effects than
previous schemes and with evidence that SC/ST coverage i s high. At the same time,
implementation performance has been very variable across states and many o f the inherent
challenges in operating an effective works scheme remain.
12. National Rural Health Mission: launched in April 2005 to improve health outcomes.
National schemes drive efforts to improve health outcomes, but performance i s also
determined by states and local governments since they control the management o f
government services. The Mission's focus on financing inputs for public provision will
require a system-wide emphasis on accountability for results in order to achieve improved
service delivery goals.
13. Rashtriya Swasthiya Bima Yogana (BSBY): announced in October 2007 and initiating rollout from April 2008, this i s a health insurance scheme for serious health events for poor
households. It i s GoI's central pillar to extend different forms o f social security to the
unorganized sector. The scheme i s highly innovative, including partnerships with public and

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report -- Attachment A4.2
Page 4 o f 5
Oct. 27,2008

private insurers and health providers, portability o f benefits for the poor across state lines, use
o f biometric smart cards for cashless transactions, inclusion o f grassroots level mobilizers.
14. A major initiative o f Go1 has been to place strong emphasis o n the implementation o f the
decentralization o f government to the lowest level that was f i r s t developed and enacted as
amendments to the constitution in 1992 by the Congress government l e d by Rajiv Gandhi.
Go1 i s rightly emphasizing concurrent devolution o f functions, functionaries and financing,
and has worked energetically to mobilize support at the state level - often difficult, but
essential since the states are the main reform actors. I t i s also mobilizing technical assistance
support for states willing to undertake reforms as well as funding for state-level pilots. While
full implementation will take many years, and require massive capacity building, these
reforms hold the promise o f greatly improving the impact o f public expenditures for service
delivery by strengthening local empowerment and control.
15. National Environment Policy (NEP): approved inM a y 2006 to address the key environment
challenges relating to environment degradation and economic growth (conservation o f critical
environmental resources, livelihood security for the poor, integration o f environment
concerns in economic and social development, environment governance and enhancement o f
resources for environment conservation, etc). Further to the NEP, the new Environment
Impact Assessment (EM) notification was introduced by the Ministry o f Environment and
Forests (MoEF) in September 2006.

16. Right to Information Act: passage in 2005 was a significant step towards greater
transparency and empowering citizens, although the way in which it i s implemented will be
crucial to i t s impact.

17. The approval by Cabinet o f the National e-Governance Plan vision and implementation
strategy in M a y 2006 provides an important vehicle to improve government service delivery
to both citizens and businesses. MCA21, the Ministry o f Corporate Affairs streamlined online business registration services has begun implementation.
18. National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC): released in June, 2008 the NAFCC
focuses attention o n eight priorities or “national missions” running through 2017 and directs
ministries with lead responsibility for each mission to submit detailed plans, including
objectives, implementation strategies, timelines, and monitoring and evaluation criteria, to the
Prime Minister’s Council o n Climate Change by December 2008. The eight missions
Solar Energy; (ii)
Enhanced Energy Efficiency; (iii)
Sustainable Habitat;
identified include (i)
(iv) Conserving Water; (v) Sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem; (vi) A “Green India”; (vii)
Sustainable agnculture; and (viii) Strategic Knowledge Platform for Climate Change.
19. Doing Business Reforms: beginning in 2007, the GO1 has initiated a systematic business
regulatory reform process, aimed in part at improving the D o i n g Business indicator rankings
but also dealing with the “inspectorate raj”. T h i s work which will take some time i s
primarily aimed at coordinating states’ efforts to reduce regulatory burdens (time and cost) o n
businesses.
20. In the banking sector, a recent reform (2008) grants foreign investors in Indian banks voting
rights that are proportionate t o their equity investments.
21. Financial markets: Go1 has introduced in 2008 a reform allowing the trading o f exchange
traded interest rate and exchange rate derivatives contracts (one o f the recommendations o f

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report -- Attachment A4.2
Page 5 o f 5
Oct. 27,2008

the Report o f the High Level Committee o n Financial Sector Reforms chaired by Raghuram
Rajan),

22. In the pensions sector, GO1 has allowed the participation, from July, 2008, o f private
pension fund managers. Restrictions that have constrained the investment choices faced by
provident funds have also been eased.
23. Financial management and accountability: (i) The Planning Commission along with the
Office o f the Controller General o f Accounts (CGA) i s strengthening the monitoring &
oversight on usage o f resources flowing through CSSs by implementing a Central Plan
Monitoring System which will track actual expenditure at decentralized level and eventually
evolve intoexpenditure authorization. T h i s will (a) enhance accountability in CSSs by
enabling tracking o f expenditures and MIS ; and (b) suitably address the fiduciary r i s k
associated with the decentralized arrangements and lower the opportunity cost o f funds; (ii)
the Comptroller and Auditor General o f India has introduced a practice o f continuous
improvement in auditing methodologies, marked by a recent, significant upgradation o f the
standards applied to the financial audits o f government financial statements; (iii)Institute of
Chartered Accountants o f India (ICAJJ has decided, to converge fully with International
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs) issued by the International Accounting Standards
Board (IASB) commencing 2011. With this decision, India joins 102 countries which
presently require or permit use o f IFRSs in preparation o f financial statements.
24. Land Rights. A National Resettlement & Rehabilitation Policy, was approved by Cabinet
in November, 2007 which represents a significant step forward compared to the earlier policy
o f 2003. An R&R Bill based o n the NRFU’, 2007 together with a revised Land Acquisition
A c t are expected to be finalized by Parliament in the 2008/9 session. In addition, “The
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition o f Forest Rights) Act,
2006” was passed by the parliament in December 2006. The A c t recognizes and vests the
forest rights and occupation o f forest land by forest dwelling Scheduled Castes and Tribes,
who have been living in these forests for generations. It also provides the framework for
recording o f these rights and the evidence required for the recognition o f these rights

CAS ANNEX 4: FY05-08 CAS Completion Report -- Attachment A4.3
Page 1 o f 1
Oct. 27,2008

Attachment Table A4.3: Statewise Composition o f WB Portfolio FY04 -FYO8

State and Central Shares in the World Bank Portfolio - FY04 - FY08
June 2004

Amt ($m)
Ap

Assam
Bihar
Chattisgarh
Gujarat
HP
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Maharashtra
Mizoram
MP
Ollssa
Pondicherry
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
UP
Uttarakhand
Centrally Spon Schemes
Financial Intermediaries
Public Undertakings
Total India

1,192
0
102
113
824
0
50
750
309
840
60
110
355
0
0
670
711
1,242
101
2,694
130
1,795
12,048

Yo of
total
portfolio
10%
0%
1%
1%
7%
0%
0%
6%
3%
7%
0%
1%
3%
0%
0%
6%
6%
10%
1%
22%
1%
15%
100%

June 2008

.Yo of
Amt ($m)

total
portfolio

737
154
288
93
328
536
44
872
308
1,048
78
394
0
42
404
33 1
1,767
838
20 1
2,381
720
2,260
13,823

5%
1Yo
2%
1%
2%
4%
0%
6%
2%
8%
1%
3%
0%
0%
3%
2%
13%
6%
1Yo
17%
5%
16%
100%

Attachment A4.5: IEG Evaluations for India FYO5-08: K e y Lessons Extracted from ICR
Reviews

TN WATER RESOURCES CONSOLIDATION
(1) The long period o f pre-project policy dialogue and the long, detailed project preparation
established a strong strategic direction for the project. This helped sustain the project in the face o f two
changes o f state governments in 1996 and 200 1.
,
(2) A dramatic paradigm shift in the government's approach to managing a k e y resource such as
water requires extensive training o f government staff, W A S ,farmers, and even o f NGOs involved in
delivering such training. Training needs are often underestimated and training capacities o f NGOs to

j

provide training often overestimated.
(3) Irrigation projects should include an agncultural support services component at the outset in
order to enhance their economic impact.
(4) The separate component for land acquisition and economic rehabilitation worked w e l l for
acquiring land, but faced some limitations in rebuilding the livelihoods o f those adversely affected by
the project.
(5) Revision o f water rates involves not only political will but also assurances that revenues so raised
will result in improved services.
(6) Involving intended beneficiaries in planning, implementation, and monitoring can improve
transparency, instill a sense o f ownership, and reduce conflicts.
(7) Covenants which have little direct relevance to project activities -- such as that to reduce
subsidies to the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board -- should not be imposed o n projects. These are difficult
to enforce, and take considerable______"
time and e
f both
Bank and Borrower
with negligble returns.
"..-...,-,.--------~.I--____-__
I
_

~

"

REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH I
Policy reform at the national level must be accompanied by a plan for implementation o f the policy at
sub-national levels, particularly with regard to delegating appropriate responsibilities and building
capacity for implementation. Special focus should be given to poor-performing states/districts.
0

The challenge o f implementing a national project dealing with sensitive issues o n population
and reproductive health should not be underestimated.
Stronger emphasis should be placed o n IEC programs t o help implement policy changes.

NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGY.
1. Decentralizing control in a research organization can increase efficiency if it i s
accompanied b y systems of accountability. Exchanging the principle o f hierarchical control
for the principle o f accountability has unleashed an enormous amount o f energy and creativity
in an organization with large intellectual capacity.
2. A clear communications strategy i s needed to successfully implement organizational and
management changes. A better communications strategy o n the overall change process
throughout the organization would have enabled staff to understand and respond to the changes
in a better way.
- ~in
- - research
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ and
_development
_-__
- --_
3 -_
. Fosterin2 public-p-ivatepartnership
-_
requires not only
- _ -.an
_
I
_
_
_
_
I

enabling environment, but also private sector participation in project design and
implementation, and broad dissemination of success stories. Only a few such partnerships
were established due to (a) inadequate investment in partnership building, and (b) lack o f
attention to the potential benefits o f public-private partnerships.
4. Cost recovery o f extension services not only reduces the cost to government but also
demonstrates to farmers that extension services have economic value. Inthe case o f the
extension programs organized under the ATMAs, most material technologies and services were
sold to farmers o n a cost-recovery basis, and farmers paid part o f the cost o f training programs.
In the traditional system in non-project districts, the distribution o f free inputs and services to
farmers continues to create a dependency relationship o n government so that many farmers
look to extension for a “hand-out” rather than as a reliable source o f technology and
information.

ODS I1- CONSUMPTION PHASE OUT
The establishment o f regulations requiring private sector f i r m s to abide by national environmental
commitments i s necessary if substantial benefits are to be achieved efficiently.
0

0

Compensation to private-sector f i r m s for subproject completion should be performance-based
or be based on the achievement o f agreed-upon milestones should the financial burden for
completion be too heavy o n firms. T h i s would act as an incentive for the timely completion of
subprojects.
Even for an implementing agency that has had considerable experience and has partnered with
the Bank in the past, it i s important to ensure that the agency possesses the necessary capacity
to fulfill i t s functions under the project in question, as new projects may entail different
procedures and new knowledge requirements.

UP POWER SECTOR RESTRUCTURING
Energy sector reform should always have the return o f the sector to financial viability as a clearly
defined primary objective. Most o f the other objectives are means to reaching this primary objective.
There i s an inherent conflict between the objectives o f sector reform, which are difficult and often
contentious, and subject to the ebbs and flows o f the commitment o f changing governments, and the
objectives o f physical investment lending, which are straightforward and short term. The reform
agenda often passes through periods o f l o w popularity, but in the end i s critical for the successful long
term stability o f the sector. T h i s i s an ongoing conflict, which the Bank must accept as it continues i t s
efforts to encourage and support improved energy sector performance.

TN URBAN DEV I1
Projects supporting decentralization should assess the risk offluctuating State commitment to reforms
as well as identifi mitigating measures, at preparation. Decentralization i s a process prone to reversals
and decelerations but the project did not recognize at appraisal the substantial risk that the State may
not sustain the reform process. In fact, the Tamil Nadu Urban Local Bodies Bill was never
implemented and ULBs remain highly dependent o n the support o f the Government for important
decisions.

While municipalJinances may improve with the introduction ofpartial private sector
ownership, this approach has a number of limitations. The creation o f TNUDF substantially

improved operational efficiency. However, the environment and conditions faced by TNUDF's
clients -the ULBs - did not change and TNLTDF i s s t i l l highly dependent o n the decisions o f
Government to do business. However, many problems were resolved because the TNUDF
maintained a good working relationship with the Government, which supported the objectives
o f the TNLTDF.
Projects focusing on the suppb side of services, such as provision of urban infrastructure,
should still monitor the project's impact on the target population. While the sub-loans
component was efficiently managed, in the absence o f monitoring data i t i s difficult to assess
the usefulness of this approach for poverty reduction in urban areas.
--

______--

____--___-

I
_
-_I-___--____
_
_
_
_

LEPROSY I1

'

Decentralization, by shifting ownership and responsibility to the states and district level, needs to be
supported with a strong capacity building effort.

A participatory approach involving all stakeholders from the design stage and throughout
implementation i s important for integrating leprosy services into general health semces.
Simple evaluation methods that can be easily filled out and updated by field level workers need
to be developed t o monitor the effectiveness o f the project investments.

ORISSA SAL 1
Establishing a strong analytical underpinning for policy development loans has an important payoff
in targeting loans to high priority objectives and developing coherent impact indicators. 2. It i s
important to take account o f the political economy o f reform. T o gain broad support for this operation,
i t was important to move beyond addressing the fiscal issues which were the original motivation for
adjustment to address key developmental needs o f the poor which then appropriately formed an
essential part o f the program.

TUBERCULOSIS CONTROL
State ownership and management capacity and the articulation o f clear objectives and management
guidelines are critical for effective implementation o f TB program activities at the decentralized levels.
The TB program initially used a center-to-district model, which caused states to have inadequate
involvement in program planning, management and oversight, and, as a consequence, limited
ownership and effectiveness.

f

L
I

Allowing local health providers and patients to choose community volunteers allowed the
engagement o f a broad range o f persons o f diverse background and the significant involvement
o f women, and resulted in improved response to the particular needs and situations o f target
groups at the local level.
The involvement o f private practitioners in the RNTCP was instrumental in widening the reach
o f DOTS services
and in ensuring that TB
patients o f these providers receive quality DOTS.
_..___-_____--___-.-.___.__I"
..___^-________.._-___-___..I.____

0

0

0

The RNTCP has also had promising experiences with many NGOs and voluntary self-help
groups in traclung smear positive patients, providing treatment and following them up.
W e l l developed monitoring and evaluation at all levels o f a program encourages pro-activity in
the identification and solution o f problems. Intensive monitoring and supervision o f all aspects
o f the program at every level has been essential to the success o f the program. The program has
been able to publish and distribute widely a quarterly and annual performance report,
summarizing the comparative performances o f each state and district, and the timely receipt o f
the quarterly reports has greatly facilitated this activity.
Planning for program extension should include plans to enhance staff capacity, both qualitative
and quantitative.
A firm and consistent position on the part o f the Bank when dealing with serious
implementation problems can result in significant improvements in implementation
performance. The Bank's insistence on contracting out procurement responsibilities resolved
the issue o f inadequate procurement capacity, which was slowing implementation
considerably.

ORISSA HEALTH SYSTEMS
(i)
Assess and address state and project management capacities: Despite having addressed the issue
o f project management and funds flow arrangements in the project design, these continued to be a
problem in the early stages o f the project. The capacity o f the PMC to plan, execute and monitor
various project activities, including civil works and procurement, was significantly affected due to the
decision o f the government not to contract a management agency post project effectiveness.

(ii)
Accountability also important for results: During field visits, it was observed that there were
differences in implementation progress across the state despite the same incentives given to project
managers. Hence, it i s also recommended that issues o f accountability and motivation are also studied
and addressed during project preparation.
(iii)
Develop local capacities to use fees collected: The collection o f user fees has increased the
availability o f incremental budgets for non-recurrent expenditure at the facility level, which i s likely t o
positively affect the quality o f services provided. However, there i s a need to develop local structures
like the R K S s at the facility level that should be able t o use these funds for the local population and be
accountable to them.
(iv) "Software" should not wait for the "hardware": Software activities like I E C should be initiated in
the early stages o f the project irrespective o f the status o f the completion o f civil works. T h i s gives
enough time for the project to implement these activities and generate awareness amongst the
population to use these facilities. Innovative pilots too should be initiated in the early stages o f the
project to give sufficient time period to assess the impact o f these interventions and put in place
arrangements to scale up these interventions if the impact i s positive.

(v) HCWM i s a behavioral change: Change in HCWM practices takes time and therefore constant
training and monitoring i s required by the project and the D H S t o inculcate this behavior. T h i s needs to
be a continuous process and supply o f H C W M consumable material should be continually provided or
procured using district health committee funds.
(vi) Prompt identification o f problem status important for improvement: I t was observed that
execution o f project activities and disbursements significantly improved after i t was identified as a

problem project in October 2003, despite the delay in identifying i t as a problem project. T h i s indicates
that proactive identification o f problem status and realistic ratings are important for successful project
execution.

(vii) District specific planning maybe more suitable: As the study o n child mortality in Orissa notes,
there are significant differences in health indicators between districts. Hence, district specific planning
would seem to be more appropriate compared to a uniform set o f activities being implemented across
the state to improve health outcomes.
(viii) Engage further the private sector. Given the growth o f the private sector in Orissa, it i s
important to engage more actively with the private sector and go beyond the contracting out o f just
"hotel" functions. Though the commitment o f GOO to strengthen the public sector i s warranted given
the large number o f poor s t i l l accessing these facilities in the state, it i s also important t o engage the
private sector in healthcare given i t s increased presence. The focus o f the public-private partnerships
should be o n improving access to and quality o f healthcare in remote and tribal areas where the public
sector may have poor reach and contracting in o f specialist services to provide comprehensive
emergency obstetric and neonatal care.

MALARIA CONTROL
Projects should be more realistic in setting development objectives and in defining the credit size based
on a more rigorous analysis o f the institutional and financial capacity o f the Borrower.
0

0

0

0

Future efforts should include much more extensive and realistic development o f agreed-upon
indicators and results monitoring arrangements that can be o f greater use for both the Borrower
and the Bank for recurrent program decision-making, backed up by the resources and
commitment to make them work.
In the context o f a decentralized program, nurturing ownership o f states and strengthening
program management capacity at district and state levels i s essential for program success.
Future efforts should have a stronger focus o n private sector both for service coverage and for
more accurate surveillance.
Surveillance for drug resistance could be substantially strengthened, and as resistance to CQ
expands, Go1 should accelerate expansions with ACTS.Action to ensure that effective
treatments are made available in line with documented resistance and transmission patterns.
Experience with state-level entities for disease control in India (e.g. for HIV/AIDS) might have
been taken into account, along with malaria experiences in other countries. T h i s might have
accelerated the move towards state-level malaria societies that would reduce the bureaucracies
o f state-level institutions.

1. The importance o f a committed and technically proficient implementing agency (also the
Borrower in this case) i s clear from the experience o f this project.
2. POWERGFUD's satisfactory financial and technical performance, as well as i t s environmental and
social safeguards systems, resulted from ongoing practices which had been supported by previous Bank
projects. This shows the value o f a continual, long term relationship between Bank and implementing
agency.
3. The benefits o f a strong Bank team during both preparation and supervision are evident.
4. The presence o f the TTL and other team members in the India country office undoubtedly

contributed to the excellent working relationship with POWERGRID and to the satisfactory
supervision o f the project.
5. For large utilities such as POWERGRID, with substantial investment needs, the time slice lending
approach i s appropriate, provided other preconditions - such as technical and financial proficiency and
familiarity with Bank practices -- are in place (as in this case).

WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
A. The Bank and the government should agree on the timing o f government approval o f a Bankassisted project. The Bank should not go to the Board before the Cabinet approves the project proposal,
so that the project can become effective soon after Board approval.

B. Lessons learned from previous projects, both positive and negative, should be rigorously analyzed
and applied to the subsequent project design, and a new initiative should be pilot tested on a small
scale. The health and nutrition aspects o f the ICDS program have not been adequately implemented
under the current project due mainly to the one worker and one helper model o f the AWC, although
alternatives have been demonstrated in other projects. Also, this project, like I C D S Iand I1projects,
suffered from serious problems with project funds release, procurement, and disbursement. GO1and
the Bank should have anticipated such problems since this project was a third operation o f the same
nature and modality in the same W C D sub-sector but on a larger scale.
C. The quality at entry o f the project profoundly affected efficiency o f project implementation. The
inclusion o f a nation-wide training component without proper appraisal and the lack o f defined
monitoring and evaluation indicators at negotiation delayed the start-up o f the project and adversely
affected the subsequent project implementation processes. Baseline data should be collected early so
that it can serve as a basis for preparing and agreeing o n Project Implementation Plans.

E. In addition t o input and process indicators, more output indicators (e.g. proportion o f mothers who
changed their child caring behaviors) should be used, so that the input and process indicators can be
more persuasively linked t o project outcome indicators.
F. The weak financial management and disbursement documentation were important causes o f
project implementation delays. Some audit disallowances have s t i l l not been resolved. An in-depth
review o f the processes, streamlining them, and malung arrangements for training o f local staff in these
aspects are essential before continuing with another Bank operation.
G. A specific investment project i s not an optimal tool for meeting the varied needs and capacities o f
different states in a large federated nation as India. Once the Government's project preparation and
implementation capacity i s increased and experience accumulated, a program loan approach would be
preferred with different roles played by the central government, states, and the Bank.

DPEP I11 (BIHAR and JHARKAND)
1. The DPEP model in India has the strength o f focusing on both enrollment expansion and
improved learning outcomes. The lesson from this project i s that both can occur at the same time, even
in some o f the most difficult parts o f the country.
2. Joint efforts and collaboration with many partners, including UN agencies like UNICEF (already
deeply involved in basic education), NGOs, and women's organizations can greatly strengthen project
effectiveness.
3. Project preparation for a comprehensive and complex intervention such as DPEP i s challenging,

especially in a state having relatively weak institutions and governance. In such an environment, it i s
especially important to undertake capacity assessments and to create robust strategies for addressing
the multiple risks that can be anticipated.
4. Monitoring and evaluation design i s important and flawed designs and systems can undermine a
project's ability to reveal i t s strengths and accomplishments. For example, this project would have been
much better served had it used gross or n e t enrollment rates to show improved access with breakdowns
for all disadvantaged groups, including learning disabled and workmg children.
5. This and other DPEP projects have not yet dealt effectively with student retention (or dropout).
Setting goals that are over-ambitious (like DPEP standard o f pushing dropout to below 10 percent) i s
problematic, but it i s n o better to set goals which are too modest (like the current's goal which would
s t i l l leave dropout above 50 percent). A reasonable level needs to be set, which i s both practical and
significant (pressing a state t o reach universal primary completion in a reasonable time), and
interventions developed which target areas where problems are especially acute, using strategies known
to work.
6. Household surveys conducted in the states are a promising means t o demonstrate change in
enrollments and dropout, avoiding the flaws in school system data bases. Used in a time series they can
also help to sort out questions o f attribution to particular interventions (like DPEP or SSA). It i s
important that these data be reconciled with the education data (EMIS) and that there be a
differentiation between children who are dropouts and those who have never been to school.
7. There needs to be a clearer understanding o f what contributes to the improvement o f student
learning outcomes. Many passages in the I C R seem to indicate that despite increased in-service teacher
training under DPEP, most teachers have not abandoned their traditional approaches to instruction and
rote learning. It i s important to find out, therefore, what i s the driving force in large increases in
learning outcomes. I t i s also important to find out and deal with reasons for the almost negligible
impact o f the training on teacher performance.
8. Although the production o f new, qualified teachers was not a goal o f this project, the lack o f a
stream o f new teachers became a significant constraint. T h e GOB and GOJ would be well advised to
institutionalize systems for teacher production and deployment to remove teacher shortages as a
constant deterrent to the reaching o f EFA goals.
9. Supervision o f projects with IDA funding needs to be expanded to cover financial management,
since this i s an area o f vulnerability in many states, especially those with weak governance records.
10. With the maturation o f the GOI's efforts to promote universal enrollment in quality primary
education it i s time for the government to create more impact-oriented program designs, providing
managers with the data they need to be able to attribute change to specific project interventions and to
determine where (among districts) strengths and weaknesses are evident (with a willingness to provide
remediation where weaknesses are found). This would mean addressing the counterfactual in project
designs and bringing India's strong analytical slulls to bear o n project efforts and impacts

RAJASTHAN POWER I
1. The political viability o f the reforms supported by the project should be established through
extensive consultation with actual and potential political leaders. It i s important to make sure o f
government commitment. A signed policy letter, while n o guarantee, i s nonetheless an important
comfort for the Bank.
2. Alternative approaches to achieving agreed policy goals should be carefully analyzed during
preparation.
3. In a large country like India, the country-wide context, including central government policy and
recent developments in the power sectors o f other States, should be examined and taken into account in
project preparation.
4. Project objectives should be determined realistically, in terms o f what i s likely to be achieved given
the short life and limited leverage o f a relatively small intervention.

5. Risks to project outcome should be more carefully analyzed and taken into account. In particular,
attention should be paid to climatic hazards and to subsidy regimes in other States and their likely
impact on the political viability o f proposed reforms.
6. Broader policy issues, such as power subsidies for agriculture, should be addressed at the level o f
country policy dialogue since they will inevitably and significantly affect the outcome o f projects such
as this.
7. Consumer subsidies should be clearly defined and transparent, adequately budgeted for, and
provided by the government in a timely manner.
8. Clear, user-friendly and quantitative M&E targets should be developed during project preparation
and systematically used through project closure to measure the outcomes o f the project’s goals. T h i s i s
especially important when the objectives embrace an ambitious State-wide sector reform, as in this
case.

WATERSHED MANAGEMENT HILLS I1
(1) Involving local communities in the planning and implementation o f natural resource management
interventions improves outcomes by enhancing ownership, by accessing exclusive local knowledge and
information, and by better integrating the conservation goals with local livelihood concerns.

(2) That having been said, mobilizing local communities and building their capacity in support o f
conservation and development objectives takes time. But such efforts are as critical as external finance
in achieving project objectives and work powerfully when matured.

(3) Since many conservation measures in watershed projects typically benefit landowners, it i s also
important to have pro-poor interventions targeting the weaker and marginal segments o f the community
in order to increase their stake in the project as well.

(4) For projects with a demand-driven planning and implementation modality and with multiple -conservation and productivity -- objectives, it i s essential to have a well planned and executed
monitoring and evaluation framework with relevant output and outcome indicators, especially to help
assess the trade-offs involved in large allocational changes across project components and t o help
project staff and the beneficiaries make more informed choices consistent with both conservation and
development.

RAJASTHAN DPEP
There i s a need for a reliable monitoring and evaluation system to assess project impact. A monitoring
evaluation system that i s functional from the beginning o f a project i s critical for understanding the
impact o f various interventions, identifying problems and bottlenecks, and for talung corrective actions.

2. Implementation and supervision performance are greatly impacted by adequate numbers o f key staff
members and their stability. During a period o f rapid expansion in the state, the number o f school
supervisors did not expand and staff turn over (especially at the state level) was extremely high,
effecting continuity o f leadership and quality control.
3. Teacher availability and productivity are key ingredients for achieving overall program outcomes.
Teacher policies need to include incentives for placement and retention o f teachers in difficult areas
and improved teacher attendance (on which the current project was strangely silent). There needs to __
be

3 more

careful examination o f the policy implications and incentives from a teacher management
system having both civil service appointments and the hiring o f contract teachers.

4. Greater accountability in service delivery across institutional levels will be important for accelerating
the pace towards better educational outcomes. Educational managers at all levels, in state offices to the
school, need to be made accountable for outcomes (e.g., improved student learning outcomes and better
management performance); this will require more results-oriented evaluation and oversight by
supervisors and civil society (more engaged and active community education committees and NGOs).
5. Effective implementation o f decentralization plans (down to the community level) requires careful
assessment o f the motivations o f key stakeholders and realistic timelines for capacity and consensus
building. T h i s often takes more time than expected.

6. The growth o f low-cost private primary education, a new phenomenon in Rajasthan (and throughout
India), requires more attention and careful evaluation, since i t i s unclear h o w equitable and effective
such schools are. Also, i t i s necessary that the E M I S be modified to include the growing private schools
enrollments.
7. Project supervision by the W o r l d Bank should be regularized and harmonized with that undertaken
by the government as done effectively in DPEP1, but Bank task team leaders also need the freedom to
undertake supervision activities on an ad hoc basis and in response to emerging problems.

8. I t i s important for projects like DPEPl t o draw expertise and creativity fi-om the existing pool o f
experts and resource persons, but it i s also energizing for projects to take advantage o f fresh insights
and new thinlung provided by a limited number o f non-insiders.

HIVIAIDS I1
NGOs have a critical role to play in mapping high-riskbehavior and delivering services to the most
marginalized groups. However, limited NGO capacity and difficulties in contracting procedures remain
major constraints to expanding service coverage o f high-risk groups, and the efficacy o f NGOdelivered interventions has not been evaluated.
0

0

0

0

National HIV/AIDS programs tend to under-spend on interventions for high-risk groups and
over-spend on interventions for the broader population, even in countries like India where
high-riskgroups are the main dnvers o f the epidemic. Only two-thirds o f planned spending o n
targeted interventions was disbursed, compared to nearly double the amount planned for
prevention in the general population.
The use o f inappropriate indicators, sporadic monitoring, and the lack o f periodic evaluation o f
individual components severely limits the scope for improving program effectiveness. The
project failed to monitor trends in risk behavior among the groups targeted by the project, or to
evaluate the efficacy o f key program components.
Autonomous SACS have functioned more efficiently than previous institutions linked t o the
state Ministries o f Health, but continued high turnover o f directors and staff vacancies,
including NGO coordinators reduce their effectiveness.
Financial issues, such as budget allocations and disbursements, should be clarified with
relevant government planning agencies so as to mitigate financial flow problems and avoid
disbursement delays.

I

AP ECONOMIC RESTRUCTURING
The ICR contains a number o f useful lessons beyond the usual lessons on the importance o f
ownership including particularly (with some selection and adaptation):
1. Synergstic opportunities in multi-sector projects must be identified at the design stage and
pursued in implementation. An over-arching strategy and over-arching set o f development
objectives at the outset i s important for achieving this.
2. Early funding and initiation o f baseline surveys, with at least the M&E design and any contracts
for the baseline ready for approval ahead o f project effectiveness, would help to ensure
actionable and timely M&E findings.
3. Great care i s needed in the choice o f indicators that they not only reflect the intent o f the project
but are also measurable and, to the extent possible, test attribution.

MAHARASHTRA HEALTH SYSTEMS
1. U s e r fees contribute vital resources towards non-salary recurrent costs that can make a substantial
difference to the quality o f care at hospitals.
2. Hospitals need to be given clear guidelines o n who i s exempt from such charges, and the purposes
for which such funds can be used.
3. Rationalizing service delivery through uniformity in the size and service mix at each type o f
hospital i s possible and contributes to better management o f the health system. For example, training
programs can then be standardized, QA programs can be established, and a uniform reporting system
can be put in place - all measures that would increase the clinical effectiveness o f the hospital.

4. Establishinga strong monitoring mechanism i s critical for good management. The system needs to
be simple and user friendly, focusing on a few meaningful indicators. Ensuring that baseline data are
made available prior to Project Effectiveness and following up systematically o n the agreed indicators
will provide a basis for measuring results and help in learning lessons. Also a feedback mechanism i s
necessary whereby all functionaries get regular comparative evaluations o f their performance.
5. Phasing in o f civil works needs to be built into project design, and delays in implementing any
phase should be dealt with decisively through cancellation o f works. If not, the construction program
drags on and the hospitals are barely commissioned at project closing. Thus many o f the hospitals have
to forego the opportunity o f benefiting from software inputs and quality improvement measures. As a
result, predicted project outcomes are not fully realized.

I

UPDPEP1ll
1. With strong government commitment (both political and financial) it i s possible t o create
universal primary education programs that cover both improvements in access and learning outcomes;
with effective implementation (as in UPDPEPIIIboth can move in a positive direction.
2. Continuity o f project staff, especially at the state, district, sub-district, and school levels i s
important for the process o f implementation and change to proceed smoothly.
3. Good preparation work, including the use o f baseline learning data and social assessment surveys,
can yield important contextualized information that can help in the customization o f the intervention

package (e.g., specification o f intermediate outcomes). However, t o be useful such features need t o be
tracked during the life o f the project and responded to if they reveal weaknesses.
4. Setting good performance indicators i s important but these need to be accompanied by accurate
baseline values and realistic targets in order show whether or not progress was satisfactory.
5. For projects that aspire to improve equity (such as UPDPEPIII and i t s concern for improved
primary school access and learning outcomes among the disadvantaged), outcome indicators must be
broken down by social group, so that equity improvement can be tracked.
6. With the maturation o f the GOI's efforts to promote universal enrollment in quality primary
education i t i s time for the government to create more impact-oriented program designs, providing
managers with the data they need t o be able to attribute change to specific project interventions and t o
determine where (among districts) strengths and weaknesses are evident (with a willingness to provide
remediation where weaknesses are found). T h i s would mean addressing the counterfactual in project
designs and bringing India's strong analytical slulls t o bear o n project efforts and results.
7. The decision to support third party evaluation efforts with respect to r i s k y and potentially
controversial policy positions in the project was a reasonable one (reflected in project covenants), but
the learning from such studies needs to be made available and passed o n to the designers o f follow-up
projects.

TELECOMS SECTOR REFORM TA
0

0

When projects are complex and the experience in managing such projects i s limited, it i s
essential to appoint a project management consultant early on, and to ensure there i s
appropriate buy-in for their recommendations.
Additionally in telecommunications projects, it i s better to proceed in a phased manner, and
develop and test a prototype, before expansion to a h l l y scaled up system.
When a project uses two subcontractors, it may be essential t o establish a clear reporting
structure, with one party reporting to the other, so that ultimate responsibility lies with one
contractor. Requiring domestic productiodmanufacte o f technical parts, may add to project
complexity.
In the telecommunications sector where technological advances are a key driver o f change, it i s
necessary to build flexibility into the project. In this project, this has allowed for project
realignment where necessary, and facilitated the redefinition o f needs and reallocation o f
resources.

IMMUNIZATION STRENGTHENING PROJECT
Technically sound research in important program areas can lead to better policies. Injection safety
research has led t o a decision to introduce (safer) auto-disabled syringes for the immunization program
nationwide, which could have major positive implications in immunization quality and effectiveness in
India.

0

0

Successful monitoring o f progress with a large-scale priority program o f this kind needs much
greater attention to data sources, timeliness and quality. Available datdservice statistics were
inadequate for program monitoring and mid-course corrections.
A high level o f political awareness and attention i s a major asset in reinvigorating a large and
lagging program.
Clearly delineated roles and responsibilities o f center and states and follow up to ensure that

0

0

these roles and functions are being adequately executed will ensure beter results.
Development objectives must be carefully calibrated to reflect the scope and inputs supported
under the project.
Shared vision will strengthen partnership between the government and the development
partners. The polio eradication program i s a good example o f strong partnership resulting in
sound program planning and management.

AP DPIP

'

1. I t i s n o t realistic t o expect a poverty reduction project such as APDPIP t o achieve i t s
objectives within a five year t i m e frame. Such projects should rather be implemented over a
long-term horizon, say 10-15 years, so that the government can adopt a programmatic approach
towards planning such programs.
2. Autonomous institutions need appropriate institutional arrangements, quite different
f r o m a n o r m a l PIN. Such institutions may need to deal with new types o f products, such as
insurance and marketing, and need the flexibility to recruit from the open market.
3. Follow-on projects should wait until the preceding project i s well under implementation.
It would have been better that the follow-up APRPRP was launched at least a year later so that,
by that time DPIP could have been more well entrenched and well established without any
distractions, and the problems associated with a program expanding too rapidly could have
been avoided.
4. Capacity building should b e given very high priority. Implementation o f sub projects should
start only after sufficient capacity building i s achieved. Any attempt t o fast track without
proper foundation can result in manipulation and diluting project objectives.
5. Scaling up can n o t happen through external teams. These projects need to invest in
community to community mechanisms o f scaling up and mobilization.
6. Mechanisms f o r transparency and disclosure, community monitoring and social audit
ensure effective and efficient use o f project funds and have important spill-over effects.
i
F o r example, these elements induce communities t o amplify their voice in making public
expenditure work for them by participating in local government processes. Social Audit, with a ,
transparency o f process and participatory process, i s a very effective tool for ensuring fiduciary
safeguard.
7. There are l i m i t s t o social mobilization in reaching certain groups: The project has
mobilized a large proportion o f POP and Poor households into the SHG fold. However, certain
households (migrants, seasonal migrants, households with aged persons and the destitute)
could not be mobilized into the SHGs. There are inherent limitations to social mobilization. A
separate strategy would be required to address households and individuals who cannot be
mobilized into the SHGs.
8. C o m m o n interest groups a r e less likely t o survive in the absence o f SHGs. In the absence
o f micro-finance activities, there was n o cementing factor in the CIGs that could ensure their
sustainability. Closely knit and functionally effective SHGs are a prerequisite for fund
management, asset promotion, retention and i t s productive use.
9. Institution o f appropriate book-keeping arrangements are an essential prerequisite f o r
I
successful financial management. Providing hand holding support t o the book-keepers,
periodic auditing o f accounts, institution o f suitable audit arrangements o f the project are an
integral part o f transparent and accountable financial management for sustainability o f the
CBOs.
10. CBOs provide a lower
___ - r i s k ~.credit m a r k e.-..-.,..._I
project
- ..
experience reveals that the
t f o r banks:The
..-. .

_
_
_
_
_
I
_

CBOs provide an elastic and r i s k fiee credit market for the banks. The very high SHG loan
recovery ratio (95%) in the project districts i s a testimony t o the good repayment behavior o f
the SHGs.

ELEMENTARY EDUCATION PROJECT (SSA)
A well-managed centrally sponsored program can provide a powerful vehicle to mobilize
ownership and commitment o f stakeholders to a common mission. Flexibility to support
differentiated needs i s central to addressing the challenges in diverse local contexts.
Inputs, such as adequate physical facilities, free textbooks, and teacher training, are necessary for
achieving quality education, but they need to be accompanied by sufficient attention to classroom
processes. Improving instructional delivery and learning outcomes takes time, particularly when
educators are unsure which methods t o encourage.
A strong focus o n equity in program design can help narrowing o f gaps between those who receive
services and those who do not, but the poorest and most marginalized populations are often very
hard to reach. Special efforts are required to address access and equity concerns for the poorest,
particularly in upper primary education, particularly in urban and state-aided schools.
SWAP financing and supervision can w o r k w e l l with a small number o f donors (four in the case o f
this project) who are w e l l coordinated. Data collection and analysis i s crucial in monitoring
progress o f large projects on a regular basis.

GUJARAT HIGHWAYS
1. Success of aproject is rests on strong continued leadership and commitment of the top
management. This project enjoyed strong leadership in the government, in the implementing
entity, and in the Bank team. All three contributed to the project's success.
2. Stakeholder consultation process is part of the product. The Environmental Management Unit in
the implementing entity was successful not only because o f effective training, w e l l planned impact
mitigation, and recovery o f roadside community and water supply facilities but, especially, because
o f continuous and enduring community consultation programs and processes t o achieve community
acceptance.
3. Strong and cooperative contract management ensures good, cost-effective results. The Employer
and the Consultant worked together toward the same objectives. Well-informed project
management, supported by knowledgeable consultants, started at design, continued through
procurement and control o f cost and time schedule t o completion. The Consultant was also able to

UP SODIC LANDS
Projects scaled-up from pilots that explore development options and modalities and identify
winning combinations tend to be successful provided all the lessons, positive and negative, are
learned. However, as with the pilot, the appraisal team needs to bear in mind institutional and
physical constraints and mitigate them.
Involving project beneficiaries in project design at the field level builds local ownership and
encourages development o f local capacity to manage and maintain project assets after completion.
Independent M&E, provided i t i s timely, greatly assists project managers to keep o n track o n
achieving development objectives. However, because the independent M&E substitutes for the
governm&t's o& efforts,consideration
has .to be given to ensure that there i s sufficient
..-.-.
.- ___-I.__.
_____________.______.._______.____..--~-~._-__..._____.____..___I_

government/agency capacity to maintain the M&E system after project closure.

KARNATAKA HIGHWAYS
1. Decentralization of task leadership and supervision of theproject to the Bank country office has
many benefits. Decentralized task leadership o f the project enabled the Bank team to monitor and
supervise the project effectively through the conducting o f frequent site visits. Many critical issues
(e.g., delays in implementation) thus received more timely and adequate attention from the Bank
side. [A bank wide assessment o f the Resident Office supervision may merit a study].
2. Institutional and policy reforms should be implemented incrementally and sequentially. Entity
restructuring and implementation o f reform take much time, because o f the need to involve all
affected parties, build political consensus and ownership, and re-design some o f the reforms to
adjust to new circumstances. Some o f the reforms (e.g. road financing instruments, changing the
mind-set o f a traditional works-executing agency to a corporatized road management entity) will
take more than one project cycle duration to implement. The Karnataka State Highways project
experience mirrors that o f many other projects in that when plans include sophisticated policy and
institutional interventions, they need to be tackled incrementally, with phased actions to modernize
and strengthen core management functions within the existing context.
3. Inter-agency cooperation is important for timely and compliant project implementation. Lack o f
communication between the implementing agency and local government authorities can lead to
delays in the implementation o f social safeguards, especially in or near urbanized areas. In
addition, in resettlement, a lack o f cooperation can result in different interpretations o f ownership
o f land and unclear delineations o f responsibilities. Inthe Karnatarka project, an action plan was
developed by the PWD, including remedial measures, to address this issue. The need for remedies
could have been prevented if the implementing entity had cooperated more closely with the local
authorities and informed them o f the compliance requirements with respect to the social
safeguards.
4. I t i s likely that the situation described above, with some local variation, prevails in general in many
client countries, not only with respect to safeguards but also with utilities. An MOU with a clear
explication o f requirements and delineation o f responsibilities between the implementing entity and
the other relevant entities would be a very practical solution, as recommended by the Bank’s
supervision mission late in the project.

2
rcl

0
W

2

PI

I€--

[

4
x

-B

m

B

E

u

8

8

a

8

8

2

ru
0

x
M
B

s

v)

B

s

I

I

8

8

.

2

ru
0

m

x

2

i-

B

2

m

8a

0

3

e,

ti
a

rn

3

%!

8

I

I

I

I

a

8

.

I

8

.

8

I

8

8

2

cu

0

h

F

cr

s

m

m

3

I2

-

L

2

k

0

x
M
22

2

CA

2
cd

U

8

8

8

E.

a
e,

2

F4

v-

8

3

B

to

8

8

.d

m
e,
V

'Es

1

Y

2
rcl

0

W

h

k

+

s

wl

.

.

2

ru
0

m

9

p1

v-

B

4

h

Yt
Y

s
c

tn

fi

u
cd

B

A

8

I

. .

m-

x
M
B

2

VI

B
5
3m

4

U

India Country Strategy Annex 6, Page 1 o f 2

ANNEX 6: COMMUNICATIONS, CONSULTATIONS, AND OUTREACH STRATEGY

As highlightedin the CAS Progress Report (April 2007), communications and outreach have
become an integral part o f the Bank’s program implementation. The Bank has developed a
multi-pronged strategy aimed at facilitating a greater exchange o f development knowledge
and improving the quality o f operations by strengthening the disclosure and transparency
aspects o f i t s projects.
Project Communications
Strengthening communications aspects in project operations will continue to form a large
part o f the Bank’s commitment to enhancing public communications, transparency, and
disclosure. Strengthening the capacity o f implementing agencies and officials to
communicate and consult effectively with their stakeholders is a challenge often faced in
development projects. Attention to these aspects early during prepvation makes i t possible
to integrate them into design and implementation. A significant part o f this effort will
include supporting counterparts in the government meet their disclosure obligations under
the Right to Information legislation.
Dissemination & Outreach
In terms o f knowledge exchange, the Bank has created new platforms for enhanced
interaction with a broad range o f stakeholders, including NGOs and other c i v i l society
organizations, the media and the private sector, academicians and think-tanks and
government officials at both the state and national level. N e w initiatives like theme-based
consultation sessions, a series o f interactions called the Development Dialogues, closer
collaboration with the chambers o f commerce, discussion forums with editorial heads o f
media organizations, and state-focused workshops have helped achieve the objective o f
broadening the Bank’s engagement with i t s stakeholders in India.

Extensive consultations with stakeholders have underscored the need for greater engagement
and knowledge exchange at the state level. The Bank will thus increase the frequency and
depth o f i t s interactions in various states to allow for a greater level o f engagement with
people and organizations directly involved with Bank initiatives and projects. This will
include creating specially-tailored information packages for state-based audiences; setting
up platforms for taking forward the development discourse specially in the low-income
states; and using the opportunities provided by project launches to h l l y acquaint beneficiary
populations and local stakeholders with the aims, objectives, timelines, etc. o f Banksupported projects.
The Bank has stepped up i t s proactive approach to the dissemination o f various knowledge
products, allowing for a greater cross-fertilization o f global and in-country development
knowledge and experience. The Bank’s Public Information Center, with i t s network o f 18
regional libraries across the country, i s emerging a major channel o f knowledge-sharing and
a platform for discussion and debate on development issues. The PIC will continue to lead
the Bank’s engagement with youth through its program o f collaboration with leading

India Country Strategy Annex 6, Page 2 o f 2

educational institutions. Extendingthe PIC services by opening up some satellite PICs in
various regions o f the country is under discussion.
Other dissemination channels include a country-specific website in English and Hindi
(www.worldbank.org.in and www.vishwabank.org). The website i s the World Bank’s mostvisited country website, reflecting continuous efforts made to provide relevant and timely
information about the Bank’s knowledge products and project operations. A bi-monthly
newsletter sent to about 10,000 interlocutors, regular press releases and briefing notes,
summaries o f major reports (all often translated) and a range o f other print and electronic
products complete the range o f dissemination materials.

India Country Strategy Annex 7, Page 1 o f 7

ANNEX 7:

A DECADE
OF DEVELOPMENT
POLICY LENDING
I N INDIA

Introduction
1.
While national Development Policy Loans (DPLs) have been a useful Bank
instrument across the world to support policy-based reforms with fast-disbursing budget
and/or balance o f payments support, in India they have not been requested since the early
1 9 9 0 given
~ ~ ~the~ generally prudent macroeconomic setting. State-level DPLs (formerly
called Sub-national Adjustment Loans, or SALS) have instead been important. An
innovative instrument within a federal setting in large countries, they are designed to
provide quick-disbursing budget support to state governments to undertake fiscal and other
policy reforms. India was among the first countries within the Bank to receive sub-national
SALsDPLs, and i s probably the most advanced in terms o f design.
Origin and Context
Over the course o f the 1990s, following the liberalization o f trade, investment and
2.
macro-economic policies, states in India began to seriously compete for private investment.
Fiscal management and the investment climate at the state level grew in importance. In line
with this development, the focus o f World Bank assistance to India gradually shifted
towards the states. The 1997 CAS stated: "As thefocus of the reforms has shifted to the
states over the past few years, the Bank Group's assistance strategy is itself being reoriented
to focus mainly on those states that have chosen to embark on a comprehensive program of
economic reforms." Andhra Pradesh (AP), whose Chief Minister, Chandrababu Naidu, was
fast emerging as the pioneer among state reformers, was selected by the Bank as i t s initial

focus state.
3.
As if to underscore the growing importance o f states in carrying forward economic
reforms in India, the decade o f the 1990s closed with a serious fiscal crisis affecting the vast
majority o f states. The increased cost o f fiscally irresponsible populism had led to steady
deterioration in state finances over the decade, and the large pay hike following the central
Fifth Pay Commission award announced in 1999 was the last straw. The Government o f
India (GoI) faced increasing pressure from states for special bail-out packages. Go1 sought
the Bank's help in restoring state fiscal responsibility, Le., in inducing them to accept and
abide by a hard budget constraint in exchange for quick-disbursing and relatively cheap
financing. The context was thus created for reform-linked budget support operations to
qualifying states, consistent with the state focus approach o f the CAS.
Historical Overview
3.
Between 1998 and 2008, the Bank provided about US$2.5 billion in budget support
through 11 operations in six States (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka,
Orissa, and Uttar Pradesh) (see table A7.1). T w o operations totaling US$450 million were
dropped in two states (Karnataka and Tamil Nadu), after significant preparation efforts. The
2004 CAS indicated that state DPLs should not normally exceed 15% o f annual lending and
that there would be two such operations in a given year.

23

The only national S A L (in 1991) helped India undertake exchange rate adjustments and industrial, trade
and financial sector liberalization.

India Country Strategy Annex 7, Page 2 o f 7

4.
Although Andhra Pradesh was the first focus state, it was not the first recipient o f
Sub-National Adjustment Lending (SAL), as this instrument was not yet available in 1998.
So the first attempt at policy based lending to an Indian state was a US$450 multi-sector
investment project, the Andhra Pradesh Economic Restructuring Project (APEFU?), approved
in 1998, which was underpinnedby an agreed multi-year fiscal fiamework. This was
followed by the first SAL, the Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Reform and Public Sector Restructuring
Loadcredit o f US$250 million, approved in April 2000. The third state to become a ‘focus
state’ was Karnataka in 2001.

5.
UP’Sreforms, especially in the power sector, faltered in a context o f political
instability and short-lived coalition governments, and the state’s partnership with the Bank
weakened. Tamil Nadu joined Andhra and Karnataka as a focus state. The fact that by
2002/03 the Bank had as i t s main focus in policy dialogue three states which were both
relatively high-income and regarded as having better prospects epitomized a tension
between supporting reformers and focusing o n poverty reduction. There was growing
concern that lagging states were being overlooked in the Bank’s focus.24 The 2001 CAS
recognized this tension and addressed it by initiating a dialogue with Orissa, starting in
2002, which ultimately led to two SALLDPL operations, in 2004 and 2006 respectively.
6.
The 2004 CAS proposed a change o f approach from the ‘focus states’ strategy to a
broader focus on the twelve largest and poorest states. It stated: “Though the Bank Group
strategy w i l l retain an essentially reform- andperformance-based approach to the states, it
w i l l also change in ways that are intended to go as far as possible in opening up new
engagements with these largest and poorest states. I t More resources were envisaged for the
four poor states o f Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh.

7.

The entry o f Bihar into the set o f states receiving DPLs was a development o f great
significance. For many decades, Bihar had epitomized poor governance, caste-based
politics, poor law and order and the absence o f development f i o m the political agenda. This
changed in 2005 with the election o f a new coalition and political leadership strongly
committed to a developmental agenda. With Bihar and Orissa emerging as the main DPL
states, the Bank’s commitment to supporting reforms in low-income states appears to be o n
track. Renewed dialogue with UP around a possible DPL following the 2007 election o f the
state’s first stable majority government in over a decade points to a possible further
expansion o f D P L engagement in low-income states.

8.
The D P L to Himachal Pradesh (HP) in FY08 represented an exception t o the trend o f
focusing DPLs o n the lagging states. HP i s more prosperous than the average and has
significantly better-than-average human development indicators. The main rationale for this
exception was the fact that HP was the first state to commit to develop a comprehensive
state-wide environmental action plan, and the Government o f India expressed strong interest
in a D P L operation to this state, in the hope that it could serve as an example for other
mountainous, less developed states along India’s border regions.

24

This was often referred to as the “What about Bihar?” question.

India Country Strategy Annex 7, Page 3 of 7

Results and Effectiveness
9.
An analysis o f fiscal outcomes suggests that, since 2000, DPL states had o n average
better fiscal performance and made more progress in reducing power losses than other states
(see figure A7.1). The non-DPL states also started to adjust, albeit with a lag. A visible
concrete impact o f DPLs was that “reform champions within a state found the additional
pressure of meeting milestones agreed with the Bank useful for overcoming political or
bureaucratic resistance to reforms. ... And in a chaotic democracy where there are any
number of <reform distractions ’ (scandals, natural disasters, political challenges), this was
a valuable

10.
DPLs brought about other benefits in addition to fiscal correction and reduction in
power sector losses, but these are harder to quantify. The DPL states were frontrunners in a
number o f reform areas, with significant demonstration effect o n all states. For instance,
Andhra Pradesh was the first to introduce a single-window clearance system for new
investments, which was then emulated by many. Karnataka was the first state to enact a
Fiscal Responsibility law, followed by Go1 and other states. Bihar has taken pioneering
initiatives in police reform and in teacher management.
Figure A7.1: Fiscal Deficit Reduction Faster and Less Volatile; Reduction of T& D
Losses (2000-2005) in Power Sector Better in DPL States versus non-DPL States
f wmnuf P ~ O ~ O J D V
651

f,w

rima>

Fmdl

nDYX

WDIIO

n-

*-bid

AndhmPradesh -P9

Hlmachal PmdeSh

MadhyaPradesh
West Bengal
War P mdesh

Punjab
Maharashtra
Gujarat
Tamil Nadu

Kerala

-6

-0

-5

0

5

U

6

20

Source: Bank staff estimates.
25 Stephen Howes, Deepak Mishra and V. J. Ravishankar, Ten Years of World Bank Sub-National Policy-Based
Lending to India; A Retrospective, forthcoming publication, 2008.

India Country Strategy Annex 7 , Page 4 o f 7

11.
Among the low-income states, the Bank has had the longest D P L engagement in
Orissa, with significant visible impact. Orissa has achieved the most remarkable fiscal
correction o f all Indian states since 2000, starting from an acute crisis situation. I t has also
achieved faster completion o f investment projects through improved prioritization within a
constrained capital budget during the fiscal correction period. I t is the most visibly active
state in terms o f anti-corruption actions and has risen to the first position in terms o f private
investments under implementation. Lessons from the experience in Orissa highlight the
importance of: (i)
patience and persistence for the WB to serve as a reliable partner through
difficult times building on a base o f strong analytical work, (ii)
consistency in maintaining
fiscal targets, (iii)
a consultative approach as taken by the Orissa authorities in explaining
the fiscal crisis to the public to build consensus around the necessary adjustments, and (iv)
as noted in the IEG I C R assessment, complementing the fiscal objective with other
investments and activities addressing the state’s key developmental challenges.
Strategic Importance o f DPLs
12.
The share o f state-level DPLs in total WB lending to India has been quite smallless than 6%. The DPLs have, however, had a strategic importance in terms o f four main
aspects: (a) they enhanced state-level cross-cutting engagement in policy making and
reforms across a broad front, involving engagement across state government departments
and across WB sectors; (b) they supported state-wide cross-cutting reforms (fiscal policy,
fiscal responsibility and financial management, public procurement, government efficiency,
accountability, transparency and anti-corruption) and accompanying sector policy reforms
(different in each state, but including reforms in investment climate, education, health,
agriculture, social safety nets, power, roads, etc.); (c) they enhanced AAA, TA for capacity
building, and investment lending as the policy and governance environment improved; and
(d) they stimulated partnership with other donors, such as DFID and ADB.

13.
From the viewpoint o f the central government, DPLs strengthen the Centre’s own
efforts to induce fiscally responsible behavior and improved governance in the states. The
primary interest o f the Ministry o f Finance i s to ensure that states take their commitment to
fiscal responsibility seriously; but Go1 i s also interested in more states embarking on reforms
to improve the effectiveness o f expenditures and enhance service delivery in those areas
which are state responsibilities, thereby improving development outcomes (and reducing the
need for central outlays through related CSSs).
Government o f India Guidelines
14.
The Go1 has an established process governing all state-level DPLs, and approves the
initial request and the authorization to appraisal, in addition to participating in negotiations.
The designated counterpart department for all DPLs i s the Department o f Expenditure (DOE)
within the Ministry o f Finance. In October 2005, the GoUDoE established new guidelines
for states wishing to avail o f SALS/ DPLs, supplementing earlier guidelines that were issued
in December 2002 and taking into account the context o f the recommendations o f the
Twelfth Finance Commission (see table A7.2). The biggest changes were: (a) an explicitly
definition o f the fiscal targets (zero revenue deficit and 3% fiscal deficit by 2008-09), and
the introduction o f multiple tranches as a design requirement so that states have to

India Country Strategy Annex 7, Page 5 o f 7

demonstrate sustained fiscal improvement to qualify for the full amount o f the loan; (b)
requiring enactment o f Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Acts in
states and formal letters o f commitment and milestones; and (c) at the same time, providing
greater flexibility and ownership by states o f their other reform directions and paths.
15.
W h i l e the 2005 Guidelines o f Go1 remain largely relevant and appropriate, some
revisions may be required in the next phase o f DPL engagement. First, the guidelines
require states to use a large part (in practice over 50%) o f DPL finds to retire old expensive
debt through debt swaps. There i s not much old expensive debt l e f t on the books o f state
governments, except for the National Small Savings Fund liabilities, which Go1 i s not
willing to swap. In the future, Go1 will need to allow states to use DPL financing as a
substitute for other sources o f deficit financing. Second, the requirement o f multiple
tranching may also merit reconsideration in cases where a track record o f reform has been
established and where single-tranche operations may be more appropriate given
considerations o f political economy or reform sequencing.
Future Challenges
16.
W h i l e the fiscal stress facing Indian states eased considerably during 2000-2008, the
year 2008/09 begun with several risks looming, including rising fie1 and food subsidy bills,
the impact o f the Sixth Pay Commission award on state salary bills, and a slowing down o f
GDP growth and hence tax revenues. This suggests that Go1 will continue to welcome Bank
assistance to help states remain o n a fiscally sustainable path while pursuing their
development objectives. The demand for DPLs will likely remain strong during 2008-12.

17.
Experience during the 2004 CAS period confirms that DPLs are one o f the W B ’ s
primary instruments to engage with poor states. The lessons learned from the positive
experience in Orissa and Bihar, the progressing dialogue in UP, and the problems
encountered in HP are the following: (i)
designing DPLs with strong client ownership takes
time, especially so in the poorer states with weak capacity; (ii)
the electoral cycle and
government stability are important: DPL discussions should begin early in the tenure o f a
client
government and should be broadly based in states with coalition governments; (iii)
efforts to accelerate preparation need to be channeled toward demonstrating creditable
commitment and building a reform track record; (iv) DPLs should be pursued in the context
o f a state strategy which uses the full range o f WB instruments to help tackle the k e y
development challenges facing the state.
DPLs are complementary to GoI’s initiatives in promoting state-level reforms
18.
through national schemes that provide financial support to states for pre-identified policy
and institutional reforms. This suggests that there may be scope for the Bank and Go1 to
work together to: (a) focus on lagging or weak-capacity states to support their capacity to
utilize more effectively the reform-linked centrally sponsored schemes; and (b) support
broader reforms o f such schemes at the national or state levels, using sectoral DPLs. The
Statistical Strengthening project developed toward the end o f the 2004 CAS period and still
under consideration by Go1 i s the first proposed Sector DPL in India and could test the
ground for such approaches.

India Country Strategy Annex 7, Page 6 o f 7

Table A7.1: State-Level DPLs

APEcoRec*

1998

Amount
(US$m)
543

APSALI
APSALZ

2002

250

Approved

2004

220

Approved

1996-04

APSAL3

2007

225

Approved

2004-

UPSALI

2000

250

Approved

2000-2002

KARSALI
KARSAL2

2001

150

Approved

1999-04

2002

100

Approved

1999-04

KARSAL3

2003

200

Dropped

1999-04

TNadul

2004

250

Dropped

2002-06

Orissa 1

2005

125

Approved

2000-

Orissa 2

2007

225

Approved

2000-

HPI

2008

200

Approved

2003-07

Biharl

2008

225

Approved

2006-

FY

Status
Approved

State Govt
(CM)Tenure
1996-04
1996-04

2963
Approved

Dropped

1998

543

0

1

States
AP

2000

250

UP

150

1

KAR

2002

350

2

AP,KAR

2003

0
220
125

0
0
0
200
250
0
0
0
0
450

1

2001

2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

0
450
425
2513

Numbers

0
1
1
0
2
2
11

KAR
AP, TN
Orissa
AP, Orissa
HP, Bihar

* APEW was not a S A L or DPL; i t was a multi-sector investment operation with a n agreed fiscal
framework. I t i s being counted here as it was the f i r s t attempt in India o f a policy based state level
operation.

India Country Strategy Annex 7, Page 7 o f 7

Table A7.2: Comparison o f the Go1 Guidelines
Topic

2002 DPL Guidelines

Fiscal Adjustment

Key focus. Target to limit (achieve)
consolidated fiscal deficit to 3% of
GSDP within a 3-5 year period.

2004 Debt
Sustainability and
External Borrowing
Guideline

Now referred explicitly to the 12" Finance
Commission (TFC) proposals and achievement o f
a zero revenue deficit and a 3% fiscal deficit by
2008-09
States are required to enact a Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM)
Act as a condition for accessing DPLs, using
2005-05 levels as starting bases and fiscal
correction path from that base
States furnish: (a) a Letter of Commitment with
fiscal correction path and outcome indicators and
milestones; and (b) Submits a Concept Note on
the proposal.

FRBM Act

Other
Commitments

Non-Fiscal
Objectives

State Governmentswould need to
send in requests with monitorable
indicators that would be then
discussed by GO1 with World Bank
and States concerned.
DPLs support a) structural reforms for
sustainablepoverty reduction; b)
programs for elimination of subsidies
and a sustainable programme for
power subsidy elimination or
containment; c) civil service reforms
including reduction of administrative
costs of governance; d) public sector
enterprise reforms including
divestment; e) overall focus on
poverty reduction and sector specific
parameters (infrastructure, education,
etc.) ingredients of MDGs should also
be reflected in action programme of
the DPL
(a) establisheda definition o f
debt-stressed states as
consolidated debt and
liabilities to total revenues
that exceeded 300%; 200%
for special category states;
and @) stipulated that any
external borrowing proposals
from debt-stressed states
would require concurrence of
DOE.

Debt Sustainability

Tranches

End Uses

Multi-year programme and negotiated
as one single programme with multitranches linked to achievement of
specific refom milestones. Multiyear programme fully laid out in
Bank's project documents, while legal
agreements for allocation of funds
may be processed separately for
different tranches. Where adjustment
programme falls behind by six months
or more or if adjustment path i s
unlikely to be pursued, the DPL could
be called off and remaining
undisbursedassistance cancelled.
Sal not to be used for meeting revenue
deficits.

2005 DPL Guidelines

(a) following TFC recommendations, revised the
debt-stress test to define the threshold as interest
payments to revenue receipts ratio that exceeded
20%; and (b) continued the general guidance that
debt-stressedstates would need the concurrence
of DOE(with some guidelines for approval) for
external borrowings, including DPLs. As long as
state borrowing within overall borrowing ceiling,
DOEwould have no objection; if in excess,
examined on case-by-case basis and DOEwould
discourage any such borrowing by debt-stressed
state.
Disbursed in 2-3 tranches, size to be determined
on case-by-case basis and triggered only on
achievement o f benchmarks in fiscal correction
path. If achievement of benchmark falls behind
by six months or more or if adjustment path i s
unlikely to be pursued, the DPL could be called
off and remaining undisbursed assistance
cancelled.

Primarily to cover retiring high coupon debt.
Other areas of reform may also be covered,
through this loan, as per concept note. States to
make provision in budgets or state plans only
after affirmation by DEA to that effect. Funds
passed on to states on a back-to-back basis for
IoansDPLs signed after April 1,2005

India Country Strategy Annex 8, Page 1 o f 6

ANNEX8: STATUS OF WBG DIALOGUE
WITH SELECTED LOW-INCOME
STATES
BIHAR

With a population o f 83 million, Bihar i s India’s third most populous state. It i s also one o f
India’s poorest states, with one in seven o f the nation’s poor residing in Bihar and about
41.4% o f the state’s population in poverty compared to 27.5% for all-India. Average state
per capita income in Bihar i s Rs. 8,838, which i s about a quarter o f the all-India level.
Bihar’s social indicators are amongst the lowest in Indian states, and at present trends it will
attain only two o f the eight MDG targets by 2015 (reduction in child malnutrition and access
to safe drinking water).
Since November 2005, the Government o f Bihar (GOB)has undertaken a comprehensive set
o f reforms aimed at growth, governance and fiscal adjustment. The main sectors covered
have included public expenditure management; infrastructure, especially roads; changes in
the health delivery system; decentralization o f administration and devolution o f power to
local government; technical and institutional fillip to agriculture, and education. The Bank
has been supporting these through a broad-based relationship encompassing technical
assistance, investment lending and a DPL. The Bihar Rural Livelihood project (US$63
million) was approved in June 2007 and the first Bihar Development Policy Loan / Credit
(US$225 m) in December 2007. A multi-sector capacity building technical assistance
program (approx $5 million, complimentary to the DPL) has begun implementation, and
other areas o f technical assistance include public expenditure management and flood
forecasting. Several national projects supported by the Bank are currently being
implemented in Bihar, including one-third o f the Bank’s Lucknow-Muzaffarpur Highway
project (US$620 m). Altogether, Bihar’s share in the Bank’s total net commitments in India
is about 6 percent.

At the joint South Asia Retreat o f the World Bank, DFID, ADB and Japan in November
2006, i t was agreed to pilot a strategic partnership between donors in Bihar. Since then, the
ADB, DFID, and the Bank have developed a joint strategy for Bihar which was presented to
the Bihar Chief Minster in February 2008. This partnership has enabled the donors to better
serve the client through reduced transactions costs and offer the best possible package o f
support to Bihar o n the basis o f a rational division o f labor and innovative partnership
efforts.
Looking ahead, the Bank i s developing i t s strategy to intensify and scale up i t s engagement
with Bihar. This will include capacity building, scaled-up investment lending, as well the
next phase o f Development Policy Lending. Projects currently under preparation include
Rural Roads, DPL I1and 111, and Panchayati Raj Institutions, and future lending will depend
o n both the pace o f reforms as well as the state’s absorptive capacity.

JHARKHAND
Carved out o f Bihar as a separate state in 2000 in recognition o f i t s tribal population (which
comprises 28 percent o f i t s 27 million population), Jharkhand has enormous mineral and

India Country Strategy Annex 8, Page 2 o f 6

forest resources and is home to prodigious iron ore and coal deposits. However, for all i t s
natural wealth, i t remains one o f India’s least prosperous states, and i t s social indices are
also far below the national average - the literacy rate and child malnutrition both stand close
to 54 percent. To add to i t s problems, infrastructure, especially in the vast rural tracts i s
negligible - only 26 percent o f Jharkhand villages are connected by all-weather roads, less
than 25 percent have access to electricity, and only 7 percent have rural sanitation facilities.
N o r i s agriculture particularly sustaining with a mere 10 percent o f Jharkhand’s potentially
arable land i s actually irrigated.
The Bank has done an economic report and a financial accountability assessment on the
state, both o f which were not able to pave way for a Wher dialogue mainly due to a
fragmented and politically fragile government. The Bank has no state-specific project for
Jharkhand and the forestry project that was under preparation has been abandoned. Six
multi-state projects are currently being implemented in the state, with one rated
‘unsatisfactory’. The performance under others i s not very encouraging due to lack o f
capacity in the state and frequent transfer o f project implementing staff.
Going forward the strategy would be to discuss a plan through which some cross cutting
issues in the multi-state projects under implementation could be addressed. A portfolio
review, first o f its kind will be organized in the state. This may pave way for a dialogue o f a
low level engagement o f technicaVnon-lending technical assistance and preparation o f a
modest state specific project, l i k e the rural livelihoods project in the state.
MADHYA PRADESH
Following the division o f the previous Madhya Pradesh (MP) state into a new MP and
Chhattisgarh in 2000, the state now has an estimated population o f about 60 million (Census
2001). Estimates from the 61“ round o f the National Sample Survey indicate that in
2004/05 about 38% o f the population lived below the national poverty line, making the state
the fourth in terms o f number o f poor. Agriculture accounts for 35% o f state GDP and over
70% o f employment. More than one-third o f the population belongs to socially and
economically disadvantaged groups consisting o f scheduled tribes (20%) and scheduled
castes (15%), amongst the highest such shares in India. The tribal population i s isolated in
physical terms since i t lives in forests and relies on subsistence agriculture and collection
and sale o f forest products. Poverty and human development outcomes for the tribal
population are lowest than for other groups in the state. The state also has high gender
inequality as measured by access to health, education and employment. On the positive
side, in the last decade MP accelerated its push towards educational reform and the results
are evident in the dramatic growth in literacy from 44% in 19991 to 64% in 2001, close to
the national average. Although gender disparities in literacy remain, these have narrowed
considerably during the decade. Serious bottlenecks remain with regard to health sector
outcomes, despite the state’s increased focus on human development.

With poverty reduction and sustainable economic growth as i t s primary objectives, GoMP
has also embarked on far-reaching policy reforms in the public sector, encompassing fiscal
management, governance and decentralization, with support among others from the Public

India Country Strategy Annex 8, Page 3 o f 6

Resource Management Project provided by the ADB. Although these reforms reportedly
have accelerated economic growth, i t remains below the national average. A widening
disparity between agriculture and non-agriculture growth rates has pushed MP’s duality
index above the national average, suggesting that MP’s overarching objective should not be
just to further accelerate growth, but also to make growth more inclusive.
Currently, the Bank has two active projects in Madhya Pradesh focused o n putting in place
the enabling conditions for inclusive growth by reviving rural livelihoods and improving
water resources management. Total lending under these projects amounts to US$484
million. Bank lending to Madhya Pradesh i s complemented by the ADB’s, which has an
active and long-standing relationship with the state in both the power and roads sectors.
Looking forward, GoMP has sought support to replicate and scale up the positive outcomes
that have been achieved under the ongoing livelihoods project through a second operation,
which i s now under preparation.

ORISSA
Orissa, with a population o f 38 million, i s one o f India’s poorer states. Oriya society i s
characterized by relatively high incidence o f subsistence production, traditional land tenure
patterns and pronounced social and regional differences. About 85% o f the population lives
in rural areas. The Scheduled Tribes (STs) constitute 22% o f the total population in Orissa
(compared to 8% in India) and 40% o f the poor in the state. The present Government, led
by the Biju Janata Dal, a regional party and an ally o f the Bhartiya Janata Party, was elected
in early 2000 for a five year term. Unlike in many other Indian states, elections held in
Spring 2004 returned the incumbent Chief Minister and coalition in Orissa, for a second
term that extends until 2009 - reportedly due to the clean and anti-corrupt image o f the
leadership.
Orissa has stood out among Indian states in terms o f prosecuting and convicting corrupt
officials, politicians and tax evaders. Such actions have had a deterrent effect on tax evasion
and corruption, positively impacting fiscal outcomes. Assisted by the state’s initiatives to
improve the investment climate as well as central level policy changes, the rate o f economic
growth in Orissa has risen to 8.5 percent o n average during 2002-07 as compared to 7.8
percent for India as a whole. Rapid economic growth, spurred by investment in metal
industries, has had a multiplier effect throughout the economy. Opportunities for
nonagricultural self-employment, as well as wage employment, have expanded. A
remarkable fiscal turnaround, achieved through the state’s own efforts and complemented by
perfonnance-linked support from the central government and external donors, has created
space for developmental initiatives and high-priority public investments by the government
o f Orissa. Significant improvement in human development indicators has occurred in the
last h a l f a decade, while very big challenges remain as Orissa i s still well below middleincome states in terms o f i t s Human Development Index.
The World Bank has a long-standing engagement with Orissa, consisting o f analytical and
advisory services, investment and development policy loans and credits. The first o f a series
o f development policy loans/credits, was disbursed in December 2004; the second

India Country Strategy Annex 8, Page 4 o f 6

loadcredit became effective in September 2006. Three Bank-financed investment projects
have been recently completed in the power, health and water resources sectors. Three new
projects have been recently approved, for state roads, rural livelihoods and tank irrigation.
While the Bank had postponed approval o f a State Roads Project in 2002, due to the acute
fiscal stress at that time, a bigger version o f such a project has n o w moved forward as a
result o f the fiscal turnaround. Trust fund grants are being used t o support pilot interventions
in tourism and in marketing o f medicinal plants and handlooms through an Orissa Fund For
Development Initiatives. A social development-led program o f non-lending technical
assistance goes hand in hand with the second DPL and has focused o n issues o f inclusion
and local accountability. The Bank is supporting the government in i t s quest t o craft a
system for greater benefit sharing in mining. I t i s also working with the ‘government to
support follow-up to large-scale social audits under the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme.

A recently completed Detailed Implementation Review (DIR) o f the Bank financed Orissa
Health Systems Development Project identified a range o f administrative weaknesses that
provide opportunities for fraud and corruption, and pose risks to effective health outcomes.
Following the DIR, the government has developed an action plan to specifically deal with
the major weaknesses highlighted in that report. Reform measures envisaged include
strengthening the procurement and contracting systems o f Department o f Health and Family
Welfare (DoHFW) through the development o f a Procurement Reform Plan, including the
establishment o f a specialized organizatiods to manage procurement o f drugs, equipments
and services, establishment o f independent systems to undertake concurrent quality control
and checks o f the procurement activities, as well as a third party verification system for
health investments.
Going forward, requests for further development policy lending will be considered by the
Bank to support the medium-term program for the socio-economic development o f Orissa.
Addressing major issues o f inclusion, and o f strengthening governance, including the postDIR action plan, are likely to be the focus o f the third Orissa DPL.

RAJASTHAN
The Bank’s program o f support to Rajasthan focuses on addressing the k e y development
challenges facing the state: (i)
Reviving economic growth with a special focus o n rural
livelihoods and adaptation to climate change, water resources and public financial
management; and (ii)
improving human development outcomes by strategic investments in
the social sector and community-driven development initiatives. The Bank’s support has
two aspects: A modest program o f technical assistance to the state government for
strengthening governance, financial management, and regulatory reforms that follows up
from the 2005 State Economic Report, titled Rajasthan: Closing the Development Gap.
Other reports recently completed include: an assessment o f the Rural Employment
Guarantee scheme and the state pensions scheme.

India Country Strategy Annex 8, Page 5 o f 6

The current portfolio o f two state investment projects (amounting to $214 million o f
lending) are focused o n strengthening water resource management and improving health
outcomes in the state with a special focus o n socially lagging groups such as scheduled caste
and scheduled tribe groups. The state is also part o f the multi-state rural road project in
which i t s share stands at US$128 million.
Discussions are also under way to continue supporting attainment o f Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), with proposed investments in a rural livelihoods development
in drought prone areas, a multi-sector Agricultural competitiveness and diversification
project, a medium-scale irrigation development project, and a rural drinking water supply
and sanitation project.

UTTAR PRADESH
With 166 million people, Uttar Pradesh is not only India’s largest state but in many ways the
key to India achieving its fill potential. W h i l e the state’s poverty rate fell from 40.9 per cent
in 1993-94 to 29.2 per cent in 2002-03, there are s t i l l 48.8 m i l l i o n people living below the
poverty line. The state’s human development indicators also pose some stark challenges,
especially in terms o f a relatively l o w sex ratio, and high fertility and infant mortality
numbers. Agriculture provides about 40 percent o f Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP)
and over two-thirds o f employment in the state. UP i s India’s largest producer o f food grains
and oilseeds in the country, and accounts for about h a l f o f India’s sugarcane production.
Relative to its own performance in the 1 9 9 0 the
~ ~ economy o f Uttar Pradesh has done better
in the recent past. Per-capita income has grown at 2.7% o n average during 2000-05,
compared to only about 1% in the mid 1990s. Agriculture and allied activities have clocked
an average growth o f 2.8% and there has not been a single year o f negative growth. This is
better than agricultural performance in India as a whole. Data o n per-capita household
expenditure from the National Sample Survey (NSS) show that recent growth has been more
inclusive and ‘pro-poor’ than before. Same data show that the gap between Scheduled
Castes and the rest o f the population has narrowed between 1994 and 2005. Data from a
smaller sample generated as part o f the Bank study Moving out of Poverty, indicate that
upward mobility has been even more significant among the Other Backward Classes
(OBCs). Education outcomes have improved faster than all-India over the past decade,
including substantial progress with expanding coverage by mid-day meals.

W h i l e agriculture remains important for inclusive and poverty reducing growth in UP, it
cannot be denied that the state cannot catch up with the rest o f India without a rapid
acceleration o f industry and services. Recent surveys show that lack o f adequate and
affordable infrastructure (particularly electricity) i s the biggest binding constraint to private
investment in UP, followed by regulatory burden (the “Inspector Raj”), and law & order.
Anti-competitive practices (including contractor mafias), complexities in tax administration,
and problems in accessing finance are also major impediments to doing business in UP.

The fiscal situation in the state has improved significantly since 2000-01, the year when the
World Bank approved the first Indian sub-national adjustment loadcredit (SAL) o f
US$250m to the Government o f Uttar Pradesh (GoUP). In the last two years, i.e., 2004-06,

I n d i a Country Strategy Annex 8, Page 6 o f 6

GoUP has succeeded in enhancing i t s investment and development budget significantly,
while at the same time reducing the overall fiscal deficit.

The quality o f public spending, however, remains poor and below the average for other
states. Much o f this owes to l o w levels o f accountability and can be addressed by a multipronged approach that focuses on greater access to information, improved competitive
procurement, business process re-engineering, and by improving the delivery o f primary
education, health, and drinking water in rural areas.
The World Bank has, over the last decade, supported the state in implementing two
important interventions in agriculture - the UP Diversified Agriculture Support Project and
the two Sodic Lands Reclamation projects - which have had significant impact on the
poorest o f the poor.

Ongoing Bank support includes projects in state roads as well as rural roads, state health
services and state water sector restructuring, worth a total amount o f US$1 billion. The state
also receives significant portions o f Bank assistance in a range o f nationaYmultistate
projects, especially in the transport sector, where more than U S $ 1.3 billion o f Bank finance
i s aimed at improving roads and highways in Uttar Pradesh.
Politics in UP has been witness to three-way and sometimes four-way contests between the
major contending parties, differentiated along caste lines, which led to fractional verdicts
and unstable coalitions during 1990-2006. The absolute majority w o n by the BSP under the
leadership o f Ms. Mayawati in M a y 2007 promises political stability for the first time in 15
years. Soon after assuming charge as Chief Minister, Ms. Mayawati announced her top
priorities to be good governance including improved law and order, employment creation
through rapid industrial and agricultural growth, and more effective protection for the poor
and disadvantaged sections o f the population.
GoUP has requested, through the Government o f India, for Development Policy
Loadcredits from the World Bank to strengthen government effectiveness and help
accelerate private investment led economic growth. Such an operation is currently under
preparation, focusing on (a) fiscal governance, including reform o f the public procurement
system; (b) investment climate reforms; (c) power sector reforms; and (d) selected service
delivery and administrative reforms.

India Country Strategy Annex 9, Page 1 o f 4

ANNEX 9: WORLD BANKEXPERIENCE
WITH CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES

1.

Centrally sponsored schemes (CSSs) have been in place for several decades in
India. They arose as a mechanism by which the central authorities could support particular
programs in sectors which were constitutionally under state responsibility. The schemes
have evolved with a wide variety o f forms depending o n the particular objectives and
institutions involved. Typically the schemes involve disbursement o f resources from the
central budget to various implementing agencies at the state or lower levels. The Centre i s
not typically involved in implementation which therefore may vary widely from state to
state even within uniform parameters. In many cases even the flow o f resources may
bypass state fiscal mechanisms through the use o f off-budget societies which receive the
central finds and disburse to implementing agencies.

2.
The World Bank has been engaged with CSSs for a long time. However, only with
the rapid expansion o f such schemes during the Tenth Plan period and their association with
some o f the key MDGs did the CSSs gain prominence in the WB program as a k e y
instrument to scale up impact. During the period o f the 2004 CAS some 28 operations were
linked in some way to CSSs (table A9.1).
3.
In order to assess WB experience with CSSs as an instrument to scale up impact i t
is useful to recognize at least three different types o f WB support to CSSs:
1.
The WB may engage with direct budget support to the central ministry or agency
sponsoring the scheme, which may either cover an entire subsector in all states such
as primary education or a national vertical program such as TB control. In these
cases the WB accepts the parameters o f the scheme as applied across all
participating states and may either j o i n an on-going scheme (such as SSA1) o n
which the WB will have limited influence, at least initially, or may work with the
central sponsor o f the scheme to help formulate the parameters o f the scheme (such
as SSA2). In either case the WB follows a uniform approach to financial
management, procurement and monitoring and evaluation across states; however in
implementing this uniform approach, the WB may or may not use country systems
(or state systems if procurement i s done at the state or local level). The WB may
also pool i t s support with other partners in a SWAP-type operation (SSA1 and 2).
(WB operations following this type o f engagement are listed in the first section o f
table A9.1.)
.. The WB may support a CSS only in certain states or finance only a specific set o f
11.
investments. If the WB limits i t s support to particular states i t may provide support
to the CSS counterpart funds if those are required from the state. The financial
management and procurement arrangements are generally “ring-fenced” in these
operations but there is a uniform approach across the whole scheme. Support to
rural roads i s an example o f this type o f engagement (operations o f this type are
the second section o f the table).
... listed inthe
111.
WB may also support a CSS through individual state operations that run
Finally
parallel to the CSS but are not formally part o f it. In these cases the WB may
require additional actions at the state level or only finance states which agree to

India Country Strategy Annex 9, Page 2 o f 4

follow the guidelines that the WB has identified for engagement in the sector. In
these cases financial management and procurement are ‘ring-fenced’ and follow WB
procedures. The rural water supply and sanitation (RWSS) operations are typical o f
this approach (third section o f the table).
Most WE3 operations supporting CSSs have followed the first model, providing
support to national schemes, usually following WE3 procurement guidelines. Support to SSA
has been exceptional in i t s use o f country systems under a SWAP. Although this remains
the goal, the findings o f the DIR, which referred to several operations supporting CSSs in
the health sector, have resulted in the WB taking a much more restrictive view o f centrallevel engagement in CSSs with correspondingly greater emphasis on the robustness o f
financial management, procurement, and project management capacity at the state level,
which would suggest future CSS involvement may be more o f the second or third type. A
state-by-state approach as in the District Primary Education projects or RWSS allows the
WE3 to follow fiduciary systems more easily but at the cost o f reduced leverage in
contributing to the policy parameters o f the CSS and therefore to impact.

4.

5.
CSSs also suffer from poor M&E frameworks. The central government has so far
mainly tracked disbursements from the central budget to a state or district-level entity, with
limited systems to track how the money is being spent and to monitor outputs at the point o f
service delivery and, with a few exceptions, very little attention to intended outcomes. This
lack o f a results culture has emerged as a significant shortcoming as the resources devoted
to CSSs have mushroomed. One consequence has been little feedback into design
modification or improvements in resource allocation during implementation. The political
economy o f CSSs is linked to spending and pays scant attention to the incentives which the
scheme either creates or i s intended to change. A recent exception i s the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme for which Go1 requested WE3 support in setting up a robust
M&E with top international expertise (this has been supported as part o f the W B ’ s AAA
program and therefore i s not covered in the table). However, delays linked both to the
conceptual framework for evaluation and access to data have severely hindered this activity.
6.

Another key issue affecting the capacity to scale up impact through CSSs is
sustainability. CSSs usually have had their origin in the desire at the central level to
promote a specific objective by augmenting the resources o f the states. When this goal has
a well-defined delivery mechanism and clearly measurable target (e.g. eradicating TB or
polio) there has been considerable success, in part because once the target i s achieved there
i s little more that the state needs to do. But other goals (e.g. improved early child nutrition
or delivering primary health care) are much more complicated with significant recurring
responsibilities at the state level. In such instances the incentives generated by CSSs have
perversely resulted in the states abdicating responsibilities in those areas covered by the
CSSs and concentrating their resources elsewhere (often in areas o f lower impact, e.g.
district or state hospitals). As a result the financial sustainability o f the activity continues to
depend on central allocations. This bifurcation o f funding sources also reduces the
likelihood that any entity will develop a comprehensive and integrated overview o f
programs and activities in the sector, which fiuther erodes sustainability.

India Country Strategy Annex 9, Page 3 o f 4

7.
A key dimension o f sustainability in terms o f impact is the effect o f CSSs on
capacities and responsibilities across levels o f government. In theory the provision o f
additional resources to lower levels o f government should improve the capacity to deliver
services; but in practice CSSs have come to rely on agencies outside the official institutions
charged with implementation at the state and local level. CSS funds are often disbursed
through special societies which bypass state and local fiscal agencies. Further the
bihrcation o f sector responsibilities (primary health vs. hospitals) means that local
institutions which should be developing an integrated approach to key challenges (achieving
an MDG, for example) are not able to do so.
8.
These considerations suggest that the WB critically assess i t s future engagement
with CSSs ex ante to ensure that the following factors are adequately addressed:
a results chain for the CSS with clear linkages between inputs, outputs and
outcomes (service delivery goals),
a governance and accountability framework which includes measures to follow the
money and verify outputs, consistent with a risk-based approach to WB
implementation support,
adequately funded M&E to mark progress toward outcomes,
design flexibility to ensure responsiveness to local conditions and evolving
circumstances,
implementation structures and arrangements which support India’s on-going
decentralization recognizing that multiple CSSs converge at the district level
resulting in a significant institutional burden.

India Country Strategy Annex 9, Page 4 o f 4

Table A9.1: Centrally Sponsored Projects funded by the Bank in FY05-08
Sector
Management
Unit

Project ID

Revised
Closing
Date

Board
Approval

Project Name

Net Comm
Amt. ($)

WB support to the scheme at the national level
WB support to an on-going scheme with acceptance by the WB of the basic parameters of the scheme

1 1

14
15

I

SASHD

SASHD
SASHD

I

I

PO10511

PO75060
PO78539

16

SASHD

17
18

SASHD
SASHD

PO99047
P102547

26
27
28
29

SASEI
SASEI
SASDU
SASDU

PO50653
PO73369
.PO83187
PO90592

I

Malaria Control

I RCHII
TBII
Thud National HIV/AIDS
control
Vocational Training India
Elementarv Education (SSA 11)

Karnataka RWSS I1
Maharashtra RWSS
Uttaranchal RWSS
Punjab RWSS

I

I

6-Dec-97

22-Aug-06
22-Aug-06

I

31-Mar-05

I

I 30-Sep-10 1

118

31-Mar-12

360
170

26-Apr-07

30-Sep-12

250

5-Jun-07
15-Mav-08

31-Dec-12
31-Mar-10

280
600

18-Dec-01
26-Aug-03
5-Sep-06
14-Dec-06

31-Dec-07
30-Sep-09
30-Jun-12
31-Mar-12

152
181
120
154

India Country Strategy Annex 10, Page 1 o f 5

ANNEX10: INDIA
PORTFOLIOMANAGEMENT

Portfolio Status

1.
Key Portfolio Data. India remains the largest IDA beneficiary and the third-largest
IBRD borrower o f the Bank Group. The total net commitments at end-June 2008 stood at
around $13.8 billion (ofwhich IBRD was $8.2 billion and IDA $5.5 billion) and the undisbursed balance at about $9.2 billion (IBRD $5.3 bln and IDA $3.9 bln). Currently, 18
projects, or almost a third o f the portfolio, with a combined net commitment o f around $3.5
billion, or 25% o f the total portfolio, are more than five years old. Twelve projects
(including a DPL) closed in FY08, three with unsatisfactory development outcomes and/or
implementation progress. For investment lending projects, the average age at closing was
7.3 years and ten out o f eleven projects had at least one extension to the original closing
date. By sector, sustainable development (comprising the agriculture/rural, energy,
environment/social, rural water, transport, and urban sub-sectors) has the largest share o f
the portfolio with 44 projects amounting to US$6.9 billion, or 50% o f total net
commitments. Human Development is the second-largest sector in the portfolio (11 projects
with 17% o f total net commitments), followed by Finance (two projects; 5%) and P R E M
(three projects; 5%). By borrower, about 62% o f the Bank’s current portfolio is
concentrated in 19 state-level operations. Public undertakings, centrally sponsored schemes
(CSSs) and financial intermediaries account for the remaining 38% o f the portfolio,
effectively covering all the states and union territories in India.
2.
Portfolio performance. With the downgrading o f project ratings in a number o f
cases, the percentage o f commitments-at-risk reached a five-year high o f 23% at the end o f
FY08, well above the Bank average o f 17%. This, together with a five-year l o w
disbursement ratio o f 18.3%, has raised concern. Slow disbursement i s a cause o f concern
in Agriculture & Rural Development, Health, and Urban Development among subsectors
and in Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, and Karnataka among major borrowing states. In
addition, in sectors, states, or entities that have otherwise performed well, some large
projects (e.g. Mumbai Urban Transport, Rural Credit Cooperatives, Punjab Rural Water
Supply and Sanitation (RWSS) and UttarakhandRWSS) have had a relatively slow take-off
in FY08. Interms o f riskiness, the percentage o f commitments-at-risk constitutes around a
fourth o f the total net commitments in some sectors (e.g. RWSS, Transport, Health) and
some states (e.g. Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka). Risk flags related to Financial
Management, Procurement, and Slow Disbursement are dominant in the portfolio.
Agriculture & Rural Development, Health and RWSS among sectors, CSSs, and Karnataka
and Punjab among states have the highest number o f risk flags. The summary disbursement
and risk status o f projects in India v i s - h i s the Bank as o f June 2008 i s shown in the first
table below, while the summary sector and state portfolio performance i s shown in the
charts.

India Country Strategy Annex 10, Page 2 o f 5

Education
Energy
Environrn en t
Finance & Pvt.Sector
Health
PREM
Rural W/S & Sanitation
Social Development
Transport
Urban / Urban Water

3
3
2
2
8
3
5
1
10
5

2 5%
33%
60%
100%
2 0%
40%

17%
19%
14%
16%
21%
2 6%
21%
2 0%
15%
18%

4 0%
31%
71%
100%
23%
57%

16%
14%
6%
8%
31Yo
24 Yo
21 %
22 %
16%
18%

29 %
91%
34%
13%
14%
49 %
23 %
8%
24 %
8%

23 %
19%
25 %
24 %
22 %
16%
19%
37 %
22 %
17%

State I E n t i Portfolio Performance as of June 2008
Bo

55
50

45

- 40
0

E35
5

:30
rn
E25

- 20
YD

0

15
10

5
0
0

5

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 E5 70 75 80 C
ComrnlbnentsatRI&(W

Portfolio Improvement Program

The India Program has embarked on a number o f actions to facilitate improvements
3.
in the overall effectiveness o f the program in meeting objectives, and to begin to address
some o f the challenges highlighted above. These actions are also aimed at forming
reasonable responses to the deeper and more systemic issues raised in the DIR o f health
operations. This set o f actions (known as the Improvement Program (IPE)) also draws upon
the observations and recommendations made in the recent IAD audit report, which
examined eight investment operations, as well as institutional analyses such as the IDA 14
Internal Controls Review and the Volcker Panel Review. The IPE also takes o n board the
conclusions and recommendations o f the most recent internal India Portfolio Review in
selected sectors, completed in July-August 2008, as well as initial findings from a r i s k
assessment framework o f ongoing projects. The India Program continues i t s regular

India Country Strategy Annex 10, Page 3 o f 5

practice o f periodic portfolio reviews with the Ministry o f Finance and key operating
ministries.
a. Supervision. A number o f follow-up actions are being put in place to facilitate
improvements in supervision planning and practices, and encourage higher levels o f
effort. A s highlighted above, there has been a trend towards slower disbursement
and longer implementation periods with a concentration o f risks in certain sectors
and states. This calls for a targeted approach that includes actions such as:
(i) carrying out a baseline risk assessments o f the entire portfolio, using a risk
methodology that explicitly integrated risks, including fraud and
corruption, by state, sector and project;
(ii)shifting more resources to implementation, including more support for the
projects identified as high-risk projects, as required;
(iii)
flagging persistent implementation problems and high-risk operations to
management, via pre-mission and post-mission meetings chaired by the
Country Director;
(iv) proactively following up on mitigation actions including through
restructuring and cancellations; and
(v) strengthening or developing GAAPs and other means to instill demand
side accountability mechanisms in ongoing projects.
In addition, the approach is to be more pro-active in anticipating changes, especially
in the political economy, that may affect project implementation. This will be done
through greater use o f the External Communications Team to monitor early warning
signs. Other innovations are expected to be introduced to bolster economies o f scale
and to identify cross-cutting concerns that require a systemic response by the Bank,
such as selective expansion o f thematic supervision, either by sector (e.g.
livelihoods, transport) or cross-cutting theme (e.g. financial management,
environment, M&E, GAAP implementation). Approximately two thematic
supervision missions are planned to be undertaken each year. Another tool that i s
planned to be introduced on a pilot basis involves reviewing and adapting certain
aspects o f supply-chain or l i f e cycle methodologies to detect vulnerabilities in
operations during implementation. Finally, new guidelines, related to reinforcing
and improving the f l o w and diversity o f information regarding implementation
performance, such as tracking complaint mechanisms, are being tested o n a pilot
basis in certain sector portfolios. SASSD, with the largest portfolio o f projects
under implementation, has already adopted such guidelines to enhance supervision
planning. One o f the key changes made thus far in this realm is the use o f “red
flags” to detect anomalies in procurement processes.

b.

Clarifiing roles and responsibilities of Sector Managers (SMs) and Lead Specialists
(LS), and members of the task team. Part o f the IPE addresses roles and
responsibilities more generally through the project cycle. This will help to improve
both project design and supervision. Particularly with respect to supervision, there
are gaps and ambiguities in the roles o f task teams with respect to contract
management, certain procurement-related matters, handling o f complaints and
follow-up to fiduciary concerns. Teams find themselves with conflicting demands

India Country Strategy Annex 10, Page 4 o f 5

o n their time and face difficulties in scheduling and participating in missions, to
mention but a few o f the problems that teams face. In addition, taking into account
the scale and nature o f the Bank’s operations in India, the current reassessment o f
the role o f Lead Specialists based in the Delhi office complements a region-wide
effort to strengthen country-level coordination, accountability, and strategic
orientation. I t i s anticipated that increased delegation will help focus attention o n
detecting anomalies, resolving conflicts, and taking decisive and timely action to
remedy implementation problems. The India Program thus expects to: (i)
further
delegate decisions from S M s to the L S s in the field t o improve timeliness and
responsiveness o f decision-making; (ii)
initiate work to address many o f the
questions related to roles and responsibilities and provide updated guidance to Task
Teams in these areas, as well as pilot training methods to help Task Teams start to
apply such guidance to their work; and (iii)
promote the use o f structured spaces
such as COSO-in-Projects workshops that are n o w being piloted to help teams
identify and address risks in projects, and help them try to resolve implementation
problems.
c.

Portfolio Management Activities of the CMU. Another dimension o f the IPE is the
strengthening and reinforcement o f overall portfolio management in India. This
entails initiating work to expand and deepen the CMU’s efforts at distilling
supervision and implementation experiences, piloting approaches aimed at drawing
attention o f sector u n i t s and clients to bottlenecks and recurring problems,
examining ways by which some approached and solutions can start to be
implemented more widely, and piloting systems which could, over time, better
report and monitor emerging and existing risks, issues, and weaknesses in the
portfolio. If, during the course o f monitoring work, it is found that unanticipated
analytical work may be helpful, this may be proposed in discussions with GoI, under
the new Fee-based Services policy the Bank has put in place.26 This new policy
allows for such work to be conducted, while “un-bundled” from lending.
Specific actions under the portfolio management activities o f the C M U consist of:

(i)
promoting expansion o f the use o f risk assessment tools, as already developed
and piloted, while engaging the S M U s in a discussion o f the inherent risks o f the
portfolio; (ii)
initiating work to deepen the Program’s understanding o f current
supervision practices, including the frequency o f field visits, as well as recent
innovations such as 3rd party monitoring; (iii)
sponsoring approached proposed by
others that are related to India-wide mechanisms to respond to complaints as well as
encouraging greater access to information o n implementation progress; and (iv)
facilitating finding common solutions to common problems that have been identified
by the C M U or others, particularly as they pertain to fiduciary issues and GAAPs.
In addition, the C M U will: (i)
continue its practice o f canying out semi-annual
portfolio reviews with the client and sector management; (ii)
begin to extend this
initiate processes that could derive pertinent portfolioprocess to some states; (iii)
related information from text-based reports, such as Aide-memoires and other
26

The policy was updated following discussions with the Board on September 5, 2008. Details can be found
online at http://intresources.worldbank.org/OPSMANUAL/Resources/SecM2008-0376.pdf.

India Country Strategy Annex 10, Page 5 o f 5

project level reports, to be used as inputs to portfolio monitoring systems; and (iv)
coordinate closer scrutiny o f implementation status and results reports by SMs and
L S s to ensure realism o f ratings. T w o cross-cutting issues will be high o n the
CMU’s agenda: the design and implementation o f GAAPs and the development o f
institutional approaches to M&E. With respect to GAAPs, the CMU will review and
provide advice o n G M s both during preparation and implementation; and monitor
their impacts. With respect to M&E, the C M U will pursue the agenda set out in the
M&E study carried out last year, with a view to: (a) monitoring the results
framework and aligning inputs, outcomes and project objectives; and (b) reviewing
the status and existence o f baseline data, mid-term data, and data at project closing,
as appropriate.

A final dimension to improving portfolio performance i s to have “smarter” project
design. i t is expected that with “smarter” project design the practicalities o f supervisionand getting results on the ground-may be explicitly factored into project selection, choice
o f instrument, and project design. This entails: (a) stricter adherence to the
“Implementation Readiness Filters” during project preparation even if this means slowing
down new lending; (b) greater use o f the Project Preparation Facility to help improve
project readiness for implementation and build implementation capacity especially for
fiduciary, safeguard, and M&E aspects; (c) early assessment o f the appropriate approaches
4.

to procurement and disbursement (e.g. output-based disbursement) as part o f project design;
and (d) promotion o f greater knowledge acquisition and sharing o f experiences in the use o f
country systems.

5.

To s u m up, during the CAS period, the aims o f WE3 portfolio management efforts

are to:
a

a

a

a

a

a

Initiate work to put in place a risk assessment framework that explicitly and
holistically takes all risks, including fraud and corruption, into account.
Introduce and pilot supervision approaches and processes that build o n that risk
assessment, mitigation plans, and anticipated vulnerabilities.
Introduce enhancements to current portfolio management systems to help
managers target and adjust resources, promote management attention to
operations on the basis o f their risk, and sponsor processes that may help staff
better address those risks, and contribute new information emerging over time.
Initiate work to build o n existing systems and country-wide approaches that
would better distill information, discern anomalies, capture economies o f scale,
and promote collective action across the portfolio.
Pilot “smarter” project design that would better anticipate implementation risks,
promote outreach and rapid reaction to problems when they occur.
Invest in finding country solutions that can be institutionalized.

India Country Strategy Annex 11, Page 1 o f 8

ANNEX 11: SECTORAL GUIDELINES FOR ENGAGEMENT

General Principles

The following general principles o f engagement would be applied to all operational activities:
J

The use o f country fiduciary systems i s the preferred option for WB engagement. A s a
consequence WB activities will support strengthening the fiduciary, institutional, and other
operational systems and structures o f the government and relevant institutions. All DPLs would
include appropriate measures to strengthen the fiduciary systems o f government.

J

The design o f WB projects and programs will take into account existing implementation
capacity o f the relevant agencies. Complex projects and programs would include dedicated
institutional and procedural arrangements to facilitate implementation (including capacity
building support), in particular a clear and transparent definition o f oversight responsibility and
decision m a h n g authority.
J WB projects require a Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) which will be
developed with and agreed upon by the concerned implementing agencies. GAAPs should be
based on a value-chain analysis; they should have milestones and monitorable indicators; they
must be costed to the extent feasible.

J

WB projects and programs support the Right-to-Information A c t (RTI). They include measures
to assist relevant institutions to comply with RTI , in particular anticipating and financing
activities to disclose, pro-actively, key information regarding WB-financed programs and
projects.
J For WB projects and programs to be effective a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) system will be put in place t o assess and analyze outcomes, particularly those linked to
improved quality. These would include, as appropriate, “triangulation” o f information on
project performance and results through independent sources (e.g. community monitoring).
J WB projects and programs should have a financing plan linked to a results framework which
identifies clear and monitorable outcomes. Adequate baseline data should be defined and
collected prior to projecdprogram launch.
J WB projects and programs would provide for (demand and supply-side) capacity building
activities as necessary to strengthen the ability o f relevant institutions to design, implement and
monitor policies, programs and projects.

Principles o f Engagement -- Education
Support for elementary, secondary, vocational and technical education could be provided to central
agencies or programs and to states that:
J Make an explicit commitment to fundsupport both investment and recurrent costs associated
with WB-financed educational programs, projects and goals;
J Include project design elements which (i)
move towards decentralized planning and service
delivery, including increased community (or industry) involvement and/or oversight, and (ii)
recognize the ability o f civil society and the private sector to assist government in developing
education including through public-private partnerships;
J Focus o n inter-district variations in educational performance with additional support given to
lagging regions and/or to weaker districts in the state;
J Make an explicit link between outcomes and improved quality;
J

Demonstrate a firm commitment to improving fiduciary management o f both WB and public
resources, including third party audits and oversight.

India Country Strategy Annex 11, Page 2 o f 8

Principles of Engagement -- Health, Nutrition and Population
World Bank support at the central and state levels will be contingent upon policies and plans that:
J Include activities aimed at improving basic managerial processes such as planning, budgeting,
logistics, and procurement, strengthening accountability and incentives, creating a robust
information environment, sound M&E systems, and supporting service delivery PPPs;
J Onent the role o f the public sector toward greater emphasis o n oversight and stewardship o f the
sector as a whole, including performance links in public financing.
J Emphasize improved risk protection particularly for the poor;
J

J

Foster a network delivery model that takes a “whole system” approach by accounting for public,
private and NGO actors in defined geographic areas, integrating heretofore vertical programs,
and building horizontal links among service providers;
Create an enabling fiduciary environment that accepts short-term risks while strengthening (and
using) counttyhtate systems for procurement and FM for long-term development impact.

Principles o f Engagement -- Agricultural Technology, Competitiveness,Marketing and
Related Agricultural Support Services
World Bank support to the Centre and the states in agncultural extension, marketing and related
support services will be based on demonstrated commitment to:
J Foster farmer-centered public extension systems, which are (i)
decentralized to district levels
with effective integration o f the extension programs in crop, horticulture, livestock and other
related sectors; (ii)
focus on farm productivity enhancement and effectively linlung farmers to
markets; and (iii)
promote public-private partnerships and increased private sector participation
in the delivery o f agricultural extension and other support services (market information,
livestock services, etc).
J Provide efficient and competitive markets by: (i)
amending the Agricultural Produce Market
Committee A c t to foster multiple channels for marketing o f agncultural produce; (ii)
improving
the policy and regulatory environment for private sector participation in agricultural marketing;
and (iii)
promoting farmer/rural based organizations for facilitating post-harvest management
and marketing.
World Bank support for agricultural research would be based o n the Indian Council o f Agricultural
Research and State Agncultural University commitment to:
J Shift the research focus to a farming systems approach within a pluralistic agncultural
technology system that incorporates participation o f farmers and other stakeholders in
determining the research agenda;
J Increase institutional accountability in using public funds; and
J

Promote public-private partnerships in research, including through effective competitive grant
programs and other innovations.

Principles o f Engagement -- Rural Livelihoods
Investment lending support could be provided to states that demonstrate commitment to:
J Incorporate a community driven approach that involves direct financing t o community/user
groups and upstream investments in social and economic mobilization on a long term basis);
J Implement effective strategies to ensure inclusion o f the poorest o f the poor, including
vulnerable and otherwise disadvantaged social groups
J Establish an independent society for project implementation

India Country Strategy Annex 11, Page 3 o f 8

J
J

J

J

Support strong community based approaches to accountability and anti-corruption
Develop M&E systems tailored to the demand-driven nature o f livelihood interventions
Demonstrate willingness to engage with private sector, commercial banks and microfinance
providers in a public private partnership mode t o ensure sustainability o f investments and
access to credit and markets
Demonstrate willingness to converge various anti poverty programs using best practices in
rural livelihood development

WB projects would include TA support offered at both Centre and state level for developing
technical capacity to monitor, evaluate and reformulate the National Programs for Poverty
Elimination, particularly related to self-employment and rural livelihoods.

--

Principles o f Engagement Broad-based Rural Service Delivery and Strengthening o f
Local Governments
In the context o f India’s 73rdConstitutional Amendment, the W o r l d Bank could provide support to
states that demonstrate a strong commitment to:
J

J

Implement a legal framework that supports administrative and fiscal decentralization
Support the role o f local government entities to provide services and basic infrastructure to
their constituencies.

Principles of Engagement -- Water Resources
The WB aims to improve performance and sustainability o f the various sub-sectors (e.g. irrigation,
urban and rural water supply, hydropower and watershed management) by fostering coordination
between sub-sectors and encouraging identification and adoption o f best practices in water resources
management and development.
World Bank support could be provided in selected states or geographic areas where there i s
commitment to:
J There i s a commitment to reform as demonstrated by upfront or planned policy changes and
actions;
J Address water resources management cross-sectorally and identify champions and bring
multiple stakeholders are onboard from the outset;
J Focus on gathering and consolidating information relevant for the sector as the basis for
decision-making at the political level,
J Use cross-sectoral water resources management interventions t o contribute to sustainability;
and
4 Develop pilot activities to inform future policy malung and investments by the government.

Principles of Engagement

-- Irrigation and Drainage

World Bank support could be provided on a programmatic basis (i.e., over a 10-12 year time
horizon) to selected states that are willing to:
J Unbundle upfront overall water resource management from existing irrigation and drainage
(I&D) institutions;
J Analyze key issues and options to improve the productivity o f water in the I&D sector and
develop a prioritized investment program o n the basis o f a full appraisal o f options,
including economic, financial, institutional, technical, environmental, and social aspects;
J Strengthen I&D institutions at all service-levels, inter alia state irrigation agencies, water
users associations, corporations, and public-private partnerships, for efficient and affordable
service delivery;

India Country Strategy Annex 11, Page 4 o f 8

J
J
J

Develop an agncultural management strategy focusing on intensification and diversification;
Develop a strategy for financial sustainability o f service delivery operations;
Prepare appropriate legislation to support the necessary reforms t o help govern the I&D
sector according to modern and professional principles;
J Develop and support autonomous regulatory authorities in the water sector with clear
mandate for fixing bulk water tariff for various water uses to meet at least the O&M costs,
and for setting and monitoring service delivery standards;
J Strengthen governance and accountability processes in the I&D sector, including building
contract management capacity, and setting proper benchmarks and indicators; and
J Develop mechanisms to ensure that appropriate institutions work effectively together with a
shared vision to ensure that agricultural and other benefits o f more reliable irrigation service
delivery are realized.

Principles of Engagement -- Power
At the state level, World Bank support will be tailored t o the level o f commitment to institutional
reform, capacity building by state utilities and compliance with the Electricity A c t 2003.:
J In states indicating a serious interest in developing and pursuing reforms, the WB could provide
support to help shape reform strategies and mechanisms for implementation.
J
In states taking upfi-ont actions and policy changes on structural and governance reforms with
clear initial improvements in cost recovery and financial performance, the WB could provide
development policy lending support (with a power reform component), TA and investment loans
confined to financing items needed to advance reform implementation.
J

In states that are willing to open rural access and apply tariffs that at least cover the recurrent
costs o f rural electrification, the WB could provide investment loandguarantees to support
rural electrijkation .

At the national level, the WB could provide TA andor investment or guarantee instruments, for the
expansion and improvement o f rural energy access, both through formal utilities and alternative
service delivery modes (including PPPs). This would be dependent in part on:
J Policy reforms that make rural services sustainable, and
J Adequate implementation o f monitoring arrangements to track results.
The WB will seek, whenever feasible, to build on the assets already financed through the CentrallySponsored Scheme RGGVY.
Also at the national level, the WB, could provide TA or investment instruments (including through
PPPs) to support a low-carbon growth path. Investments in generation (hydropower, cleaner coal,
and renewable energy) and transmission would be contingent on:
J Progress in implementing the Electricity Act; and
J Good implementation performance under existing projects, if any.

Principles o f Engagement -- Rural Electrification
World Bank financing for rural electrification will seek to improve the quality o f rural power
supply by mitigating barriers to private investment in distributed generation (including from
renewable energy based) plants (1-3 MW) in selected states. The overall thrust i s to find an
economically and technically sound approach to energize the last mile, building on assets already
financed by the centrally-sponsored scheme RGGVY. WB financing could be available for states
that demonstrate commitment to the following principles for all rural electrification investments in
the sector:

India Country Strategy Annex 11, Page 5 o f 8

Institutional:
J State-level Grant Administration. In each participating state an agency would need to be
responsible for receiving, appraising and administering project proposals. This agency
should have wide presence in the state, be able to operate independently t o ensure objective
appraisal o f financial sustainability, and as far as possible face incentives to conduct
transparent, good quality project appraisal. T h e appraisal should be based on pre-agreed,
objective criteria that include financial viability o f the project.
J Level Playing Field for Alternative Service Providers. All rural electricity service providers,
including communities, user associations, and entrepreneurs as well as the incumbent
utilities, should be given equal access to funding, power supply, and other resources t o
implement rural electricity projects.
J Technology-Neutral Grant Provision: Capital grant provision should be technology neutral,
with conventional, renewable, grid and off-grid technologies eligible for support.
Technology choice should be determined by objective economic criteria.
J Support for Alternate Service Providers. There should be a clear strategy and appropriate
resources for providing technical, development and mobilization support to alternative
service providers.
J Community Participation: Projects would be developed with involvement o f communities
for which support and resources would be provided by the agency.
Financing:
J Cost recovery. The basic principle would be for the tariff to be adequate to cover 10% o f
capital cost plus full O&M cost; however, exceptions to this principle would be acceptable t o
the extent required to reduce tariffs (not below 50% o f average cost o f supply) for the first
30 kwh for lifeline supply to those below the poverty line. In this case the implied subsidy
will be paid - to the service provider or directly to consumers when feasible - through an
explicit budget allocation.
J Capital Cost Sharing. Service providers should be required to share at least a portion o f
capital costs (i.e. 10%) to ensure that they have incentive to sustain systems.
J WB funding would be used to build on assets already financed by central government
transfers for rural electrification investments (notably by addition o f distributed generation).
J Project preparation funds. Adequate funds and resources for the design and preparation o f
the project would need t o be available.

Principles o f Engagement -- Urban Transport
World Bank support will focus on:
J Implementation o f the National Urban Transport policy, with in particular priority given t o
pedestrian, non-motorized transport and public transport.
J Cities that are undertalung a city mobility development plan, developed through stakeholder
consultation and cities that are undertaking reforms to improve interagency coordination for
planning, programming and regulating or managing urban mobility, in particular through
institutions like UMTAs, and display commitment and capacity to manage pre-construction
activities (LA, R&R, etc.).
J Projects or project component where financial sustainability i s ensured (often implying
institutional, regulatory and financial reforms).
Note:
J

Even i f a state has not engaged in cross-cutting urban reforms (such as repeal o f the rent
control act), urban transport projects could s t i l l go forward provided they are consistent with
the above points.

India Country Strategy Annex 11, Page 6 o f 8

J

Urban transport projects are better handled as stand alone projects when they address more
complex issues (such as bus operation and priority, mass transit, sophisticated automated
traffic control), while they are more conveniently addressed within broader urban projects
when they concern simpler issues (such as road maintenance, simple traffic management
improvements, non-motorized transport).

--

Principles of Engagement Urban Development
In the context o f the principles outlined in the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Reform Mission
(JNNURM),the WB could support urban programs geared t o strengthen:
J Institutional clarity (the clear definition and separation o f urban policy-making, regulatory
and service provision functions between and within tiers o f government);
Fiscal and financial viability (strengthened capacity o f ULBs t o both undertake investments
and develop viable models for operations and maintenance);
J Enhanced voice (strengthened mechanisms for communities to influence the budgetary
decisions o f urban local governments t o ensure both demand-side efficiency and broader
public sector accountability);
J Services to the poor (reforms and investment that lead to systematic improvements in the
access by poor households to services and assets).

,
Only on an exceptional basis could World Bank support include stand alone projects in individual
cities to pilot slum improvement approaches, specific public private partnerships, or regulatory
reforms.

Principles of Engagement - Railways
J

J

World Bank support would focus o n the establishment o f the institutional framework and
capacity to develop and deliver the dedicated freight corridor, in particular the development
o f a dedicated strategic business plan and o f a consistent M&E framework.
World Bank engagement with Indian Railways will be based on overall progress in Indian
Railway’s reforms including those agreed with ADB and in addition:
0
Adoption o f improved operation and management practices;
Commitment and capacity to manage pre-construction activities (LA, R&R, etc.);
0
Gradual phasing out o f non-core activities and increase o f private sector
participation;

Principles o f Engagement -- State Highways and Rural Roads
Criteria for the provision o f WB support would be include::
J Commitment o f the state to economic prioritization o f road expenditures; including adoption
o f a sound multi-year program based on a core state highway network strategy;
J Existence o f a long-term road maintenance strategy, including funding aspects, based on
global asset management systems developed and implemented;
J Commitment and capacity for responsible management o f environmental and social impacts,
including road safety, and pre-construction activities (LA, R&R), effectiveness o f
coordination with related Departments;
J Investment in management information and M&E, public information, involvement o f road
users in planning and monitoring;
J Government-led activities to increase competition in the sector for the supply industry
(design, construction, supervision);
J Increase in the level o f private sector participation in the provision o f road services, through
investment, construction and O&M, and a combination o f approaches l i k e BOT-Tolling and

BOT-Annuity;

India Country Strategy Annex 11, Page 7 o f 8

J

Rural roads: l o w levels o f connectivity, application o f appropriate and cost effective rural
road design standards, agreement o n prioritization o f a core network.

--

Principles o f Engagement National Highways
Criteria for provision o f WE3 support would include:
J
J
J

Commitment to an adequate policy framework to address PPP, modernization o f t o l l
collection, road safety, axle load control and HIV/AIDS issues;
Strengthenedadequate institutional capacity for pre-construction activities (LA, R&R, etc.);
Strengthened institutional capacity to better manage surveys, design and construction
activities o f highway development projects.

--

Principles of Engagement Disaster Risk Management
Recognizing that the disaster management agenda, especially post-disaster recovery and
rehabilitation, includes a wide ranging and complex set o f issues which cannot be addressed through
one project solely focusing on emergency response, W o r l d Bank support in disaster r i s k management
to the Centre and states will be contingent on::
J Demonstrating commitment to a long-term disaster r i s k management framework and
systematically up-grading the policy, institutional, technical and financial capacity for
managing disaster risks;
J Incorporating risk reduction approaches systematically into the design and implementation
o f emergency preparedness, response and recovery programs
J Demonstrating sustainable financial capacity both to undertake investments and develop
viable models for operations and maintenance, such as risk mitigation infrastructure,
technological installations such as early warning systems, etc.;
J Providing ownership and leadership to integrate disaster risk mitigation into the overall
sustainable development policies and planning.
On an exceptional basis the program could include stand-alone innovative projects like risk financing
in order to advance the learning regarding catastrophe risk and individual risk financing or transfer.

Principles o f Engagement

-- Environment and Climate Change

Given the relatively modest engagement relative to the vast needs in India, WB involvement in
promoting environmental sustainability and addressing climate change would be selective with an
emphasis o n areas o f greatest need and impact. Services could be provided to states and sectors
where there are:
J high poverty-environment impacts and a commitment to reform demonstrated by upfront or
firm policy changes or actions
J high environmental risks to the WE3 portfolio
J a commitment to move to a country systems approach
J a commitment to strengthen and develop a monitoring and evaluation system for analyzing
outcomes
For adaptation, priority would be given to states or sectors based on degree o f risk and a
demonstrated commitment to address climate issues that i s verified through an adaptation plan or a
strategy under development.
For mitigation o f greenhouse gases, priority would be given to the implementation o f the National
Action Plan o n Climate Change, and to support clean technology and energy efficiency measures
identified in the Eleventh Plan or Integrated Energy Policy.

India Country Strategy Annex 11, Page 8 o f 8

--

Principles of Engagement Social Development
WE3 involvement in the promotion o f social development would be take into account the following
priorities:
J states where issues o f equity and inclusion are salient with greater involvement o f civil
society
J states where governments have displayed initiative in resolving social development concerns
J sectors where empirical evidence i s weak and the discourse clearly needs greater evidence
Principles o f Engagement-- Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
In support o f GoI’s Swajaldhara Program and Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC), the WE3 could
support institutional and policy reforms in RWSS that promote decentralization o f service delivery to
PRIs while enhancing resource and fiscal sustainability and universal access t o services. In
particular WE3 support would align with the following principles:

Institutional:
J Decentralized Service-Delivery Approach: Providing Panchayats (PRIs), in partnership with
user groups, control over resources and responsibility for investment planning,
implementation, and operations and maintenance (O&M).
PRI strengthening: Supporting vehicles for PRI-level capacity building and a shift in
responsibility o f state sector institutions to facilitators supporting PRIs.
Financial
J PRIs and communities will decide on the mechanisms o f financial sustainability by ensuring
the funding o f O&M costs, costs for depreciation, and subsidies for poor consumers through
a combination o f local taxes, user charges and in-kind contributions.
Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion
J Policies o f GoI’s Total Sanitation Campaign program will be broadly followed for
household and community sanitation.
J An integrated approach will be taken to water supply, environmental sanitation works, and
changing hygiene behavior, including common support mechanism.
Water Source Protection, Development and Management
J Developing and adopting satisfactory policies relevant to the sustainability o f drinking water
sources; and
J Improving water resource management by supporting water conservation and recharge
measures, promoting integrated water resource management by communities and GPs, and
promoting rainwater harvesting.

h

k

4-

s
m

B

N

rr

0
N

0 0
r
7

a 0

w r

0

bco

m o

mco

mm
h

r

-

0)o

-

$

-

0

-

0

R

h m

zo
2:

R

India Country Strategy Annex 13, Page 1 o f 1

ANNEX13: COUNTRYFINANCING
PARAMETERS

m
A
I
COUNTRY F’INAECING PARAMETERS
Date: March 24,2005
The country financing parameters for In& set out below have been approved by the Regional
Vice President, South Asia Regon and are being posted on the Bank’s mteml website. These
parameters would be applied w i t h the overall ffamework of the Bank‘s Country Assistance Strategy for
FY05-08 (see India: Counby Assistance Strategy, R2004-0170l3, IDAIR-2004-020813, September 17,
2004).
Ibm
Cost sharing. Limit on the
proportionof individualproject
costs that the Bankmay

Parameter

vp to 1Wh

finance

R m m t costfujanciag. Any

No country

limits that would apply to the
overall amount o f recurrent
expenditmes that the Bank may

Letps limit on

recurrent cost

financing.

finance

Local costfinmcmg. Are the
Yes.
requzemmtsforBank
financmg of local expendlms
met, namely that. (1) financng
requkements for the coim&y’s
developmentprogram would
exceed the public sector’s o m
resources @.E., &om taxation
and other revenues) a d
e x p e c ~ ~ ~ c b r r o ~ :
atld (si) the hancing o f foreiign
expendttmes alone wouldnot
enable the Bank to assist mthe
financmg o f mhiduaiprojects
No.
Taxes and d d e x Are there
any taxes and dales that the
Bankwould not finance7

RemarksExplanation
Cost h
g arrangements m mdnidual projects would be
managed to stay wthm the aggregate lendwg envelope, the
Bauk’s overall financmg share IS not expected to change
srgxuficantly The Bank’s ftasncmg percentage m each project
may z?rry !?om p r o ~ e to
a project, depaxhg uponproject type,
sector etc Some l e w l o f counterpart Gnaocmg h o w e a
~ SI
expected to cantlnue m m y projects The Bank may selectlvely
finance 100% of project costs e g ,s o c d sector projects and
prOJectS 1l1poor and remote ZifeaS hld n d d projects, COSt
shrmug anangemems would take mm consderatlon the
charactenstlcsof the project and xctor-spetdic aspects (e g ,
based on the CAS ‘giudelmcs for Bank lendmg m key sectors’)
Inm o d - l e v e l projects, where the Bank’s envsages
cofinancmg with other de\ elopment partmrs under common
arrangements, I m l h g sector-mde approaches, the Bank’s
f i a a n c share
~
i s expected to be relatn-elylow
IndetermuungBank h a n c m g o f recurrentcosts m d n d u a l
p r ~ ~the
e Bank
~ t ~wdl take mo account sustaloabthty lssues at
the sector and project levels mcludmg sustamabdity of the project
/ program achcvements/ourcomes, and lmplied fume budgetary
outlays Sector-specific conslderat~ons(e g ,based on the CAS
‘gmdehes for Bank l&g
m key sectors’) would also be taken
mto account
I n h a meets the cntena for Bank’s financmg o f local costs
Therefore, the Bank may finacre local rmd fomgn costs XI any
propomon as needed m mdmdualprojects

Current levels oftaxes adduties are reasonable. At the p r o j e c t
level, the Bank would consider whether taxes and duties
m & i t u t e an excessively high share of project costs

India CAS Annex A2

CAS Annex A2. India a t a d a n c e
Key Development Indicators
India

11/12/08

South
Asia

Lower
middle
income

(2007)
1.123.3
3,287
1.2
29

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

1,520
5,140
1.4
29

3.437
35,510
1.o
42

Age distribution, 2007

I
~

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international$)

-- Page 1 of 3

Male

Female

75.79

45-49
60.M
30.34

1,071.2
950
2,740

1,339
880
2,537

6,485
1,887
4,544

9.0
7.7

8.5
6.9

9.7
8.6

42
76
64
57
44

40
74
64
62
41

69
41
25

73
48
114
109

70
46
111
104

93
85
112
109

80

89
28

87
33

88
54

0

15.19

0.4

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (“YO)
(most recent estimate, 200&2007)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP. %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

15

5

10

5

0

10

15

percent

r----Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

120
100

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

60
40
20

1990

1995

L; India

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2006):
United Kingdom
European Commission
United States

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1980

1990

2000

2007 *

2,186

1,399

1,463

1,379

134
85
83

97
58
-24

204
60
15

349
210
97

1.2
3

0.4
2

0.3
1

0.2
1

12.3
11.5

12.4
10.7

3.7
3.5

6.2
4.3

7.9

17.9

45.7
100

40.1
88

2000

2006

DSouth Asia

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

I 12T

Long-Term Economic Trends
90

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
T e n s of trade index (2000 = 100)

95

--O-GDP

05

00

-GDP per capita

1980-90 1990-2000
2000-07
(average annual growth %)

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

687.3
183,799

849.5
317,467

1,015.9
1,123.3
460,182 1,174,336

2.1
5.5

1.8
5.9

1.4
7.8

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

35.7
24.7
16.7
39.6

(% of GDP)
23.4
29.3
26.2
26.9
16.7
15.6
43.8
50.5

17.8
29.4
16,4
52.8

3.1
6.0
6.0
6.8

3.2
6,l
6.7
7.7

3.1
8.6
8.0
9.2

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov’t final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

74.6
10.0
18.5

65.6
11.7
24.2

64.1
12.6
24.2

56.8
10.1
36.2

4.7
7.3
7.2

5.8
6,6
6.9

6.8
3.4
14.9

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

6.2
9.4
20.2

7.1
8.5
22 2

13.2
14.2
25.4

21.3
24.4
36.2

4.9
6.1

12.3
14.4

15.7
19.4

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2007 data are preliminary.
a. Aid data are for 2006.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

.. indicates data are not available.

India CAS Annex A2

-- Page 2 of 3

India
2000

Balance of Payments and Trade

2007

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2007
(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

45,452
57,912
-10,768

146,632
248,521
-52,510

-2,918
-0.6

-17,642
-1.5

12,890

27,000

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

I

I

Voice and accountability
Political stability

‘

I

50

75

11

Regulatory quality

,

Rule of law

Workers’ remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

Control of corruption

42,281 309,287

Reserves, including gold
Central Government Finance
(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

17.7
14.6
24.0

23.1
18.8
25.4

Overall surplus/deficit

-9.9

-5.1

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

30
40

30
30

25

0

loo

0 2007

Country’s percentile rank (0-100)

n2000

hrgher values imply better ratings

Source Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruui, Wood Bank

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(‘/
of.manufacturedexports)

47.5

2007

4

24

5.0

4.8

61
22.7

61
22.8
5.3

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ milions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

99,099
10,868

220,956
40,718

21.5
14.3

18.8
13.6

3,584
2,345

17,453
9,549

-

Total debt Y(‘O of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

-

Composition of total external debt, 2006
Short-term,

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protected areas Y(‘O of land area)
Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (“YO of internal resources)
C02 emissions per capita (mt)

1.1

1.2

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

3.8

4.5

452

49 1

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

IDA. 24622
rlBRO. E404 J

1,152
51.2

2

F O

Other multilateral 3461
ilateral 20143

Pnvate. 94534

US$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Electricity
Tax rates
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (Y‘ O)

2000

2008

-

30
70.1
45

2000

2007
30.5

12.5
32.2
5.7

154.9
6.6

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2007 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. - indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

11/12/08

-- Page 3 of 3

India CAS Annex A2

Millennium Development Goals

India

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)
Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
______
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Pnmary school enrollment (net, %)
Pnmary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)
Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in educati
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary
Women employed in the nonagnculturalsecto
Proportion of seats held by women in national

ultural employment)

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportionof one-year olds immunized, %)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

-

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HlVlAlDS and other major disAaZe2
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)
Goal 7 : halve the proportionof people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
C02 emissions (metnc tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (%of I-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

30

ilj

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

1

,

0
2WO

2002

2004

2006
2WO

2002

2004

2006

- - 9 - P r i m r y net enrollment ratio
U
Ratio of girls to boys in primary &

secondaryeducation

0 India

0 South Asia

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. _.indicates data are not available
Development Economics, DevelopmentData Group (DECDG).

c3 Fixed + mobile subscribers
B Internet users

11/12/08

India CAS Annex A2

-- Page 1of 1

CAS Annex B2. India
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 09/12/2008

Indicator
Porffolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementationa
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a , c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Porffolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2006

2007

2008

2009

56
3.5
8.9
11.3
10.7
15.4
25.2

67
3.6
10.4
14.7
11.9
17.9
21.7

59
3.7
22.0
21.8
23.7
23.2
18.3

61
3.8
21.3
22.7
21.3
22.7
4.0

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
32 1
30
42,198.8
5,521.4
25.9
13.3
23.9
11.7

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

India CAS Annex B3a

-- Page 1 of

CAS ANNEX B3a. IBRD/IDA LENDING PIPELINE FYO9-IO

1.

FY09
Project Name

rissa Rural Livelihoods (under IDA XIV) (A)
adhya Pradesh Livelihood II
Dectrlzn Wtrshed GEF (addl financing)
Agric Competitiveness

I Fired Power Station Rehab
ium Sized Project lnstit Coordination GEF
er Efficiency (GEF / CN / MT)
JNNURM TA - Cap Bldg for ULBs & Urban PA

Bihar DPL II
Orissa DPL Ill
Capital Markets & Pension Reform I
Tech Eng Educ Quality lmprovmt It
Andhra Pradesh Water Sector Improvement
UP Sodic Lands Reclamation Ill
Haryana State Power
Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydroelectric
Financing Energy Efficiency in SMEs
Railways Freight Corridor
Mumbai Suburban Rail (MUPT II)
Sustainable Urban Transport

]Total

- FYI0 Operations Program

125
65

125
135
50

300
435
200
400
400
17
400
500
200

690

2,645

* Projects marked with "A" have already been approved.
Note: The Operations Program for FYI 1-12 is under discussion with DEA.
IDA lending will be limited by available IDA15 and possible IDA16 allocations.
IBRD Lending will be consistent with the Single Borrower Limit.

20

37

250
200
50
300
435
200
400
400
17
400
500
220

3,372

[No]
[No]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
[No]
Yes

1

India CAS Annex B3b

CAS Annex B3b
India: IFC Program Summary

Commitments (USSm)
Gross
Net**

Net Commitments bv Sector (Yo)
EQUITY
LOAN
QUASI EQUITY
QUASI LOAN
RISK PRODUCT
Total

Net Commitments bv Investment Instrument (Yo)
Equity
Loan
Quasi equity***
Quasi loan
Risk product
Total

As of August 31,2008
** IFC's Own Account only
*'* Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types

2006

2007

2008

2009*

452.81
252.81

1149.58
1047.18

1048.57
1048.57

259.99
259.99

45.14
54.47
0.4

6.95
55.7
6.66
30.68

29.06
67.17

77.5
22.5

0.05
3.72
100

100

29.06
67.17

77.5
22.5

0.05
3.72
100

100

100.01

99.99

45.14
54.47
0.4

6.95
55.7
6.66
30.68

100.01

99.99

-- Page

1 of 1

India CAS Annex 84 -- Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B4. Summary of Key Non-Lending Services FYO9-I0

INDIA -- Key FYO9 AAA Deliveries to Client

I

High-visibility cross-sectoral studies
Programmatic Poverty Assessment
Low-Carbon Growth
Groundwater
Social Dimensions of Urbanization
fondernand policy and i ~ p l e ~ e n t a tadvice
j~n
Poverty Mapping
Social Protection Programmatic AAA
Social Security for Unorganized Sector

IOperational support and due-diligence reviews
Quarterly Macro-Financial Update
Doing Business Initiatives (ICA follow-up, incl DB Indicators, manuf, competit., etc.)
Tracking Results for Better Performance of India's Health Sector (TF Stat. Cap. Build.)
Developing Certification System for Health Procurement
DIR Follow-up notes (corruption, competition, accountability studies)

tmpact evatuations
MP-Pilot on Integrated Child Development (EPDF TF)
Teacher Accountability Study (EPDF TF)

-

/Wigh-visibility cross-sectoral studies
Environmental Challenges of India's Rapid Growth
Poverty & Social Exclusion
Development Policy Review
Skills
IOn-demand policy and implementation advice
Capacity building in hydro, renewables, etc.
Adaptation in the Sundarbans
Orissa Institutionalizing PSlA Capacity
Strengthening the PPP framework
TA for Low-Income States
Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation (LA/R&R)
loperational support and due-diligence reviews
Quarterly Macro-Financial Update
Irrigation and Drainage Sector Review
Strengthening Institutions for Service Delivery
HR Capacity for Effective Health System
[Impact evaluations
AP State Education Strategy (DFID TF)
Impact Evaluation of Rural Credit Cooperatives
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme Evaluation
Note: Where Trust Funds are expected to provide significant or full funding for an activity, the
relevant TF is indicated.

I

India CAS Annex B5 -- Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B5. India Social Indicators
Latest s i n g l e year

1980-85

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average forperiod)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

765.1
2.1
24.3
4.4

1990-95 200197
932.2
1.9
26.6
3.4

1,123.3
1.4
29.3
2.5

36.0
32.4
37.3

27.5
25.7
28.3

380
70

950
138

..

34.9
9.3
27.3

S a m e r e g i o n l i n c o m e group
LowerSouth
middieAsia
income
1,520.4
1.6
29.2
2.8

3,437.1
1.I
41.7
2.3

POVERTY”
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)

300
28

INCOMElCONSUMPTlON DiSTRlBUTlON
Share of income or consumption
Gini inde?
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

880
140

1,887
144

4.9
21.8
2.6

0.9
2.7

2.0
4.7

89
90
87

85
88
83

90
91
90

77
92
71

89
96
86

87
94
84

88
96
83

72
71

59
55
44

65
64
41

77
75
25

..

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure3
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)

..

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access t o an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under byears)

1
18

India CAS Annex 85 -- Page 2 of 2

Latest single year

1980-85

Same regionlincome group

1990-95 2001-07

South
Asia

Lowermiddleincome

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per I,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (77)

57
57
57

61
61
62

64
63
66

64
63
66

69
67
71

97
137

74
102

57
74

62
83

41
54

261
279

236
241

260
168
301
47

251
173
500
41

202
128
300
69

..
34

CAS Annex 85. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system unless stated otherwise.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.
1: Source: Poverty Estimates for 2004-05, New Delhi,Gol, Press Information Bureau, March 2007
2: At 93-94 Real Price; Source: Calculated from Unit level data; NSS 61st Round (2004-05), Schedule 1
3: Calculated from the Reserve Bank of India. Data pertains to the year 2005-06. Figures may not be comparable with other regions
4: National Family Health Survey, 2005-06
5: Sample Registration Survey (SRS), 2001-03

11/12/08

CAS Annex 86

--

Page 1of 2

CAS Annex B6
India Key Economic Indicators

-

Gross domestic product
Agriculture

100.0
19.2

100.0
18.8

100.0
18.3

100.0
17.8

100.0
16.8

100.0
16.3

100.0
15.5

100.0
14.7

100.0
14.0

Industry

28.2

28.8

29.3

29.4

28.7

28.4

28.2

28.0

27.8

Services

52.6

52.4

52.4

52.8

54.5

55.3

56.3

57.2

58.2

70.2
31.6
28.4
6.4
22.0
3.2

69.4
33.4
31 .O
7.0
24.0
2.4

68.2
34.8
32.5
7.4
25.0
2.3

66.9
36.2
33.9
7.8
26.1
2.3

69.5
34.2
33.0
7.9
25.0
1.2

69.4
33.5
32.5
8.4
24.1
1.o

68.4
34.5
32.9
8.0
24.9
1.6

67.6
35.5
33.2
7.6
25.7
2.3

67.1
36.0
33.4
7.6
25.8
2.6

Total Consumption
Gross domestic investment
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment
Change o f stocks
Net exports

-1.8

-2.8

-3.0

-3.1

-5.0

-4.4

-3.8

-3.4

-3.1

18.1
19.9

19.9
22.7

22.1
25.1

21.3
24.4

23.6
28.7

23.1
27.5

22.7
26.6

22.5
25.8

21.7
24.8

Gross domestic savings

29.8

30.6

31.8

33.1

30.5

30.6

31.6

32.4

32.9

Gross national savingsd

32.0

32.9

34.1

36.2

32.9

33.0

33.7

34.3

34.5

700921

808706

630

740

Exports (GNFS)‘
Imports (GNFS)

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (“h,calculated from 1999-00 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
8.3
Gross Domestic Income’

6.1

918578 1174336 1217620 1343823 1487230 1645795 1866331
820

950

1050

1160

1240

1360

1500

9.2

9.7

9.0

7.0

6.2

7.0

7.5

8.0

12.9

10.9

8.8

4.7

7.1

7.8

8.4

8.3

8.2
8.2
8.8

7.7
5.7
6.0

5.5
3.2
2.1

4.7
6.5
6.8

5.5
6.0
6.0

6.0
6.9
7.0

6.5
7.1
7.2

Real annual per capita growth rates (“3. calculated from 1999-00 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
6.7
7.8
Total consumption
-0.4
10.7
Private consumption
-0.7
11.9
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)

Exports (GNFS)‘
Merchandise FOB

128455
85206

162811
105152

204264
128083

246148
158461

287818
190000

310364
207122

338274
228161

369777
253055

404682
281182

~mports(GNFS?
Merchandise F O B
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

146731
118908
-18276
20525
-2730

191545
157056
-28734
24493
-10096

235625
191254
-31361
27941
-9993

298658
248521
-525 I O
40778
- 17642

349166
296614
-61347
40630
-31584

368885
3 12425
-58521
43068
-26577

395266
334292
-5699 1
44790
-25255

424945
359938
-55 I68
46582
-24287

463403
393444
-58721
48445
-27755

3713

3034

8479

10000

13000

17000

20000

7117
996
6121
17452

4210
1426
2784
17904

17922
2437
15485
19605

15545
24279
1817
22462
68446

7500

Long-term loans (net)‘
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. m o r s & ommissions)

-535
2721
-3256
-8350

-1455
3580
-5035
7700

2877
3153
-276
25200

7957
2750
5206
27200

9561
2283
7278
29200

Change in reserves (- increase / + decrease)g

-25552

-15052

-36013

-90628

32969

10332

-15822

-27870

-3 1006

-2.6

-3.6

-3.4

-4.5

-5.0

-4.4

-3.8

-3.4

-3.1

13.9
24.2

35.1
32.2

33.3
19.9

8.2
10.5

12.6
6.4

7.9
9.9

7.9
9.5

9.3
10.9

9.7
9.2

Net private foreign direct investment

Memorandum items

Resource balance (“ho f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( 1999-00 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

CAS Annex 86

--

Page 2 of 2

India - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

General Government Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)h
19.5
Current revenues
19.7
21.1
22.7
24.2
25.1
Current expenditures
-3.2
-4.0
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
-4.5
4.0
2.3
1.3
Capital expenditure
Overall fiscal balance
-7.3
-6.8
-5.3
0.5
Foreign financing
0.2
0.2
Monetary indicators
MUGDP
Growth o f M 2 ("h)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (YO)

23.1
25.4
-2.4
2.7
-5.1
0.2

21.6
24.9
-3.3
3.2
-6.5
0.7

21.8
24.6
-2.8
3.3
-6.1
0.7

22.4
24.5
-2.2
3.2
-5.4
0.7

22.6
24.6
-2.0
2.8
-4.8
0.7

23.0
24.5
-1.5
2.9
-4.5
0.6

71.5
12.3
95.0

76.2
21.2
97.7

80.2
21.8
86.0

85.4
21.1
97.9

87.0
19.3
92.2

91.2
18.0
91.7

93.7
16.1
90.9

95.6
15.1
91.0

96.9
15.0
91.9

Price indices( 1999-00 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index

192.4
131.9
145.9

175.7
131.7
133.4

160.6
133.8
120.0

170.0
157.4
108.0

195.6
176.4
110.9

197.6
169.1
116.8

201.8
165.3
122.1

204.7
160.5
127.5

207.3
160.7
129.0

Real exchange rate (uS$LCU)'

100.1

102.4

98.5

106.2

5.6

4.1

5.6

4.3

9.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

5.0

GDP deflator ("hchange)

a. All data related to World Bank and IFC fiscal years - July to June.
b. GDP at factor cost
C. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
d. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
e. Gross domestic income i s defined as sum o f gross domestic product at market prices and terms o f trade effect.
f. Debt flows data i s based on balance of payments data from Reserve Bank o f India.
denotes increase in reserves and "+" denotes decrease in reserves.
g. Includes use o f IMF resources.
h. General government i s defined as a sum o f central government and states government after netting out intergovernmental transfers.
i. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." A n increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.
'I-'I

Sources: Central Statistical Organization, Reserve Bank o f India, and World Bank's staff estimates.

CAS Annex 87

-- Page 1of 1

CAS Annex B7
India - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual
Indicatora

Estimated

Projected

2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-2011 201 1-12 2012-13
124399

123145

175540

220956

221633

220178

223055

231011

240572

Net disbursements (US$m)b

6179

6989

34817

10541

715

-1455

2877

7957

9561

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)b

9697

18198

12989

15230

27584

32185

32017

33183

39355

TDOiXGSc

81.8

64.2

73.3

74.0

65.0

60.4

56.7

54.2

51.8

TDOIGDP

17.7

15.2

19.1

18.8

18.2

16.4

15.0

14.0

12.9

TDSiXGS

6.4

9.5

5.4

5.1

8.1

8.8

8.1

7.8

8.5

34.5

33.6

24.9

21.7

22.1

22.6

22.1

20.9

19.3

IBRD DSipublic DS

2.0

2.5

5.8

2.4

5.2

4.5

5.5

5.8

5.7

Preferred creditor DSipublic DS (%)d

7.8

8.8

16.8

6.9

16.6

15.5

16.4

16.1

15.1

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)b

Debt and debt service indicators (%)

ConcessionaVTDO

IBRD exposure indicators ("?)

IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)e
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

IDA TDO (US$m)e

IFC WS$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equityf

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.3

4993

5652

6404

7187

8012

9316

11036

12900

14753

4.7

5.4

6.5

7.2

7.8

8.9

10.1

11.2

12.1

23191

23798

24622

26238

25917

26256

26829

27574

28269

24 1

356

138

855

744

13

57

115

143

305

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. All debt data related to World Bank and IFC are in World Bank's fiscal years (July to June), other data are

reported in Go1 fiscal years (April - March).
b. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital. T h e historical data differs from Annex B 6 because o f different sources used.
c. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, includingworkers' remittances.

d. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
e. Includes present value of guarantees.
f. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.
Sources: World Bank's Debt Reporting System, World Bank's staff estimates, and Reserve Bank o f India.

N
c

m

CAS Annex 886

-- Page 1of 2

CAS Annex B8b
India
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As Of 08/31/2008
(In USD Millions)

Committed
M ADDlOVal

ComDany

2007
2007
0
2005108
2006
2008
2008
2008
2005
2005

Aavishkaar
Abc coffee
Abtl
Adpcl
Ahei
Aim? 2
Ambit pragma
Angel infin
Ap paper mills
Apidc biotech
Aspet
At1
Atul Itd
Avigo fund ii
Balrampur
Bask Itd.
Bharat biotech
Bhf
Bhsil
Bihar sponge
Biit
Btvl
Cairn india Itd.
Ccil
cgl
Cgpl ultra mega
Connectiva
Cosmo
Dewan
Dqel
Dscl
Electrotherm
Federal bank
Finechem
Fino
Granules
Gspl
Gvkpil
Hdfc
Hdfc bank
HWfg
laaf
lcici bank
Idea cellular
idfc
lhdc
lhdc -ascent
lndecomm
India agri fund
India direct fnd
India infr. fund
Jain irrigation
Jk paper
Kamani oil
Kotak mahindr...
Kpit
Lanco group
Lgb
Lifetree
Lok fund
Mahinfra
Max healthcare
Mbpv
Midas
Modern dairies

0

2002/03
2006
2008
2003107
2001
2005
2003
2007
1984
2001
2001
2007
06/07/2003
2004
2008
2008
2005
2003
2003
2005/06
2007
2006108
2008
2007
2007
2007
0

2003l07
2007
2008
1998
2007
2008
1998/05
2006
0
2006
2009
1996
2008
2oQ8
2006
2008
2005107
2005
2007
2006
2008
2006/08
2001
2007
2007
2009
2008

Loan
0

10
16
42.13
0
0
0
0
30.33
0
0
8.06
17.89
0

44.81
0
0
10.99
35
5.58
0
0
0
7
4.92
450
0
0
5.56
0
34.6
15
0
20
0
9
77.27
0
100
0
20
0
0
84
43.75
8.42
7.4
0
0
0
0
15
15
0
16.5
11
0
0
0
0
0
0
22.5
0

8.5

Eauitv
1.57
5
0
15.55
5.08
20.5
15
38.8
3.66
3.14
9.19
0

0
10
0
0.98
0
0
0
0

9
2.09
23
3.19
0
0
5
2.39
0
9.15
0
0
36.11
12.4
2.5
2.57
25.88
13.89
0
0
4.72
0.17
0
0
10.82
0
0

2.57
20.01
0.44
50
0
6.31
5.84
0
2.11
8.02
1.92
19.8
4
10
12.44
0
12.5
6.46

Disbursed Outstanding

Eauitv *GT/RM
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
4.5
10.99
15.75
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0
0
1.9
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
150
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
45
0
0
0
0
0
0
62.19
0
0
0

committed

0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0.72
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
1.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

Partici
Dant

Loan

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3.72
0
0
0
0
0
0
90
0
0
0
0
12.4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

10
0
26.33
0
0
0
0
30.33
0
0
8.06
8.93
0
44.81
0
0
10.99
35
5.58
0
0
0
7
4.92
0
0
0
5.56
0
34.6
15
0
17.14
0
9
16.03
0
100
0
5
0
0
0
43.75
8.42
2.29
0
0
0
0
15
15
0
16.5
11
0
0
0
0
0
0
22.5
0
0

0

Partici

“Cluasi
Eauitv
1.33
5
0
7
5.08
5.38
0.23
38.79
3.66
2.73
6.44
0
0
7
0
0.98
0
0
0
0
9
2.09
20.84
3.07
0
0
5
2.39
0
9.15
0
0

36.11
8.29
2.23
2.57
23.07
13.89
0
0
2.38
0
0
0
10.82
0
0

2.57
0
0
0.6
0
6.08
0
0

2.11
5.91
1.92
0
1.1
0.79
12.44
0
5
6.46

Eauitv *GT/RM

Dant

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0

0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0.72
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.59
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0

0

0
0
0
0
0

0
3.3
10.99
15.75
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0
0
1.63
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
150
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
45
0
0
0
0
0
0
62.19
0
0
0

Disbursed Outstanding

0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0

0

0

0
0
3.72
0
0
0
0
0
0
90
0
0
0
0
12.4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

,

C4S Annex 88b

PI ADDrOVal
0

1996/99/00
2007
2003
0/07/08
2003/04
2007
2007
2007
2001
2008
2006
2007
2008
2004
2006
2006
2008
2008
0
2004
2005
2008
0
2008
2008
2004
0

2008
03/07/2001
2007
2004
2002
2005
1996/05
2004
2002
2008
05/08/2001
1997
2007
1997

Cormany
Montaivo
Moser baer
Mspl
Mssl
Nevis
Newpath
Ocean sparkle
Ocimum
oci
Orchid
Owens corning
Peepul capfnd ii
Petronet
Polycab
Poweriinks
PSIlimited
Punj iloyd
Punj upstream
Rain calcining
Rain commodities
Rak india
Ramky
Rockland
Rv kanoria
Samara capital
Samson maritime
Seaiion
Soktas india
South indian bk
Spryance
Suguna
Sundaram finance
Sundaram home
Tata steel
United riceiand
uPI
Usha martin
VPf
Vysya bank
Walden-mgt india
Wcpm
Wiv
Total Portfolio:

Loan

Eauih,

“Quasi
Eouih/ *GT/RM

Partici

40
0

0.72
6.25
10.34
0.01
0
0.34

0
0
0
0
1.85
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
11.16
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
42.48
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

@nJ
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
300
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1855.28

706.6

413.34

44.7

606.12

0
0

33
0
0
0
26.33
2.6
46.98
0
12
0
150
0
66.1
0
20
25
0
0
14.55
0
0

14.8
0
24
3.78
18.47
0
0
0

34.34
3.34
100
12.88
10.9
0
0
0
0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

0.94
14.41
0
0.09
1.44
12.1
0

3.05
0
0.73
0
20
0

126.27
0
3.81
0
2.66
0
0.88
0
3
13.71
4.44
10
5.72
0
2.32
9.41
2.39
0
0
0
0
0
0

Loan
0

-- Page 2 of 2

Partici
Eauitv

0

0.72
2.25
10.34
0.01
0
0.34

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

907.76

367.72

411.87

1.31

0
16.17
0
0
0
26.33
2.6
23.49
0
8
0
0
0

68.1
0
0
0
0
0
14.55
0
0
0
0
10.5
3.78
6.04
0
0
0

34.34
3.34
100
12.88
10.9
0
0
0
0
40

0

Eauitv ‘GT/RM

14.41
0
0

1.44
12.1
0
3.05
0

0.73
0
10.23
0
0
0

3.81
0
0
0

0.68
0
3
7.03
4.17
2.11
0
0
0
9.41
2.39
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

1.85
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

T1.16
0
0
0

@nJ
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
300
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

606.12

