d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of 
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 32190-EG 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

FOR  

THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT 

FOR THE PERIOD FY06-FY09 

May 20, 2005 

Middle East and North Africa Region 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.                   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The date of the last Country Assistance Strategy for Egypt was June 5, 2001 

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS 
Unit of Currency = Egyptian Pound (LE) 
1US$ = 5.8 LE (average during April 2005) 
Fiscal Year:  July 1 – June 30 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

London Interbank Offered Rate 
Millennium Development Goals 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Middle East and North Africa 
Middle Income Country 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee 
Agency   
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Education 
Memorandum of Understanding 
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework 
National Council for Women 
National Democratic Party 
National Investment Bank 
Non Performing Loan 
Official Development Assistance 
Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development 
Operations Evaluation Department 
Private Enterprise Partnership for 
Middle East and North Africa 
Public Expenditure Review 
Programmatic Economic/ Sector Work 
Public Information Center 
Private Participation in Infrastructure 
Principal Bank of Dev. and Agr. Credit 
Public Private Partnership 
Public Sector Bank 
Quality Assurance Group 
Qualifying Industrial Zone 
Research and Development 
Social Fund for Development 
Small/Medium Enterprise 
State Owned Enterprise 
Sector Wide Approach 
Technical Assistance 
Total Debt Outstanding and Disbursed 
United Nations 
United Nations Development Program  
US Agency for International Develop. 
World Bank Institute 
World Trade Organization 

AAA 
AfDB  
AML/CFT  

CAS  
CBE 
CDS 
CGA 
CMA 
DAG 
DPR 
EC  
ESW  
EU  
FATF 
FDI  
FIAS 
FSAP 
FY 
GASC 

GAFI 
GATS 

GDP 
GEF  
GER  
GFI 
GOE 
GTZ  

IBRD  

ICA 
ICT 

IDF 
IFAD 

IFC 
IMF  

KfW 

Analytical and Advisory Activity  
African Development Bank  
Anti-Money Laundering and 
Combating Financing of Terrorism  
Country Assistance Strategy 
Central Bank of Egypt 
City Development Strategy 
Country Gender Assessment 
Capital Market Authority 
Donor Assistance Group 
Development Policy Review  
European Commission  
Economic and Sector Work  
European Union  
Financial Action Task Force 
Foreign Direct Investment  
Foreign Investment Advisory Service 
Financial Sector Assessment Program  
Fiscal Year  
General Authority for Supply of 
Commodities 
General Authority for Investment 
General Agreement on Trade and 
Services 
Gross Domestic Product  
Global Environment Facility  
Gross Enrollment Rate 
Gross Fixed Investment 
Government of Egypt 
German Agency for Technical 
Cooperation  
International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development 
Investment Climate Assessment 
Information and Communication 
Technology 
Institutional Development Fund 
International Fund for Agric. 
Development 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 
German Development Credit Agency 

LIBOR 
MDG 
M&E  
MENA  
MIC  
MIGA 

MOF 
MOE 
MOU 
MTEF  
NCW 
NDP 
NIB 
NPL  
ODA 
OECD 

OED  
PEP-
MENA 
PER 
PESW  
PIC  
PPI  
PBDAC 
PPP 
PSB 
QAG  
QIZ 
R & D  
SFD 
SME  
SOE 
SWAP 
TA 
TDO  
UN 
UNDP  
USAID 
WBI 
WTO 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MANAGERS AND STAFF RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS CAS  

IBRD 
Vice President 
Country Director 
Task Manager 

IFC 
Vice President 
Director 
Task Manager 

Christiaan Poortman 
Emmanuel Mbi 
Farrukh Iqbal 

Assaad Jabre 
Sami Haddad 
Margaret Henderson 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the cooperation of Government of Egypt in 
the preparation of this CAS. Government officials gave generously of their time and ideas 
at various stages and the final product has benefited greatly from their inputs.  Non-
government stakeholders were also consulted during the preparation of the CAS and their 
contributions are also appreciated. 

By its design, a CAS is a group effort and the Egypt CAS has been no exception to this 
rule.  Within the Bank, the team effort was reflected in the fact that numerous staff 
provided suggestions and ideas at several country team meetings and written comments 
on various drafts.  We are grateful to all who have contributed to this CAS. 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.                   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ......................................................................................................................... iii 
I. COUNTRY CONTEXT............................................................................................................................ 1 

A. Economic Growth, Poverty, and Human Development Trends ..................................... 1 
B. Political Context ............................................................................................................. 4 

II. DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND MEDIUM TERM PROSPECTS ................................................ 5 

A. The Development Agenda .............................................................................................. 5 
B. Medium-term Macroeconomic Prospects..................................................................... 15 

III. EGYPT-WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP FOR FY06-09 ............................................... 16 

A. Implementation of Previous CAS ................................................................................ 16 
B. Salient Aspects of Proposed CAS ................................................................................ 19 
C. Expected Outcomes of CAS and Bank Support ........................................................... 23 

IV. MANAGING RISKS............................................................................................................................ 31 

A. Country Creditworthiness and Exposure to the Bank Group ....................................... 31 
B. Implementation Risks ................................................................................................... 31 

ANNEXES 

Annex: 1 CAS Results Framework (FY06-09) ................................................................. 34 
Annex: 2 CAS Completion Report ................................................................................... 42 
Annex: 3 Private Sector Development Strategy................................................................ 88 
Annex: 4 World Bank Institute Strategy ........................................................................... 97 
Annex: 5 Macroeconomic Simulations ............................................................................. 98 
Annex: A1 Egypt at a Glance.......................................................................................... 100 
Annex: B2 Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ......... 102 
Annex: B3 Proposed IBRD Lending Program ................................................................ 103 
Annex: B4 Summary of Non-lending Services ............................................................... 104 
Annex: B5 Social Indicators ........................................................................................... 105 
Annex: B6 Key Economic Indicators ............................................................................. 106 
Annex: B7 Key Exposure Indicators............................................................................... 108 
Annex: B8 Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA/Grants) .................................................... 109 
Annex: B8 (continued) Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio .................... 110 
Annex: C  Egypt: Country Financing Parameters ........................................................... 111 

i 

 
 
 
TABLES 
Table 1: Baseline Medium-Term Macroeconomic Scenario 
Table 2: Indicative Assistance Program of the Bank (Fy06-09) 

BOXES 
Box 1: Egypt and the Nile Basin Initiative 
Box 2: Egypt’s Public Debt 

FIGURES: 
Figure 1. GDP Growth 
Figure 2. Investment Trends 
Figure 3. Fiscal Deficit to GDP Ratio  
Figure 4. Gross Primary School Enrollment 
Figure 5. Demographic Transition 

16 
30 

11 
32 

1 
1 
2 
3 
4 

ii

 
 
 
 
  
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  

i. 
The key development objectives of the Government of Egypt (GOE), as expressed in its 
planning documents, are the “achievement of high and sustainable GDP growth” and the 
“alleviation of poverty and attenuation of income disparities.”   To achieve these objectives, the 
Government seeks to make more use of the private sector as a development agent as well as better 
leverage the role of the public sector in the economy.  Broadly speaking, the growth-enhancing 
potential of the private sector is to be harnessed through improving the business climate across a 
broad range of policies (covering trade, finance, and taxation, among others) while the 
complementary role of the public sector is to be strengthened through enhancing the provision of 
public services such as infrastructure, education, and macroeconomic stability, among others.  
Inter alia, this two-pronged growth strategy is expected to help Egypt cope with the challenge of 
reducing unemployment in the context of a growing labor force. Government also intends to 
pursue equity through redesigning social policies to meet national welfare objectives in a more 
effective and efficient manner. In addition, for disadvantaged groups that are unable to participate 
in the mainstream of economic growth or who are adversely affected by economic reforms, 
Government intends to strengthen its social safety net system so that more of the vulnerable are 
covered by it, and its effectiveness is enhanced through administrative decentralization, 
community-based approaches, and the use of NGOs. Finally, inter-regional equity is to be 
improved in part through targeted investments in Upper Egypt. 

ii. 
There is a broad overlap between the thinking of the GOE and that of the Bank Group 
with regard to Egypt’s key development challenges and reform agenda.  The Bank Group 
proposes to help the GOE achieve its goals by aligning its support over the next four years 
(FY06-09) to three key strategic objectives, namely, facilitating private sector development, 
enhancing the provision of public services, and promoting equity. 

iii. 
With regard to facilitating private sector development, support by the Bank, IFC, MIGA 
and FIAS will be directed to achieving three specific outcomes. These are: (a) a financial sector 
that is more efficient, and responsive to private sector needs; (b) an international trade regime that 
features lower transaction costs and (c) a business climate that features lower transaction costs for 
starting, running and shutting down business operations.  

iv. 
With regard to enhancing the provision of public services, Bank Group support will be 
devoted to ensuring that (a) fiscal and monetary policy are consistent with the requirements of 
macroeconomic stability;  (b) there is an increase in the supply and improvement in the efficiency 
of infrastructure services (such as power, transport and telecommunications, among others); (c) 
the quality and relevance of education is improved at all levels; (d) air and water quality are 
improved and water resources are managed efficiently; (e) the coverage, quality and financial 
sustainability of the social insurance system is improved and (f) public sector agencies become 
more accountable. 

v. 
With regard to promoting equity, Bank Group support will aim to (a) improve the 
coverage and effectiveness of safety nets; (b) reduce disparities between Upper and Lower Egypt; 
(c) improve access and quality of healthcare for the poor; and (d) reduce gender disparities. 

vi. 
Measures to achieve the above goals and implement the above strategies have already 
been introduced.  The Cabinet appointed in July 2004 has embarked on a far-reaching reform 
program. Some bold reform measures have already been initiated while plans have been 
announced for others.  At the same time, the growth rate of the economy has picked up, helped by 

iii

 
 
policy reforms and favorable external developments.  Thus, the political and economic context 
for the present CAS is very different from that prevailing at the time the last CAS was prepared 
(June 2001).  The earlier CAS was introduced at a time when economic growth was slowing and 
the political will to pursue reforms appeared to be waning.  The current context features both a 
revival of growth and of interest in reforms.  There now exists a remarkable opportunity for the 
Bank Group and other development partners to harness their financial and technical support for 
Egypt to an improving economy bolstered by a credible reform program. 

vii. 
In view of the much improved context, the Bank can make available more support than 
has been possible in recent years.  A base case program of $500 million a year on average is 
proposed in order to support the key development objectives of the CAS over FY06-09.  From a 
structural policy and macroeconomic perspective Egypt is already considered to be in the base 
case and the objective of Bank Group financing and analytic support would be to maintain the 
present macroeconomic and reform status.   

viii. 
A high case lending scenario with an average commitment of $700 million per annum is 
also envisaged.   Included in the high case are two quick-disbursing loans to support financial 
sector reforms that are considered central to improving the climate for private sector 
development.  The triggers for moving to the high case will be twofold: first, evidence of 
implementation of substantive financial sector reforms and second, a financing plan for meeting 
the total funding needs of the financial sector reform program that shows at least 10 percent of 
funding being obtained from non-debt-creating sources.  Adherence to such a financing plan will 
help contain the rise in public debt that is expected from the restructuring of the financial sector. 

ix. 
Finally, a low case scenario, with a lending envelope limited to $250 million per annum, 
would result from policy-driven deterioration of the main macroeconomic indicators or a 
significant dilution of the current program of structural reform. On the macroeconomic side, a 
weakening of the good monetary and exchange rate policies followed in recent years or a 
deterioration in the consolidated fiscal deficit for reasons unrelated to the proposed trade, tax and 
financial sector reforms, would raise concerns about the sustainability of a 5 percent or higher 
growth trajectory.  On the structural side, a significant dilution of the present program of trade, 
tax, investment climate and financial sector reforms would create similar concerns. If such 
conditions arise, the Bank would move to a low case lending program of about $250 million per 
annum.   

x. 
The program to be supported by the CAS could face risks from both external and 
domestic sources including: a slowdown of growth in OECD countries that are important sources 
of demand for Egyptian goods and services; regional instability that could affect tourism and 
foreign investment flows; domestic social and political tensions that may result in economic 
disruption and interruption of reform momentum; and weaknesses in the institutional capacity to 
manage the reform process.   Some reassurance can be drawn from the fact that the external 
environment is presently favorable and that Egypt has successfully managed an ambitious reform 
program in the 1990s. The Bank can mitigate the risks as well by providing strategic and high-
impact financial support, continuing to demonstrate the expected benefits of selected reforms 
through quality analytical work, and helping to build coalitions of support within Government, 
civil society and the international community. However, what is likely to be of decisive 
importance in the success of this CAS is the degree of ownership of the reform agenda exhibited 
by the Government of Egypt.  At present, this is demonstrably high. 

iv

 
xi. 

The following issues are suggested for the consideration of the Board: 
Is the CAS structured to adequately meet the needs of a middle-income client of the 
Bank Group?  Is the mix of analytic work and financial support appropriate?  Is the 
proposed strategy sufficiently flexible? 
Given the specific circumstances of Egypt today, is the emphasis on facilitating 
private sector development, enhancing the provision of public services, and 
promoting equity appropriate?   
Are the risks to the CAS adequately described and addressed?  

• 

• 

• 

v

 
vi

 
I. COUNTRY CONTEXT  

%

Figure 1. GDP grow th in Egypt

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1986

A. Economic Growth, Poverty, and Human Development Trends 
Growth and Macroeconomic Trends 
1. 
Egypt experienced high growth in the second half of the 1990s following the adoption of a 
structural adjustment program.  A structural adjustment program was undertaken by the 
Government of Egypt in 1991 to cope with the severe macroeconomic instability that had arisen 
in the second half of the 1980s.  Between 1986 and 1990, this instability was reflected in high 
fiscal deficits (reaching 15 percent of GDP), high inflation (exceeding 20 percent in some years), 
large current account deficits, and currency 
volatility (the black market premium on the 
Egyptian pound exceeded 70 percent on two 
occasions in this period).   Partly as a result 
of this instability and partly as a result of an 
ongoing slowdown 
in world economic 
demand, 
economic growth 
in Egypt 
collapsed 
to 1 percent 
in FY91. The 
stabilization and reform effort that was 
launched 
thereafter 
had 
quick 
and 
substantial effects.  Over the next four years, 
the fiscal deficit fell to 1.3 percent of GDP 
while 
inflation 
returned 
to single-digit 
values.  A sharp devaluation of the pound 
resulted in significant improvement in the current account position, virtual elimination of the 
black market premium, and rapid accumulation of foreign exchange reserves. A major 
privatization effort was undertaken, resulting in the sale of about 21 percent of all SOE assets 
between 1991 and 1998. Trade was gradually liberalized, with the average tariff rate falling from 
27.8 in 1991 to 20.5 in 1998. The economy revived and grew by around 4 percent per annum on 
average during FY92-95 before accelerating to a 5.5 percent average during FY96-00. 
2. 
Economic growth and investment levels faltered after 2000. After the strong run-up of the 
late 1990s, Egypt’s GDP growth rate 
decelerated between 2000 and 2003, 
averaging only around 3.2 percent per 
annum. The loss of growth momentum was 
accompanied by a decrease in both private 
and public investment. Private investment 
has declined from around 11 percent of GDP 
in 1998 to around 8 percent currently. This 
low level is a cause for concern since it is 
widely believed that private investment must 
serve as the main engine of future growth 
and employment.  Public investment has 
fallen  from around 15 percent of GDP in 
1998 to around 8 percent currently. While 
helpful from a short-term debt management 
perspective, this decline is also a cause for 

Figure 2. Inve stment trends in 
Egypt

2000
2002
Public I

1994
1996
Pr ivate I

1996

1998

2000

2002

1988

1990

1992

1994

1990
GFI

0
1986

40

30

20

10

P
D
G

%

1988

1992

1998

1

 
 
18%

15%

9%

6%

3%

12%

Figure 3: Fiscal Deficit 
- to - GDP Ratio 
Deficit, Old Series 
Deficit, Budget Sector, NIB & GASC 
Deficit, Budget Sector, NIB, GASC & SIFs

0%
FY 97 FY 99 
FY 01 FY 03
FY 91
FY 93
FY 95
Source : Calculated from MoF data published by CBE 

concern since it may have compromised the infrastructure base that Egypt needs for future 
growth.  At 16 percent of GDP, the domestic investment rate in Egypt is about two-thirds of the 
level observed in the top ten fastest-growing lower middle income countries in the world.  
3. 
Fiscal deficits have been rising, leading to concerns about fiscal and public debt 
sustainability. Fiscal deficits began rising after 
FY98, following a long period of improvement. 
Austerity measures, principally with respect to 
public investment, undertaken in the context of the 
Economic Reform and Structural Adjustment 
Program reduced the fiscal deficit from 15 percent 
in FY91 to around 1 percent between FY95 and 
FY98.  Since then, however, the deficits have risen 
steadily and stood at 7.6 percent of GDP at end-
FY04 (using the broad definition of the public 
sector) or 2.7 percent of GDP 
(using 
the 
consolidated definition).1  The net public debt level 
corresponding to the consolidated deficit, as derived from data published by the Central Bank of 
Egypt, stood at 88 percent of GDP at end-FY04.   
4. 
A growth revival now appears to be underway helped by policy reforms and favorable 
external developments. The growth rate of the economy picked up in 2004, rising to 4.4 percent.  
This was most likely due to certain policy reforms as well as to favorable external developments. 
A key domestic policy reform consisted of the flotation of the Egyptian pound in early 2003.  
Despite some hitches in the initial management of the float, the substantial depreciation (of about 
35 percent) that occurred during 2003 helped boost Egypt’s foreign exchange earnings from such 
sources as tourism and  manufactured exports, thus contributing to the growth pick-up. A key 
external development that worked in Egypt’s favor during 2004 was the increase in world 
economic demand.  World economic growth rose from 2.7 percent in 2003 to 4.0 percent in 2004, 
helping increase traffic (and Government revenues) through the Suez Canal as well as demand for 
key Egyptian exports. Foreign exchange earnings have also been boosted by exports of recently-
developed gas resources and by rising oil prices.   
Poverty and Human Development Trends2 
5. 
Poverty was reduced during the second half of the 1990s. Between FY96 and FY2000, the 
poverty incidence rate declined from 19.4 percent to 16.7 percent.  This decline may be attributed 
in part to the overall growth of the economy during that period. The two regions (Lower and 
Metropolitan Egypt) that grew the fastest during this period also experienced the most rapid rates 
of poverty reduction. By contrast, Upper Egypt grew the slowest and actually experienced an 
increase in poverty.  In more recent years, the poverty situation may have deteriorated since the 
average growth rate of the economy has been lower than in the late 1990s and since inflation has 
been somewhat higher.  More information on poverty trends during FY00-FY05 will become 
available once the 2005 Household Income and Expenditure Survey is completed and analyzed.   

1 A new fiscal reporting system was adopted by Egypt in FY00. This distinguishes between three 
definitions of the public sector.  The first and narrowest definition covers only the central government, 
local administration and public service authorities.  The second (“broad”) version includes as well the 
accounts of the General Authority for the Supply of Commodities (GASC) and the National Investment 
Bank (NIB).  The third (“consolidated”) definition incorporates the Social Insurance Funds (SIFs).  The 
consolidated concept yields lower deficit and debt levels since the SIFs are a net source of financing. 
2 See Annex B5 for achievements to date with respect to specific Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 

2

 
                                                 
6. 
Egypt has a good record in providing education to its citizens. Educational attainments in 
the country have been rising steadily. Between 1980 and 2002, gross primary enrolment rates rose 
from 73 percent to 96 percent while secondary enrolment rates rose from 50 percent to 85 
percent, a performance that is among the best in the MENA region as well as among lower 
middle income countries. Nevertheless, many challenges remain, chief among these being the 
improvement of education quality, the achievement of cost effectiveness, and the provision of 
access to underserved groups in remote locations.  
7. 
Steady progress has been made in improving health indicators but significant challenges 
remain.  Life expectancy at birth increased from 55.5 years in 1980 to 68.9 years by 2002, thus 
catching up with the MENA average which is currently at 68.6 years. Over the same time period, 
the under-five mortality rate fell from 173 per 1000 to 39, a performance that is substantially 
better than the average in MENA which fell from 134 to 54.  Maternal care has also improved 
and maternal mortality rates are now estimated to be around 84 per 100,000 live births.  As with 
education, however, important challenges remain.  Significant inequities persist in health 
outcomes: among the poorest income quintiles, infant mortality rates stood at 76 per 1000 live 
births, compared to 30 among the highest quintile households.  At the same time, the impact of 
the demographic transition, rapid urbanization and changing lifestyles is contributing to 
proportionate increase in non-communicable diseases and injuries. This shift in disease profile 
will necessitate changes to the health services that will significantly increase the cost of health 
care. Unless this transition is carefully managed, this could lead to a major cost escalation in the 
health sector without commensurate improvements in health outcomes, which could negatively 
affect labor productivity. Thus, Egypt faces the dual challenge of improving access to health care 
and health outcomes among the poor while raising the quality and efficiency of health services to 
meet the rising demand for more costly health services.   
8. 
Safety nets for the poor exist but can be much improved. The public safety net system in 
Egypt consists of various subsidies, employment programs, and cash transfer arrangements. 
However, there is much room for improvement in the cost-effectiveness of the safety net and its 
coverage of the poor.  There are major targeting issues amongst the different programs since 
many of them benefit the non-poor more than the poor. Approximately one million families in 
Egypt are covered by cash transfer programs but only about 15 percent of these families qualify 
as poor by the national poverty line criterion. Moreover, for those that do have access, such 
transfers are meager and make up only around 5 percent of their total income.  
9. 
Substantial progress has been made 
with respect to gender disparities. As a 
result of past investment in human capital, 
Egypt has made substantial progress in 
closing gender gaps in education, health, and 
economic participation. The average gross 
enrollment 
rate 
(GER) 
for girls has 
progressively improved over time at both 
primary and preparatory levels and the gap 
with boys has been reduced. Relatively 
greater improvement has been achieved in 
Upper Egypt where average GERs were 
lowest for girls. Improvements in access to 
public health and information have resulted in lower maternal mortality rates, higher 
contraceptive rates and lower fertility.  There has also been progress in women’s economic 
empowerment, as reflected in the increase in women’s participation in the labor force from 18 
percent in 1994 to 22 percent in 2004 and in women’s access to credit (for SMEs) rising from 10 

Figure 4. Gross pr imary school 
enrollment in Egypt

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

2000

%

1980

1985
Total

1990
1995
Female Male

3

 
 
percent in 1994 to 27 percent in 2004.  Legislative efforts have helped empower women.  These 
include the Family Tribunal Law, the Nationality Law and the Family Court Law as well as 
measures strengthening a woman’s right to divorce, all of which have built stronger legal rights 
and privileges for women and children. 
10. Egypt is currently undergoing a demographic transition which offers both challenges and 
opportunities.  The share of the working age population in Egypt’s total population has been 
increasing since the early 1990s. Projections suggest that this increase will continue until it 
plateaus at about 67 percent in 2020.  If 
Figure 5. Demographic Trans ition in 
the economy manages to absorb the 
Egypt
incremental 
labor force through the 
creation of productive private sector 
jobs, this could boost economic growth 
and increase the savings rate.  Combined 
with declining fertility, this would create 
the potential for a virtuous cycle leading 
to further growth acceleration as the 
lower number of children per worker 
would help 
to 
increase per capita 
investment in human capital.  On the 
other hand, a failure to create sufficient 
productive employment opportunities 
would likely exacerbate social pressures.  
At almost 11 percent (higher for fresh 
graduates, especially women), unemployment is already quite high and a focus of attention in 
policy making circles.   

40%
1960

u
p
o
P

1980

2020

)
l

s
e
a
g
o
a

t

t

2040

2000

55%

4
6

-

5
1

60%

65%

n
o

i
t

a

l

f

o

%

(

70%

50%

45%

B. Political Context 

11. Political stability and economic reforms.  As is well known, stability and continuity have 
been prominent features of Egypt’s political system for several decades now.  This system has 
proved able to accommodate both rapid and substantial changes in the nature and content of 
economic policies, a prominent example from the 1990s being the adoption of a comprehensive 
structural adjustment program in 1991 and more recent examples being the flotation of the 
currency in 2003 and the reinvigoration of reform efforts in 2004.   
12. The Cabinet appointed in July 2004 has embarked on a far-reaching reform program.  The 
mandate of the new government is to improve living standards, promote investment, reduce 
unemployment, contain inflation, and improve the performance of the financial system and of 
administrative bodies. Some bold reform measures have already been initiated while plans have 
been announced for others. The government plans to facilitate private sector development through 
improving trade policies, financial sector performance, and business regulations.  The scope for 
the private sector is to be expanded through further privatization and public-private investment 
partnerships in such areas as infrastructure projects.  Public sector reforms will aim at enhancing 
the provision of public goods (such as physical and social infrastructure) and improving the 
delivery of public services in general.  
13. The success of the reform effort will depend, in part, on its social consequences. The 
success of the reform effort will partly depend on public support which, in turn, will depend on 
whether the consequences of the reforms are perceived to be inequitable and burdensome for 
vulnerable groups.  Since some of the reforms will have an impact on employment and price 
levels in certain sectors and for certain commodities, it will be important to ascertain which 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
groups are most likely to be affected and to design measures to mitigate the impact on these 
groups.   
14. A more open and competitive political system is in prospect.  Recently, at the 
recommendation of the President, Parliament changed the relevant clauses in the Constitution to 
allow for multiple candidates to run for the office of the President with the winner to be chosen in 
a direct and secret balloting procedure.  It is likely, therefore, that a more competitive political 
system may develop in the future, providing a new vent for the full range of public opinion that 
prevails in the country.  The new system of choosing the President will be applied in the elections 
that are due in September 2005.  

II. DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND MEDIUM TERM PROSPECTS 

A. The Development Agenda  

15. The key development objectives and targets of the Government of Egypt are expressed in 
the Fifth Five Year Plan for Socio-Economic Development covering the years 2002-2007.  The 
introductory part of this document sets out a longer term – twenty year – vision as well.  Among 
important elements of Egypt’s long term vision of development are the “achievement of high and 
sustainable GDP growth” and the “alleviation of poverty and attenuation of income disparities.”  
The strategy for achieving these objectives is set out in general terms in the Five Year Plan 
document and in more specific terms in policy papers produced by the governing party, the 
National Democratic Party. 3  More recently, the top priorities of the current Cabinet have been 
listed in a 10-point program announced by the Prime Minister in an address to the Egyptian 
Parliament.  
16. According to these sources, Egypt seeks to achieve growth with equity by making more use 
of the private sector as a development agent as well as by changing the role of the government in 
managing the economy.  Broadly speaking, the growth-enhancing potential of the private sector is 
to be harnessed through improving the business climate across a broad range of issues (including 
trade, finance, and taxation, among others) while the complementary role of the public sector is to 
be strengthened through enhancing the provision of public services such as infrastructure, 
education, and macroeconomic stability.  Inter alia, this two-pronged growth strategy is 
anticipated to help Egypt cope with the challenge of reducing unemployment in the context of a 
growing labor force. Government also intends to pursue the equity objective through redesigning 
its social policies to incorporate social insurance mechanisms that meet national welfare 
objectives in an effective and efficient manner.  In addition, for disadvantaged groups that are 
unable to participate in the mainstream of economic growth or who are adversely affected by 
economic reforms, Government intends to strengthen its social safety net system so that more of 
the vulnerable are covered by it, and its effectiveness is enhanced through administrative 
decentralization, community-based approaches, and the use of NGOs. Finally, inter-regional 
equity is to be improved through targeted investments in Upper Egypt.  
17. 
It would be fair to say that there currently exists a broad overlap between the thinking of 
the GOE and the Bank Group regarding Egypt’s key development challenges and reform agenda.  
There is concurrence on the objective of pursuing broad-based growth in order to meet 
employment and poverty challenges, and also on the importance of using the private sector as the 

3 While these papers do not necessarily describe actual Government policies in all cases, they provide a 
strong sense of the future policy agenda reflecting the thrust of thinking within top policy-making circles.  
Topics covered include monetary policy, taxation reform, management of public utilities and economic 
organizations, public debt management, education, health, social insurance, industrial policy, development 
of small and medium enterprises, private sector participation in infrastructure projects, capital market 
development, and trade and investment policies. 

5

 
                                                 
main engine of growth while facilitating its ability to do this through strategic public investments 
in infrastructure and human resource development.  There is agreement as well regarding the 
point that growth by itself will not necessarily resolve the special challenges faced by regions 
such as Upper Egypt and, therefore, the growth strategy will have to be supplemented by some 
specific measures aimed at regional equity. 
18. With regard to the reform agenda discussed in detail below, such areas as the financial 
sector, the trade regime, taxation, and the regulatory regime were identified as high priority areas 
for structural reform in discussions among the GOE, the Bank Group, and other donors in recent 
years. For example, the reforms announced for the financial sector echo elements of the Financial 
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) completed by the Bank and the IMF in December 2002.  
Similarly, the restructuring of the tariff system is in line with recommendations made by the Bank 
in discussions related to a possible policy-based loan in 2003 while customs reform measures 
currently being implemented are linked to a program supported by technical assistance from 
many development partners.  The tax reform bill currently before Parliament has benefited from 
technical advice from the IMF and many of the regulatory or investment climate reforms being 
considered are connected with ongoing advisory work of the Bank under the rubric of the 
Investment Climate Assessment.  

Facilitating Private Sector Development  

19. Financial sector challenges. The Egyptian financial sector is characterized by inefficiency 
and weaknesses in intermediation due primarily to the dominance of state ownership.  In the 
banking subsector, four major state-owned banks account for almost 58 percent of assets, earn 
lower net interest margins than private banks, have higher operating costs and have been slow to 
modernize and innovate. The quality of their portfolios is widely considered to be poor.  The 
insurance subsector is also dominated by public ownership and is under-developed in the sense of 
having annual premium income of less than 1.1 percent of GDP and offering only a limited range 
of services, in some cases not even extending to the coverage of basic risks.  Non-bank financial 
institutions such as the mortgage market, financial leasing, and venture capital remain limited in 
scope and activity.  The stock market remains thin with trading confined largely to 30 or so 
companies, despite recent positive trends in market capitalization (up 36 percent to LE 234 billion 
in 2004), trading volume (up 30 percent to LE 36.1 billion in 2004) and average valuations (the 
Capital Market Authority (CMA) general index rose by almost 51 percent in 2004). Other 
challenges include that of expanding access to financial services, through electronic payment 
mechanisms and/or through non-bank channels such as the postal network, for example.  
20. To improve the performance and soundness of the financial sector, Government has 
proposed a series of bold measures as follows:4 
• 
In the banking subsector, reform objectives include: merging the six most poorly 
performing banks with larger, better-performing banks, privatization of public sector 
shares in joint venture banks and operational restructuring of the public sector banks 
(PSBs); privatization of one of the big four PSBs (namely Bank of Alexandria) and 
recapitalization of some other PSBs; and setting up at the Central Bank of Egypt of a unit 
for monitoring non-performing loans and a referee committee to streamline the process of 
rescheduling non-performing loans, loan recovery and repossession of collateral. 
In the insurance subsector, reform objectives include: privatizing one of the state-owned 
insurance companies; major restructuring of the remaining state-owned companies; 
encouraging private sector participation; strengthening of insurance regulations and the 

• 

4 The description of reform objectives and measures is taken from a paper entitled Financial Reform 
Program: 2005-2008 issued by the Ministry of Investment in October 2004. 

6

 
                                                 
• 

• 

underlying accounting principles and commercial codes; and achieving full compliance 
with GATS commitments regarding the liberalization of this sector. 
In the capital markets subsector, reform objectives include: improving corporate 
governance through better information disclosure, more vigorous enforcement actions 
and compliance with international codes and standards; and increasing market liquidity 
and efficiency through allowing margin trading and establishing a primary dealers 
system. 
In the mortgage market, the goal is to create a more active, competitive and sustainable 
mortgage market by establishing a transparent system to protect property rights and 
streamline real estate registration; facilitating foreclosure procedures; improving housing 
affordability; and reducing lending and funding risks for mortgage lenders and investors 
in mortgage securities. 

• The financial sector reform program also includes measures related to financial leasing 
companies, factoring, and venture capital. In particular, steps are being considered to 
improve the credit information system that should in turn improve access to credit, 
especially for small and medium firms. Finally, an important objective of the reform 
program is to strengthen financial regulations and supervision. Towards this end, steps 
have been taken to separate the monetary policy function from the bank supervision 
function within the central bank, and to unify all non-bank financial services policies 
under one ministry (namely the Ministry of Investment). 

21. Trade-related issues.  Egypt carried out significant trade policy reforms during the 1990s.  
However, there was a slackening of the reform effort at the turn of the decade, especially when 
viewed in comparison to changes taking place in other parts of the world.  Egypt’s export 
performance deteriorated in this period, contributing to the slowdown in overall economic 
growth.  To regain momentum in this area, the government adopted a floating exchange rate 
system in 2003 and took steps to improve the functioning of the interbank foreign exchange 
market in 2004.  In addition, it has recently introduced a number of measures that aim to enhance 
the competitiveness of domestic industry.  These include: reducing the number of tariff bands 
from 27 to 6, cutting the average (weighted) tariff rate from 14.6 percent to 9.1 percent, and 
removing fees and surcharges on some imports so as to bring Egypt into compliance with 
commitments made to the WTO. Import liberalization is to be complemented by measures to 
simplify custom procedures, rationalize the regime under which imports are inspected for 
compliance with Egyptian standards, develop transport infrastructure (roads, airports and sea 
ports), provide assistance to SMEs in foreign marketing, and facilitate insurance against export 
risks. The government also intends to take maximum advantage of free trade and partnership 
agreements and opportunities with the EU, the US and Arab countries. Recently, Egypt has 
entered into a Qualifying Industrial Zones (QIZ) agreement that will allow it to export certain 
products (especially textiles) to the US market without quota restraints and free of tariffs.  
22. The GOE is aware that Internet technologies can enhance trade and competitiveness, not 
least as marketing channels. E-commerce, though increasing, remains constrained by legal and 
administrative barriers. However, awareness of e-commerce potential is growing and some 
enabling legislation (notably on e-signatures) has been developed. Challenges include 
strengthening laws and regulations on electronic transactions, including electronic contracting, e-
payment, security, privacy, crime and protection of intellectual property rights; as well as 
increasing access to information and communications infrastructure, particularly outside major 
urban areas. 

7

 
 
 
23. Privatization.  Despite substantial privatization during the 1990s, the stock of state-owned 
companies remains significant.  The current Cabinet intends to follow an asset management 
approach with the objective of maximizing returns from the restructuring or sale of state-owned 
companies.  Ultimately, the idea is to greatly reduce the number of state-owned companies so as 
to minimize the involvement of the state in areas where private sector enterprises can function 
effectively.  Significant progress has been made since July 2004 in that 19 companies have 
already been sold; another 83 are listed for sale during the remainder of 2005.   
24. Tax rates and administration. Tax rates are currently as high as 42 percent for many 
corporations although many others are able to take advantage of one or the other of the numerous 
tax exemption schemes that have been introduced in the last few decades.  To reduce the burden 
of taxes and reinvigorate the business environment, the government has recently submitted a draft 
tax law to Parliament in which it proposes to cut marginal corporate and personal income tax 
rates to 20 percent, streamline exemption rules so as to reduce tax avoidance and create a more 
level playing field for different types of business ventures, increase the penalties for tax evasion, 
and strengthen the institutional capacity of the Tax Department in order to improve tax collection 
while minimizing arbitrary and unpredictable treatment of taxpayers. 
25. Other investment climate considerations. The government is currently working on a 
detailed program for fast tracking and streamlining of bureaucratic procedures for investments 
with the aim of upgrading the business environment and introducing further deregulation.  Recent 
actions towards this end include: restructuring of the leadership and management of GAFI, 
establishing a Board of Trustees to clarify its mission and mandate, establishing a Board of 
Directors with a majority of private sector members to provide a better link with business 
developments and needs, and specifying a plan to shift GAFI’s priorities from regulation to 
investment promotion and investor advocacy; and opening a “one-stop shop” to handle foreign 
and domestic investment registration and information needs. The government has also started to 
offer business support services such as licensing and building permits, customs and tax 
information via the Internet on a limited basis. There is considerable scope to enhance such “e-
government” programs that can help to reduce processing time and transaction costs.  
Enhancing Provision of Public Services 
26. Maintaining macroeconomic stability. Recent macroeconomic performance suggests that 
while Government has kept inflation and interest rates low on average, it has not been able to 
keep fiscal deficits and the public debt from rising to levels that could jeopardize long run 
sustainability. The Government recognizes the importance of controlling the fiscal deficit and has 
plans to reduce the deficit over the medium run through both restraining public expenditures and 
increasing public revenues. Towards these ends, there are plans to redesign subsidies, control the 
growth of public sector employment, cut unnecessary or “luxury” expenditures in government 
departments, rationalize tax exemptions, and improve the performance of the tax collections 
department.  Some actions have already been taken in this regard.  For example, the subsidy on 
diesel fuel and electricity has been reduced in recent months.5 Also, as already noted, a new tax 
law has been proposed that should help improve tax collections in the medium run. Government 
expects that the reduction of corporate tax rates and the restructuring of tax administration 
procedures that are part of its reform program will lead to higher tax collections within three 
years of implementation due to increased business activity, a broader tax base, fewer exemptions, 
and lower rates of evasion.  Increased business activity is also expected from the reforms being 
pursued with respect to the investment climate.  This too should help increase the revenue to GDP 

5 Prices of selected grades of diesel and gasoline have been adjusted upwards at least twice over the last 
twelve months.  There are plans as well to increase electricity rates by 5% per annum over the next five 
years. 

8

 
                                                 
ratio over time. However, during the next two years, Government expects the fiscal deficit and 
public debt to increase for two reasons: to finance much-needed public investments to facilitate a 
private sector response to the structural reforms being undertaken and to reflect an initial period 
of declining revenues as tax and tariff rates are cut.   
27. The pace and sequencing of various fiscal actions noted above need to be analyzed further 
to ensure that macroeconomic stability is preserved as the reform program proceeds. In particular, 
the funds needed for the resolution of the NPL problem in the banking sector will impose a 
substantial strain on the fiscal accounts and the public debt.  To alleviate this pressure in a 
credible manner it may be necessary to move more aggressively on certain items of current 
expenditure such as subsidies. Attention will also need to be paid to strengthening treasury 
functions within the budgetary system so as to improve transparency and reduce total borrowing 
needs. Finally, more attention will need to be paid to contingent liabilities that may reside in the 
pensions system. 
28. Enhancing public investments. As already noted, there has been a significant reduction in 
the rate of public investment in recent years.  While this reduction has helped restrain an even 
larger increase in the fiscal deficit, it may have compromised the infrastructure base on which 
private sector investment relies.  Since the success of the ongoing reform program depends to a 
large extent on the investment supply response of the private sector, Government plans to 
facilitate a positive response by changing some key policy parameters as well as by making 
strategic infrastructure investments in areas such as electricity generation and transport, for 
example, and supporting more competitive provision of telecommunications services.  
29. A key aspect of Government’s strategy is to increase the involvement of the private sector 
in public 
infrastructure 
investments. Relevant options 
include variants of build-own-
operate/transfer arrangements.  Government is presently discussing ways to make such 
arrangements commercially attractive for the private sector and has sought technical assistance 
from various sources.  Discussions focus on elimination of certain restrictions on private sector 
participation, setting quality standards for participation, and establishing clear legal rules for the 
selection of investors through transparent and competitive procedures.  At the same time, 
Government is conscious of the need to ensure that the resulting arrangements do not create 
private monopolies and that they are embedded within a regulatory and supervisory framework 
that protects the public interest, especially in such services as utilities or public transportation.  It 
is expected that public-private partnerships will be sought most actively in such sectors as 
transportation, telecommunications, tourism and real estate development. In the case of 
telecommunications infrastructure, the government has taken a number of measures to improve 
access and quality of service, including support for competitive Internet service provision (the 
sector is private sector-driven and about 180 Internet Service Providers are now active); a 
broadband initiative (2003); incentives to increase diffusion of personal computers; and the 
establishment of a universal (telecommunications) service fund. However, the challenge of 
improving rural access remains. 
30. 
Improving water resource management. Egypt has about 950 cubic meters per year per 
capita of water resources, lower than the MENA average of 1,200 cubic meters. Growing 
urbanization and the expansion of agriculture to formerly desert lands has increased the 
competition for the relatively fixed supply of river and ground water while putting pressure as 
well on the quality of these water resources. Water quality is declining, especially in the Delta, 
due to insufficiently treated industrial and municipal discharges, inadequate sanitation coverage 
in rural areas and heavily-polluted drainage canals. In certain areas, groundwater and shallow 
water aquifers are severely contaminated.  In addition, there are concerns about supply/demand 
imbalances for the future, weaknesses in service delivery, reliability and transparency, and the 
fiscal/financial sustainability of current arrangements.  The Government recognizes that top 

9

 
priority must be given to improving water resource management and has sought technical 
assistance on appropriate sector policies and practices. Among the key objectives of its evolving 
water management strategy are: expanding the water network coverage in urban and rural areas 
through an accelerated investment program and improvement in service delivery;  rationalizing 
water consumption for both municipal and agriculture demands (through improving the fee 
collection system, minimizing illegal leakages from water networks, expanding metering systems 
and increasing public awareness about water conservation); and reducing water pollution (for 
example, through projects aimed at preventing wastewater seeping into groundwater, diverting 
potable water networks from areas relying on sanitary trenches, and improving agricultural 
drainage).  There is a regional dimension to the management of water resources as well, 
necessitated by the fact that Egypt depends almost entirely on the Nile for its water and the Nile is 
shared by nine other riparian states (see Box 1). 
31. 
Improving air quality. Egypt suffers from poor air quality due to practices such as the 
burning of agricultural residues, an aged stock of automobiles, and certain industrial activities. A 
recent assessment showed that the annual damage from air pollution is about LE 6.4 billion (2.1 
percent of GDP in 1999) and is reflected largely in premature mortality and morbidity.  Local 
damage costs due to the burning of agricultural residues were approximately LE 700 million 
(US$150 million in 1999/2000).  In the absence of remedial measures, further economic activity 
will lead to an increase in damage costs of almost 25 percent by 2010. In this regard, the 
reduction of subsidies on gasoline and electricity in recent months should help tilt incentives in 
favor of more efficient energy consumption. Other actions being considered include: (a) reducing 
concentration of pollutants in the transport and agricultural residues sectors; (b) increasing the 
share of natural gas in the industrial sectors (with emphasis on small-and-medium industry) and 
in the transport sector particularly for city buses and micro buses; (c) using the Clean 
Development Mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol to increase revenues from the trading of 
certified emission credits; and (d) disseminating information to the public on air pollution and its 
health risks. 
32. Supporting growth through better education and training. Government attaches high 
priority to strengthening the country’s educational system. While much has been achieved in the 
last two decades, it is recognized that much more needs to be done to equip Egyptians adequately 
for the twenty-first century and to build an “information society” or “knowledge economy” in the 
country.6 Towards this end, Government intends to pursue a strategy aimed at: improving the 
quality of education at all levels, including pre-schools (through developing and maintaining 
national standards and strengthening monitoring, accreditation and quality assurance processes); 
making curricula at various stages more relevant to the needs of domestic and international labor 
markets (and thereby enhancing the employability of graduates); decentralizing the locus of 
decision making to schools and communities as appropriate (so as to increase local and parental 
ownership of the educational process, improve accountability of teaching staff, and enhance 
quality); improving access to quality education services to currently disadvantaged populations in 
Upper Egypt and poor urban areas, including working children and disabled; and improving the 
performance of training institutes (in part through linking them better with private sector sources 
of demand). Such a program will also require improving access of schools to information 
infrastructure (connectivity) at reasonable cost. 

6 The foundations of the knowledge economy will be strengthened not only by initiatives in education but 
also by measures related to private sector development, especially those that facilitate ICT and financial 
sector reform.  Such measures should help build a more dynamic information and innovation infrastructure. 

10

 
                                                 
Box 1: Egypt and the Nile Basin Initiative 

Egypt is the most downstream of the 10 riparian states of the River Nile. Except along the Mediterranean 
coast and the Sinai, rainfall over most of Egypt is close to zero and, although there are some non-renewable 
groundwater resources, surface water resources outside the Nile Basin are extremely limited.  So Egypt is 
totally dependent on the flows of the Nile, which account for 96-98 percent of the country’s renewable 
freshwater resources and provides for 95 percent of the country’s population, who live within a narrow strip 
along its banks.   

With populations and water demand growing among all riparian states, the future management of Nile 
waters is a major challenge, best met through cooperative efforts to optimize river flows and food and 
power production, reduce drought and flood shocks and water losses, and ensure a water-secure future for 
all.  Until recently, there was no inclusive mechanism to address this challenge; instead there has been a 
long history of dispute over Nile waters.  The Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) set out to change that in 1999.  

The NBI has made considerable progress since 1999.  A basin-wide program of projects is under 
implementation, with the objective of building trust and capacity and laying the foundation for joint 
investment.  The NBI is now pursuing a joint multi-track investment strategy at the sub-basin level, 
involving: (i) investments responding to urgent needs on the ground through irrigation and fishery 
development, watershed management, flood preparedness, and power interconnection; and (ii) longer term 
large scale investments in hydropower, flood control, river regulation and environmental management that 
address comprehensive and integrated basin development. Egypt is playing an active role in all of the 
basin-wide and sub-basin programs. 

With 85 percent of the Nile flow into Egypt coming from Ethiopia through Sudan into Egypt, there are 
major opportunities in the ‘Eastern Nile’ for joint development.  A recent agreement among the Eastern 
Nile states promises to facilitate such outcomes as improved river regulation and flow, efficient use of 
water for productive purposes, access to new energy sources (Egypt plans to add 1000 MW of electricity 
every year), and better flood control and reduced sedimentation.   

The potential for meeting Egypt’s grain and meat demand from within the basin is being actively pursued, 
an approach that will be greatly facilitated by Egypt’s offer to share its successful experience in irrigated 
agriculture and marketing.  This will lead to the Egyptian private sector exploring opportunities for 
cooperative investments with private sector entities in other basin countries, with some partnerships already 
emerging  – for instance, in the manufacture of pipes and the establishment of abattoirs in Ethiopia.   

The regional agenda may slow Egypt’s own plans in the short run; however, continued positive 
engagement with the NBI should lead to significant economic and political benefits, along with a 
potentially accelerated program, in the medium term. Gaining broader stakeholder understanding through 
civil society discourse and commitment at the highest political levels for the NBI is important. 

33. Some characteristics of education financing in Egypt present a special problem. Most of the 
education budget is directed towards salaries of teachers and other administrative staff, leaving 
very little for other areas such as investment or maintenance and other recurrent cost items. There 
are 1.2 million employees in the education sector of which 800,000 are teachers while the rest are 
non-teaching staff.  All are paid low salaries to the extent that quality cannot be easily improved 
without revising compensation levels, an issue that is common to other government services as 
well.  Recognizing this problem, Government intends to: (a) use the current budget more cost-
effectively through reallocation of resources among different items.  For example, savings can be 
derived from using textbooks over multiple years or from making changes in the design 
specifications of school buildings.  These savings could then be directed to better maintenance of 
schools, more opportunities for teacher training and the payment of incentives to good teachers; 

11

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and (b) encourage community participation and the establishment of private schools and 
universities.  The private sector presently accounts for only 7 percent of enrollees in pre-
university education (except at the pre-school level where there is a greater share of the private 
sector).  This needs to be increased threefold in order to reduce the pressure on the Government 
budget for education.  Provided they follow prescribed national standards, private schools and 
universities can help improve the quality and market relevance of education as well.  
34. There is broad agreement between Government and the World Bank on key objectives and 
programs in education.  Many of the areas of focus of the Ministry of Education are those that the 
Bank is supporting through its ongoing projects and sector dialogue.  For example, the 
Government’s recent move to increase access to and improve quality of preschools is supported 
by the World Bank and several other donors through the recently approved Early Childhood 
Education Enhancement Project.  The Bank also supports the efforts of the Ministries of Finance 
and Education to review public expenditures in the education sector in order to identify areas of 
inefficiencies and waste.  The implementation of the recommendations emerging from the 
ongoing PER exercise should help the MOE in reallocating resources towards cost-effective 
approaches, which in turn would help improve schooling quality. One area where the Bank would 
propose greater focus is increased collaboration and harmonization among donors supporting the 
education sector. 
35. 
Improving quality and efficiency of health services.   Demands on the government health 
system are rising as a result of demographic and epidemiologic transition.  The increasing burden 
of chronic and geriatric diseases, the need to provide a more equitable distribution of health care 
to low-income people and people living in rural and frontier areas, and the demand for higher 
quality and better service, are already straining public resources.  The Government recognizes the 
need to (a) improve the quality and efficiency of the existing government health care delivery 
system by reducing fragmentation, introducing greater managerial autonomy and accountability, 
and contracting of services where appropriate; (b) place greater emphasis on prevention and 
primary care; and (c) enhance management of public funds, including the Health Insurance 
Organization, through the introduction of modern information systems and management 
practices.  
36. Fostering greater accountability in the public and private sectors. Government plans to 
improve the performance of public sector agencies through strengthening their governance and 
management structure. This could include introducing performance monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) frameworks, ensuring regular performance evaluations for senior management, 
developing sound and unified accounting rules for the treatment of profits among state-owned 
enterprises, improving the information databases used by public sector units for their investment 
and service delivery objectives, and requiring a higher level of information disclosure to the 
public on service delivery targets and achievements through such means as publishing the 
minutes of key meetings on official websites (such as the Investment Portal).  Implementing these 
ideas in key sectors such as health and education services should be given high priority.   
Government also recognizes the importance of good corporate governance in the private sector.  
Towards this end, it has set up an Institute of Directors whose mandate is to strengthen corporate 
governance practices, provide research and technical advisory services to enhance compliance 
with laws and regulations and promote awareness of benefits of good corporate governance.  The 
mandate of the Institute has recently been widened to go beyond listed companies to encompass 
all companies registered under GAFI. 
37. Addressing urban challenges. Cities in Egypt have been suffering from low municipal 
capacity, poor urban planning, inadequate land and housing policies, low levels of local 
investment in basic infrastructure relative to needs, and deteriorating environmental conditions in 
several areas.  The National Democratic Party’s report, “Preservation of Agricultural Lands and 

12

 
Management of Urban Development in Egypt” (September 2004), defines Egypt’s major urban 
challenges in the coming 20 years as: a) preserving scarce arable land from informal urbanization; 
b) upgrading 1105 squatter and slum settlements in Egypt, in which some 15.7 million inhabitants 
now live; and c) enhancing service delivery capacity to accommodate an expected increase of 26 
million in Egypt’s population by 2020.  These challenges are complex and underscore the need 
for innovative approaches and solutions, including partnerships with the private sector. Egypt’s 
cities and metropolitan governments represent the institutional counterparts for private sector 
investors, and their ability to form effective partnerships hinges critically on the quality and 
efficiency of the services they are able to offer.  Over the past two years, Government has 
successfully piloted the City Development Strategy (CDS) in Alexandria.  It is now ready to 
mainstream this as a preferred approach to strategic planning by making it mandatory for other 
governorates.  
38. 
Improving government services.  Since the public sector has a substantial and pervasive 
presence in the Egyptian economy, the quality of development in the country is substantially 
affected by the quality of human resources in the public sector, the organizational framework 
within which public services are delivered, and the costs of maintaining the current size of the 
civil service.7  Government is fully cognizant of the centrality of civil service reform to long term 
growth in Egypt.  However, mindful of political sensitivities, it prefers to deal with the problem 
in a piecemeal and gradual fashion.  At the moment, its approach encompasses ideas for 
outsourcing some civil service functions (such as building maintenance), limiting new hires, 
exploring the possibility of part-time and short-term contracts for new hires rather than offering 
them lifetime employment as has been the norm so far, introducing better performance 
monitoring systems, and allowing greater flexibility to local administrations with respect to 
deployment of civil servants. Under the aegis of the Organizational Development Initiative, 
Government proposes to:  assess the functions of different government agencies in relation to 
their mandates; assess the scope for decentralization of selected functions; strengthen institutional 
capacity building among municipalities and governorates so as to enable them to carry out 
decentralized assignments effectively; and encourage civil society to be more involved in the 
selection, design, implementation and monitoring of certain public services. Furthermore, 
Government is open to adopting new methods of service delivery where possible as shown by the 
case of the CDS noted above.  
39. Redesigning social policy.  Social policy also has a part to play in achieving a diversified 
and competitive economy that generates growth and new jobs. Egypt already possesses several 
components of a social protection system that can play such a growth-facilitating role.  However, 
these components may have to be redesigned so as to make them more effective and compatible 
with the needs of an economy that will be functioning in a more competitive world.  Critical areas 
in this regard are:  the social insurance system (including health insurance) which needs to be 
made financially sustainable; training and skill development programs that need to be properly 
aligned with market demands; and labor market regulations that need to ensure a better balance 
between the rights of workers and the need for adequate flexibility for enterprises to adjust 
workforce levels and compensation.  With regard to the last mentioned point, a new Labor Law 
was enacted in 2003 whose implementation should help Egypt move towards the necessary 
balance.  Finally, safety nets for the poor are also an important aspect of social policy in Egypt 
and a prominent instrument to promote equity as discussed in the next section. 

7 Analytical work suggests that government consumption, in part reflecting expenditures on the civil 
service, has a negative impact on growth in Egypt. At present, expenditures on wages and salaries absorb a 
significant chunk (31%) of current expenditures.  This is because the civil service is large relative to the 
size of the economy (5.5 million people and approximately 29% of the labor force).   

13

 
 
                                                 
Promoting Equity 
40. Strengthening safety nets.  Helping the poor is an important collective preference in 
Egyptian society and there exist both private and public social safety nets to support those who 
are unable to earn adequate incomes.  The public safety nets presently consist of subsidy 
programs (such as for food and energy), public employment programs (such as those operated 
under the Social Fund for Development) and cash transfer programs (such as those managed by 
the Ministry of Social Affairs and Insurance).  Government is keenly aware that concerns exist 
about the effectiveness and efficiency of some safety net programs.  In recent months, it has 
begun to place special emphasis on the need to redesign safety net programs with a view to 
improving their efficiency and facilitating the social adjustment to the ongoing reforms, thereby 
making the reforms themselves more sustainable.  A dialogue on relevant issues and sharing of 
international experience occurred in Luxor, Egypt in February 2005.  This dialogue was 
facilitated by the World Bank and involved relevant members of the Egyptian Cabinet (led by the 
Prime Minister) and counterparts/experts from Mexico and Brazil.  Following this meeting, GOE 
organized a Social Reform policy group within the Cabinet that is charged with assessing various 
reform options with a view to presenting recommendations for action.   
41. 
Improving access to health care.  Health is an important dimension of national welfare.  In 
Egypt, all employees (and their families) in the public sector, as well as in certain private 
companies, are entitled to (partial) health insurance. However, those who are self-employed, or 
working in informal private sector enterprises, do not have employment-based health insurance 
coverage and must rely for support on public or private safety nets. 37 percent of Egyptian 
households from the lowest wealth quintile are reported to have no access to insurance, compared 
to 15 percent of the highest quintile.  Providing access to quality health care for a broad segment 
of the population, especially the less well-off, and doing so in a cost-effective manner, is an 
important objective of public policy in Egypt.  Towards this end, Government plans to reform the 
health insurance system and find ways to extend coverage to those not presently covered. It also 
plans to devote more resources to primary health care programs, strengthen the administration of 
the public health system, improve the public health information system, and expand the 
participation of NGOs and local communities in the planning and delivery of health services. 
42. Decreasing interregional disparities.  Upper Egypt, and in particular rural Upper Egypt, 
has the highest incidence of poverty in the country: 34 percent of the people there are poor and 
half of all poor Egyptians live there.  In addition, while poverty fell between 1995/96 and 
1999/2000 for the rest of Egypt, it increased in rural Upper Egypt, suggesting that the region is 
not well linked to the mainstream of the economy.  Government is mindful of the special 
developmental challenges of Upper Egypt, and has been diverting a rising share of public 
expenditures to that region (from 19 percent in the fourth Five Year Plan to 25 percent in the fifth 
Five Year Plan).  Additional public resources are needed, not only to reduce disparities in access 
to services and public infrastructure, but also to better support income generating activities.  In 
Upper Egypt, the poorest (lowest two quintiles) comprise agricultural laborers, landless farmers, 
as well as farmers with very small landholdings (less than one feddan).  Specific activities to 
promote agricultural productivity and growth, as well as develop non-farm rural economic 
opportunities, will be required.   
43. Decentralizing public service delivery.  At present, most public services in Egypt are 
delivered by central ministries operating through their own (de-concentrated) local staff.  Budget 
and administrative control is exercised by ministries or by appointed Governors who head local 
administrations. This level of centralization is not necessarily compatible with the optimal choice 
and efficient delivery of local priorities. Using community organizations and NGOs to define 
public service needs and to monitor delivery can be particularly useful and cost-effective for rural 
development purposes, for improving the poverty-reducing impact of social funds, and for 

14

 
delivering health and education services.  Even within the present system, however, there are 
opportunities for expanding local initiative. Some local administrations have negotiated the 
bureaucratic and legal space to tackle local development issues in a more flexible manner. For 
example, in Qena governorate, health care workers can draw supplemental income from funds 
generated by co-payments on health services imposed under the authority of the local Executive 
Council, leading to improved morale and better staffing and utilization of health care facilities.  
Furthermore, measures to promote fiscal (expenditure and revenue) decentralization are under 
consideration.   Finally, the authorities have launched an E-Government initiative that should also 
help achieve significant decentralization of some public services. The program has so far been 
implemented on a pilot basis, involving selected urban and rural administrative districts. The task 
ahead is to improve monitoring and evaluation and, on that basis, scale up successful models. 

B. Medium-term Macroeconomic Prospects  
Base Case  
44. 
In the base case scenario, Egypt should experience growth of 5 percent on average 
during FY06-09. This scenario is based on three key points. First, the economy is already 
growing at close to 5 percent (provisional estimate for FY05) and the momentum from this 
should carry over into subsequent years.  Second, external demand is likely to stay broadly 
favorable.  Third, a raft of domestic policy reforms have been initiated, boosting the credibility of 
the economic management of the present Government.  There is much confidence that the 
announced reforms will be successfully implemented and new ones will be initiated. However, 
concerns remain about the fiscal position and the impact of rising international interest rates. 
45. Present growth momentum. An economic growth rate of 4.8 percent has been recorded in 
the first half of FY05 (up from 4.2 percent the year before).  This is expected to accelerate in the 
second half, based on current trends in investment and exports. Total export earnings have grown 
by 34 percent in the first half of FY05 while total investments have grown by 10.5 percent (in 
nominal terms).  Business community expectations are positive as well, as revealed by the 
“Business Barometer” put out by the Egyptian Center for Economic Studies in January 2005.  
Respondents to this semi-annual survey anticipate an increase in output and sales, and are 
guardedly optimistic as well about short term employment and investment growth. 
46. Prospects for external demand. External developments are likely to stay favorable with 
respect to world economic demand and oil prices.8  Over the CAS period, world economic growth 
rates are likely to exceed the average that has prevailed over the last five years. Prospects for 
higher exports of oil and gas (and for higher FDI in those sectors) and for higher tourism flows 
are particularly favorable. Expanding world economic demand and trading opportunities available 
under various trade agreements should raise Egypt’s merchandise exports. Oil prices are likely to 
stay high in the short run before declining to around $30 for the medium term.  This should 
strengthen Egypt’s balance of payments and fiscal position since the country is a (small) net 
exporter.  
47. Rising international interest rates.  Domestic interest rates have declined recently due to 
excess liquidity in the banking system and high inflow of foreign funds seeking to exploit the gap 
between domestic and foreign interest rates. However, this situation is not expected to last much 
longer.  World interest rates are likely to be higher over the next few years, with the six month 
LIBOR rising from 1.6 percent in 2004 to an average of 4.1 percent in 2005-06.  As world 
interest rates rise, there will be pressure on domestic interest rates to rise in Egypt.   

8  A strong link exists between the GDP growth rates of Egypt and OECD countries over the last 15 years. 
The simple correlation between these two variables for the period 1988-2003 is 0.70.  

15

 
                                                 
48. Fiscal position.  The ratio of the consolidated fiscal deficit to GDP is expected to rise in 
FY06-08 due to higher spending on debt servicing and lower revenues from trade and income tax 
rate reductions.  After that it should decline as growth continues at 5 percent and tax collections 
begin to increase as a result of tax administration improvements. The net public debt ratio is 
expected to decline modestly over the CAS period under base case assumptions. However, it 
should be noted that the high level of the deficit and the public debt limits the room for maneuver 
and makes the economy more vulnerable to interest rate and other shocks. 

Table 1: Baseline medium-term macroeconomic scenario 

Growth Rates (percent) 

Real GDP 
Real Consumption 
Real Gross Domestic Investment 
Export Volume 
Import Volume 
GDP deflator 

Ratios to GDP (percent) 

Gross Domestic Investment 
Fiscal Balance (consolidated) 
Net public debt (consolidated) 
Current Account Balance 

2004 

2005 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

4.4 
4.5 
3.0 
22.7 
13.4 
10.0 

16.5 
-2.7 
88 
4.5 

5.0 
4.8 
5.4 
10.5 
16.3 
8.0 

16.3 
-3.4 
89 
4.0 

5.0 
3.8 
8.2 
12.5 
9.0 
6.5 

16.7 
-4.5 
87 
3.7 

5.0 
3.8 
8.1 
12.0 
7.6 
5.0 

17.3 
-4.5 
86 
3.7  

5.0 
3.8 
8.0 
10.7 
7.9 
5.0 

17.8 
-4.5 
86 
3.7  

5.0 
3.6 
7.9 
10.1 
7.5 
4.5 

18.5 
-4.4 
85 
3.5 

Alternative scenarios 
49. External or domestic shocks could cause growth to drop from one to two percentage points 
below the base case scenario. Two types of adverse developments (or their combination) could 
trigger lower growth. First, unfavorable exogenous shocks such as lower OECD growth, a sharp 
spike in world interest rates, or an adverse regional geopolitical event (such as a terrorist attack) 
could occur.  These would affect growth through reducing foreign demand or domestic supply or 
both, depending on their nature and duration.  The economy’s resilience would partly depend on 
the quality of the policy response, and partly on the soundness of the financial system and 
investment climate. Second, a slowdown of reform efforts, in particular a failure to strengthen the 
financial system and improve the investment climate as needed in the face of stiffer international 
competition, would put at risk the sustainability of growth in the 5 percent range and most likely 
lead to lower private investment (including foreign direct investment) and higher unemployment. 
Simulations of two macroeconomic scenarios – “External Shock” and “Policy Shock” – described 
in Annex 5, show that both types of developments will likely reduce the investment rate in Egypt 
by up to 6 percentage points of GDP in the medium term. In this context, Egypt will face 
difficulties in meeting its financing needs. 

III. EGYPT-WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP FOR FY06-09 

A. Implementation of Previous CAS 

50. The World Bank Board discussed the previous CAS for Egypt in June, 2001.  Over the next 
three years (FY02-04), the scenario that prevailed came closer to the low case than the base case 
that was outlined in the CAS.  Policy reforms slowed, the fiscal deficit continued to rise, and 
lending declined.  
51. Slowdown of policy reforms.  The CAS period saw a lack of forward movement in several 
areas of reform including trade, foreign exchange management, finance, and privatization.  Some 

16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actions were taken but in a manner and at a pace that reduced the likelihood of a timely positive 
impact.   For example, a free trade agreement was signed with the European Union after several 
years of negotiation but key liberalization measures within this agreement were loaded into the 
outer years.  In the meantime, the tariff system remained relatively complicated (with 27 bands) 
and an impediment to trade (with an average tariff level of 15 percent or so). The exchange rate 
was floated in January 2003 but an ad hoc system of administrative guidance was imposed on the 
key foreign exchange market players quickly thereafter.  The parallel market did not disappear for 
the next eighteen months or so.  While a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) exercise 
was undertaken, little effort was made to implement its main recommendations though some 
progress was made through the issuance of new laws and regulations pertaining to capital 
requirements, banking supervision, credit concentration, and connected lending.9  Finally, the 
speed of privatization slowed down relative to the vigorous pace set a few years earlier. 
52. For the Bank, while the dialogue over structural reforms remained inconclusive, that 
pertaining to other issues, such as poverty, gender and education, improved substantially.  During 
the CAS period the Bank and the Government collaborated on several pieces of analytical work 
that led to both a better and a shared understanding in such areas as poverty trends, gender 
achievements, and education sector needs.  The spirit that marked this collaborative effort bodes 
well for the future as the shared understanding feeds into policy and project design and leads to 
faster implementation.  
53. Deterioration of fiscal performance.  The CAS period also saw the continuation of a rise in 
the fiscal deficit.  During FY02-04, the consolidated public sector deficit increased from 2.5 
percent of GDP to 2.7 percent.   The quality of the deficit continued to worsen in the sense that 
capital expenditures declined from 4.0 percent of GDP to 3.7 percent while current expenditures 
(including civil service salaries, subsidies and debt service payments) continued to rise (from 22.6 
percent of GDP to 23.2 percent) and revenue performance deteriorated from 27.5 percent of GDP 
to 26.8 percent.  
54. Decline in lending.  The above developments were associated with a decline in Bank 
lending.  Two rounds of discussion regarding a possible policy-based loan for Egypt failed to 
produce an agreement, partly because the adverse economic impact from such external events as 
the attacks of September 11 (in 2001) and the war in Iraq (in 2003) was smaller than anticipated, 
thereby reducing the urgency and need for external assistance, and partly for lack of timely action 
on selected trade, tax and financial sector measures. The lending pipeline, already in decline by 
2000, registered commitment levels of 0, 50, and 12.4 million dollars respectively during FY01, 
FY02 and FY03.  However, the last year of the CAS period, FY04, saw a substantial surge in 
lending (to $340.6 million) due to a large loan for a new airport terminal.    
55. 
Improvement in portfolio performance. Despite the overall decline in the quantity of 
lending, the quality of the outstanding portfolio improved over the CAS period. At the end of 
FY02, five of the Bank’s 18 projects were in problem status, with a very low disbursement ratio 
(about 7 percent). Egypt was on the Bank-wide watch list for countries with commitments at risk 
above 33 percent. Today, there are only two problem projects, with commitment at risk of around 
2 percent, and a disbursement ratio of over 18 percent. Improvements have been achieved through 
increased efforts to build implementation capacity, restructure projects, cancel unutilized 
amounts, and even close some projects (e.g., PBDAC project was closed in December 2003.)  
Project effectiveness delays have been markedly reduced. In FY03-04 effectiveness delays ranged 
between 3 and 7 months with an average of about 4 months, compared to an average of 14 

 9 Another achievement following the FSAP was the fulfillment of all legal and institutional requirements 
in accordance with the FATF recommendations and measures.  This resulted in the removal of Egypt from 
the list of non-cooperating countries and territories in February 2004.  

17

 
                                                 
months in the two years prior to that.  Effectiveness was speeded up by enhanced collaboration 
with the Ministry of International Cooperation and diligent intervention of the line ministry 
concerned at each and every step of the process mandated in Egypt for aid-supported projects.  
Project implementation was successfully improved through dedicated, proactive support to the 
procurement and disbursement process at the project level by the Country Department. As of July 
31, 2004, the Bank had approved 110 projects for Egypt, valued at about $7 billion, of which 
about $4.5 billion had been disbursed. The current active portfolio has 18 projects (including the 
recently effective Airports Project) with a commitment value of about $1.025 billion. 
56. 
 Selected lessons of previous CAS.  The implementation of the previous CAS unfolded 
differently from initial expectations and the Bank made several strategic and tactical choices 
some of which are of relevance to the design of the new CAS program. First, as Egypt graduated 
from IDA in 1999, the Government’s approach to borrowing changed.  This was indeed 
recognized in the previous CAS which emphasized that IBRD projects would need to be 
packaged together with donor grants to meet Government requirements for a 40 percent grant 
element.  During CAS implementation, it became clearer that coordinated approval and 
implementation in the context of differing donor project processing and approval cycles resulted 
in longer preparation periods and higher processing costs.  Several loans have in fact occurred but 
a year or two later than projected in the CAS. To the extent that the Government remains 
interested in minimizing the cost of funding for donor-supported projects, the Bank will need to 
factor in the need for more timely consultations with likely grant-making partners so as to contain 
project processing times and costs.  
57. Second, the previous CAS had assumed that structural reforms in Egypt would occur in the 
context of Bank policy-based lending.  It became apparent during CAS implementation that while 
the Government valued the Bank’s knowledge in designing structural reform measures it did not 
necessarily want to implement these measures when these were specified as part of the 
conditionality associated with a policy based loan.  Eventually, many of the measures (e.g. 
exchange rate reform, tariff restructuring and rationalization of tax rates) discussed during the 
preparation of the policy based loan were implemented as part of the Government’s reform 
program and have resulted in Egypt beginning this CAS in a strong base case scenario.  Lessons 
from this experience have been incorporated into this CAS being designed in a holistic manner 
(as described in paragraph 64).   
58. 
 Third, the previous CAS had attempted to focus the Bank’s lending assistance on areas 
where Government’s commitment was clear.  Despite these efforts, some projects were dropped 
and others cancelled without significant disbursement.  Two major changes have occurred in the 
design of this CAS which should considerably reduce this risk for the future.  First, Government 
has designated lead donors in relevant sectors, thus making it easier to determine where the 
Bank’s own efforts should be focused and with whom to conduct discussions regarding 
coordination and harmonization of efforts.  Second, specific activities included in this CAS have 
been validated with the Government and it has been agreed with the authorities that project 
preparation would not commence in earnest before the authorities pre-approve the Bank loan 
amount. Such a pre-approval would reduce the likelihood of projects being dropped after 
significant preparation has been undertaken and would reduce the time needed for ratification and 
effectiveness upon Board approval. 
59. Finally, the previous CAS had focused the Bank’s non-lending assistance on discrete 
deliverables with a limited time horizon.  During CAS implementation, the Government’s interest 
was in a more sustained and lengthy process of engagement (e.g. in poverty analysis and strategy 
design).  Non-lending support during the upcoming CAS will therefore increasingly focus on a 
long-term programmatic engagement with focused outputs (e.g. the Public Expenditure and 
Fiduciary Management work or the Poverty and Social Impact Analysis).  

18

 
B. Salient Aspects of Proposed CAS  

60. The political and economic context for the present CAS is very different from that 
prevailing at the time the last CAS was prepared.  The earlier CAS was introduced at a time when 
economic growth was slowing and the political will to pursue reforms appeared to be waning.  
The current context features both a revival of growth and of interest in reforms.  There now exists 
a remarkable opportunity for the Bank Group and other development partners to harness their 
financial and technical support for Egypt to an improving economy bolstered by a credible reform 
program. 
Results Framework 
61. 
 The content and expected outcomes of the CAS have been expressed in a Results 
Framework (attached as Annex 1).  Starting with the overarching objective of achieving growth 
with equity the Framework identifies three intermediate strategic objectives based on discussions 
with Government and consultations with other stakeholders.   These strategic objectives are: (a) 
facilitating private sector development; (b) enhancing the provision of selected public goods and 
(c) promoting equity. These objectives are further disaggregated into a set of 13 outcomes that the 
Bank expects to influence through the CAS as well as a larger set of intermediate outcomes that 
can be monitored to track progress towards the achievement of the CAS outcomes.  The 
framework also identifies various financial and advisory interventions by the Bank Group that are 
intended to contribute towards the achievement of these outcomes. 
62. The Results Framework is intended to be flexible in application.  It provides an initial sense 
of strategic direction for Bank assistance but should be thought of as remaining open for change if 
evolving Government priorities and external developments so warrant.  While a list of proposed 
Bank financial and analytical support activities is provided for the next four years, this is intended 
to be tentative, especially for the outer years.  The choice of certain analytic activities reinforces 
the intention to stay flexible.  For example, we anticipate providing analytic assistance to evaluate 
public expenditure priorities and to examine the poverty and social impact of various reforms.  
However, the exact content of activities in these two categories will be determined each year in 
consultation with the Government.  
63. The Results Framework is also intended to be a monitoring tool. The scope of monitoring 
will cover the 13 outcomes shown in Annex 1.  The frequency of monitoring will be once a year.  
The mechanisms will be as follows: for macroeconomic and related outcomes the relevant 
monitoring data will be obtained from the key economic ministries, while for sectoral outcomes 
relevant data will be obtained through project supervision missions.  These data will feed into the 
CAS Progress Report scheduled for FY08 and the CAS Completion Report scheduled for FY10. 
64. The CAS approaches the link between Bank instruments and the achievement of reforms in 
a holistic fashion.  The Bank has an understanding with Government whereby financial assistance 
will be concentrated in a limited number of high-priority sectors and projects while analytic and 
advisory work will be expanded in scope and content to incorporate a broader range of reform 
issues and measures. It is expected that the current reform momentum will continue and will not 
necessarily be linked to individual projects. Dialogue and action on reforms will be the objective 
of the total program of assistance provided by the Bank rather than mostly that of the financial 
assistance component of it. 
Consultations with stakeholders 
65. 
 In the course of preparing the CAS, consultations were held with government officials as 
well as with representatives of the private sector and of civil society (including women’s groups).  
Specific events included: (a) several meetings with key Ministers, both on a one-on-one basis and 

19

 
in groups; (b) two workshops with civil society groups and one with the private sector; and (c) a 
meeting with local government officials and NGOs in a governorate in Upper Egypt.   
66. These consultations validated the importance of the goal of achieving growth with equity in 
Egypt and provided support for the specific framework suggested for the CAS, namely, the three 
strategic objectives discussed in Section IIA above.  As might be expected, support for the first 
two objectives (private sector development and provision of public services) was strongest within 
the private sector while support for the third pillar (promoting equity) was strongest among 
representatives of civil society.  Consultations at the sub-national level proved useful in providing 
an appreciation of the scope for decentralizing the delivery of public services in Egypt.  
Evidently, much can be done in a decentralized manner without necessarily changing the formal 
political structures that govern center-local relations in the country. 
Coordination with Development Partners 
67. Owing to its size, strategic location, and geopolitical position, Cairo houses an extensive 
presence of representatives of bilateral, Arab regional, multilateral, and UN agencies. The Donor 
Assistance Group (DAG) is the main formal vehicle for the exchange of information and 
coordination of efforts among donors, and serves, to a lesser extent, as a coordinator between 
donors and the Government. The DAG meets on monthly basis in Cairo at the level of heads of 
development assistance departments (for bilaterals) and heads of agencies or operations (for 
development institutions). Numerous DAG specialized subgroups were formed on topics such as 
health, education, private sector development, gender, poverty, governance and water resource 
management. Those subgroups meet on a regular basis to facilitate technical consultations among 
specialized staff.  Frequent consultations by the Bank with donor representatives in Cairo have 
been critical to ensure effective collaboration with them.  Such efforts have allowed the Bank to 
mobilize financial support from other donors for many ESW activities and for almost every 
project in the current portfolio (notably collaboration with EC in human development projects, 
with KfW in water and irrigation projects, and IFAD in rural development projects).  
68. The main donors in terms of financial transfers continue to be the USAID and the EC. 
USAID programs in Egypt are increasingly supporting efforts in the education, governance 
(democracy), and financial sector domains as compared to ongoing programs in the water, 
environment, and large infrastructure domains and annual ODA is expected to gradually come 
down to approximately $400 million. EC assistance for Egypt is expected to support efforts in the 
water, governance, and innovation and R&D domains during the current MEDA program that is 
expected to end in 2006. Additional EC resources, possibly twice as large as those currently 
available, are expected to be negotiated under the aegis of the new European Neighborhood 
Policy. More recently, the AfDB announced that it plans to significantly enhance its support to 
Egypt with emphasis on power generation, financial reforms and transport. 
69. As noted above, cooperation with development partners has been close and effective in 
recent years.  There is every likelihood that this state of affairs will continue both because of the 
degree of goodwill that exists and because of the overlap in future areas of interest.  For example, 
both the EU and USAID propose to support Government efforts towards improving the 
environment for private sector development and, in particular, reforming and restructuring the 
financial sector.  These are focal areas for the Bank Group as well and we expect to see both 
upstream cooperation 
in analytical work and downstream collaboration 
in project 
implementation.  In this connection, a Financial Sector Donors Sub-group has been formed to 
coordinate efforts and ensure complementarity in both technical and financial support provided to 
the government. One outcome of this group is the joint World Bank-EU project for modernizing 
the payments system at the CBE.  Similarly, we expect to continue to collaborate with the AfDB 
through arranging parallel financing in infrastructure projects.  The framework and priorities of 

20

 
the CAS have been discussed with key development partners while strategic documents of 
partners, such as the country assistance strategy of the AfDB, have been shared with the Bank.  
Discussions are also expected on the EU’s Action Plan for Egypt currently being prepared under 
the aegis of the new European Neighborhood Policy. Finally, greater efforts are expected to be 
made in coming years to coordinate development strategies and projects with the various regional 
Arab funds. 
Capacity Building 
70. The proposed CAS has also been designed with a stronger emphasis on capacity building to 
accompany the change in the government’s role in the management of the economy. The World 
Bank Institute (WBI) is expected to play an important capacity building role in support of 
operations. Building on results of a baseline evaluation of WBI activities in FY03 and on a strong 
partnership between WBI and country operations thanks to the location of a senior staff in the 
Cairo Office, WBI activities will focus primarily on two CAS pillars, strengthening the public 
sector role in implementing reform in these areas: (i) facilitating private sector development; and 
(ii) enhancing the provision of selected public services. 
71. Activities will be specifically targeted at Egyptian high-level officials to improve 
dialogue/discuss options on key policy reforms and support implementation (see Annex 4). The 
targeting of senior officials with decision making capabilities has proven effective over the past 
two years in moving reform agendas. A second set of activities targeted to the “middle tier” of 
officials and other stakeholders will be developed to support reform implementation and broaden 
support. The in-country activities will be complemented by regional and global WBI activities. 
Country Financing Parameters 
72. Cost Sharing. Country Financing Parameters for Egypt (see Annex C) have been agreed 
with the Government.  Government shapes the development program through a comprehensive 
planning process that has been in place for several decades now.  While the process is driven 
largely by central and local authorities, consultative mechanisms have been built into it that allow 
for feedback from non-government sources as well, especially the private sector.  Strong 
ownership of the program is also shown by the fact that the Government finances the bulk of 
development spending through its own resources and seeks bilateral and multilateral assistance 
for a modest part of it.  For example, public investment amounted to around $6.3 billion in FY04 
while gross medium and long term external borrowing was around $1.3 billion.  Egypt also 
receives official grants (around $900 million in FY04) but these are not necessarily applied to 
development projects. 
73. 
 The Bank’s disbursements to Egypt have averaged around US$82 million annually over 
the past four years.  This is equivalent to only around 1.3 percent of public investments and about 
0.1 percent of GDP.  While small in overall terms, Bank finance is deployed strategically by 
Government and Bank projects are well aligned with development priorities and plans.  Bank 
financing and expenditures on Bank-financed projects are included in the government’s budget. 
Measures being taken to further assure Government commitment to projects financed by the Bank 
have been outlined earlier (see paragraph 58).  Project implementation performance has improved 
significantly in recent years (see paragraph 55).  Flexibility regarding the Bank’s financing share 
in individual operations (up to 100 percent) is welcomed by the borrower and in the instances 
where this is used may contribute to faster implementation.  Cost sharing arrangements for future 
projects would continue to be determined by individual project context with the expectation that 
Government counterpart funding will be forthcoming in all or most projects.  The Bank also 
expects to co-finance many projects with other development partners (see paragraph 69). The 
Bank’s financing share is expected to be higher in social sector and lower in infrastructure 
investments. 

21

 
74. 
 Recurrent Cost Financing.  While high, Egypt’s fiscal deficit and public debt are 
sustainable under the base case assumptions of the Bank’s lending program, namely, a 5 percent 
growth rate for the economy, implementation of trade and tax reforms, and new external debt 
commitments of $500 million per annum for the next four years (see Box 2 and paragraph 96).  
Under these assumptions, the consolidated fiscal deficit is expected to rise to about 4.5 percent of 
GDP by 2008 before beginning to decline (see Table 1 and paragraph 48)  while the net public 
debt is expected to rise to 89 percent of GDP before tapering off.  Given the extremely modest 
size of typical Bank disbursements relative to current expenditures in the budget ($82 million 
versus $19 billion), it is unlikely that recurrent cost financing by the Bank per se will have a 
major impact on the fiscal deficit and the public debt.  Egypt continues to finance the bulk of its 
recurrent cost needs from its own resources and relies on donor financing only for project-specific 
reasons.  The Bank’s current portfolio devotes a relatively modest share to the financing of 
recurrent costs (ranging from 3 to 5 percent, mainly for project operating costs).  The track record 
on sustainability of Bank-financed projects has been improving. No country-level limit is 
proposed on Bank financing of recurrent costs for projects in Egypt but it is expected that the 
share will remain at the current modest levels.  In determining the relevant share in individual 
projects, the Bank would take into account sustainability issues at the sector and project levels. 
75. Local Cost Financing.   Rising fiscal deficits in recent years show that domestic tax and 
non-tax revenues have been insufficient to meet current and capital expenditures in Egypt.  
Additional funds have also been needed for the broader public investment program implemented 
by state owned enterprises. In recent years, the required funds have been raised largely through 
domestic debt as the Government of Egypt has followed a cautious external debt acquisition 
policy.  Two factors suggest that the financing profile will need to change over the coming years.  
First, trade and tax reforms currently being implemented or proposed, will reduce the revenue 
base somewhat for the next few years, thereby increasing the need to borrow.  Second, the cost of 
domestic debt is high relative to that of foreign debt and, now that the potential for depreciation is 
much lower (following the significant adjustment of the exchange rate during 2003), it would be 
appropriate to adjust the currency composition of the total debt.  For both these reasons, 
Government is likely to seek larger amounts of external financing for the development program.  
The Bank would support this move.  Disbursements for local expenditures have been significant 
in the recent years, amounting to 74 percent, 78 percent, and 83 percent of investment lending 
disbursements in FY02, FY03, and FY04 respectively.  Given the experience to date and the 
nature of the proposed lending program, it is expected that a significant proportion of future 
disbursements will also be made against local costs.  The financing of foreign costs alone would 
not enable the Bank to help eligible development projects meet their objectives. 
76. Taxes and duties.  Tax revenues amount to about 13.7 percent of GDP in Egypt.  This is 
divided between income taxes (5.7 percent), sales taxes (5.4 percent) and taxes on trade (2.5 
percent).  The marginal income tax rate is currently 40 percent and is slated to be cut to 20 
percent under a law being considered in parliament (see paragraph 24).  The proposed law also 
envisages measures to improve tax administration.  The sales tax ranges from 5 percent to 40 
percent (4 bands), with the highest rate applying to luxury goods and other items that are not 
material in Bank-financed projects.  Taxes on trade (customs duties) have recently been cut from 
an average of 14.6 percent to 9.1 percent (see paragraph 21) and now range from 5 percent to 40 
percent (6 bands) with a few  higher rates for items that are also not material  in Bank-financed 
projects (e.g., luxury cars, cigarettes  and alcoholic beverages).   Bank-financed projects are taxed 
at the same rates as the country’s normal rates.  Given the moderate nature of the tax and duty 
regime, and the further improvements in prospect, the Bank may finance all taxes and duties 
associated with project costs. 

22

 
 
C. Expected Outcomes of CAS and Bank Support 

77. The Bank Group’s support for private sector development (as elaborated in Annex 3) is 
centered around the following priorities: i) reforming the financial sector; ii) integration into 
regional and global economies; iii) improving the regulatory climate for business; iv) 
strengthening cooperation between the private and public sectors; v) privatization; vi) supporting 
small and medium enterprises; and vii) improving the quality of infrastructure services.  These 
priorities have been refashioned into specific CAS outcomes listed below. The Bank, IFC, MIGA 
and FIAS all have roles to play in the achievement of these outcomes and propose to use several 
instruments at their disposal.  For example, it is expected that, in addition to investments in 
private companies, IFC will also use its technical assistance facility, PEP-MENA, to provide 
support as necessary.  For the Bank, analytic and advisory work independent of lending will 
continue to be an important instrument.   
Facilitating private sector development 

78. 
Increased efficiency of the financial sector and greater responsiveness to the needs of the 
private sector (CAS outcome 1.1). As already noted, Government has ambitious plans for 
increasing the role of the private sector in the banking and insurance sectors as well as in 
improving regulatory and supervisory arrangements in the financial sector as a whole.  It has 
already requested and received the support of several important development partners such as 
USAID and the EC.  Government has asked the Bank to play a coordinating role in this area in 
addition to providing needed technical and financial assistance.  In response, the Bank has begun 
providing technical assistance towards an assessment of the nature and scope of the restructuring 
that is likely to be required in the banking sector.  It is expected that this will be followed by a 
Financial Sector Restructuring Loan in FY07.  The Bank is also able to offer policy advice in the 
area of financial services diversification, including through the postal network and online 
channels. IFC’s proposed support covers a range of possibilities including, but not limited to, 
investments in privatized banks and other financial sector entities, deepening of the financial 
sector through new products or developing bond markets, financial services for SME 
development (particularly through PEP-MENA), and advisory assistance for privatization.     
79. Three other activities deserve mention.  First, the Bank has begun preparing a project to 
create an efficient enabling environment for a mortgage market.  This project would establish a 
market-based liquidity facility, strengthen the regulatory framework, and modernize property 
rights registration, thereby helping invigorate what is presently a moribund mortgage market. 
Prior to starting work on the project, the Bank had provided substantial policy and technical 
advice in this area. Second, the Bank has provided technical assistance to improve the functioning 
of capital markets through establishing an Institute of Directors. Improvements in corporate 
governance in the private sector could also be instrumental in building a broader and deeper 
capital market through increasing the level of confidence of potential market participants. Third, 
the Bank Group is providing technical assistance to build capacity to follow up on initiatives 
related to anti-money laundering and combating financing of terrorism (AML/CFT).  There are 
plans to develop a certificate program for AML/CFT compliance officers. 
80. Lower transactions costs pertaining to international trade (CAS outcome 1.2).  As noted 
earlier, a restructuring of trade tariffs was announced in September 2004 and there are plans to 
further reduce transactions costs through improvements in customs and standards administration 
as well as through implementation of a range of free trade agreements recently signed by the 
Government with such partners as the EU, the US, and neighboring Arab and African countries. 
The Bank and the IMF have worked closely with the authorities in these areas in recent years and 

23

 
 
 
stand ready to continue their technical assistance programs as needed.  It is expected that Egypt’s 
trade policy environment will continue to be reviewed and re-assessed in future analytical work, 
especially in the proposed Development Policy Review (FY07). In particular, analytic work will 
evaluate the scope for efficiency gains through liberalizing trade in services and enhancing trade 
facilitation.     
81. Reduced transactions costs for operating businesses (CAS Outcome 1.3).  An Investment 
Climate Assessment conducted by the Bank recently has revealed a number of impediments to the 
expansion of private investment in Egypt.  Among these are access to land, access to finance, 
especially for SMEs, and the tax environment (covering both rates and administration).  In 
addition, earlier surveys conducted under the Doing Business initiative have revealed high 
transactions costs related to registering, operating and closing businesses.  The Government has 
recently asked for deeper analysis in four areas, namely, (a) access to finance:  focusing on both 
the demand and the supply side for financial institutions, cost of funding, credit policies, rising 
liquidity ratio of the banking system, diversity of financial products, financial leasing, and non-
performing loans from the enterprises side; (b) access to land, focusing mainly on issues of 
allocation of land, state land management and property registration; (c) free zones and their 
prospects within the recent global trend, and (d) industrial land. In addition, the Bank is working 
with the Government to develop a national Public Private Partnership (PPP) Strategy. Through 
PEP-MENA, IFC can provide technical assistance to improve the business enabling environment.  
82. The Bank proposes to help lower business transactions costs through both specific 
investments and continued analytic and advisory assistance.  In the former category, the 
Alexandria Growth Pole project is being prepared with a view to helping the city of Alexandria 
strengthen the management of existing municipal assets, especially land and properties, so that 
they can be leased, sold or otherwise converted into more productive assets.  Inter alia, the 
project will help to better integrate the urban poor into the local economy through slum 
upgrading, public-private partnerships, local area initiatives and community-based approaches.  
Regarding analytic work, an Urban Sector Study is proposed for FY07.  Its main objective will be 
to complete analytical work on challenges facing the urban sector especially with regard to 
regional competitiveness, public-private partnership in housing supply, service delivery, 
protection of agriculture land from the uncontrolled expansion of informal urban settlements and 
suggest options for reform in this sector. Finally, follow up data gathering is expected both under 
the aegis of the Investment Climate Assessment and that of the Doing Business initiative. With 
regard to utilities/infrastructure, in particular telecommunications, the Bank in association with 
other development partners, is well-positioned to advise the government on issues including: 
options for improving connectivity, including through broadband, regulatory incentives for open 
network provision, alternative telecommunications networks and other new technologies, and on 
financing options for rural communications. This assistance will be delivered through a series of 
policy notes and dialogue with relevant stakeholders.   
83. Costs can be lowered and investments facilitated by guarantee facilities as well. MIGA 
provided its first political risk insurance guarantee in Egypt to a Spanish investor in FY04. The 
project involved a management contract awarded by the Cairo Governorate for the management 
of solid waste. A particular focus of MIGA’s efforts in Egypt in the future will be to support 
investments in the agribusiness, manufacturing and services sectors, which tend to be dominated 
by SMEs.  MIGA will also market its Small Investors’ Program, which provides streamlined 
coverage to SMEs, throughout the MENA region. 
Enhancing the provision of public services 

84. Fiscal and monetary policy consistent with macroeconomic stability (CAS outcome 2.1).  
At the Government’s invitation, the Bank has begun to work on the management and 

24

 
 
prioritization of public expenditures in Egypt.  The current work program includes assessments of 
public expenditures on education, health, transport and water as well as on the sustainability of 
the public debt.  It is proposed that other critical areas of inquiry will be addressed through future 
policy notes prepared under the aegis of a series of Public Expenditure Reviews.  Other aspects of 
macroeconomic management, such as monetary and exchange rate policy, fall primarily within 
the domain of the IMF and the Bank proposes to keep on top of relevant developments through 
periodic consultations with the IMF and through its own routine economic monitoring. 
85. Expanded supply and improved efficiency of infrastructure services (CAS outcome 2.2). 
The success of the reform program will depend to a large extent on the depth of restructuring and 
streamlining of government bodies responsible for infrastructure and the investment supply 
response of the private sector. Government plans to facilitate this response not only by changing 
some key policy parameters but also by undertaking institutional reforms and making some 
strategic infrastructure investments, in such areas as electricity generation and transport, for 
example.  The Bank Group proposes to support these investments through technical and financial 
assistance.  The FY06-09 lending program contains projects to help improve water management 
(West Delta, Integrated Sanitation and Sewerage Infrastructure, and Urban Water/Wastewater) 
increase electricity generation (El Tebbin Power and follow up project) and improve 
transportation (Ports Sector Development, Roads Development and Asset Management, Railways 
Sector Investment and Restructuring, Urban Transport SWAP).  An integrated approach to 
promote more efficient delivery of urban and rural infrastructure services, local economic 
development and regional competitiveness will be applied through a couple of Integrated 
Governorates Development projects.  These are expected to enhance linkages between urban 
markets and rural production, as well as provide private sector investment opportunities in 
selected governorates.  Analytic work in the area of transport sector development, especially on 
the restructuring of the railways system, road network management and urban transport policy, is 
also envisaged. Analytical work and policy advice on telecommunications infrastructure, noted 
above, is also relevant in this regard.  
86. Finally, the Bank proposes to facilitate private sector participation in public infrastructure 
projects through technical assistance (a workshop was organized in December 2004 and further 
initiatives are planned for later) as well as through lending (e.g. via West Delta and El-Tebbin 
Power projects). The focus of the Bank’s assistance will be on elimination of certain restrictions 
that are presently imposed on the private sector’s participation in infrastructure projects; setting a 
clear and unambiguous regulatory framework and quality standards for such participation; 
establishing a system to select investors through transparent and competitive procedures; and 
highlighting the need for rationalization of costs, prices and subsidies in various sectors. IFC is 
also able to support infrastructure privatizations and public private partnerships, as well as to 
provide financing for private sector infrastructure investments.   
87. 
Improved quality and relevance at all levels of education system (CAS outcome 2.3). Egypt 
has developed (with the assistance of the Bank and other development partners) a long term (20 
year) vision for the education sector.  This vision has informed a number of policy and program 
innovations in recent years.  The country has achieved much success in providing access to 
education to the majority of its citizens, although gaps still exist in remote regions and for 
disadvantaged populations.  From the point of view of supporting the education sector in the 
future, the priority issues have to do with quality and curriculum choice.  The importance of 
improving quality can hardly be overestimated given the need to improve Egyptian school 
children’s performance in most subjects, but particularly in math and science as well as the high 
rates of unemployment among high school graduates.  Curriculum choice is also important, 
especially in view of the science and technology needs of a knowledge economy and the demand 
for such skills in Egypt.   

25

 
88. 
In order to reach these objectives, and consistent with the approach of the Ministry of 
Education (MOE), the Bank will focus on policies and programs to (a) improve quality and 
curricular relevance (through teacher training, testing and a rational approach to technology 
introduction in classrooms); (b) ensure appropriate curricular linkages across educational levels 
(e.g., linkages between secondary technical track education, vocational/skills training, and higher 
technical institutes); (c) explore connections with other sub-sectors such as health and nutrition 
(e.g., school health and feeding programs), social protection, infrastructure and transportation 
sectors (e.g., road linkages to schools) as well as with the private sector (e.g., skills of graduates 
entering the labor market and skills development among in-service employees), these approaches 
being particularly relevant for reaching out to disadvantaged populations with quality education 
services; and (d) develop and implement national standards and strengthen monitoring, 
accreditation and quality assurance processes at all educational levels (including for the private 
educational establishments).  These areas of support will be prominent in the Bank’s future 
program, reflected in such activities as an Education Sector Review in FY06 and an Education 
Enhancement II Project in FY07.  In addition, these activities will continue to pay special 
attention to gender concerns and the cost-effectiveness of education spending. Bank support will 
also focus on helping identify areas of inefficiency (through the ongoing PER exercise) and 
helping the Ministry of Education in implementing workable recommendations in a phased 
manner.   The PER exercise has already looked at some aspects of education spending (e.g., 
capital investments and textbooks). In addition, Bank support will include capacity building in the 
Ministry of Education. 
89. 
Improved water resource management and air quality (CAS outcome 2.4).  The Bank’s 
overall approach aims to mainstream environmental considerations in both the lending portfolio 
and the government’s policies and programs. The lending program will focus on two sub-sectors: 
(1) Water Quality/Integrated Irrigation Improvement. The Bank is developing a portfolio of 
projects aimed particularly at improving water/wastewater quality.  This includes the West Delta 
Irrigation Project (FY06) to support the implementation of an innovative partnership with the 
private sector for the management of water resources in the West Delta region, incorporating 
environmental objectives and components into the design of both institutional reforms and 
investment operations.  There will also be emphasis on sanitation services and water demand 
management through such projects as Integrated Sanitation and Sewerage Infrastructure (FY08) 
and Urban Water/Wastewater (FY09).  In both the lending program and related analytic work, the 
Bank will focus on the issues of governance of water agencies, private sector participation, 
coordination among stakeholders, rational pricing of water services and incentives for water 
reallocation and pollution control.  (2) Air Quality and Waste Management. Learning from the 
successful implementation of a precursor we are preparing a follow-up project, the Pollution 
Abatement Project II, whose objective is to reduce pollution generated by point-source/industrial 
entities in the region of Alexandria and Cairo, in order to limit impacts on public health as well as 
on ecological systems. The project will introduce for the first time in Egypt a combination of 
IBRD lending, GEF and revenues from the sale of carbon emissions reductions. The Bank will 
also be co-financing with GEF, the Solar Thermal Hybrid Project (in FY06) whose objective is to 
contribute to improving the economic attractiveness of solar thermal technology globally. Efforts 
will continue to be made towards harmonizing the environmental review and resettlement 
procedures followed by the Bank and by Egypt.  Towards this end, one or two Bank financed 
projects will be designed to serve as pilots. Finally, analytic support will be focused on three 
areas where the Bank has comparative advantage and global experience: (i) the use of economic 
criteria and valuation of externalities; (ii) the linkage between environment and poverty 
reduction, energy and environment, women and environment, and banking and environment; and 
(iii) the strengthening of the decision-making process in water quality, solid waste management, 
and rural water and sanitation sectors.  

26

 
90. Strengthened accountability of public sector agencies (CAS outcome 2.5). International 
experience shows that the impact and effectiveness of public sector agencies can be improved 
through the introduction of such accountability mechanisms as:  performance evaluations for 
senior management, performance based budgets, unified accounting rules for the treatment of 
SOE profits, strengthened legislatures (e.g., budget and finance committees or public accounts 
committees with enhanced powers of scrutiny over the budget) and greater information disclosure 
about service delivery targets and achievements. Government is presently formulating plans for 
public sector administrative reforms that encompass some of these objectives.  The Bank Group, 
which has previously provided technical assistance in the area of performance budgeting, stands 
ready to provide support as well for other initiatives aimed at strengthening public sector 
accountability. A particular focus should be on building the capacity to plan and prioritize 
investments at the local administration level and to ensure that operating and maintenance costs 
are adequately budgeted. Analytical work and dissemination of best practices on sustainable and 
replicable models for selected e-government services would contribute to this outcome as well.  
91. Accountability can also be strengthened through further improvements in financial 
management.  Egypt has a French-style public financial management system featuring a powerful 
Ministry of Finance and a strong legal framework for the development, implementation, and 
monitoring of the budget. Recent Bank analyses (Country Financial Accountability Assessment, 
2003 and Institutional Financial Management Capacity Assessment, 2005) suggest that the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the administration of public funds can be further enhanced through 
such measures as the implementation of GFMIS and modern internal audit functions, and 
strengthening of the capacity of finance staff in the MOF and high-spending line ministries. The 
Bank will continue to work with appropriate Government agencies towards this end. 
92. 
Improved coverage, quality and sustainability of social insurance (CAS outcome 2.6).  
Social policy is an important priority for Government and one in which the Bank has much 
experience and information to share.  A program of support is envisaged in three areas: social 
insurance, labor market regulations, and skills development.  Social insurance reforms in such 
areas as health insurance, old age pensions, and unemployment assistance are important to ensure 
fiscal stability, support financial sector development, improve the functioning of labor markets, 
and ultimately enhance both growth and equity. At Government’s request, the Bank has started a 
study on the pension system in Egypt (to be completed in FY06) with the aim of identifying key 
reform areas and transition arrangements. Regarding health, we propose to include in-depth 
analytical work on health finance and health insurance reform in the context of wider 
programmatic ESW on Health and Population Sector Strategy.  Regarding labor markets, the 
Bank is proposing analytic work (in FY07) to develop a better understanding of employment 
structure, regulations and labor market programs in Egypt.  This could help in developing better 
programs to facilitate enterprise restructuring and labor reallocation in the context of greater 
competition.  The Bank is also active in the area of vocational training, in collaboration with the 
EC, through the Skills Development Project.  This ongoing project aims to change the paradigm 
of vocational training in Egypt by placing more emphasis on the role of the private sector in 
articulating training needs, providing training and improving its quality.  Future support could 
take the form of evaluations of training programs and the practices adopted by the public and 
private sectors for assessing training needs.  In addition, analytical work could be conducted to 
review constraints to in-service training and the private provision of training. 
Promoting Equity 
93. 
Improved coverage and effectiveness of safety nets for the poor (CAS outcome 3.1). The 
Bank has been involved for some time now in analyzing the coverage and effectiveness of safety 
nets for the poor in Egypt.  Most recently, this issue was covered in a Poverty Strategy Report 
(September, 2004) and a high-level ministerial workshop on social safety nets (February, 2005).  

27

 
   
Given the strong interest of Government and civil society in this area, the Bank will continue to 
provide analytical and financial assistance as necessary.  The Poverty and Social Impact Analysis 
item in the work program provides a vehicle for continued analytic support.  
94. Reduced disparities between Lower and Upper Egypt (CAS outcome 3.2). Helping Upper 
Egypt requires a focus on its special developmental challenges.  Among these is the need to better 
identify local priorities and use more flexible mechanisms to deliver public services.  This can be 
done in part through greater involvement of local administrations, community organizations and 
NGOs in the selection and delivery of public services. The Bank proposes to address such 
challenges in selected analytical work (as part of the Public Expenditure Review exercise) as well 
as in lending (Education Enhancement II, Social Fund IV and Integrated Governorates projects). 
The last-mentioned projects will focus on both urban and rural development and will aim at (i) 
de-concentration of public services delivery, with more responsibility transferred to local 
administrations;  (ii)  improved access to social services and economic opportunities, and  (iii)  
involvement of civil society in planning and implementation. This would be achieved through 
support for (i) capacity building of local officials and local council members in planning, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation functions, using participatory approaches; and (ii) 
investments in infrastructure and improved services to support governorate/district level plans 
and help Upper Egyptians take advantage of economic opportunities.  Nurturing economic 
opportunities is a necessary complement to the provision of social services and basic 
infrastructure (health, education, rural roads, water and sanitation).   For such projects, the Bank 
would seek partnerships with other donors.   
95. 
Improved access and quality of healthcare for poor (CAS outcome 3.3).  Addressing the 
persistent inequities among regions and income groups in access to basic health and population 
services is a priority for Government.  This issue is particularly relevant with respect to Upper 
Egypt where fertility rates remain very high and maternal and child health indicators remain 
extremely poor.  Addressing issues of unequal access requires not only improvements in the 
quality and availability of health services but behavioral changes as well at the household and 
community levels.   The Bank has been actively pursuing such changes in past projects.  The 
ongoing Population Project (due to close in April 2005) offers an interesting model of 
complementary components supported by the Ministry of Health and Population, which focused 
on improving the quality and availability of health services, and the Social Fund for Development 
which focused on participatory and community-based interventions targeted at behavioral 
changes.  We propose to build on this experience in the Family Health Project as well as through 
further analytical work (Health and Population Sector Strategy). 
96. Decreased gender disparities (CAS outcome 3.4).  At present, the Bank is facilitating social 
development, especially relating to women, through bringing a group perspective to bear in 
analytical work and selected investment projects.  Examples of the latter include support for the 
formation of user groups in irrigation projects, involvement of women’s groups in social fund 
activities, and capacity building for community organizations across a broad range of activities 
(in Sohag and other disadvantaged regions).  Such support will be continued in the future.  In 
analytic work, studies will be conducted to follow up on the country gender assessment 
completed recently.  In particular, barriers and constraints to female entrepreneurship will be 
investigated in the context of the Investment Climate Assessment currently under way. Work will 
also be continued with the National Council for Women (NCW) through an already-disbursing 
grant to help build the capacity to conduct strategic planning, performance measurement, and 
develop data and information systems to facilitate gender mainstreaming in policies, programs 
and projects. 

28

 
 
 
E. Assistance Program Scenarios 
97. 
A base case program of $500 million a year on average is proposed in order to support 
the key development objectives of the CAS over FY06-09.  From a structural and macroeconomic 
policy perspective we judge that Egypt is now in the base case and our objective should be to 
provide financial and analytical support to maintain the present macroeconomic policy 
framework and reform status.  In particular, it should be noted that Egypt has already met several 
conditions that were under discussion in FY01-04 for a higher lending program.  These include 
exchange rate adjustments and reforms in the foreign exchange management system,   
restructuring of trade tariffs and customs administration processes, and the presentation to 
parliament of a new law aimed at reforming tax rates and tax administration.  Hence we propose a 
larger assistance program than in the previous CAS.  Furthermore, the base case program is 
heavily oriented towards support for infrastructure projects, a feature that meets three tests of 
potentially high development effectiveness, namely, existence of demand from the country, 
substantial relevance to future growth and development, and alignment with the Bank Group’s 
comparative advantage.  Broadly speaking, the base case program corresponds to conditions 
described in the baseline medium-term scenario described in Section II.B of this document.  
98. A high case lending scenario with an average commitment of $700 million per annum is 
also envisaged. Such a scenario is predicated on implementation of reforms in the financial sector 
(see paragraph 20 for details).  In particular, restructuring all public sector banks will require 
substantial public funding.  The Government has invited the Bank to participate in determining 
the exact scope of the required funding through assessments of the financial status of the public 
sector banks and their performing and non-performing assets.  At the same time, the Government 
has requested that the Bank be ready to support the reform program through both technical 
assistance and loans.  Since financial sector reform is central to improving the climate for private 
sector development, we propose a high case program to accommodate two quick-disbursing 
loans.  While the financing needed for these operations is not yet known, we propose, on 
exposure management grounds, that overall lending not exceed $2.8 billion over the next four 
years in the high case.  Consideration of the high case program will be determined by two 
triggers: (a) clear signs of implementation of substantive financial sector reforms, including 
significant restructuring (and recapitalization) of the public sector banks, and movement towards 
the privatization of the Bank of Alexandria; and (b) the adoption of a financing plan under which 
at least 10 percent of the total funding needs of the financial sector restructuring program is to be 
met from non-debt-creating sources.  Such sources could include, but not necessarily be limited 
to, grants from donors and proceeds from the privatization of state-owned enterprises, divestiture 
of public shares in joint public-private banks, and the sale of the Bank of Alexandria.  Adherence 
to such a plan will limit the increase in public debt arising from implementation of the financial 
sector reform program, which in turn will facilitate macroeconomic management until the 
benefits of the reform begin to accrue, notably until growth accelerates and public debt ratios 
stabilize and finally decrease.  
99. A low case scenario would result from a dilution in the program of structural reforms and 
deterioration in the macroeconomic policy framework.  On the structural side, a significant 
dilution of the present program of trade, tax, investment climate and financial sector reforms 
would create concerns about the sustainability of medium-term growth of 5 percent or above.  On 
the macroeconomic side, a weakening of the good monetary and exchange rate policies followed 
in recent years or a deterioration in the consolidated fiscal deficit for reasons unrelated to the 
proposed trade, tax and financial sector reforms, would raise similar concerns.  If such conditions 
arise, the Bank would move to a low case lending program which, depending on the severity of 
the deterioration, could decrease to an average of $250 million per annum.  

29

 
Table 2: Indicative Assistance Program of the Bank (FY06-09) 

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY06 
Analytical Work 

Poverty and Social 
Impact Analysis of  
Selected Subsidies 

Poverty and Social 
Impact Analysis of 
SOE Divestment 

Poverty and Social 
Impact Analysis of 
Structural  Reforms 

To be 
determined in 
consultation 
with 
Government in 
FY07/08 

Public Expenditure 
Review  

Public Expenditure 
Review  

Public Expenditure 
Review   

Transport Sector Policy 

Education Sector Review 

Country Environmental 
Analysis (TA) 

Investment Climate 
Assessment Follow-Up 

ESW on Access to Land 
and Finance 

Water Resources: 
Implications for Income 
and Health of the Poor 
Lending 

El-Tebbin Power 
($250m) 

Mortgage Market 
Development ($50m) 

Pollution Abatement II 
($20m)  

West Delta Irrigation 
($150m) 

Ports Development  
($50-100m) 

Social Insurance 
Reform Options 

Agricultural 
Productivity and 
Marketing 

Urban Sector Strategy 

Country Environmental 
Analysis Follow Up 

Health and Population 
Sector Strategy 

Financial Sector 
Restructuring Loan I  
($ TBD)* 

Urban/Alexandria 
Growth Pole ($100m) 

Social Fund IV ($75m) 

Education 
Enhancement II  
($60m) 

Integrated 
Governorates ($100m) 

Solar Thermal ($2m) 

* refers to high case operation 

Labor Market 
Assessment  

Development Policy 
Review  

Investment Climate 
Assessment Follow-Up 

Roads Dev. & Asset 
Mgmt ($100m) 

Power II 
($200m) 

National Pilot 
Urban Water & 
Wastewater 
($75m) 

Urban Transport 
SWAP ($100m) 

2nd Integrated 
Governorates ($100m) 

Railways Sector Inv & 
Restructuring ($100m) 

Integrated Sanitation 
and Sewerage 
Infrastructure ($120m) 

Financial Sector 
Restructuring Loan II 
($TBD)* 

Family Health ($75m) 

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. MANAGING RISKS  

A. Country Creditworthiness and Exposure to the Bank Group 

100. Egypt currently meets all guidelines for Bank Group debt exposure by comfortable margins and 
implementation of the CAS lending scenarios does not create a risk of exceeding the exposure limits.  
One guideline limits Bank exposure to any single country to $13.5 billion. The Bank’s current 
exposure is just over $1 billion.  The base case lending scenario would add $2.0 billion to this 
exposure over four years while a high case scenario would add $2.8 billion.  Under both scenarios, we 
would stay far below the single country exposure guideline. A second guideline pertains to the share 
of export earnings absorbed by debt service to the Bank.  The current guidelines are 6 percent for 
countries in the low-risk category, 5 percent for those in medium risk, and 4 percent for those in 
severe-risk category. Our simulations suggest that Egypt’s debt service to the Bank will not exceed 1 
percent of its exports even under the high case lending scenario.  Finally, a third guideline suggests 
that the Bank Group’s share of public and publicly guaranteed debt service should not exceed 20 
percent and preferred creditor debt service should not exceed 35 percent. Our simulations show that 
even under the high case lending scenario, the Bank Group’s share in Egypt’s public debt will not 
exceed 8 percent, and preferred creditor debt service will not exceed 25 percent. 
101. External judgments of Egypt’s creditworthiness have varied in recent years.  In June 2002, 
Egypt was able to sell its first sovereign international bond, raising $1.5 billion which was three 
times the original target. From 2001 through most of 2004, its ratings declined in response to 
slow growth, inconsistent reform efforts and rising fiscal deficits. Following the announcement of 
reform measures by the new Government in July 2004 and the improvement in the economy 
during the year, Egypt’s credit rating has been rising. For example, the overall country risk rating 
assigned by the Economist Intelligence Unit to Egypt improved from 50 in September 2004 to 48 
in November 2004 and has since been constant.  Ratings assigned by Standard and Poor’s and by 
Fitch have also improved in recent months and are now at BB+ with a stable outlook.   
102. At 88 percent, Egypt’s public debt to output ratio is high relative to what is considered desirable 
for macroeconomic stability.  However, fiscal sustainability analysis suggests that this level is 
manageable under a higher growth trajectory than experienced in recent years.  For example, analysis 
suggests that the debt/GDP ratio will decline moderately over FY06-09 if the economy grows at the 
baseline rate of 5 percent on average over this period.  Analysis also suggests that implementation of 
the base case CAS lending program will not worsen Egypt’s debt sustainability.  However, the high 
case lending scenario would lead to an increase in the debt/GDP ratio and thus be more difficult to 
manage (see Box 2). In this case, it would be advisable to limit the increase in debt by relying as much 
as possible on non-debt sources of finance.  At the same time, it is worth noting that Egypt’s external 
debt is moderate (less than 30 percent of GDP as of FY 2004), owed largely to official sources and 
heavily tilted towards medium and long term liabilities.  These characteristics help keep external debt 
servicing costs low.    

B. Implementation Risks  

103. Risks may emerge from both external and domestic sources. Attention has been drawn 
previously to the high correlation between OECD growth rates and Egypt’s economic performance.  
This link is likely to be enhanced as Egypt pursues greater integration with global markets through 
implementation of trade agreements with the EU, the US and regional partners. The downside of 
greater integration is a greater susceptibility to external shocks.  If world economic growth falls 
sharply relative to current expectations, this may lead to a larger impact on Egypt’s growth than has 
historically been the case.  Regional instability in the Middle East and North Africa and increased 
concerns about internal and external security could also affect Egypt’s economy and society in the 
coming years, particularly if they affect tourism and foreign investment flows.   

31

 
Box 2: Egypt’s Public Debt  

The consolidated net public debt for Egypt, as derived from data published by the Central Bank of 
Egypt, was 88 percent of GDP at the end of FY04, comprising an external debt of 29 percent of GDP and a 
domestic debt of 59 percent.  The term “consolidated” means that the measure is arrived at by netting out 
all intra-governmental transactions.  In particular, transfers from the Social Insurance Funds in the amount 
of just over 40 percent of GDP are netted out.  
Four aspects of the public debt provide cause for concern.  First, the current level is high, well above 
the 60 percent that is conventionally used as a threshold of concern. Second, the debt has been rising since 
FY00, after having declined steadily through the 1990s, suggesting a fiscal policy dynamic at work that 
needs to be arrested and then reversed.  Third, this debt level has been reached despite substantial cuts in 
public investment and government capital expenditures.  This suggests that the room for maneuver is 
increasingly limited and a more aggressive strategy of current expenditure control and treasury 
management is now required. Fourth, financing needs have typically been larger (by about 2 percent of 
GDP in recent years) than budget deficits on account of sizable “arrears” and “adjustments for errors.”   
At the same time, however, some other aspects suggest that the debt situation might be more 
manageable then what the above ratios and trends suggest. First, the measure of debt reported here does not 
take into account approximately 70 billion Egyptian pounds held by the Government in “blocked” accounts 
at the Central Bank of Egypt. These accounts were set up to hold funds for eventual repayment of external 
obligations that were rescheduled in 1991. For FY2004, an adjustment of 70 billion Egyptian pounds would 
have reduced the net debt to 73 percent of GDP.  Not enough information was available to forecast how the 
receipts and outflows from this account would affect the public debt level in future years.  Furthermore, the 
institutional characteristics of Egypt’s public debt suggest that it might be less sensitive to classic market-
based reactions. For example, the fact that around 70 percent of the domestic debt is held by domestic 
financial institutions, rather than external agents, reduces refinancing and rollover risks, although it could 
compromise the efficiency of the domestic financial system. Such risks are also reduced by the fact that the 
external debt is long term in nature, highly concessional, and held by official sources, rather than by 
commercial banks or bondholders.  
Fiscal sustainability analysis suggests that the debt ratio would stabilize and slightly decline (to 85 
percent in FY2009) under the assumption that economic growth will average 5 percent per annum and that 
additional external debt in the amount of $2 billion would be obtained at official development assistance 
terms. However, the acquisition of significantly higher debt, in the amount of $9 billion (of which $6 
billion equivalent is assumed to be in domestic currency) does worsen the debt trajectory, leading to a peak 
debt ratio as high as 92 percent by 2009. Under the circumstances, a desirable strategy for Egypt would be 
one that generates growth without raising the public debt significantly and thus one that relies largely on 
private investment to serve as the engine of growth. To the extent that some growth-supporting reforms, 
such as financial sector restructuring, might be financed by additional debt, it would  be desirable to obtain 
a large share of this on concessional terms while relying as much as possible on non-debt sources of 
funding. 

104. Risks may also arise from domestic sources.  The current optimism with regard to 
achieving higher growth over the medium run depends to a large extent on the credibility of the 
present reform program. If domestic social and political developments lead to a delay or dilution 
of the announced reform program, this is likely to have an adverse impact on private investment 
and growth. Some tensions are inherent in the reform process itself.  For example, economic 
reforms may lead to social discontent if the employment and price effects on vulnerable groups 
are not adequately addressed through fiscal and social policy measures.  Furthermore, Egypt is 
also simultaneously embarking on a political reform process that will increase the level of 
political competition as well as the public’s access to information and expression of voice.  While 
this process will undoubtedly be beneficial in the long run, it could affect the pace of reforms in 
the short run. 

32

 
105. There is also a risk emanating from possible deficiencies in the institutional capacity 
needed to implement the reform program and manage the social and political tensions that may 
come into play.  Some reassurance can be drawn from the fact that Egypt successfully 
implemented an ambitious reform program in the early 1990s, featuring a broad range of 
stabilization measures and structural reforms and including a substantial fiscal adjustment of 
almost 15 percent of GDP. Comfort can also be derived from the fact that project implementation 
has been improving in recent years. Nevertheless, the implementation challenges ahead are 
substantial and will require special attention to issues of public sector skills, incentives and 
governance. 
106. Both external and domestic risks can be mitigated through the implementation of the multi-
faceted reform program described in the CAS. The Bank Group can play a useful role by 
providing strategic and high-impact financial support, continuing to demonstrate the expected 
benefits of selected reforms through quality analytical work, and helping to build coalitions of 
support within Government, civil society and the international community. However, what is 
likely to be of decisive importance in the success of this CAS is the degree of ownership of the 
reform agenda exhibited by the Government of Egypt.  At present, this is demonstrably high.  

33

 
 
Strategic Objective 1: Facilitating private sector development   

  Annex: 1  CAS Results Framework (FY06-09) 

More competitive and 
efficient financial sector 

Long-term Development Agenda for Egypt 
Egypt’s long-term goals 
Major issues which hinder 
Egypt’s ability to achieve 
long-term goals 
High level of non-performing 
loans 
Dominance of public 
ownership in the banking 
system 
Underdeveloped bond, 
insurance, and mortgage 
markets 
Thin trading in equity market 
and weak corporate 
governance 
Inadequate access to finance 
outside major urban centers 
Insufficient infrastructure for 
electronic payments  

Outcomes influenced by the CAS Program 
Outcomes that the Bank 
Intermediate outcomes to track 
Group expects to influence 
CAS implementation 
over CAS period 
1.1 Financial sector more 
efficient and responsive to 
needs of private sector 
Public ownership share in 
the banking sector declines 
from 65 percent in 2004 to 
40 percent by 2009 
Share of private business 
sector in domestic credit 
rises from 54 percent in 
2004 to 64 percent in 2009 
Privatization of at least one 
of the four major public 
commercial banks  
Diversified mortgage 
market 
Streamlined property 
registration process 
Higher capacity to comply 
with AML/CFT 
requirements 

Divestiture of public shares in 
joint public-private banks 
Consolidation of banking sector by 
merger or closure of weak banks 
Strengthened supervision of  
financial sector  
Reduction of  proportion of non-
performing loans  
Preparation for sale of at least one 
public sector commercial bank 
Preparation for sale of one public 
insurance company 
Increase in number of registered 
properties; lower registration fees 
Enhancement of postal ATM 
network and electronic payments 
system 
Operation of Institute of Directors  
Restructuring of public sector 
insurance companies 
Operation of program for regional 
certificate on AML/CFT 

Bank Group Assistance  
Interventions for each 
strategic objective 

Proposed activities: 
Financial Sector 
Restructuring Loan 
Mortgage Market 
Development Loan 
Postal financial services  
WBI Financial Sector 
Enhancement Program 
On-going activities: 
Grant for establishing 
Institute of Directors 
Grants for strengthening 
Egypt's credit reporting 
system; modernization of 
payment system; and  
strengthening of data analysis 
and supervision of market 
risk, connected lending and 
large exposures 
Investments and TA by IFC, 
including institution building  

34

 
 
 
 
 
Increased trade with 
regional and global 
partners 
Average annual exports 
growth rate rises to 13 
percent 
Tourist arrivals reach 10 
million per annum by 2009 

Underdeveloped and 
inefficient seaports and 
airports  
Legal restrictions to foreign 
investment in certain sectors 
(real estate, banking, foreign 
trade etc.) 
Cumbersome customs 
procedures 

1.2 Lower transaction 
costs pertaining to 
international trade 
Customs: Average number 
of days to clear imported 
goods reduced to 2 in 2009 
Ports: average cargo dwell 
time reduced from 18 days 
to 12 in 2009 

Increased private 
business activity  
Private investment rate 
rises to 10 percent of GDP 
by 2009. 
50 percent increase in 
annual volume of new 
companies established 
between 2004 and 2009  
Unemployment falls to 8 
percent by 2009 
Number of women-
operated enterprises rises 

Cumbersome regulations for 
new business start-ups  
High cost and uncertainty 
involved in dealings with 
public agencies (e.g., tax 
authorities, inspections) 
Inefficient industrial land 
market and registration  
Poor bankruptcy regulatory 
and institutional framework 
Unreliable and slow law 
enforcement institutions 
Underdeveloped ICT and e-
commerce infrastructure  
Inadequate telecoms/ICT 
access outside major cities 
Unnecessary restrictions on 
private sector participation in 
certain economic activities  
Lack of proper accounting 
standards for private sector  

1.3 Lower transactions 
costs for operating 
businesses 
Time to register company 
reduced to 5 days and time 
to insolvency cut to 2 years 
(in at least one governorate)  
Number of inspections 
reduced to 8 by 2009  
Private participation in 
management of industrial 
zones piloted in 2 zones  
Corporate and income tax 
rates reduced  per new law 
SOEs privatized as per 
current Government plan  
International accounting 
standards introduced  
Percentage of cargo handled 
by private companies in 
ports exceeds 50 percent in 
2009 

Progress in implementation of  
free trade agreements  
Simplification of customs 
procedures  
Active consideration of measures 
to reduce legal restrictions to 
foreign investment 
Increased investment in 
development of sea- and airports 
Streamlining company registration 
and bankruptcy procedures begun 
Risk-based inspections adopted by 
at least two inspections authorities  
Bankruptcy law revised  
Corps of specialized bankruptcy 
judges created;  reform launched 
for liquidators and trustees  
Reform of land registration and 
management strategy launched  
Increased outreach of 
telecommunication services  
Implementation of pre-sale 
measures to privatize SOEs   
Implementation of the Landlord 
Model in the port sector 
Development of a pilot PPP in 
irrigation infrastructure  
Obstacles to women’s 
entrepreneurship better understood 

Proposed activities: 
Development Policy Review 
Ports Sector Development 
Project  
Ongoing activities: 
Airport Development Project   
Economic monitoring notes 

Proposed activities: 
Programmatic ESW on free 
zones, industrial areas and 
access to finance and land  
ICA Rapid Results Approach  
Policy notes/TA on 
telecommunications issues  
Ports Sector Development 
Project  
Alexandria Growth Pole 
Project 
Road Asset Management 
Project 
West Delta Irrigation Project 
On-going activities: 
PEP-MENA (IFC) 
Investment Climate 
Assessment 
IFC equity and loan 
investments 

35

 
 
Strategic Objective 2. Enhancing the provision of public services 

Long-term Development Agenda for Egypt 
Egypt’s long-term goals Major issues which hinder 
Egypt’s ability to achieve 
long-term goals 
High budget deficits 
Large and poorly targeted 
subsidies 
Lack of experience with 
inflation targeting 
Low average maturity of the 
domestic debt 
Inefficient treasury 
management functions  

Macroeconomic 
stability 
Single digit inflation 
throughout CAS period 
Public debt to GDP ratio 
on declining path 

Expansion and 
rationalization of  
infrastructure services 

Obstacles to private sector 
participation in infrastructure 
projects 
Under-investment in 
infrastructure, especially in 
Upper Egypt 

Operation of monetary policy 
based on inflation targeting  
Maintenance of floating 
exchange rate 
Reduction in subsidies provided 
for energy consumption (e.g. for 
fuel and electricity) 
Increase in number of taxpayers 
Longer maturity T-bills offered 

Outcomes influenced by the CAS Program 
Outcomes that the Bank 
Intermediate outcomes to 
Group expects to influence 
track CAS implementation 
over CAS period 
2.1 Fiscal and monetary 
policy consistent with 
macroeconomic stability 
Increase in primary surplus 
between 2005 and 2009 
Reduction in ratio of subsidies 
to GDP between 2005 and 
2009 
Average maturity of the 
domestic debt increased 
2.2 Increased supply and 
improved efficiency of  
infrastructure services  
Generation capacity in the 
power sector increased to 
25,400 GW by end-2009 
Telecommunications services 
efficiency improves  
Efficiency of urban transport 
services improves  

Implementation of full cost 
recovery irrigation schemes 
Increased public investment in 
power, irrigation, sea and 
airports, and maintenance of 
roads and railways  
Reform of the regulatory 
framework for taxis and buses in 
Cairo 
Improved financial and 
operational performance of 
Telecom Egypt 
Larger share of investment 
resources allocated to Upper 

Bank Group Assistance 
Interventions for each 
strategic objective 

Proposed activities: 
Public Expenditure Review 
Development Policy Review 
Ongoing activities: 
Economic monitoring notes  
Public Expenditure Review 

Proposed activities: 
Railways Restructuring Project  
Road Asset Management 
Project  
Urban Transport SWAP  
West Delta Irrigation Project 
El Tebbin Power Project 
Urban Sector Strategy 
Privatization assistance for 
telecoms (IFC) 
WBI Alexandria Local 
Development Workshop 

36

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Higher quality of 
education, increased 
employability of 
graduates, and lifelong 
learning of in-service 
employees 

 Focus of the Government on 
high cost construction 
program and lack of focus on 
quality issues 
Curriculum revision issues 
face political obstacles 
MOE faces difficulty in 
attracting qualified managers 
due to bureaucratic hurdles 
Low incentives for skills 
training among private 
enterprises 
Gender inequality in access to 
education 

2.3 Improved quality and 
relevance at all levels of 
education system 
Improved quality and 
relevance at basic and 
secondary educational levels 
Gender issues addressed at the 
secondary level 
Girls secondary enrollment 
rate increased by 2009 (from 
2005 baseline figures) 
Access to quality pre-
university education 
(including preschool 
education) increased for 
disadvantaged populations 

Egypt and rural areas 
Development of quality 
standards and transparent 
selection procedures for private 
sector  participation in public 
infrastructure projects 
Improved power sector 
framework that allows for 
multiple financing sources in a 
sustainable manner 
Curriculum revised/ updated and 
teacher training implemented at 
the basic (including preschool) 
and secondary levels   
Inclusive education policies 
implemented (to reach out to 
disadvantaged groups) 
Systems for monitoring and 
evaluation of educational 
policies strengthened  
Key PER recommendations 
implemented 

WBI Public-Private 
Partnership Finance Program 
Ongoing activities: 
Airport Development Project      
Transport Sector Policy Note    
Integrated Irrigation 
Improvement and Management 
Project                

Proposed activities: 
Education Enhancement 
Project II 
Education Sector Strategy 
WBI Strategic Choices for 
Education Reform  
Ongoing activities: 
Public Expenditure Review 
Education Enhancement 
Project 
Secondary Education 
Enhancement Project  
Higher Education 
Enhancement Project 
Skills Development Project 
Early Childhood Education 
Enhancement Project  

37

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Improved air and water 
quality and reduced 
water loss  

Inadequate environmental 
standards for air and water 
pollution 
Low coverage of water 
networks 
High subsidies on water lead 
to wasteful use 
Lack of investments in rural 
sanitation 
Lack of effective measures to 
control air pollution 

2.4 Improved water resource 
management and air quality 
Coverage of urban  sanitation/ 
treatment networks and 
facilities increased 
Portion of the rural population 
connected to sanitation 
facilities increased 
Improvement or air quality 
(PM10 and SO2)  in specific 
areas of Alexandria and Cairo 

Improved perceptions 
of public sector 
performance  

Lack of government 
accountability mechanisms  
Excessive centralization of 
public service delivery 

2.5 Strengthened 
accountability of public 
sector agencies 
Increased efficiency and 
service orientation of tax 
department  
Decentralization of public 
services delivery, with a 
greater role for private sector, 
local authorities, and civil 
society 

Legislation of  revised 
environmental standards 
Strengthening of monitoring and 
enforcement of air and water 
quality 
Improvement of  the water use 
fee collection system 
Expansion of water-metering 
systems 
Implementation of projects 
aimed at preventing  wastewater 
seeping into groundwater 
Implementation of projects for 
pollution control 

Introduction of  regular 
performance evaluations for 
senior management 
Development of sound and 
unified accounting rules for the 
treatment of SOE profits 
Setting up of monitoring and 
evaluation system for integrated 
water management 
Replication of Qena-style local 
government initiatives 
Implementation of local area 
development program 

Proposed  activities: 
West Delta Irrigation Project 
Integrated Sanitation and 
Sewerage Project 
Pollution Abatement Project  
WBI Nile Basin Initiative 
Program 
On-going activities: 
Integrated Irrigation 
Improvement and 
Management Project  
National Drainage Project 
Pumps Rehabilitation Project 
Integrated Water Resource 
Management Action Plan  
Proposed activities: 
Railway Restruct. Project 
Urban Transport SWAP 
Social Fund IV 
WBI Local Governance 
Management Program 
Ongoing activities: 
Irrigation Improvement and 
Management Project  
Integrated Water Resource 
Management (AAA and TA) 
Social Fund III 

38

 
 
 
 
Adequate, financially 
sustainable, equitable, 
and efficient social 
insurance 

Current schemes are 
financially unsustainable; 
financing mechanisms hinder 
employment creation and 
forgo opportunities to develop 
the financial sector 
Benefit formulas and 
eligibility conditions distort 
incentives 
Schemes are prone to adverse 
distributional transfers 
Voluntary pensions 
(occupational plans) are badly 
regulated exposing plan 
members to undue financial 
risk 

2.6 Improved coverage, 
quality and financial 
sustainability of social 
insurance system 
Implicit debt of the current 
pension system made explicit 
and financing mechanisms in 
place by 2006 
Integrated pension system in 
place that is financially self-
sustainable, links contributions 
to benefits, and guarantees 
equal treatment to all members 
by 2009 
Adequate regulatory and 
supervisory framework (for 
occupational/voluntary plans) 
in place by 2007 
Scheme of social pensions 
replaces current system for 
casual-workers by 2009 
Improved  unemployment 
insurance system by 2009 

Assessment of the pension 
system and analysis of options 
for reform 
Draft Law for pension reform 
ready 
Draft Law for regulation of 
voluntary private pensions ready 
Assessment of  unemployment 
insurance system and 
recommendations to improve 
financial sustainability and 
incentives for employers and 
employees 

Proposed activities: 
TA assistance in the area of 
pension reform 
TA assistance in the area of 
unemployment insurance and 
severance pay reform 
Ongoing activities: 
Social Insurance Reform 
Options Study 

39

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic Objective 3. Promoting equity 

Developing targeted 
safety nets 

Long-term Development Agenda for Egypt 
Egypt’s long-term goals Major issues which hinder 
Egypt’s ability to achieve 
long-term goals 
Poor targeting of the current 
consumer subsidies 
Lack of technical expertise 
with implementation of 
targeted safety nets 
Lack of expertise in 
developing safety net 
programs through socially 
inclusive approach 

Outcomes influenced by the CAS Program 
Outcomes that the Bank 
Intermediate outcomes to 
Group expects to influence 
track CAS implementation 
over CAS period 
3.1 Improved coverage and 
effectiveness of social safety 
net for the poor  
Some universal subsidies 
replaced by targeted safety 
nets by 2009 

Analytical work on targeting 
mechanisms performed 
Agencies responsible for safety 
net programs undergo relevant 
training in developing socially 
inclusive programs and in 
implementing targeting 
mechanisms 

Decreasing 
interregional disparities  

Lack of public investments in 
Upper Egypt 
Lack of resources for income 
generating programs in Upper 
Egypt 
Lack of capacity among local 
administrative authorities and 
community groups in Upper 
Egypt 

3.2 Reduced disparities in 
living standards between 
Upper and Lower Egypt 
Income per capita in Upper 
Egypt rises as a proportion of 
income per capita in Lower 
Egypt between 2004 and 2009 

Rising share of Upper Egypt in 
annual public investment 
program 
Share of public resources 
allocated to health and education 
in Upper Egypt increases 
Local capacity to plan and 
prioritize investments increases 
in Upper Egypt 

Improving access to 
healthcare 

3.3 Improved coverage and 
quality of healthcare for the 
poor 
Coverage of basic health 

Increased utilization rates in 
family health services in target 
governorates 
Increased public investments in 

Bank Group Assistance 
Interventions for each 
strategic objective 

Proposed activities: 
Poverty and Social Impact 
Analysis  
WBI Poverty Assessment 
Workshop 
Ongoing activities: 
Poverty and Social Impact 
Analysis (subsidies) 
Poverty Reduction Strategy 
Proposed activities:  
Poverty and Social Impact 
Analysis 
Social Fund IV  
Ongoing activities: 
Upper Egypt Rural 
Development Strategy report 
Integrated Governorates  
Social Fund III 
Proposed activities: 
Health and Population Sector 
Strategy  

40

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
family health services in priority 
under-served regions 
Development of institutional 
arrangements to support the 
expansion of health insurance 
coverage in primary care 

Family Health Project  
WBI Health Sector 
Performance Program 
WBI Social Protection 
Program 
Ongoing activities 
Health Sector Reform Project 

benefits package (primary care 
& public health programs) 
increased to 45 percent in 
target governorates (Menofia 
and Alexandria) 
Utilization rate increased of  
family health services   
(antenatal care visits, 
contraceptive prevalence rates, 
delivery with professional 
assistance, and child 
immunization rates) 
Reduced regional and income 
disparities in access to basic 
health services as measured by 
health insurance coverage and 
health services utilization rates 

Decreasing gender 
disparities 

Disparities still exist between 
men and women, especially 
related to economic 
empowerment, participation in 
the labor force, access to 
credit, as reflected in the 
incidence of poverty among 
female headed-households. 

3.4 Strengthening the 
capacity of National Council 
for Women for strategic 
gender planning, monitoring 
and evaluation, and 
promoting the collection and 
use of  gender-disaggregated 
data 

Ongoing activities 
IDF Grant for the Capacity 
Building of NCW 

Gender issues highlighted in the 
Bank’s projects and the 
Government’s Five Year Plan. 
Gender disparities reduced in 
selected sectors such as 
healthcare and education 
Gender strategy launched based 
on the recommendations of the 
Egypt CGA. 
More gender-disaggregated data 
made available  

41

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 2: CAS Completion Report 

Date of CAS: June 2001 
Period Covered by CAS: FY02-04 
Report Prepared by: Habib Fetini (Bank Staff) and Clive Gray (Consultant) 
Date: April 27, 2004 

Purpose and Methodology 

This is the CAS Completion Report (CCR) of the Egypt Country Assistance Strategy 
(CAS) for FY 2002-2004. The main objective of this report is twofold: to assess the effectiveness 
of the country strategy in bringing about the expected results, and to highlight the key lessons that 
have been learned during this period. The report also aims at stimulating reflection about 
assistance strategies and outcomes, and contributing to the deliberations already started within the 
World Bank and with the Government on the new country strategy for FY 06-09. The primary 
audience of this report is the World Bank country team and national counterparts.  

The CCR relies on written documents, oral briefings by World Bank country team 
members, discussions with GOE counterparts in Cairo, and information gathered from other Bank 
staff. Key reference documents include the Country Assistance Strategy FY02-04; the Egypt 
Projects Results Page and Portfolio Status, November 2003; project concept/identification 
notes/documents, and appraisal reports; QAG and OED reports; and AAA products. 
Overview 

i. 
According to the CAS for Egypt approved by the Board in June 2001, the “over-arching 
objective of the Bank Group’s country strategy in Egypt is to reduce poverty and 
unemployment.” Noting that unemployment was high in Egypt and that Government was aiming 
for a growth rate of about 7.0-7.5 percent, the CAS drew attention to the need for certain 
structural measures, including reduction of tariffs, simplification of customs procedures, tax 
reform, reduction/better targeting of subsidies, more active privatization, reform of the 
commercial code and its application, reforms of the financial system, and a more open foreign 
borrowing policy.  In the event, a combination of external developments (such as low OECD 
growth) and domestic policies (such as tardiness in dealing with an overvalued exchange rate in 
2001-02 and hesitant steps in other potential reform areas) led to much slower growth of the 
economy than expected.  Nevertheless, there continued to be active engagement with the Bank 
through reviews of poverty, gender, the financial sector, education, health and through 
negotiations over a Policy-Based Loan (PBL).  As a result the prospects for reforms are much 
better for the next CAS period.     

ii. 
The 2001 CAS outlined three scenarios for Bank assistance to Egypt, described as high-, 
base- and low-case. Some triggers for each of the scenarios were met—policy dialogue 
intensified, a joint Poverty Assessment was carried out, and the quality of the Bank’s portfolio 
improved significantly (all high-case), but the fiscal deficit worsened from 4.4 percent in 2001 to 
6.4 percent in FY03 (low-case). Only three of eight new CAS-projected Bank loans were 
approved by June 2004, totaling $68 million against a planned $450 million. However, the late 
addition of a major infrastructure loan not foreseen in the CAS--$335 million for Cairo and 
Sharm El Sheikh airports—brought total approvals, at $368 million, to 82 percent of the CAS 
total. 

42

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii. 
The Bank continued to implement 19 loan/credit projects approved before June 30, 2001. 
These were concentrated in three sectors, namely agriculture, water & rural development (eight 
projects), education (three), and health & population (five). Three other projects were underway 
in tourism (two projects) and pollution abatement. Four new projects were approved, one in 
agriculture, two in education and training, and one in infrastructure (the airports project 
mentioned above).  Meanwhile, the IFC committed twelve new projects in a range of sectors, 
notably the financial sector, transport infrastructure, SMEs, manufacturing, gas fields, and 
chemicals. IFC also co-financed a new technical assistance facility to support SME development. 
MIGA executed two investment guarantees.   

CAS implementation: Lessons for four main clusters of Bank activity 

iv. 
Key findings from the implementation of the 2001 CAS relate to structural reforms in 
general as well as to development strategy in three sectors, namely agriculture and water, 
education, and health. 

• 

Structural reforms. Government’s approach to structural reforms during the previous CAS 
was hesitant.  This was due in part to understandable worries about the short run 
implications for employment and public revenues from proposed reforms. Future analytic 
work must focus not only on the overall benefits of the reforms in the long run but also on 
their short-run costs for different sectors and groups.  It should also be noted that, when a 
decision was made by the Cabinet appointed in July 2004 to accelerate reforms, the fact 
that a solid analytic basis was available in prior work done by the Bank Group (and other 
development partners), especially in the financial sector and trade policy areas, made it 
easier to determine what to emphasize in the reforms. This highlights the need to remain 
committed to a substantial analytic and advisory program even if there is a decline in the 
pace of actual reforms. 

• Agriculture and water. Apart from the need to reorient lending in this sector to channel 
more benefits to the poor of Upper Egypt, future Bank/GOE collaboration must address 
creatively the low water productivity and lack of cost recovery in Egypt’s irrigated 
agriculture. Other issues to be faced are decentralization of water management to water 
users’ associations, and how to curb the harm to downstream farm families caused by 
upstream pollution of the Nile. Both the Bank and GOE have become increasingly aware of 
the confluence of issues of irrigation and drainage, and rural water and sanitation. The 
Integrated Irrigation Improvement and Management Project, scheduled for approval in 
FY05, is designed to meet this concern. 

• Education. Egypt’s human resource base is still far from being competitive in the 
international knowledge-based economy. The new CAS must consider how the Bank can 
provide a critical mass of support to achieve that objective within the next generation. It 
must focus on developing better national standards to guide curricula and measure 
improvements in relevant learning.  The standards should reflect international experience 
and be linked to teacher and administrator incentives in order to improve accountability and 
quality of teaching and learning. 

• Health and social services. Approaches to health insurance tested in earlier Bank projects 
have not proved viable. A key issue for the new CAS is to design alternative approaches 
that cope adequately with risk management. Preconditions for continued Bank financing 
should include political support for a given reform by way of necessary legislation.  

43

 
 
 
 
 
 
I.  Implementation of the 2001 CAS 

1. 

The 2001 CAS, covering the period FY02-04, envisaged the Bank’s assistance program 
in Egypt as continuing a long-standing focus on four activity clusters deemed central to 
alleviation of poverty.  These include promotion of sustainable macroeconomic growth, pari 
passu with concomitant structural reform, and development of three key sectors, namely, 
agriculture and water resources, education, and health and other social services.   

2. 

The bulk of this Completion Report (Sections II-VIII) views implementation of the 2001 
CAS in a dynamic framework, highlighting the principal clusters of Bank intervention along with 
the factors that affected the Bank’s strategy during the three years FY02-04.  

3. 

Section II discusses the shared Bank-GOE objective to alleviate poverty, and shows how 
the joint poverty assessment that was carried out brought this goal to the forefront. Section III 
summarizes the initial strategy and evolution of each of the four activity clusters. Section IV cites 
the benchmarks and triggers set forth in the CAS in regard to high-, base- and low-case scenarios 
of Bank activity during the CAS period, and compares these with the actual evolution of the 
Bank’s portfolio. Sections V through VIII describe the four activity clusters in turn, departing 
from the initial strategy pursued in accordance with the CAS; tracing its evolution in the light of 
external events and new information; and indicating key findings for the next (FY06-09) CAS. 
Section IX describes other Bank Group activities, notably the investments of IFC, analytical and 
advisory assistance (AAA), and capacity building by the World Bank Institute. Section X 
summarizes the CAS 2001’s statement of project selection criteria, targets for program 
implementation, and intended procedural improvements, and analyzes the degree of fulfillment of 
those objectives during the CAS period. 

II. A Shared Objective:  Alleviation of Poverty 

4. 

The CAS describes the GOE’s “over-arching objective,” as that of achieving a private 
sector-led growth rate of 7.0-7.5 percent that would create gainful employment opportunities and 
reduce the incidence of poverty.  It goes on to note that, notwithstanding this objective, as of 
2001, absence of Bank/GOE dialogue about the problem of poverty in Egypt “prevents the Bank 
from developing a truly effective poverty alleviation strategy.” Moreover the Government had not 
yet granted outside researchers access to the 1995-96 and 1999-2000 Household Income, 
Expenditure and Consumption Surveys.  

5. 

Poverty assessment. This changed with the onset in FY02 of a period of collaboration 
between the Bank and the Egyptian Ministry of Planning in FY02 that envisaged work on both 
poverty assessment and strategy formulation.  The first output of this joint effort was the June 
2002 report, Poverty Reduction in Egypt – Diagnosis and Strategy. 

6. 

The study constructed a novel food poverty line, taking into account regional differences 
in prices as well as household age and size. The report established that the share of Egypt’s 
population below the poverty line had fallen from 19.4 percent in the first period to 16.7 percent 
in the second, although concern was expressed that slower economic growth after 2000 might 
have reversed the trend.  The study also found the distribution of poverty shifting from the 
previous urban-rural divide to a geographical/regional pattern, poverty being both deeper and 
more severe in Upper Egypt than elsewhere. Although inequality increased country-wide, in 
Lower Egypt, where growth was highest, expenditures of the poorer population groups grew 
faster than those of higher-income groups, indicating that growth had been pro-poor. The study 

44

 
 
 
 
revealed education to be the strongest correlate of poverty, over 45 percent of the poor being 
illiterate.   

7. 

Transfers, primarily from government, were shown to be a larger share of the income of 
the nonpoor (15 percent) than of the poor (10 percent), arising from the fact that most poor do not 
work in the regulated sector and so do not benefit from social insurance.  While not an efficient 
mechanism (since it is universal in design), the bread subsidy was shown to keep a large number 
of people out of poverty.   

8. 

The publication of the poverty assessment in 2002, coupled with its wide public 
distribution in Egypt, has already influenced Bank-GOE dialogue. A second collaborative output, 
focusing on designing a strategy for poverty reduction, is scheduled for completion in FY05 to be 
followed by further analytic work on the next HIECS that is to be conducted in 2005.  Designing 
a more efficient social safety net (covering the cash transfer program as well as selected 
subsidies) is now a high priority for Government and the Bank’s technical assistance is being 
sought in this regard.   

9. 

Gender assessment. Closely related to the poverty assessment, in FY02-03 the Bank and 
the GOE’s National Council for Women collaborated on a gender assessment, leading to a report 
of that title dated June 2003. The study found gender inequality to be correlated with income, and 
established a strong link between women’s education and improved gender indicators. Gender 
inequality in school enrollment was highest at secondary level in Rural Upper Egypt, where the 
ratio of girls to boys in 1996/97 was only 0.51. The report called for future polices to continue to 
emphasize reduction of gender disparities in education.  It also recommended the following 
measures: removal of discriminatory provisions under certain laws, particularly those governing 
family relations; steps to equalize employment opportunity, compensation and social security; 
steps to promote a culture valuing women as full and equal partners in development; and the 
collection and dissemination of more economic and social data disaggregated by gender. 

III. 

Evolution of Strategy in the Four Clusters of Bank Activity:  A Summary 

Sustainable economic growth 
10. 

The macroeconomic context in Egypt deteriorated in several respects during the CAS 
period. First, the growth rate fell steadily to an estimated 2.5 percent in 2003. Second, the 
consolidated fiscal deficit rose from around 1 percent of GDP in FY00 to 2.9 percent in FY04. 
This context, strongly influenced by adverse external events, both international and regional, 
induced two financing requests from the GOE that were not anticipated in the 2001 CAS, one for 
a $500 million Policy-Based Loan (to be split 50-50 with the African Development Bank), and 
the other for a $335 million loan for the third terminal of Cairo Airport and for Sharm El-Sheikh 
Airport, arising in a context where previously anticipated private financing for such projects was 
not available on terms considered reasonable.  

Agriculture and water resources 
11. 

Bank activity in this sector has been dominated for three decades by parallel loans to the 
three main components of irrigation, namely distribution, pumping and drainage of Nile water. 
During the CAS period, growing attention focused on two concerns, (i) the fact that Egyptian 
agriculture features the lowest level of water productivity in the Middle East/North African 
region, about US20¢ per cubic meter, and (ii) the health hazard posed by upstream pollution on 
downstream farm families. As a result, the Bank’s strategy changed to help the authorities reform 

45

 
 
 
the institutions that manage water distribution and modify the incentives faced by the various 
actors, in a word to create an integrated management system. A new lending operation, named 
Integrated Irrigation Improvement and Management, was designed during the CAS period and 
scheduled for approval in FY05. It combines irrigation, drainage and pumping station 
improvements under one project.  

12. 

In parallel, and to address growing concerns regarding water quality and sanitation issues, 
a study has been initiated to define the scope of a complementary lending operation in rural water 
and sanitation, as envisaged in the 2001 CAS. This project will build on the community structures 
and social capital created under the on-going water resource projects.  

Education 
13. 

During the CAS period, advances in school numbers and enrollment made it clear that, 
overall, access was no longer a major issue in the education system. While access in remote areas 
and for disadvantaged and disabled children remained a concern, Bank support for Egyptian 
education began to focus more on the quality dimension, i.e. how best to generate graduates with 
technological and problem-solving skills demanded by both the domestic labor market and the 
information-oriented global economy. Needs in this regard were articulated in a joint Bank-GOE 
Education Sector Survey, completed in October 2002. Both education loans approved during the 
CAS period—the Higher Education Enhancement Project (HEEP) and Skills Development 
Project—emphasized quality. Creation of a quality assurance program for universities was a 
central component of the HEEP. 

Health and social services 
14. 

At the outset of the CAS period, the Bank’s major intervention in these sectors was 
proceeding on the assumption that a way could be found to create near-universal insurance 
coverage for primary health care services in three pilot governorates. In late 2002 the ruling 
party’s health policy committee identified “extending health insurance coverage” as one of the 
Government’s two key objectives in the sector. However, it soon became clear that 
implementation of this goal depended in large part on reform of the national Health Insurance 
Organization, which was not forthcoming.  By end-2003, only 7 percent of the IDA health sector 
credit had been disbursed. A Bank-led health sector reform and financing review identified key 
reasons for the slow progress. Pending development of a new health insurance model, the 
project’s focus has shifted to improvement of health services, including rationalization of 
infrastructure.  

IV. 

CAS Benchmarks & Scenarios, and Evolution of the Bank Portfolio 

15. 

The CAS defines a set of four benchmarks to guide both lending and non-lending 
involvement in Egypt during FY02-04, as well as four triggers for base-, high- and low-case 
scenarios for the lending program. The benchmarks are:10 

• Success of the Bank Group in being able to complete substantive analytical work in the 
areas of poverty alleviation and the financial sector 
• Sustained policy dialogue between the Government and the Bank 

10 World Bank, Memorandum of the President on a Country Assistance Strategy for the Arab Republic of 
Egypt, Report No. 22163-EGT, cited herein as the 2001 CAS, June 5, 2001, pp. 21-22. 

46

 
 
 
                                                 
• Fewer dropped projects and lower average cost of those dropped. Average cost to be 
aligned with Bank average during FY02-04 
• Delays in effectiveness reduced from an average of about a year to about eight months 
Benchmarks 1, 2 and 4 coincide with triggers listed in Table 1 following. Benchmark 3 is 
not categorized as a trigger, and is analyzed in Section IX as a procedural target, while the 
outcomes of the other three benchmarks are reviewed in this section. 

16. 

Scenarios for the Bank’s lending program in FY02-04 
17. 

The CAS defines three scenarios for new Bank lending in Egypt during the period: a base 
case (considered to be most likely) and high and low cases.  These are summarized as follows: 

• Base case – continuation of the current pace of growth (5.0-5.5 percent p.a.) and policy 
implementation; absence of “significant shocks or reversals of policy reforms, but also no 
major structural reform breakthroughs” 
• High case – either a “major deepening of the structural reforms or a severe deterioration 
in the external environment” 
• Low case – “implementation of policy reforms (deepening controls, halting structural 
reforms)” and the Bank portfolio deteriorate considerably 

18. 

Table 1 details four main triggers for the three scenarios: the macroeconomic framework; 
structural reforms; the quality of overall policy dialogue between the Bank and the GOE; and 
management of the Bank’s portfolio. 

19. 

During 1996-2000, GDP grew, on average, by over 5 percent per year. Since then, 
external shocks including the September 11, 2001 events in the United States and the U.S.-Iraq 
war, contributed to a deceleration of GDP growth to 3.4 percent, 3.0 percent, and 2.5 percent in 
FYs ’01, ’02 and ’03, respectively. Domestic policy measures also played a role. Notwithstanding 
12 percent depreciation of the Egyptian pound against the dollar during 2000, the CAS regarded 
its continuing overvaluation as one element in the economy’s vulnerability. After averaging 9 
percent of GDP during 1990-93, merchandise exports had dropped to 6.4 percent by 2000.11  

20. 

During 2001-02 the GOE allowed the official exchange rate to depreciate by another 25 
percent. At end-January 2003 it announced a floating of the pound, allowing the central bank 
(CBE) rate to fall another 25 percent by year’s end, from EP 4.62/$1 to around 6.20. During 
2001-03 merchandise exports recovered modestly to average 7.3 percent of GDP—still far below 
levels characteristic of newly industrializing economies.  

21. 

In order to stem the pound’s fall, during 2003 the GOE intervened in the float, inter alia 
freezing government imports and requiring exporters to sell 75 percent of their proceeds to 
domestic banks. Foreign investors’ remittance of profits and dividends was subject to delays. The 
parallel exchange rate remained in existence and fluctuated widely, spiking in early October at EP 
7.40, or 20 percent above the central bank rate, before dropping to EP 6.85 by end-February 
2004. 

22. 

The CAS noted a worsening of the budget sector fiscal deficit, which rose from 0.9 
percent of GDP in 1997 to average 3.9 percent in 1999-2000. This was attributed partly to 

11 Computed from Bank’s SIMA database. 

47

 
 
 
                                                 
clearing of arrears as a stimulus to the private sector, but also to an increase in public investment 
in “mega” projects. Skepticism was expressed about GOE efforts to attract more private Middle 
Eastern investment in these projects. In the event, the deficit rose to –5.5 percent, -5.8 percent and 
–6.4 percent in FYs ’01, ’02 and ’03 respectively. However it was expected to drop to -5.5 
percent in FY04, mainly as a result of expenditure controls and the positive impact of exchange 
rate depreciation on revenues. 

Table 1: Triggers and Main Assumptions for the Lending Program 

Base-case assumptions        

        High-case triggers 

            Low-case triggers 

∗ Gradual improvement in 
current monetary and 
exchange rate policies. 
Significant move towards 
fiscal sustainability. Fiscal 
deficit declines gradually from 
a level of 4.4 percent in 2001. 

∗ Significant progress in 
achieving fiscal sustainability. 
Fiscal deficit of 3.6 percent 
achieved in 2001, and 
reduction in following years. 

∗ Elimination of tariff 
surcharge.  

∗ Average unweighted tariff 
reduced to 22 percent. 

∗ Progress toward reforms in 
the financial sector. FSAP 
completed.  

∗  Improvement in the quality 
of policy dialogue. Full access 
to poverty data.  

∗ Acceleration of financial 
sector reform. FSAP 
completed. At least one of the 
4 large public commercial 
banks privatized. 

∗ Significant improvement in 
quality of policy dialogue. 
Poverty Assessment 
completed as a joint product 
with the Government. 

∗ Controls deepened, 
fiscal 
deficit unsustainably high. 

∗ No progress in structural 
reforms, especially in trade 
liberalization. 

∗ No progress in financial 
sector reform. 

∗ No improvement in policy 
policy dialogue, and problems 
of access to data persist. 

∗ Steady improvement in the . 
Bank's portfolio. Problem 
projects in the 10 percent-35 
percent range. Delays in 
effectiveness gradually 
reduced to about eight months. 

∗ Significant improvement in 
the Bank's portfolio. Problem 
projects below 10 percent. 
Delays in effectiveness 
reduced to about six months. 

∗ Significant deterioration in 
the Bank's portfolio. Problem 
projects over 35 percent. 
Effective- ness delays in 
excess of a year.  

23. 

Regarding the balance of payments, the CAS noted pressures arising from the drop in 
tourist receipts following the Luxor attack, as well as net outflows from the domestic banking 
system reflecting a loss of confidence. During 1999-2000, net international reserves declined by 
28 percent. By mid-2003 the current account was once again in surplus, but this was largely due 
to an 18 percent drop in imports over the past three years, with predictable consequences for 
growth. FY04 has seen a major improvement in the current account, partially offset by outflows 
on capital account due to uncertainty about the exchange rate regime. 

48

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24. 

The CAS cites an estimated current level of $1.5 billion in foreign direct investment 
(FDI), noting the GOE’s intention to double it by 2010. Revised data show that FDI actually 
reached $2.1 billion in FY00, but dropped to $600 million in FY03. These pressures, together 
with skepticism about the GOE’s willingness to persevere with economic reform, were believed 
to underlie decisions in 2002 by two credit rating agencies (Fitch and Standard & Poor) to 
downgrade Egypt’s ability to service its long-term debt. S&P’s rating shifted Egyptian debt from 
“investment” to “speculative,” thus raising the country’s borrowing costs. 

Trend and impact of GOE policies during the CAS period 
25. 

The CAS refers to an unfinished agenda of structural reforms:  

26. 

Reform of tariffs and other trade barriers. The central policy theme of the 2001 CAS is 
that Egypt must reverse the inward orientation of its economy, and promote non-oil 
manufacturing exports as 
the main contributor 
to higher productivity, 
international 
competitiveness, and thus economic growth. Success in this endeavor, according to the CAS, 
requires more flexible exchange rate management, as well as reduction of the level and dispersion 
of import tariffs, which create an anti-export bias in trade policy. Other factors underlying this 
bias are identified as non-responsiveness of the public administration; antiquated customs 
procedures, including outdated and inconsistent product standards and quality control; and 
inadequate export finance. 

27. 

The nominal floating of the currency in January 2003, and the subsequent depreciation of 
the central bank rate, represented a step towards more flexible exchange rate management, 
although this was partially offset by the measures of intervention cited above. As regards tariff 
reform, given the fiscal situation, and the fact that import tariffs account for about 20 percent of 
tax revenue12, the GOE was reluctant to take steps that would reduce taxes in the absence of 
offsetting revenue-enhancing measures. It was also concerned about the employment impact of 
lower protection for import-substituting industries.  

28. 

In early 2003 an IMF team studied the revenue impact of alternative tariff reforms and 
advised that reducing the number of tariff bands from the present 28 to five would have only a 
modest revenue impact. At mid-year the tariff question was a subject of dialogue between the 
Bank and the GOE during early negotiations for a Policy-Based Loan (see below).  

29. 

At the end of the CAS period, tariffs on apparel were being made WTO-compliant, and 
tariffs on certain basic and intermediate goods were being reduced. Some steps were also 
underway to reduce the dispersion of tariffs and reduce tariffs on IT. In early 2003 the GOE 
established a schedule for a series of customs reforms, some of which were completed later in the 
year (launching of a model tax and customs center in Cairo, establishment of a new, modern port 
at Ein Sokhna). 

30. 

During the CAS period the GOE took other measures designed to promote exports, 
including establishment of a Ministry of Foreign Trade and enactment of laws on Special 
Economic (export-processing) Zones and Export Promotion. The latter includes establishment of 
an Export Promotion Fund, improved machinery for executing the duty drawback and tax rebate 
systems, and provisions to combat extra-legal levies on foreign traders. 

12 Karim Nashashibi, IMF Middle Eastern Dept., Fiscal Revenues in South Mediterranean Arab Countries: 
Vulnerabilities and Growth Potential, Working Paper No. 02/67. 

49

 
 
 
                                                 
31. 

Tax reform. The CAS cites a joint GOE/Bank task force report on tax policy and 
administration, recommending management information systems to monitor performance in all 
major functions of revenue collection, starting with duty drawback and sales tax rebates for 
exports. With respect to the tax code, the report suggested abolishing most tax incentives in order 
to reduce distortions, limit discretion and facilitate tax administration. A major bill designed to 
limit arbitrary tax assessment and lower the tax burden on businesses was scheduled for 
submission to Parliament in early 2004.  

32. 

Subsidies. The CAS describes the present system of food subsidies, amounting to roughly 
1.7 percent of GDP and available to poor and non-poor alike, as an inefficient mode of social 
protection, and recommends more explicit targeting to the poor. However the GOE questions the 
administrative feasibility of such a reform, and has taken no steps in this direction. Electricity 
tariffs, set by Cabinet decree, have not changed since 1994, meaning a growing implicit subsidy 
over the past nearly ten years. In opportunity cost terms (world market prices), petroleum 
products likewise embody a substantial implicit subsidy. The total for electric power and 
petroleum together is estimated at 1.5 percent of GDP. Reform is reported to be under discussion, 
but had not been implemented as of the date of this report. 

33. 

Privatization. Privatization slowed during FY01, compared with FYs ’95 through 2000, 
when some 130 enterprises with assets worth about US$3.8 billion were privatized. 
Notwithstanding this effort, in 2000 the public sector still accounted for around 30 percent of 
economic activity. Subsequent data13 show that FY01 saw only 13 companies privatized, 
compared with the preceding 4-year average of 29, with proceeds equaling only 41 percent of that 
average. According to the CAS, the GOE had indicated plans to divest most remaining enterprises 
during the next 2-3 years (i.e. by FY04), privatizing the gas distribution network, and selling 
public sector shares in joint venture insurance companies as well as 20 percent of Egypt Telecom. 
In the event, only five companies were privatized in FY02, yielding merely 8 percent of FY01’s 
already reduced proceeds.  

34. 

Reform of the commercial code and its application. The CAS calls for improvements in 
Egypt’s legal system to facilitate investment and accelerate settlement of commercial disputes. 
During the CAS period the GOE took several legislative initiatives, including adoption of laws on 
intellectual property rights and labor and drafting of a competition policy law. Nonetheless, at the 
end of the period, observers were noting the persistence of time delays in resolving commercial 
cases:  just over a third of cases filed in commercial courts are resolved, taking an average of six 
years. 

35. 

Financial system reforms. The CAS noted the public sector’s continued dominance of the 
financial sector through retention of the four main commercial banks and major insurance 
companies, questions about the soundness of loan portfolios, and the GOE’s continued resort to 
administrative controls in areas where modern economies rely more on market discipline. The 
controls and lack of competition are blamed for the high cost and nonavailability of medium- and 
long-term finance, especially to small and medium enterprises. 

36. 

IMF data on bank portfolio soundness as of March 2002 show non-performing loans at 
nearly 17 percent of total loans, with only two-thirds covered by provisions.14 The CAS 
characterizes the World Bank’s current access to financial sector data as “limited,” but notes that 

13 World Bank Cairo office, “Egypt Brief – Economic Monitoring Note,” March 31, 2003, p. 18. 
14 Ibid., p. 8. 

50

 
 
 
                                                 
the GOE is considering participation in the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) with a 
view to helping it better assess the sector’s vulnerabilities and development needs. 

37. 

An FSAP exercise was indeed launched and a report issued at the end of 2002. Several 
facets of the action plan it recommended were implemented during FY03-04. A new Banking 
Law enhances CBE independence. Prudential regulation was strengthened through regulations 
concerning insider lending. The CBE and banks worked to develop an automated credit risk 
information system (CRIS).  In the area of monetary policy, the CBE established a separate 
monetary policy unit and introduced new open market operations, including deposit windows. A 
Real Estate Finance Law, enacted at the start of the CAS period, was expected eventually to 
promote housing affordability by lengthening amortization periods and reducing effective interest 
rates. Later in the CAS period the Capital Market Law was modified to support emergence of a 
mortgage market. An Anti-Money Laundering Law was adopted, with independent enforcement 
machinery.  No major changes were made in the banking and insurance sectors with respect to 
ownership; however, new management was introduced at the four major public sector banks in 
2002/03. 

38. 

Foreign borrowing policy. The CAS expresses concern that overly cautious borrowing 
policy, designed to keep foreign debt within prudent limits, could hold capital inflow below levels 
necessary to finance an investment rate consistent with Egypt’s 7 percent growth target. The view 
is expressed that the current policy of requiring a minimum 40 percent grant element in individual 
loans is overly restrictive, and should rather be applied at an aggregate level.  In the event, it 
appears that the GOE has applied the policy rather selectively during the CAS period. At the start 
of the period (July 2001) it floated a $1.5 billion Eurobond, and in June 2003 it formally applied 
to the World Bank for a $350 million Airports Development loan (see below). At the end of 
FY03, foreign debt in dollar terms was about 8 percent above its level at the start of the period, 
largely due to the dollar’s depreciation. Notwithstanding, at one-third of GDP, foreign debt 
remains at a modest level, as does the debt service ratio of roughly 10 percent. 

39. 

As indicated previously, GDP growth during the CAS period diverged sharply from the 
GOE’s 7 percent target, although this cannot be blamed solely on failure to attract greater capital 
inflow for investment. Towards the end of the CAS period, in FY04, signs of an economic 
recovery began to appear. Business confidence appeared to be firming up, and both non-oil 
exports and import-competing domestic production were responding, with a predictable lag, to 
the pound’s depreciation. Tourism arrivals reached record levels, and the nascent natural gas 
industry was making solid progress. GDP growth was projected in the 3½-4 percent range, up 
from FY03’s 2.5 percent.  

40. 

The outcomes of the various triggers can be summarized as follows: 

41. Macroeconomic policies. Consistent with the base case scenario, monetary and exchange 
rate policies improved. Controls in these areas were not removed, but cannot be said to have 
deepened according to the low-case scenario. On the other hand, there was no significant move 
towards fiscal sustainability; far from declining after 2001, the deficit reached -6.4 percent in 
FY03, before declining to roughly -5.5 percent in FY04.  

42. 

Trade policy. Consistent with the base- and high-case scenarios, tariff surcharges were 
eliminated and the average unweighted tariff was reduced below 20 percent. The float of the 
exchange rate was a pro-trade measure not foreseen in the CAS, although partially offset by the 
interventions described above. 

51

 
 
 
43. 

Financial sector reform. Here the base-case scenario seems to fit. The FSAP was 
completed and some reforms (see above) were undertaken. No commercial bank was privatized 
as envisaged in the high-case scenario, although at the end of the CAS period discussions were 
underway between the GOE and the Bank, IMF and USAID on initiating the privatization 
process. 

44. 

Policy dialogue. Here the high-case scenario seems to fit. The Poverty and Financial 
Sector Assessments were completed (see below), and serious policy dialogue occurred in the 
course of negotiations over the Policy-Based Loan as well as in contacts between GOE 
ministerial and Bank vice-presidential levels. 

45. 

Bank portfolio management. One year into the CAS period, five out of 18 projects or 28 
percent were in the problem category. Strenuous efforts following a Country Portfolio 
Performance Review (CPPR) in May 2002 improved performance to the point where, as the CAS 
period drew to a close, only one out of 13 then active projects, or 8 percent, still fell in that 
category. The three new projects becoming effective by the time of writing, Higher Education 
Enhancement, Skills Development, and 2nd Matruh Resource Management, attained effectiveness 
in three, six and ten months, respectively, averaging just over six months. Thus, portfolio 
management met the two high-case triggers cited in Table 1. 

46. 

In summary, the situation as it evolved contained elements corresponding to some of the 
triggers of all three scenarios.  

New Bank loans during the CAS period 
47. 

• 

Sectoral focus. The CAS signals the Bank’s intent to focus on three types of interventions  
during FYs 02-04: 
Interventions that support higher and sustained growth. The latter involves supporting 
macroeconomic stability, phased restructuring of the bank and corporate sectors, and 
improved infrastructure for greater competitiveness. Bank participation in this category 
was to be limited because of heavy USAID/EU involvement. 
• Targeted interventions for poverty reduction. Defined as activities in basic education and 
health; social protection/safety net; and rural poverty.  
Interventions with indirect poverty reduction impact. Defined as activities that generate 
benefits for the poor by promoting broad-based growth, developing poor areas, initiating 
dialogue on governance and community development, and building effective 
institutions. 

• 

48. 

Projected volume of activity.  As shown in Table 2, the CAS base-case lending program 
foresaw eight new projects, totaling $500 million.  For the high case, total lending over three 
years was foreseen at around US$1.5 billion, half of it to take the form of quick-disbursing loans. 
This was described as presupposing sustained dialogue between the GOE and the Bank on the 
key structural issues. For the low case, it was foreseen that total new lending would be limited to 
around US$100 million for one or two social sector projects. 

52

 
 
 
Table 2: Base-Case Bank Lending Program, FY02-04, 
FY02 
FY03 

Higher Education Enhancement 
($50m) 
Skills Development ($50m) 

Information Infrastructure: 
Telecom, Posts, e-Commerce 
($10m) 

Natural Resource 
Management ($50m) 
Early Childhood 
Development ($50m) 

FY04 
Health Sector Reform II 
($100m) 
Irrigation/Drainage 
Improvement ($100m) 
Agricultural Exports ($40m) 

Rural Water/Sanitation 
($50m) – planned for 
FY04/05 

49. 

In the event, four new loans for a total of $403 million have already been or are 
scheduled to be approved during the CAS period. Table 3 lists those four plus two loans 
scheduled for approval in FY05.  Comparison of Tables 2 and 3 shows that one of the four CAS-
period loans, Airports Development, was not foreseen explicitly in the CAS. The current 
projection of 13 active projects at the end of FY04 is one less than the CAS base-case scenario. 
Four projects will have closed during FY02-04, and two more are scheduled to close in FY04, but 
extensions are anticipated.  The bottom line is that five out of the eight projects foreseen for 
FY02-04 in the base-case scenario are expected to be approved by end-FY05, albeit two for 
substantially lesser amounts. The Agricultural Exports project is being redesigned, and Health 
Sector II is still possible further down the road, depending on the outcome of a redesigned Health 
Sector I. 

Table 3: New Loans Approved or Expected to be Approved During FY02-05 

FY02 

FY03 

FY04 

FY05 

Higher Education 
Enhancement 
($50m) 

Matruh Resource 
Management 
(approved but 
subsequently 
cancelled) 

Skills Development 
($5.5m) 

Early Childhood Development 
($20m) 

Airports 
Development 
($335m) 

Integrated Irrigation 
Improvement & Management 
($120m) 

Application of sectoral focus criteria during CAS period 
50. 

The lending program realized during the CAS period will not meet a rigid interpretation 
of the sectoral foci outlined in the CAS, but there are sound reasons for this: 

53

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• The Bank's lending to Egypt is modest compared to the volume of overseas development 
assistance (ODA) to Egypt from the U.S. and EU.15 Moreover, its market-based terms 
cannot compete with grant funding from those two sources and other development 
partners. However, experience during the CAS period shows that the GOE appreciates 
the Bank’s role more as a critical partner mobilizing knowledge and experience to 
pioneer efforts in challenging areas, than as a source of funds. For example, at the GOE’s 
request, the Bank is initiating and leading efforts in Egypt to enhance Early Childhood 
Development, and to restore private sector participation in provision of infrastructure 
services by introducing private management of airport services. 
• The CAS sectoral focus of support for “sustained growth” is so broad as to accommodate 
a great variety of interventions. Project analysis in the Bank has shown a close linkage 
between expansion of Cairo and Sharm El Sheikh airports and development of tourism. 
• The CAS’ Private Sector Strategy annex states, “The Bank Group has and can continue to 
play a role in the infrastructure area, and increasingly in the private provision of 
infrastructure. Areas for Bank and IFC activity include…ports and airports.” GOE and 
Bank perceptions agree that, given the current political backdrop, private foreign capital 
is not available in significant amounts for investments such as the Airports Development 
Project.  The Bank’s acceptance of the airport project conforms to the above 
supplemental selection criteria. There is no question of the GOE’s unequivocal 
commitment. While the Bank has not done many recent airport projects, there is likewise 
no question of its comparative advantage in managing international tendering and 
implementation of infrastructure projects on this scale. 
• As noted above, two of the CAS-listed projects not approved during FY02-04 (Irrigation) 
have merely been postponed to FY05. Many factors induce changes in the phasing of 
planned projects. 
• Special factors apply to two of the Table 2 projects that no longer appear in the lending 
program. USAID offered cheaper funds for the Information Infrastructure project, and the 
Agricultural Exports project turned out not to meet the criterion of serious government 
commitment, although the GOE is supporting design of a project with similar objectives 
(West Delta Development), planned for FY05. 

51. 

Admittedly, the number of new loan projects during FY02-04 that could be termed 
“targeted interventions for poverty reduction” is limited to one, namely Matruh Resources 
Management II, which also satisfies three criteria under the sectoral heading “interventions with 
indirect poverty reduction impact,” namely: developing poor areas, initiating dialogue on 
governance and community development, and building effective institutions. Conversely all four 
new FY02-04 projects target “broad-based growth,” which makes the CAS’ “indirect poverty 
reduction” heading a rather vague demarcation of sectoral priorities.  

15 According to OECD/DAC, ODA disbursements to Egypt in 2000-01 averaged $643 million p.a. for the 
U.S., and $392 million for EU members together. World Bank data show average annual IBRD/IDA 
disbursements in FY00-01 of $62 million. 

54

 
 
 
                                                 
V.  Cluster 1:  Promotion of Economic Growth through Structural Reform 

Evolution of Bank/GOE policy dialogue 
52. 

In discussing what did and did not work under the previous CAS,16 the 2001 document 
cites two sectors where the Bank’s role in policy dialogue was “greatly appreciated,” namely 
human resource development and rural development. Conversely, it refers to a “constrained 
relationship” associated with policy dialogue 
that 
is variously described as “weak,” 
“circumscribed,” and “marginal” in four critical areas, namely: nature and incidence of poverty in 
Egypt; assessment of the financial sector, desirable in order to help the GOE better understand, 
and respond to, weaknesses of the system and its vulnerability to economic shocks; export push 
and private sector development.  

53. 

As noted above, the CAS cites development of “sustained policy dialogue” between the 
GOE and the Bank as both a benchmark for overall Bank involvement in Egypt during FY02-04 
and a trigger for the lending program. As indicated below and in Section II, implementation for 
the first time of joint studies on poverty (see Section II) and the financial sector laid the 
groundwork for sustained policy dialogue in those areas.  

54. 

Financial sector assessment. The financial sector study, carried out during April-June 
2002, focused on banking, where four state-owned commercial banks hold 51 percent of system 
assets, and the Government has shares in most of the 50+ smaller banks. According to the study, 
state dominance of the sector has restrained competition and retarded financial sector deepening. 
The state banks’ operations lack cost-effectiveness and their portfolios reveal weaknesses. The 
study’s conclusion: to attract private buyers, substantial public funds would have to be injected 
into them.  

55. Major recommendations include: audits of the state banks to assess loan recoverability; 
resumed privatization of joint ventures; early steps towards privatizing the state-owned banks; 
allowing market-determined interest rates in primary auctions; restructuring of government 
borrowing plans; gradual lowering of reserve requirements and remuneration of reserves; 
strengthening the Capital Market Authority to improve corporate governance and protect 
investors; privatization of the insurance industry; review of the structure and financing of social 
security; establishment of a credit registry; legislative-judicial reform to facilitate collection of 
collateral and protect creditor rights; and revenue-neutral tax reform for the financial sector. 

56. 

Dialogue in context of proposed Policy-Based Loan. In January 2002 the GOE, calling 
attention to the impact of the September 11, 2001, events on the Egyptian economy, formally 
applied for a $500 million PBL. Over the next two years this led to high-level dialogue touching 
on all major facets of development policy, including the above four topics.  

57. 

A draft Letter of Development Policy underlying the discussions, tabled in FY03, 
described as the foremost aim of Egypt’s reform strategy to create an environment for sustainable 
economic growth, overall stability and social development. This would enhance private, 
particularly foreign, investment, thereby raising productivity, competitiveness and employment. 
Five areas are listed as fundamental to achievement of this goal: the macroeconomic framework, 
the business climate, the trade regime, the financial sector and social safety nets. The document 
describes reform measures already introduced by the GOE and discusses their implementation 

16 2001 CAS, Box B, p. 20. 

55

 
 
 
                                                 
and enhancement. Key issues arising in these areas and featuring in the Bank/GOE dialogue can 
be summarized as follows: 

• Macroeconomic framework. Management of the floating exchange rate; setting of 
money supply and inflation targets; revenue enhancement and expenditure control 
measures to reduce the budget deficit, including the impact of external tariff reform; 
enhanced transparency through public release of budget data. 
• Business climate. Rationalizing business taxation, inter alia by reducing marginal tad 
rates, phasing out exemptions; lowering business costs through reform of labor law; 
promoting the real estate market by facilitating mortgage financing; reform of company 
registration, commercial adjudication and 
insolvency; 
improving 
the business 
environment for SMEs. 
• Trade policy. Promotion of exports, inter alia through a new financial facility and 
establishment of special economic zones; customs modernization based on a new 
customs law; implementation of a new tariff structure, reducing the number of tariff 
bands, regularizing exemptions and lowering the average tariff rate; reform of the import 
inspection regime. 
• Financial sector modernization. Enhancing the soundness and competitiveness of the 
banking sector, including sale of government shares in joint ventures, risk assessment of 
the four state-owned banks and their eventual privatization; regularizing taxation of 
financial intermediaries and transactions; new legislation on accounting and auditing of 
capital market entities. 
Social safety nets. Improved targeting of the poor in order to concentrate subsidies that 
now benefit poor and the nonpoor alike. 

• 

58. 

Tariff reform. An avenue of reform that is encountering resistance among the Bank’s 
GOE discussion partners is modification of the tariff structure. Two main concerns underlie this 
position: (i) the fiscal consequences of uncompensated loss of tariff revenue; and (ii) the 
unemployment consequences of reduced protection for Egyptian industry.  Resolution of the first 
concern depends less on technical information than on whether Cabinet and Parliament can be 
persuaded to adopt compensating revenue/expenditure control measures with non-neutral impact, 
i.e. that will unavoidably make some elements in society worse off.  

59. 

As regards the issue of unemployment, however, it is inevitable that the GOE would be 
concerned about a reform that promises to intensify foreign competition, particularly for Egypt’s 
textile and garment industries. There is reason to expect the Government to welcome a joint study 
of the net employment impact of lower tariffs in certain industries and options for relocating 
affected workers. A showing that job losses in some branches could be compensated by gains in 
others would strengthen the Bank’s hand in pushing for tariff changes that would on balance 
increase the Egyptian economy’s openness and integration with world markets. 

Evaluation of the Bank’s performance 

60. 

During the CAS period, the Bank provided a swift response to the GOE’s applications for 
two large growth-oriented loans, those for airports and policy reform, involving a total 
commitment of over $800 million (of which the African Development Bank tentatively agreed to 
share half the cost of the $500 million PBL). In its negotiating posture vis-à-vis the PBL, the 
Bank recognized policy reforms recently undertaken or currently in course, and engaged the GOE 
in constructive discussion about further measures to stimulate investment, increase the Egyptian 

56

 
 
 
economy’s competitiveness and enhance incentives for local producers. Ultimately, an improved 
balance of payments and GOE reticence vis-à-vis some of the proposed measures led the PBL to 
be dropped. 

61. 

In regard to economic and sector work (ESW), with GOE participation the Bank executed 
a major study of the financial sector (FSAP), underpinning discussions on that component of the 
PBL reform package.  Solid analytic work, in the form of a report done in 2000 on export 
development options, was also available to underpin the trade reform proposals.    

Key findings for the next CAS (FY2006-09) 

62. 

The forthcoming CAS period will witness implementation of the airport loan and the 
culmination of discussions related to structural reforms in the financial, trade, tax and regulatory 
policy areas. The former will contribute directly to GDP via growth of Egypt’s tourism and 
transport sectors, as well as indirectly by lowering transaction costs for other sectors.  

63. 

Drawing lessons from the Bank’s interaction with the GOE on structural reform issues 
during FY02-04 is a more complicated matter. In the PBL negotiations hitherto the Bank 
proposed a series of reforms designed to speed the growth of exports, employment and GDP over 
the long run. However, the government is clearly worried about the risk of economic and political 
shocks those reforms could cause in the short run. Clearly there is a need for the two sides to 
engage in a deeper dialogue about how Egypt can escape the relative stagnation in which the 
economy found itself at the end of the CAS period. How can the country best take advantage of 
the disappearance of trade barriers between it and the European Union, scheduled to culminate in 
free trade by 2012? What steps can it take to retrain and relocate workers who will be displaced 
as the economy opens further? And, further, what lessons does financial liberalization in other 
countries offer Egypt about the resulting stimulus to the economy? How can the nonpoor segment 
of the population be weaned from energy and food subsidies that burden the public finances and 
impede programs to help the poor? What will be the macro impact of rising agricultural 
productivity as management of tertiary irrigation canals is decentralized? In the longer run, what 
will be the impact of a more decentralized system of higher education, reoriented towards 
producing skills for the knowledge-based economy? Answering these questions collaboratively 
with the Bank’s Egyptian partners calls for greatly expended investment in economic and sector 
work during the next CAS period.  

VI. Cluster 2:  Development of Agriculture and Water Resources 

Previous Bank involvement in/focus on agriculture & water  

64. 

During FY02-04 this cluster had two main components, comprising: irrigation, where the 
Bank has been Egypt’s principal external partner for three decades, operating via parallel loans to 
the sector’s three main branches—water delivery, pumping and drainage; and community-based 
rural development and natural resource management in three regions.  

65. 

The CAS cites the preliminary (July 2000) report of a sector review on agricultural 
exports, whose final report appeared in December 2001. The review led to design of a $40 million 
loan project to promote horticulture exports, especially in the context of Egypt’s agreement with 
the EU. The project was dropped for lack of sufficient GOE commitment, but a similar project, 
West Delta Development, is being prepared for FY05, with much stronger support from the 
authorities. 

57

 
 
 
Implementation of pre-CAS loans 

66. 

Bank evaluators of CAS-period implementation of the three ongoing irrigation sector 
loans have rated it as satisfactory. These are Irrigation Improvement ($80 million, 2/3 IDA, 1/3 
IBRD; approved in FY95), National Drainage II ($50 million, 100 percent IBRD, FY00), and 
Pumping Station Rehabilitation III ($120 million, 100 percent IBRD, FY99). At end-2003, 44 
percent of the loan amounts had been disbursed. 

67. 

The water delivery component (Irrigation Improvement) has focused for some time on 
institutional aspects of the sector, based on recognition of the advantages of bringing water users’ 
associations into the allocation and pricing of water at the tertiary canal level.  

68. 

Two of the community-based rural development projects encompassed East Delta, where 
the Bank lent to raise productivity, including nonfarm income, of 20,000 poor families recently 
settled on reclaimed (formerly saline) land; and Sohag, Upper Egypt, where a Bank loan is 
financing credit and enabling local authorities to prepare, implement and manage infrastructure 
projects and services. The third region is Matruh, in the western coastal drylands, where a loan 
completed at the start of the CAS period supported natural resource management and community 
participation among Bedouins and a follow-on project was approved in March 2003.  

69. 

A seventh project in the agricultural sector was designed to channel the bulk of its 
$175m. value into rural credit through the Principal Bank for Development and Agricultural 
Credit (PBDAC), a state-owned institution that is the main financial intermediary in rural Egypt. 
Problems arising in implementing this combined loan/credit led to a joint Bank-GOE decision to 
close the project in early 2004. 

Evaluation of Bank performance 

70. 

During the CAS period the Bank came to realize that its long-time support for traditional 
ways of doing business in Egypt’s irrigation sector was perpetuating inefficiency and leaving 
downstream irrigators exposed to health hazards. The question may be asked whether this 
realization could have come sooner, leading to better design of the lending operations underway 
during the CAS. The opposing argument is that, ancient modus operandi being as entrenched as 
they are, one must allow time to nudge the bureaucracy towards modern departures. The new 
integrated lending operation bids fair to be a substantial improvement over its predecessors.  

Key findings for the next CAS 

71. 

Section III above mentioned growing concern with low water productivity of Egypt’s 
irrigated agriculture, and harm to downstream farm families caused by upstream pollution of the 
Nile. Low productivity means that irrigated agriculture is receiving large implicit subsidies. 
Traditionally, Egyptian governments have considered it their responsibility to provide water. 
However, it has become clear that management of distribution by a cumbersome bureaucracy 
leads to waste. Farmers are coming to realize that control by themselves, through water users’ 
associations (WUAs), can bring substantial efficiencies. Moreover, Nile Delta farmers are turning 
increasingly to horticulture, and prefer pressurized networks, managed individually, over 
traditional canals.  

72. Meanwhile the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation is recognizing the need for 
cost recovery. The first handover of tertiary canals to WUAs is scheduled for late FY04. Water 

58

 
 
 
boards are being established to manage the secondary canals. A key issue for the new CAS is how 
well these bodies will function, and how willing the bureaucracy will be to cede its control. 

73. 

On the mechanical side, the GOE has sought to preserve the monopoly of pump supply 
long enjoyed by a state-owned factory in Helwan. However, this enterprise has not been able to 
meet demand, helping to make P.S. Rehab. III the slowest disbursing of the three irrigation loans 
(only 29 percent in 42 months since effectiveness). Pressure is rising to allow the private sector 
into the industry.  

74. 

As regards pollution control, at present, upstream towns have little incentive to treat their 
effluents even when treatment facilities are available. The growing health hazards inflicted on 
Delta households by these effluents can only be controlled by motivating riparian communities to 
treat them. 

75. 

Growing awareness, on the part of both the GOE and the Bank, of the confluence of 
issues of irrigation and drainage on the one hand, and rural water and sanitation on the other, 
underlies the ongoing ESW effort in the latter field, designed to lead to a complementary lending 
operation in the new CAS period. 

76. 

Experience in rural finance over the past decade, culminating in recent cancellation of the 
PBDAC credit/loan, indicates that strong GOE commitment to policy change is a prerequisite for 
future Bank involvement in publicly owned agricultural banks. In the meantime, lending to small 
businesses may be included in rural development operations. 

77. 

The new West Delta project will provide value added and opportunities for implementing 
the Bank agenda in promoting private ownership and stakeholder participation, particularly in 
managing water resources.  

VII. Cluster 3:  Development of Education 

Previous Bank involvement in education 

78. 

Through interaction with Egypt’s two education ministries since the early 1990s, 
involving technical support of the Government’s 20-year Education Sector Strategic Framework 
(1999-2019) and culminating in the education sector review completed in 2002, the Bank has 
become a major partner in developing a comprehensive strategy for education reform at all levels. 
A Basic Education Enhancement project, approved in 1993, financed school construction in rural 
as well as urban areas and developed an education management information system. Starting in 
1997 an Education Enhancement Program (EEP) targeted further improvement in access to basic 
education as well as quality and efficiency.  

Implementation of pre-CAS loans 

79. 

The CAS period saw continued implementation of three projects from the 1990s. Both 
the Basic Education Improvement and Education Enhancement Projects continued reducing 
gender and regional disparities in access through community participation and subsidies to poor 
families. The EEP supported massive training (over 500,000 teachers and administrators) on 
topics such as effective teaching techniques and computer literacy. It also picked up on a key 
recommendation of the Education Sector Survey (see below) concerning reform of the 
examination system, traditionally based on one-time, all-for-nothing tests of students’ 
memorization. Over 100,000 teachers and inspectors were trained in comprehensive, cumulative 

59

 
 
 
 
evaluation. The impact of the various training programs on teacher classroom behavior and 
student outcomes remains to be assessed. In collaboration with other donors, the EEP also 
supported a School Improvement Program aimed at instituting capacity in some 2,500 schools to 
take local initiative in implementing reforms.  

80. 

A Secondary Education Enhancement Program, becoming effective in mid-2000, 
converted outdated vocational schools to general secondary schools, trained mathematics and 
science teachers in computer technology, and surveyed businesses and educationists to develop 
guidelines for curricular reform.  

New loans 
81. 

Both education loans approved during the CAS period emphasized quality—for example, 
creation of a quality assurance program for universities was a central component of the Higher 
Education Enhancement Project. This project, its implementation beginning only 14 months 
before the end of the period, has already encouraged some university departments to undertake 
self-evaluation, laying a foundation for a national quality assurance system.  

82. 

Structural reform involving consolidation of middle technical institutes into technical 
colleges is underway. The Skills Development Project, which became effective in early 2004, is 
expected to strengthen the capacity of training institutes to provide training in selected sectors. 

83. 

Education sector review 
This study, not mentioned in the 2001 CAS, was conducted by the Bank MNA (Middle 
East and North Africa) region’s Human Development Group in cooperation with Egypt’s 
Ministry of Education. Reporting in October 2002, it noted real progress in narrowing regional 
and reducing gender disparities, reducing class size, eliminating multiple shifts, increasing class 
instructional time, and introducing technology in the classroom.  While the share of education in 
Government expenditure has increased from 12 percent in 1991 to about 20 percent, and nearly 
all children have access to basic education, the poor continue to face severe obstacles in educating 
their children.  

84. 

to: 

The report identified five key challenges facing Egypt’s education reform efforts, namely 

• 

• 

• 

prepare Egypt’s youth for the modern, knowledge-based economy through quality 
improvements at all levels of schooling, from primary through university;  
strengthen management of educational institutions by decentralizing decisions and 
promoting accountability;  
increase efficiency by reducing over-staffing and giving higher education managers 
increased autonomy and accountability; 
improve equity by preparing children of the poor to begin school and reducing private 
costs of education to them; 
reduce regulatory barriers to redeploying resources in the education system. 
The report provided impetus for a national debate that culminated in a resolution of the 
ruling party to create a National Quality Assurance and Accreditation Agency (NQAAA), 
independent of the education ministries that would monitor all levels of the educational system 
and establish national standards for teachers, administrators, students, the community and the 
school environment. 

85. 

• 

• 

60

 
 
 
Report on Early Childhood Education 

86. 

In September 2002 the Bank’s Human Development Sector, in cooperation with Egypt’s 
Ministry of Education, produced a report entitled Egypt: Strategic Options for Early Childhood 
Education, laying the groundwork for a $40 million loan foreseen for FY05.  The study proposes 
an approach to early childhood education (ECE) that targets the poor. It discusses options for 
increasing numbers and quality of public and private kindergartens (KGs), while stimulating 
demand for KG education via incentives and heightened parental awareness. Proposals are 
advanced for strengthening ECE coordination and management, improving access to public KGs, 
transforming nurseries currently managed by another ministry into KGs, training KG teachers, 
and enhancing monitoring and evaluation. With the ECE loan, the Bank’s reach will extend to the 
entire educational pyramid, making a significant contribution at each level of the Egyptian 
education system. 

Evaluation of Bank performance 

87. 

During the CAS period the Bank correctly recognized that it could enhance its 
contribution to development of Egypt’s education sector by shifting the earlier focus on increased 
access to schooling, towards improvement of student learning. The first of two new loans, Higher 
Education Enhancement, targets legislative reform, institutional restructuring, establishment of 
independent quality assurance mechanisms, and monitoring systems. The second project, Skills 
Development, is a pilot activity that will focus on translating employers’ manpower needs into 
appropriate training.  

88. 

In addition, through its review of Early Childhood Education and development of a 
project in that area, the Bank will help Egypt redress the imbalance represented by deficiencies in 
the preparation of disadvantaged children to enter the formal education system. 

Key findings for the next CAS 

89. 

The Bank’s long involvement in Egypt’s education sector and the two surveys carried out 
during the CAS period suggest that the sector is still a long way from generating human resources 
of the quality needed to make Egypt competitive in the international knowledge-based economy. 
The next CAS needs to consider how the Bank can provide a critical mass of support for reforms 
that will achieve that objective within the next generation, while making a significant contribution 
to reducing poverty. 

90. 

Detailed survey findings reveal a need for numerous reform measures. To improve 
quality, the existing examination system needs to be replaced with continuous, comprehensive 
evaluation. Other recommendations of the Education Sector Survey include creating a Learning-
Innovations Fund managed by the school council; developing teacher capacity in new curriculum, 
teaching practices, and technology use; continued introduction of new technology in the 
classroom; and establishment of a competitive fund to foster change in higher education.  On the 
management side, the study finds a need to involve local communities and school staff in the 
education process; inform schools about teaching practices and student learning outcomes; 
decentralize decision-making authority to school managers; and train managers to use EMIS. 

61

 
 
 
91. 

Increasing efficiency requires that funding of higher education be rationalized, and 
quality assurance mechanisms introduced; enrollments in public higher education institutions 
likewise need to be rationalized, and private provision and open universities encouraged; and 
excess teachers and administrators have to be redeployed and retrained. A provisional five-year 
target has been set for the NQAAA to extend its monitoring to the entire system. 

92. 

On the side of equity, Early Childhood Education programs must be expanded in 
disadvantaged areas; subsidies need to be targeted on the poor to reduce the private costs of 
schooling; parent education programs are needed to improve child development in the home; and 
the primary school-leaving examination should be replaced by continuous assessment. 

VIII. Cluster 4:  Development of Health and Social Services 

93. 

Previous Bank involvement in/focus on health and social services 
At the outset of the CAS period, the Bank was involved in five projects in this sector, 
Schistosomiasis Control, Health Sector, Population, Social Fund III and Social Protection 
Initiative. Schistosomiasis Control closed early in the period. As the Bank’s flagship activity in 
the sector, Health Sector’s primary aim was to help the GOE establish a model of social insurance 
to finance primary health care. Through the Population project the Bank sought to help the GOE 
raise public awareness of the costs of uncontrolled population growth. 

Implementation of pre-CAS loans 
94. 

Schistosomiasis Control. The Implementation Completion Report (ICR) on this 1992 
IDA credit, which closed in September 2002, gave it an overall satisfactory rating.17 The project 
helped the National Schistosomiasis Control Program (NSCP) achieve national coverage, 
including newly reclaimed areas, and become integrated with existing health service delivery 
systems. The NSCP now covers Egypt’s entire rural population of 35 million people, and 
prevalence of the disease has decreased to less than 5 percent of the population from around 36 
percent in 1983. However, the report rated as unsatisfactory achievement of a project objective 
involving support of operational research and strengthening management of the responsible 
health ministry department. 

95. 

Health Sector. This 1998 IDA credit targeted universal insurance coverage for primary 
health care services in three pilot governorates. In late 2002 the ruling party’s health policy 
committee identified “extending health insurance coverage” as one of the Government’s two key 
objectives in the sector. For reasons described below under the health sector review, the pilot 
insurance model did not succeed. By end-2003, only 7 percent of the credit had been disbursed. 
The focus of the project has now shifted to improvement of health services, including 
rationalization of infrastructure. In collaboration with the GOE, a Bank review team was 
scheduled to develop a revised operating plan in early 2004. The Government has requested a 
two-year extension of the June 2004 closing date. 

96. 

Population. Implementation of this 1996 project, designed to increase demand for family 
planning services, has also been slow. Just over one-third of the IDA credit had been disbursed by 
the scheduled end-2003 closing date. However, the government’s concern over rapid population 
increase, currently 1.9 percent,18 has grown. “Managing population growth” was the second key 
objective identified by the ruling party committee. In close cooperation with several public 

17 Egypt: National Schistosomiasis Control Project, Vol. 1, Report No. 25552, March 2, 2003. 
18 Egypt, Arab Rep. at a Glance, Dec. 7, 2003. Rate given for 1996-2002. 

62

 
 
 
                                                 
agencies and NGOs, the project is highlighting public awareness and targeting vulnerable and 
hard-to-reach population groups. In view of the renewed GOE focus on population issues and 
recent progress in implementation, the project was extended at end-2003. 

97. 

Social Fund III. This 1999 IDA credit, third in a series starting in the early 1990s, focuses 
on creating jobs and providing community infrastructure and services through labor-intensive 
works. It is being implemented in partnership with local authorities, communities and the private 
sector. A gender component supports female involvement in the private sector. By end-2003, a 
year before closing, just over one-fifth of the $50 million credit had been disbursed. The ICR for 
the previous credit (Social Fund II) described the Fund’s sustainability as being at risk.  

98. 

Social Protection Initiative. This 1999 $5 million IDA-funded pilot project targets poor 
children with disabilities or at risk of street life. It was designed to develop new strategies for 
integrated delivery of services through multidisciplinary and inter-agency cooperation. As of end-
2003, also one year before scheduled closing, disbursements amounted to just over 10 percent.  

New loans 

99. 

No new loans were approved in this sector during the CAS period. As shown in Table 2, 
the CAS anticipated commitment of a $100 million Health Sector Reform II loan during FY04. 
However, as indicated above, implementation of Health Sector I has been delayed, and 
preparation of a new loan will have to await establishment of a viable model for health care 
financing. 

Health sector reform and financing review 

100. The Bank’s MNA Human Development Group prepared this review in 2002-03. It 
focused on lessons of the Health Sector Project, designed to help Egypt’s 1997 Health Sector 
Reform Program (HSRP) integrate the sector’s fragmented financing into a single National 
Health Insurance Fund.  

101. A pilot effort, the project sought to integrate delivery and financing of primary health 
care (PHC) in three governorates with high infant, child and maternal mortality rates. It 
introduced a Family Health (FH) approach, providing integrated services under the same roof for 
the entire family. The project succeeded in providing satisfactory PHC services, and introduced 
two major innovations in service delivery: both physicians and patients valued the concept of 
continuity of care and the unified medical record. Performance-based incentive systems were also 
adopted for the first time in Egypt, increasing provider accountability to quality standards and 
reform goals.  

102. On the financing side, Family Health Funds (FHFs) were established at governorate level 
to contract with providers for a package of essential services. They were originally conceived to 
collect and hold insurance premia, but legislation restricting that function to a national Health 
Insurance Organization was not modified.  

103. As a result, instead of shifting the decrease in private spending to the public system as 
envisioned, the project decreased households’ contribution to health care spending and increased 
the government contribution. Unsustainable deficits resulted. 

63

 
 
 
104. The report notes that (1) Egypt’s public and private health spending has more or less 
doubled in real terms since 1995, outpacing economic growth and straining the government 
budget, while (2) increased spending in a system with low technical and allocative efficiency has 
resulted in poor value for the money. The study urges the GOE to address the FHFs’ institutional 
set-up and governance and create an organizational framework integrating them into a provider 
network. More broadly, it calls for a search for ways of bringing financial stability to the health 
sector as a whole.  

Evaluation of Bank performance 
105. The question arises whether, based on experience of many other countries receiving Bank 
assistance to develop a viable model for universal health insurance, the Health Sector project’s 
designers could not better have foreseen the failure of the Family Health Funds, documented in 
the foregoing review. In any case, the review shows conclusively that the FHF model was 
doomed to failure. It is less successful in proposing viable alternatives.  Given questions about the 
sustainability of the HIO, it is not clear that the proposal to merge the FHFs into the HIO’s 
purchasing division would yield superior results. It is to be hoped that the joint team charged with 
preparing a revised operating plan for the project in late FY04 will be able to suggest more 
promising alternatives to be tested with support from the credit balance. 

Key findings for the next CAS 

106. Since the model for PHC insurance tested in Health Sector I did not succeed, the 
overarching issue for the next CAS is to propose at least one new model for testing, and to 
establish preconditions for expenditure of Bank funds on it. One issue the model must face is that 
of risk management. Whatever institution manages risks associated with health care must meet 
appropriate prudential requirements, which never came into question for the pilot FHFs.  Among 
preconditions for Bank financing should be evidence of sufficient political support for a given 
reform by way of necessary legislative changes. The FHFs could not operate as independent 
entities because a Presidential decree was not forthcoming. 

107. Other issues arise in regard to the Population, Social Fund and Social Protection Initiative 
components of the health and social sector portfolio. All three projects have been moving slowly. 
What actions by the responsible institutions are required to accelerate execution? 

IX.   IFC Activity during the CAS Period 

108. At end-April 2001 (close to the start of the CAS period), IFC managed a portfolio of 19 
projects with a total commitment, comprising loans, equity/quasi-equity, and guarantees, of 
US$328 million. Participants in IFC's B-loan program had committed an additional US$305 
million, split evenly between two power projects. 

109. Between July 2001 and March 2004 (three months before the end of the CAS period), 
nine new projects were committed.  Another three projects, with a total IFC contribution of $80 
million, were approved by the Board in March 2004, and were expected to be committed by the 
end of FY04.  At end-February 2004, the committed portfolio stood at US$270 million, with 
US$323 million in loans from participants.  Investments are in a range of sectors including the 
financial sector, infrastructure, SMEs, manufacturing, chemicals, and tourism.   

64

 
 
 
 
110. 

In addition, IFC co-financed a five-year, US$20 million North Africa Enterprise 
Development (NAED) facility, which opened an office in Cairo in October 2002. NAED signed 
advisory service agreements with two local private banks in June-July 2003.  

111. 

IFC's competitive position and strategy 
IFC is subject to stiff competition (some of which is concessional) from local banks and 
other sources, such as the European Investment Bank, the Islamic Development Bank, and the 
African Development Bank.  At the same time, solid demand remains for IFC’s services.  IFC is 
selective in its approach to financing in Egypt.  For example, IFC is interested in exploring 
opportunities in the petrochemical sector.  IFC also continues to play an important role in the 
financial sector by setting up new institutions, providing credit enhancement, and technical 
assistance. 

112. The previous CAS described IFC as seeking additional investments in support of the 
following priorities: 

• Developing private-financed infrastructure;  
• Providing support to the services sector, including tourism;  
• Supporting internationally competitive and export-oriented ventures;  
• Supporting the privatization effort through both advisory services and providing 
financing to privatized ventures;  
• Providing support to SMEs;  
• Developing financial markets; and  
• Participating in building gas pipelines to export Egypt's large reserves. 

• 

• 

• 

IFC’s activities since the previous CAS have supported those goals:  
In SMEs, IFC support through NAED (now PEP-MENA), included work with the 
Egyptian banking sector on access to finance. 
In the financial sector, IFC’s initiatives included technical assistance and institution 
building with specific focus on housing finance and risk-sharing guarantee facilities.  In 
January 2004, IFC committed an investment in the Egyptian Housing Finance Company, 
the country's first private sector housing bank. 
In infrastructure, IFC obtained Board approval in March 2004 (and has since committed) 
an investment in the multi-user container, bulk and general cargo terminals at El Sokhna 
Port on the Red Sea.   
 IFC also received Board approval in March 2004 for the development of gas fields in 
Egypt, in conjunction with two US and British companies, Merlon and Melrose. 
IFC’s support to the services sector included an investment in Metro, in the supermarket 
sector. 
IFC invested in a number of companies with export markets, including SEKEM, an 
organic producer of pharmaceuticals, Amerya, an auto parts manufacturer, and Lecico, a 
maker of ceramic tiles. 
• Although IFC did not work on privatization during the CAS period, it hopes to be able to 
support the efforts of the Government going forward. 

• 

• 

• 

65

 
 
 
 
X.   MIGA Activity during the CAS Period 

113. MIGA provided its first guarantees in Egypt during the final year of the CAS period. At 
the close of FY04, it had facilitated $1.8 million in foreign investment, and was close to signing 
agreements for $35 million of coverage with respect to two waste management projects and an 
LNG project. Several other preliminary applications were in the pipeline.   On the technical 
assistance front, MIGA has been working for some time with Egypt’s General Authority for 
Investment and Free Zones (GAFI) and its Industrial Modernization Center (IMC) to establish an 
autonomous Egyptian investment promotion program, which the European Commission has 
offered to fund. The nature of MIGA’s future TA depends in part on whether the GOE agrees to 
make the new agency independent of government, a decision which is yet to be made. If it is 
favorable, MIGA will cooperate with the U.S. Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) to 
build capacity for the agency.   

114. 

Investment opportunities in Egypt are included in MIGA’s on-line promotion services. 
MIGA has also provided $79 million of coverage for Egyptian investors in Pakistan and Ghana. 

XI.   Analytical & Advisory Assistance, Capacity Building, and Other Nonlending Services 

Analytical & Advisory Assistance (AAA) 
115. The CAS foresaw a growing role of AAA and capacity building work in the Bank’s 
program. The share of the Bank’s administrative budget allocated to such work was forecast to 
increase. The AAA program was to feature two main components: 

• Core diagnostic work on poverty, public expenditure review, a financial sector 
assessment, and gender analysis and mainstreaming, all four topics raised in the Social 
and Structural Review completed just before the CAS period; and 
• Studies and activities giving an intellectual underpinning for Bank operations and 
technical advice in human development, rural development and water management. 

116. As noted earlier, the CAS put primary emphasis on analysis of poverty and the financial 
sector, categorizing completion of substantive work in these two areas as a “benchmark for Bank 
involvement” in Egypt.19 The document notes that the effectiveness of the Bank's AAA would be 
reviewed towards the end of CAS period. To this end a Quality Assurance Group (QAG) team 
visited Cairo in February 2004. Table 4 reproduces the team’s summary of 23 AAA tasks, costing 
a total of $3.3 million.20 

19 2001 CAS, p. 21. 
20 It should be noted that the QAG team considered the Governorate Health Plan, item #7 in the table and 
financed entirely by trust funds, to be misclassified as ESW. Exclusion of that study reduces total AAA 
costs to $2.4 million. 

66

 
 
 
                                                 
Table 4: AAA Tasks in Egypt – FY01-03 

Type of 

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

FY
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03

AAA

Tasks

ESW CDF for Education and Training
ESW CEM
NLTA
Debt Market Development
ESW Export Promotion Taskforce Report
ESW Safety Net Taskforce Report
ESW Agriculture Export Strategy
ESW Governorate Health Plan
ESW Early Childhood Development
ESW Poverty Assessment
ESW Education Sector Review
NLTA
Country Environmental Analysis (EG)- GPG
NLTA
GDLN Distance Learning Center
ESW Environment Note
ESW FSAP
NLTA
Housing Finance/Second Mortg
ESW Gender Assessment
ESW Review of W ater Sector W ork in Egy
ESW Pension Reform
NLTA
ICT Development Support TA
ESW Education Sector Policy Dialogue
NLTA
FSAP FOLLOW -UP
ESW Early Childhood Education Policy
ESW ROSC Accounting & Auditing

Costs

292
209
73
20
10
2
950
609
167
124
44
43
7
259
226
134
63
28
16
12
11
8
N/A 

117. The QAG team conducted individual assessments of eight new AAA tasks out of 23 
completed during FY01-03, and revalidated three tasks assessed previously as part of regular 
QAG ESW work. Box 1 summarizes the team’s assessment of the AAA program. 

Core diagnoses 

118. The studies on poverty, gender and the financial sector were summarized in Sections II 
and IV above. Arabic translations of the poverty and gender reports were distributed publicly, 
with wide press coverage. At the GOE’s request, the financial sector report is being treated as 
confidential for the time being. 

119. 

In many member countries the Bank carries out fiduciary diagnostic work in the form of 
Country Financial Accountability Assessments (CFAAs) and Country Procurement Assessment 
Reports (CPARs). A CFAA and a CPAR for Egypt were prepared and submitted to the authorities 
in FY04.  

120. 
June 2002 saw publication of a Bank-prepared report on the Economic Costs of 
Environmental Degradation. This document was well received by both the authorities and 
civil society, and is often quoted in the press.  At the end of the CAS period, only the 
public expenditure review (PER) remained to be undertaken, constituting a subject of 
discussion between the Bank and GOE 

67

 
 
 
 
Box 2: Quality Assurance Group (QAG) Assessment of Bank’s AAA Work in Egypt, FY01-03 
The QAG panel visiting Cairo in February 2004 gave an overall assessment of Satisfactory to the 
Egypt AAA program. Out of six standard dimensions for QAG assessments, the panel cited five as 
Satisfactory—Strategic Relevance, Internal Quality, Dialogue & Dissemination, Coherence & Integration, 
and Bank Inputs & Processes—while Likely Impact was assessed as only Marginally satisfactory.  
This latter assessment is described as arising more from an appreciation of the country context 
than from the approach or scale of Bank efforts. The panel cites the GOE’s “gradualist and somewhat 
reluctant approach to reform, with the pace of reform accelerating when socioeconomic conditions worsen 
and slackening as soon as the situation becomes better.” Another factor is the Bank’s limited leverage, 
arising from Egypt’s “geopolitical importance and the abundance of resources available at concessional 
terms from other donors.” 
The panel finds the likely impact of AAA work greater in sectoral areas, “particularly where there 
is an existing domestic constituency or champions for reform, and more difficult in the core 
macroeconomic, structural areas.” Sectors where a significant impact is expected include: 
• Education, where high-quality analytical work has helped a committed minister improve access to 
education, establish national standards and enact other reforms; and 
• Poverty reduction, where the FY03 joint assessment has led another committed minister to seek 
the Bank’s help in developing an action plan. 
(The FY03 study on water sector work in Egypt was not included in the QAG panel’s sample of AAA 
work; otherwise irrigated agriculture might have been mentioned as another sector where a positive impact 
is likely.) 
The panel regards a positive impact from trade sector AAA as less likely in the near term, specifically in 
regard to: 
• Export promotion, where the foreign trade ministry has refrained from distributing the Bank’s 
report; and 
• Agricultural exports, where from the outset the Bank did not succeed in interesting the agriculture 
ministry in the study. 
The financial sector is viewed as a special case, since the management of the Central Bank 
changed after the FSAP was conducted and reticence vis-à-vis reforms proposed in the report has been 
replaced by openness, as evidenced inter alia by the CBE’s recent establishment of a Banking Sector 
Restructuring Committee. The panel sees eventual implementation of the FSAP’s recommendations as 
generating demand both for Bank TA and a lending program. 
Apart from education, poverty reduction and the financial sector, the report foresees a limited 
impact of future AAA on Bank lending, rather it expects AAA work to “increasingly address knowledge-
sharing and capacity building needs.” To increase the impact of AAA on GOE development strategy, the 
report calls for an “integrative, analytical document such as a Development Policy Review (DPR)” to help 
“draw together in a coherent way the various policy issues facing the country and allow a more convincing 
demonstration of the actions with the highest pay off.” 

68

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121. Agricultural exports. This sector review, whose preliminary (July 2000) report is cited in 
the CAS, produced its final report in December 2001. The resulting $40 million loan project was 
conceived to support promotion of horticulture exports, especially in the context of Egypt’s 
agreement with the EU. As indicated above, the project as such was dropped, but another project 
with similar objectives (West Delta Development) is in preparation. 

Studies relating to future Bank operations 

122. Of the fields listed in the CAS for studies related to future Bank loan projects, work on 
rural development and water management was undertaken during the CAS period and the 
corresponding reports are expected before the new CAS period. 

World Bank Institute activity 

123. 

In line with the CAS’ emphasis on knowledge transfer and capacity building in priority 
areas, and following consultations by WBI with stakeholders including officials, donors, NGOs 
and think tanks, during FY02-04 WBI focused its activities in Egypt on poverty alleviation, 
environmental management, macroeconomic management, globalization and the investment 
climate. The program included structured learning activities, policy services to the authorities, 
and dialogue and dissemination vis-à-vis development practitioners and civil society, building on 
the Bank’s economic and sector work (ESW) and AAA. To enhance program impact, a WBI 
economist was assigned to the Bank’s Cairo office.  

124. Specific interventions, in coordination with MNA operations, included: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

dialogue on the joint poverty assessment, involving Cabinet, journalists, NGO 
representatives, academics and donors; 
development debates via videoconferences involving Egyptian poverty experts, MNA 
specialists and senior MNA managers; 
structured learning activities on poverty assessment and monitoring; and 
orientation of Egyptian counterparts to prepare an impact assessment of Egypt’s Social 
Fund.  

125. Promoting dissemination of MNA’s report on the Cost of Environmental Degradation, 
WBI helped organize a national workshop in Cairo and is supporting follow-up studies and 
capacity building on the cost of water degradation. Working with Egyptian NGOs, WBI also 
supported capacity building and dissemination efforts in environmental monitoring. 

126. 

In the fields of macroeconomic management, globalization, and investment climate, WBI 
provided: 

• Policy services to the authorities, as well as a Macroeconomic Management and 
Monetary Policy course, in support of the GOE’s January 2003 decision to float the 
currency. WBI also delivered the first distance-learning macroeconomic management 
course to the wider MNA region in collaboration with Egypt’s GDLN center; 
capacity building programs on regulation of infrastructure services and infrastructure 
finance; 

• 

69

 
 
 
• 

• 

in collaboration with the Bank’s OPCS, capacity building in monitoring and evaluation 
skills for a pilot performance-budgeting program in several ministries; and 
capacity building in trade facilitation. 

127. Apart from the national program, Egyptian officials and development practitioners 
participated in WBI regional knowledge and capacity building activities in trade, rural 
development, health, education and social protection. 

128. New developments in implementing WBI activity in Egypt included: 

• New working relationships with Egyptian training and learning institutions (Cairo 
University, Al-Ahram Center, GDLN, etc). For these relationships to have a sustainable 
impact, these institutions’ administrative capacity needs to be strengthened. 
• WBI mobilized Egyptian experts and officials to transfer knowledge and practical 
experience to officials in other MNA and African countries. 
• To support its activities, WBI was able to raise funds from local donor offices. 

129. Table 5 summarizes WBI’s program of courses held in Egypt during FY02-04. 

Table 5: WBI Courses in Egypt, FY02-04 

Title 

Frontiers in Infrastructure Finance 
Frontiers in Infrastructure Finance 
Transparency in Infrastructure Concessions 
Introduction to Poverty Monitoring and Evaluation 

Length 

* 
9 days 
??? 
4 days 

No. of 
Egyptian 
partici-pants 
41 
35 
18 
18 

130. A base survey for an impact assessment of WBI activities was conducted in FY03 in 
cooperation with Cairo University’s Center for Developing Country Studies. The survey, based 
on interviews with course participants and three focus group sessions, found the perceived 
effectiveness to be 4.83 on a scale of 1-7, relatively high compared to other countries conducting 
the same exercise. Activities were rated as effective in raising awareness/understanding of 
development issues, refining existing knowledge, and encouraging networking, and least effective 
in providing strategies/approaches to address the needs of Egypt and participants’ organizations. 
Rating their activity highest were participants who prepared an action plan on the basis of their 
course experience.  Completion of the assessment in FY05 will help better focus WBI activities in 
Egypt. 

70

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XII.   Procedural Criteria and Targets in the 2001 CAS 

131. This section examines the degree of fulfillment of project selection criteria and targets for 
program implementation, set forth in the CAS, that do not relate directly to choice of sectors of 
activity.  

Criteria and targets 

132. Dropped and postponed loans. CAS benchmark No. 3 (Section IV above) calls for fewer 
dropped projects and lower average cost of those dropped, to be aligned with the Bank average 
during FY02-04. 

133. 

Supplemental selection criteria. After specifying three areas (Section IV above) for Bank 
focus in FY02-04—support of higher education and growth, targeted interventions for poverty 
reduction, and interventions with indirect poverty reduction impact—the CAS cites a need for 
selectivity within those areas, leading to focus on interventions where: 

• The GOE’s commitment to projects is unequivocally strong;  
• The Bank has a long and positive experience (subsectors cited are water sector/irrigation 
and human development);  
• The Bank can bring knowledge management and experience of other countries to guide 
Egypt's policy reforms (singling out mortgage market development, information and 
communications infrastructure, poverty and gender analysis, and community-based 
development); and  
• The Bank can serve as a catalyst for mobilizing financing packages 2-3 times that of 
Bank loans for well-designed and high priority projects. 

134. Portfolio management targets. The CAS also lists five considerations intended to guide 
loan portfolio management during FY02-04: 

• Closer management of closing dates; 
• Greater efforts by the GOE and Bank to reduce effectiveness delays; 
• Less resort to project management units (PMUs) to ensure sustainability of project 
outcomes;  
• Closer cooperation with development partners having softer lending terms than the 
Bank’s, to satisfy the GOE’s 40 percent grant element criterion; and 
• Efforts to dissuade the GOE from applying the 40 percent criterion on a project level. 
• Execution of the criteria and targets 
135. Dropped and postponed loans. Eight of the nine projects in the CAS table of projected 
loans—see Table 2 above—were foreseen for FY02-04 (the ninth project, Rural Water Sanitation, 
was allocated to FY05). Three of the eight, Higher Education, Skills Development, and Natural 
Resource Management (now labeled Matruh Resource Management II), will have been approved 
during the CAS period. Skills Development was recast and reduced by almost 90 percent, from 
$50 to $5.5 million, while Matruh RM II was reduced by 75 percent to $12.4 million.  Three of 
the nine projects, Early Childhood Development, Irrigation/Drainage Improvement and Rural 

71

 
 
 
Water/Sanitation, now combined in Integrated Irrigation Improvement and Management ($150 
million), are in the pipeline for FY05.  

136. 

In other words, only two of the nine CAS projects—Information Infrastructure and 
Agricultural Exports—are no longer in the program. However, it would be incorrect to term them 
“dropped”—in Bank terminology, a “dropped” project is one on which sizable administrative 
resources have been spent in taking the project to an advanced stage of preparation. Less than 
$50,000 was spent on Information Infrastructure, most of it in the form of technical assistance on 
postal development, and preparation of Agricultural Exports was limited to a small exploratory 
mission. Health Sector II remains in the pipeline for an undetermined date, as Health Sector I is 
projected to be extended two years from June 2004. The forecast loan amounts for these three 
projects totaled $150 million, or an average $50 million per loan. 

137. This observation makes it possible to evaluate the outcome of CAS Benchmark No. 3. 
According to the 2001 document, the 1997 CAS foresaw eleven IBRD/IDA operations totaling 
$450-600 million. In the event, ten loans received Board approval, for a total of $580 million. 
However, a number of these were not the same projects foreseen in the 1997 CAS, several of 
which qualify as having been dropped. Thus, no projects qualify as having been “dropped” during 
FY02-04, and the 2001 CAS benchmark was met. 

Supplemental selection criteria 

138. Degree of GOE commitment. If this is measured by relative interest shown at high 
political levels, Airports Development comes out on top. However, in each of the other three 
FY02-04 projects, the Bank is working with GOE counterparts for whom the Bank role is 
facilitating activities in whose efficacy the local actors believe strongly. Indeed, it was in part 
pursuit of this criterion that led the Bank to recast the Skills Development project from a $50 
million effort based in a ministry whose devotion to the task was uncertain, to a $5.5 million pilot 
project in a different ministry that is investing sizable resources of its own in the activity. 
Mention should also be made of the Higher Education Enhancement Project’s attaining 
effectiveness in just over three months, the second shortest period on record for Bank loan or 
credit projects in Egypt. 

139. The Bank’s comparative advantage. Of the two subsectors listed under supplemental 
criterion (ii), irrigation is the subject of a major project scheduled for FY05, while human 
development applies to the FY02-04 education and training projects. Criterion (iii), knowledge 
management/best practices as applied to policy reform, applies to the policy dialogue discussed in 
Section IV above, as well as to advice on mortgage market development provided in the FSAP, 
the joint poverty and gender assessments, and community-based development as highlighted in 
Matruh Resource Management II. 

140. The Bank’s catalytic role in mobilizing financing packages. Three projects may be cited 
here: 

• Skills Development—parallel to the Bank’s $5.5 million intervention, which will focus 
on the demand side (enhancing firms’ demand for trained workers), the European 
Commission has prepared a EUR 33 million companion project focusing on improving 
the quality of training; 

72

 
 
 
• Early Childhood Development—complementing the Bank’s projected $40 million loan, 
scheduled for approval in FY05, Canadian CIDA has agreed to provide $10 million in 
grant funds; 
Integrated Irrigation Improvement—Germany’s GTZ and possibly at least one other 
donor will participate in this project. 

• 

Portfolio management targets 

141. Overall, considerable progress was achieved during the CAS period towards sharpening 
the focus of Bank and GOE resources on current and emerging priorities. The two parties took 
bold decisions to clean up the portfolio; relinquish unutilized resources, even on IDA terms; and 
close slow-moving projects. Performance in regard to the individual CAS targets can be 
summarized as follows: 

142. Management of closing dates. Five of the 19 projects active at the start of FY02 were 
extended during the CAS period, namely Education Improvement (by one year); Basic Education 
Enhancement, Irrigation Improvement and Social Fund III (two years); and Pollution Abatement 
(18 months). In addition, two more projects—Health Sector Reform and Population—are 
scheduled for extension during FY04. However the GOE agreed not to extend the Basic 
Education project beyond end-’03 despite a significant undrawn credit balance, and has also 
agreed to adhere to the end-’04 closing date for the Social Protection Initiative project regardless 
of any then undrawn balance. 

143. Timing of loan effectiveness. As indicated earlier, effectiveness of the first three loans 
approved during the CAS period averaged just over six months. Effectiveness of the Airports 
Development loan is expected even sooner. In the past, waiting for Parliamentary approval of 
loans during the December-May session has lengthened the time required for effectiveness of 
projects whose approval was not timed accordingly. The appointment in late 2001 of a Minister 
of State for Foreign Affairs responsible for aid matters has accelerated the processing of foreign 
loans in all stages. 

144. Resort to project management units (PMUs). Such units are envisaged for all four FY02-
04 loan projects. The unit’s title varies among projects, but this is only a matter of semantics. 
Higher Education Enhancement has already established its PMU, Skills Development is to have 
one PMU each for its Bank and EU components. Second Matruh will use a project coordination 
unit (PCU). In the Airports Development project, two project implementation units (PIUs) are 
envisaged.  

145. PMU recruitment experience has shown that the needed skills are not readily available in 
the market, especially procurement and monitoring & evaluation skills. Thus far, concern over 
financial accountability and efficient implementation of loan operations has outweighed the 
longer-run sustainability objective, which is to integrate post-project activity with normal 
ministry functions. The new CAS must address capacity building in the areas of procurement and 
upgrading of local institutions. 

146. The GOE’s 40 percent grant element criterion. In the Early Childhood Development 
Project, CIDA’s agreement to provide 20 percent of the external financing on grant terms raised 
the overall grant element to 40 percent. (In addition, CIDA funding of the project’s preparation 
costs significantly increased its quality.) Co-financing of Matruh II by $17.8 million in grants 
from IFAD and GEF raised that project’s grant element well above 40 percent 

73

 
 
 
. 

Appendix - EGYPT COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX, FY02-04 

The following pages reproduce in its entirety the country program matrix from the 2001 CAS. To 
each cell under the columns “PROGRAM INDICATORS/ BENCHMARKS” and “BANK 
GROUP INSTRUMENTS,” an update cell has been added, showing evolution of the 
indicators/instruments during the CAS period. In most cases the preceding text of this report 
expands on the matrix update cells. 

74

 
 
 
EGYPT COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX, FY02-04 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Action 

Program 
Indicators/Benchmarks 

Bank Group Instruments 

Other Donor 
Activities 

I.  Interventions Supporting Higher and Sustained Growth 

Macroeconomic Stability & Growth 
Recent increase in the fiscal deficit 
current budget process makes it difficult 
for government to implement its policies 
and assess outcome of expenditures. 

Maintain fiscal discipline.  Establish a 
medium-term framework for public 
expenditure planning.  Prioritize and 
scale back implementation of mega 
projects.  Shift gradually toward results-
oriented budget. 

Fiscal deficit cut below 2 percent of 
GDP.  Current and investment budgets 
consolidated.  Investment projects 
prioritized on economic grounds.  
Major tax reform completed (extension 
of GST, tax admin, corporate tax 
system). 

AAA:  Public Expenditure Review; 
Social & Structural Review II; 
Economic Monitoring; Project 
Appraisal & Evaluation (WBI/IDF). 

IMF; USAID 

Deficit averaged –5.9 percent in FYs 
01-03, projected at –5.5 to –6.0 
percent in FY04. Budgets have not 
been consolidated. Bill to reduce 
arbitrary tax assessment & lower tax 
burden on business is scheduled for 
submission to ’04 session of 
Parliament. 

PER and SSR II not conducted. 
Economic monitoring intensified in 
context of negotiations for Policy-
Based Loan. WBI activities did not 
include project appraisal & 
evaluation. 

Export Promotion 
Distorted incentives framework; 
inefficient and high cost infrastructure 
services; institutional and bureaucratic 
constraints led to disappointing export 
performance. 

Flexible management of exchange rate.  
Tariff reform (reduction in level and 
dispersion of tariffs).  Adherence to 
requirements of COMESA, PAFTA and 
EU.  Removal of non-tariff barriers 
(customs reform, quality controls).  
Enhancing private provision of 
infrastructure. 

Non-oil exports increase by at least 10 
percent p.a.  Reduce maximum tariffs 
from 40 percent to 30 percent.  Bring 
all tariffs that were between 20 
percent-30 percent to 20 percent; bring 
them between 15 percent-20 percent to 
10 percent.  Eliminate the customs 
surcharge. 

IMF; USAID; 
EU; Arab Fund; 
Kuwait Fund 

New operation: Agricultural Exports 
Project.  Investment in export-
oriented companies.   
IFC loans & equity: Investment in 
IPPs in power.  Potential investments 
in diverse sectors such as water and 
waste water, ports, airports.  
Non-lending:  Agricultural Trade and 
WTO (WBI). 

75

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During 01-03 non-oil exports rose by 4 
percent p.a. Concerned about revenue 
loss, GOE did not revise tariffs. There 
was progress in curbing non-tariff 
barriers. 

Agricultural Exports Project was 
dropped. IFC invested in the port 
sector.  WBI activities did not include 
trade/WTO. 

Private Sector Development 
Unfavorable business environment with 
a particularly unsupportive SME 
environment. 

Streamlining of tax and customs 
administration.  Strengthen commercial 
and legal system.  Reform labor 
legislation. Bankruptcy and intellectual 
property rights legislation. 

Improved perception of business 
environment (surveys).  Increased 
private domestic investment and FDI. 

Revised labor law facilitated more 
flexible labor management, but. 
transactions costs faced by private 
business were not otherwise 
significantly reduced. Privatization 
slowed, increasing private sector 
skepticism. 

USAID; EU; UK; 
UNDP; Germany; 
Italy; CIDA 

Non-lending:TA to strengthen 
business environment.  Corporate 
governance TA.   
IFC loans, equity & TA: Focused 
lending to facilitate access to finance 
(credit lines, risk capital, guarantees, 
leasing, etc.).  Extended North Africa 
Enterprise Development Facility.  
Selected direct investments in 
companies with clear development 
impact. 
 IFC’s five new projects satisfied 
stated criteria. North Africa 
Enterprise Development Facility 
(NAEDF) opened in Cairo. 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Action 

Program 
Indicators/Benchmarks 

Bank Group Instruments 

Other Donor 
Activities 

76

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strengthen bank supervision.  Gradually 
privatize the public financial institutions.  
Develop non-bank financial institutions. 
Deepen and broaden capital markets. 

Privatize at lease one state-owned 
bank.  Stronger bank supervision 
capacity in place.  Mortgage market 
development initiated. 

Financial Sector 

Dominance of publicly-owned 
institutions has limited scope and depth 
of financial markets.  Range of products 
available insufficient to meet needs of 
private sector, especially SMEs.  Slight 
increase in non-performing loans.  No 
mortgage market to facilitate housing 
finance.  Need to modernize and better 
regulate capital markets and insurance 
sector. 

No bank has been privatized. 
Management of one state-owned 
bank changed, GOE indicated intent 
to continue introducing market-
oriented bank management. 
Regulations regarding connected & 
related party lending introduced. 
Capital market law amended to 
promote mortgage market. 

Privatization 
After impressive progress during 1995-
99, marked slowdown in privatization.  
Share of public sector still 30 percent in 
economic activity. 

Government plans to divest most of 
remaining enterprises during next 2-3 
years. 

Substantial progress in completing 
industrial sector and non-industrial 
privatizations. 

Privatizations in ‘01-’02 averaged 
only 9 p.a., compared with 29 during 
each of preceding 4 years. Average 
proceeds were only 25 percent of 
previous rate. 

IMF; USAID; 
EU; UK 

IFC loans, & equity: TA on, and 
investment in, innovative financial 
instruments to build mortgage finance 
institutions, underwrite and trade of 
bonds.  Medium & long-term loans to 
banks and non-bank financial 
intermediaries.  Become a shareholder 
of secondary mortgage market 
institution.  
Non-lending:  Mortgage development 
and capital market development.  
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
(FSAP). 
New IFC commitments featured 
manufacturing, agriculture, trade 
and financial sector. NAEDF signed 
advisory service agreements with two 
Egyptian private banks. FSAP study 
was carried out. 

USAID; EU; 
Germany; CIDA 

Information Infrastructure Project 
(Telecoms & Post).  TA to improve 
performance of public entities.  
Advisory services and selected 
transactions (IFC). 
Project was dropped. Envisaged TA 
and IFC activity did not occur. 

77

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICT Sector 
Weak capacity of the telecom regulatory 
authority (TRA).  Inadequate postal 
services.  Incomplete legal framework 
for E-Commerce. 

Build TRA capacity.  Reform and 
modernize postal sector.  Develop 
necessary legal framework for E-
Commerce. 

Information Infrastructure Project.   

USAID 

Project was dropped as - except for 
postal sector - GOE chose not to 
borrow for SIL or TA. 

Info Development study ($80,000 
grant) on SME e-readiness, 
especially in tourism & ICT sectors, 
completed Dec 03.  

Fully functional TRA.  Major 
improvement in postal services.  
Significant growth in E-Commerce 
activities. 

MCIT ministry assuming leadership 
in sector strategy. Slow 
liberalization of services (no 3rd 
mobile license) except for data 
services segment, where Egypt leads 
MNA region in ICT infrastructure 
and liberalization strategy has led to 
7 data providers, 60+ ISPs. 

SOE weak, not ready for 
privatization. Corporatization work 
started in Egypt Telecoms. Postal 
Sector undergoing major reform, TA 
from Bank (GICT) often requested 
informally through Cairo office. 

II.  Targeted Interventions for Poverty Reduction 

Education 
Despite near universal basic education, 
inequity remains in certain area.  Low 
student performance at all levels, 
especially in problem-solving and 
technology skills. 

Increase demand for education in 
disadvantaged areas through parental 
participation and provision of early 
childhood education.  Improve the quality 
of student learning for all.  Reform 
curricula and provide enhanced learning 
environment at all levels. 

Annually increase enrollment for girls 
by 2 percent and for boys by 1.2 
percent until universal 8 years of basic 
education reached.  Improvement in 
student achievement score, 
particularly in problem solving and 
technology skills. 

Ongoing operations: Basic Education; 
Education Enhancement; Secondary 
Education. 
New operations: 
Early Childhood Development. 

USAID; 
UNICEF; CIDA; 
EU; ESDF; Japan; 
Kuwait; 
Netherlands 

Non-lending: Early Childhood 
Development. 

78

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Despite improved access for girls’ 
education over past two decades, more 
needs to be done to bridge the gender 
gap. 

Provide additional basic education for 
girls, especially in rural areas.  Train 
female teachers, improve teaching 
methods.  Provide mothers education and 
encourage involvement in school 
activities.  Facilitate procedures for 
obtaining birth certificates for children 
not registered at birth. 

From 1999 to 2003, the net enrollment 
ratio (NER) in primary education rose 
from 91 percent to 95 percent for 
girls, and from 95 percent to 98 
percent for boys. In preparatory 
education, the NER rose from 73 
percent to 79 percent for girls, and 
from 75 percent to 79 percent for 
boys.  
Increased female literacy; increased 
female participation in formal 
economy. 

Early Childhood Development report 
completed. $40 million loan 
programmed for FYT05. 

AAA: Gender Assessment. 

Netherlands; 
Italy; UNICEF; 
USAID 

Rising female enrollment in all levels 
of education. Nation-wide, 
female/male ratios in first three levels 
range from 0.82 to 0.88. 

Gender Assessment carried out. 
Gender component of Social Fund III 
supports increased female 
participation.  

79

 
 
 
Health 
Free public health services available in 
principle, but poor quality of services, 
especially in poor rural and urban areas 
render them ineffective. 

Health delivery systems at all levels 
inefficient in operations and 
maldistribution of physical and human 
resources, leading to duplication, 
wastage and inequity. 

Public health services supply driven and 
fragmented through proliferation of 
many vertical & disease specific 
interventions. 

Social health insurance coverage limited 
to formal sectors, students and infants, 
leaving most women and families in 
informal sector without effective 
insurance protection. 

Support expansion of family medicine 
practice to establish quality standards and 
accreditation mechanisms, and provide an 
integrated primary care service 
responsive to needs of whole family, with 
greater emphasis on prevention and 
community participation. 
Rationalize investments in health 
infrastructure and human resources 
through health service standards, 
preparation of government Health 
Masterplans and GIS mapping to identify 
needs, gaps and duplication in service 
delivery. 
Strengthen integration of public health 
programs through improved disease 
surveillance system and greater 
governorate and district capacity to 
monitor and identify areas of need. 
Phased expansion of social insurance 
coverage for basic primary health care 
services by governorates, and 
institutional capacity building of 
insurance functions at governorate levels.  
Undertake actuarial analysis to quantify 
financing implications of expanding 
social health insurance. 
Preparation and implementation of 
governorate Master Plans in new target 
sites (Upper Egypt).  Increase number of 
accredited family medicine practitioners 
to meet needs identified in Master Plans. 

Implementation of an integrated 
national information system to support 
the communicable disease 
surveillance system. 

New: Health Sector II Project. 

USAID; EU; 
SFD; (Multi-
donor Support); 
Kuwait; Spain; 
UNICEF; UNDP; 
Denmark 

Expansion of community development 
programs in “hot spot” villages in 
Egypt with very high fertility rates 
and high Schistosomiasis infection 
rates. 

Ongoing: Schistosomiasis Control 
Project, and Population Project. 

EU 

Expansion of Family Health Fund in 
selected governorates to finance 
primary care social insurance 
program, and enrollment of uninsured 
population in targeted governorates. 
Ongoing: Population Project and 
Social Fund Project (health 
component). 

Ongoing: Health Sector I Project. 

UNICEF; WHO 

New: Health Sector II Project. 

EU; USAID 

AAA: Health Care Financing Study 
and Workshop. 

80

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disease surveillance system was 
strengthened with support of Health 
Sector Reform Project. 

Community development activities 
under Population Project led to 
increased demand for family 
planning services. 

Schistosomiaisis infection rates were 
dramatically reduced. 

New Family Health model in three 
pilot governorates expanded service 
delivery, but financing mechanism 
(Family Health Fund) proved not 
sustainable. 

Schistosomiasis Control project 
closed early in CAS period. 
Implementation Completion Report 
rating was satisfactory. 

Closing date of Population Project 
was extended.  Progress achieved in 
raising public awareness and 
targeting vulnerable and hard-to-
reach population groups. 

Health Sector Reform and Financing 
Review carried out in FY02-03 
concluded that HSR project 
improved family health service 
delivery but failed to develop a 
sustainable financing model. 

By end-03, only 7 percent of 1998 
Health Sector Reform Project was 
disbursed. Bank and GOE agreed to 
restructure the project and revise its 
objectives in early 2004.   

Health Sector Reform II postponed 
to FY 06.  

81

 
 
 
 
 
Diagnosis 
Poverty Analysis & Social 
Safety Nets 

Limited updated information on the 
magnitude and nature of poverty 
makes it difficult to develop pro-poor 
policies and strategies. 
Need for better understanding of 
distributional impact of public 
expenditures. 
Need to improve social safety net 
components in terms of coverage, 
efficiency and effectiveness, based on 
recommendations of Bank TF report 
submitted to government. 

Strategy/Action 

Program 
Indicators/Benchmarks 

Bank Group Instruments 

Other Donor 
Activities 

Government to complete Household 
Survey and make results available.  
Government to develop revised 
Poverty Strategy. 
Beneficiary analysis of public 
expenditures. 

Government to take steps to improve 
food subsidies, cash transfers, Social 
Fund and/or social insurance. 

Government to update poverty figures and 
establish poverty line.  Complete Poverty 
Assessment. 

AAA: Poverty Assessment. 

UNDP; UK; Italy; 
USAID; 

WFP; 
Netherlands; 
Denmark 

USAID 

Complete Public Expenditure Review 
(PER). 

AAA: Public Expenditure Review 
(PER) and WBI Workshop. 

AAA: Bank report on Safety Nets 
submitted to government.  
PER. 

Safety Nets report submitted in ’01. 
Crucial dialogue initiated by Poverty 
Assessment. As yet no PER or WBI 
Workshop. 

Government addresses safety net issue in 
poverty strategy. 
Incorporate safety net beneficiary 
assessment in PER. 
Poverty Assessment carried out, report 
issued June ’02, giving household- & 
region-specific poverty lines 
approximating $2 PPP/day. Poverty ratio 
estimated to have dropped from 19.4 
percent in’95-’96 to 16.7 percent in ’99-
’00. Possible subsequent increase given 
weaker economy. Fiscal pressures have 
forestalled new departures vis-à-vis 
poverty reduction. 
Poverty Assessment analyzes safety nets 
and finds food subsidies inefficient since 
nonpoor derive greatest benefit. 
Joint Gov’t-Bank poverty strategy report 
expected by mid-’04. 
Government has not agreed to conduct 
PER. 

82

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rural Development 
63 percent of the poor and 74 percent 
of the ultrapoor in Egypt live in rural 
areas.  Increasing the productivity of 
agriculture essential for increasing 
rural incomes. 

Improved water availability, reduced 
soil salinity and water logging, better 
rural services for the poor. 

Reduced soil salinity and water logging.  
Increased agricultural production in poor 
rural areas. 

USAID; KfW 
Netherlands; 
Japan 

Ongoing: Matruh Natural Resources 
Management Project includes rain 
harvesting techniques, water shed 
management. 
New: Natural Resource Management 
Project II; Rural Water/Sanitation 
Project. 
Second Matruh Resource 
Management loan was approved 3.03 
for $12.4 m. (75 percent below 2001 
program, largely compensated by $18 
million co-financing from IFAD and 
GEF). Picking up water management 
activities from Matruh I, it stresses 
capacity building and off-farm 
productive pursuits. 
Rural Water/Sanitation has been 
incorporated in Integrated Irrigation 
Management project scheduled for 
FY05. 

III.  Interventions With Major Indirect Poverty Reduction Impact 

Higher Education & Skills 
Development 
Graduates of secondary and higher 
education lack market-relevant skills.  
Need for strengthening skills in 
managerial entrepreneurial and 
technical skills in a viable manner. 

Better align curricula and assessment 
with the skills needs of employers and 
further learning.  Strengthen education 
management information system and 
introduce accountability based on 
student outcomes.  Strengthen financial 
& administrative autonomy of higher 
education institutions and their

Increased employer satisfaction with 
graduates as measured by tracer studies.  
Policy decision-making based on 
performance indicators and objective 
criteria.  50 percent of higher education 
budget will be allocated to higher 
education institutions as block grant. 

Higher Education Project; Skills 
Development Project. 

EU; ILO; USAID; 
Germany 

83

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government is asking Parliament to create 
a National Quality Assurance & 
Accreditation Agency (NQAAA), 
independent of education ministries. Some 
university departments have initiated self-
evaluation. Competitive funding for 
innovations in higher education, and 
design of block grant funding system, are 
well underway.  

Higher Education Enhancement 
Project, effective July ’02, is 
providing technical assistance 
towards  these objectives. 
Skills Development Project loan not 
yet effective at end-03. 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Action 

Water, Irrigation, Drainage 
Improvement 

Per capita availability of water in Egypt is 
low (less than 1,000 cu.m. per capita per 
year).  Improving productivity of scarce 
water resources a key issue.  In addition, 
cooperation with Nile riparian countries 
is critical to assure long-term cooperative 
management of the Nile. 

Government plans to invest in water 
pumping stations, irrigation 
improvement and drainage (I&D) to 
improve productivity of water use.  
Active involvement in the Nile Basin 
Initiative (NBI) for “win-win” activities 
in the Nile.  Institutional and 
management improvements, including 
water user participation and cost sharing 
programs. 

Sub-surface drainage problem a national 
priority.  Strategy for reuse of drainage 
water under implementation. 

Deteriorating water quality.  Continuing 
problem of salinity, pollution and rural 
sanitation. 

Program 
Indicators/Benchmarks 

Agriculture output per unit of water.  
Conveyance efficiency, reduced soil 
salinity.  Identification of “win-win” 
activities on the Nile Basin Initiative.  
Improved management of reuse.  
Recovery of O&M and capital cost as 
proportion of actual costs. 

Bank Group Instruments 

Ongoing: IIPs, NDP, Pumping 
Stations, and NDP II Projects. 
New: Irrigation/Drainage 
Improvement Project.  Private Sector 
role in Water Management (IFC). 
AAA: Drainage & Wastewater Reuse; 
NBI; Irrigation Improvement Sector 
Review. 

Other Donor 
Activities 

KfW; 
Netherlands; 
Japan; USAID; 
UNDP; CIDA; 
FAO; Kuwait 
Fund; Abu Dhabi 
Fund 

Monitoring system of water quality 
operational. 

New: Rural Water & Sanitation 
Project. 

Gross output now measured at 
$0.20/cubic meter. Management of 
tertiary canals expected to improve 
with Government handover to water 
users’ associations (WUAs), 
scheduled for mid-04.  

Integrated Irrigation Improvement 
Project (IIIP) programmed for FY05. 
IFC investments during CAS period 
did not include water management. 
Drainage & Wastewater Reuse and 
Irrigation Sector Review not carried 
out. Egypt has subscribed to Nile 
Basin Initiative.  
Rural Water & Sanitation now 
integrated with IIIP. 

KfW; 
Netherlands; 
CIDA; USAID 

84

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment 
Costs of environmental degradation 
considerable but need to be better 
quantified for policy decision-making. 

Linkages between energy and 
environment poorly understood in 
electricity, petroleum and transport 
sectors. 
Private sector and especially SMEs would 
be particularly affected by 
negative/positive implications of 
complying with strict environmental 
standards on exports/imports as a result of 
Egypt’s Association Agreement with EU. 
Poor environmental management at local 
level. 

Support policy dialogue on environment 
through systematic economic 
assessments of Egypt’s environment 
issues. 

Estimation of the cost of 
environmental degradation as percent 
of GDP. 

Number of staff trained on 
environmental management in local 
administration. 

CIDA; Denmark; 
Netherlands; 
Germany; Italy; 
Japan; UNDP; 
UK; USAID 

Enable Egypt to identify and implement 
local environment management projects 
which bring global benefits. 

Sector strategies developed for 
energy, addressing links to global 
environment concerns. 

Non-lending: METAP Study on cost 
of environmental degradation. 

Switzerland, 
Norway 

Support private sector in reducing risks 
and exposures to environmental 
regulations. 

Percentage change in imports/ exports 
due to changes in environmental 
regulations. 

Non-lending: TF Study on energy-
environment review.  GEF work on 
wind, solar/ thermal energy and 
biodiversity issues. 

Improve access to environmental 
information and help promote better 
environmental management. 

Non-lending: METAP Country 
Assessment of impact of 
environmental regulations on trade 
and competitiveness.  

Non-lending: DGF for environmental 
training at the local level. 

85

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Projects designed with support from 
the Global Environment Facility 
(GEF) and the Clean Development 
Mechanism (CDM). 

Diagnosis 

Governance 

Absence of transparency and 
ineffectiveness by government officials 
increases cost of business.  Also tax 
incentives tend to offset each other with 
little incremental benefit, but room for 
petty corruption. 
Commercial legal system too slow and 
cumbersome in resolving commercial 
legal disputes. 

With Egypt’s increasing exposure to 
globalization and its need to tap domestic 
and international capital markets, 
corporate governance standards will need 
to improve to give investors the protection 

Strategy/Action 

Need for improvements in 
administration and tax code. 

Increase number of judges and improve 
their remuneration. 

Egypt first country to undertake an 
assisted self-assessment. 

Program 
Indicators/Benchmarks 

Set up easily monitorable performance 
standards in all major revenue 
collection functions, starting with duty 
drawback and sales tax rebates for 
exports.  Abolish most tax incentives. 

“Clearance rate” for commercial 
dispute resolution ( percent of filed 
cases actually resolved) to increase 
from about 40 percent at present to 50 
percent by 2005. 
Completion of Corporate Governance 
Assessment. 

AAA: Governance Issues Report. 

Trust Fund studies carried out: 
Energy-Environment Review, Clean 
Development Mechanism. 
GEF projects under preparation on 
wind, solar/ thermal energy and 
biodiversity issues. 
GEF-funded analysis of bio-diversity 
issues as component of Matruh II. 
METAP Country Assessment included 
national EA system. 
Norwegian Trust Fund financed 
environmental training. 

Bank Group Instruments 

Other Donor 
Activities 

IMF; USAID; 
UNDP; Spain 

AAA: Task Force Report on Business 
Environment (completed). 

USAID; CIDA 

AAA: Corporate Governance 
Assessment.  Seminar to disseminate 
findings. 

USAID 

86

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment and seminar not carried 
out. 

No significant reforms introduced in 
tax administration practices. Partial 
tax reform bill scheduled for 
submission to ’04 session of 
Parliament.  
No measured change in “clearance 
rate.”  
Corporate Governance Assessment not 
carried out, nor was Governance 
Issues Report prepared. 

87

 
 
 
Annex 3: Private Sector Development Strategy 

Introduction 
Egypt needs higher economic growth in order to alleviate poverty, unemployment and 
fiscal challenges. Such growth can only be sustainable if it comes about as a result of rising 
private investment.  The strategic challenge for the Government of Egypt (GOE) is to facilitate an 
increase in private investment through improving the business climate and through making 
complementary public investments.  The present Government is cognizant of this need and has 
announced measures as well as intentions to improve the investment climate through reforms in 
finance, trade, taxation, and regulatory policy.  It has also begun to consider ways to increase and 
improve public infrastructure (in electricity, roads, telecommunications, ports, and education), in 
part through new public investments and in part through facilitating private investment in relevant 
areas.     
World Bank Group activity in last CAS period 
During FY2001-05, IBRD activity in the area of private sector development consisted 
primarily of a loan in the amount of $350 million to help improve airport facilities in Cairo and 
Sharm El-Sheikh (the Airport Development Project) and analytical and advisory activities 
including a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), an Investment Climate Assessment 
(ICA) and a workshop on private participation in infrastructure.  
IFC has had an active pipeline in Egypt, with equity and loan investments in a number of 
sectors including manufacturing, financial markets, gas production, and infrastructure.  IFC has 
committed a total of fifteen new investments since the last CAS in the following business lines: 
phyto-pharmaceuticals & health products, organic textiles & foodstuffs; dairying, fruit juice 
production and supermarket retailing and construction materials; sanitary ware & ceramic tiles; 
automotive castings, notably brake calipers; acrylic fiber; housing finance; insurance and leasing.  
IFC was also involved in the first seaport operated by the private sector with container, bulk and 
general cargo terminals.  Execution of existing commitments has proceeded apace. On the 
technical assistance front, IFC co-financed a North Africa Enterprise Development Facility 
(NAED) which has been superseded by IFC’s Private Enterprise Partnership for the Middle East 
and North Africa (PEP-MENA).  The focus of this technical assistance in Egypt has been on 
access to finance, access to business services and support for improvements to the business 
enabling environment. 
Egypt has placed significant emphasis on attracting foreign investment in order to create 
new employment opportunities, increase exports and encourage technology transfer.  Recently, 
the General Authority for Investment and Free Zones (GAFI) was revamped and given a direct 
reporting relationship with the newly created Ministry of Investment. GAFI’s new management 
has requested MIGA to design a technical assistance proposal to provide capacity building 
services to the institution with a view to improving its ability to bring foreign investment into the 
country.  This work is currently underway.  The first element of the technical assistance proposal 
will be the updating of a previous assessment made by MIGA (in 2003).   
MIGA provided its first political risk insurance guarantee in Egypt to a Spanish investor 
in FY04. The project was in the infrastructure sector for a management contract awarded by the 
Cairo Governorate for the management of solid waste in Cairo.  

88

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 

• 

• 

• 

Vision for the future 
There are five inter-linked themes in Egypt's vision for the private sector: 
Improving the business environment. Promoting a supportive environment and 
eliminating unnecessary constraints for private sector development, enabling it to 
meet international standards of cost and quality.  
Integration in the global and regional economies. Ensuring full participation in 
global and regional markets while mitigating transitional social costs of the 
integration. 
• Privatization. Reducing the role of state owned enterprises in the manufacture and 
distribution of private goods and services. 
Strengthening partnership between private and public sectors. Redefining how the 
public and private sector work together and reorienting the public sector towards 
more efficient provision of public goods. 
Supporting development of Small and Medium Enterprises. Creating an environment 
that nurtures Small and Medium Enterprises (SME)  through better access to markets, 
resources and infrastructure. 
Overlaying these themes is the need to: (a) reform the financial sector, and (b) improve 
infrastructure services.  
Private Sector Development Priorities 
Improving the business environment. The Egypt Investment Climate Assessment has 
identified a wide range of constraints to business development in Egypt, including significant red-
tape and administrative barriers, access to credit and access to land issues.  
Private firms often indicate the quality of tax and customs administration as a primary 
constraint. These systems operate in a way that imposes uncertainty, delays and excess costs on 
Egyptian businesses, particularly SMEs. Officials continue to exercise considerable discretion in 
the application of tax and trade-related regulations, raising compliance costs and evasion. There 
may be scope for streamlining tax incentives for new investments to make them more effective. 
The commercial legal system is also regarded as too slow, expensive and cumbersome in 
resolving commercial legal disputes and therefore is not heavily relied on by businesses. This 
limits the development of impersonal and complex contracting and raises the cost of business 
transactions.  
Access to resources is another major constraint to growth of private firms. The financial 
system is characterized by a low level of competition, relatively high intermediation costs and a 
low level of innovation. This set-up has limited the access to credit for new firms and in particular 
emerging SMEs. Also, while education is plentiful, skills are not.  Human resources with 
appropriate vocational and technical training are central to meeting the demands of the private 
sector in a more competitive economy. 
Insufficient provision and low quality of infrastructure services impose excess costs on 
Egyptian firms, both exporters and non-exporters, limiting their competitiveness and discouraging 
investment. Port services are slow and costly. Evidence also suggests that there are constraints in 
domestic transport (in part due to the limited road density), telecommunications and reliable 
electric power supply. Finally, access to land or industrial sites also presents a constraint to 
private sector activity.  
Integration into regional and global economies. To benefit from integration into 
regional and global markets, Egypt needs to: (i) improve its export performance in non-oil 
sectors; and (ii) promote technological innovation and take other steps towards developing a 

89

 
 
 
knowledge-based economy. Recently, the government has taken bold steps toward further trade 
liberalization. The average tariff has dropped from 14.6 percent to 9 percent, the number of tariff 
brackets decreased from 27 to six, and the list of products subject to tariffs has been shortened 
from 13,000 to 6,000.  However, progress with removing other barriers to integration, such as 
lack of marketing and distributing companies and absence of export credit and insurance services, 
particularly for SMEs, has been slower. Export Processing Zones (EPZs) have not lived up to 
their potential in terms of generating foreign exchange earnings, employment and attracting FDI. 
Data on the performance of the EPZs is inadequate to monitor performance, objectives are 
unclear and there are few if any requirements regarding exports for firms registering in the zone. 
Government is developing measures to further improve export competitiveness.  These 
include: further simplification of custom procedures; development of airports and seaports; 
assistance to SMEs in foreign marketing; facilitation of insurance against export risks, especially 
for SMEs; adoption of harmonized international standards and procedures to place producers on 
equal footing with international competitors; taking maximum advantage of the free trade and 
partnership agreements with EU and the Arab countries, and achieving similar agreements with 
the United States; and improving performance of the EPZ sector by facilitating exporter access to 
duty free inputs and infrastructure, tax, labor and environmental regulations in the zone. 
In an increasingly global economy, where knowledge about how to excel competitively 
and information about who excels are both more readily available, the effective creation, use and 
dissemination of knowledge and new technologies is increasingly the key to success. 
Technological innovation is quickly becoming the key factor in global competitiveness. To 
improve its knowledge economy infrastructure Egypt will need to:  
strengthen the general legal environment in field of intellectual property rights and 
develop new “cyber-laws”; 
improve the quality of telecommunications, especially internet infrastructure; 
strengthen the financial services sector by promoting the widespread use of credit cards 
and automatic payment systems; 
Privatization. The share of the public sector in GDP stands at about 30 percent in Egypt, 
which is relatively high compared to other countries. A public sector dominated economy 
typically reduces the productivity of the private sector by reducing its access to finance, raising 
the cost of finance, and increasing the average wage in the economy. To mitigate such pressures 
for the private sector, Egypt launched an ambitious privatization program in the early 1990s, 
which resulted in the transfer of about one third of SOE assets to private owners. By the end of 
the decade implementation of the program slowed down, but the new government is planning to 
revive it and to abandon a concept of a 'strategic' commodity or sector that must remain in 
government hands. While some sectors and utilities will probably remain off limits on the 
grounds that they are vital for national security, the number of such cases will be greatly reduced. 
Moreover, while such companies would remain part of the state, their management could be 
outsourced to the private sector.  
In approaching the next phase of the privatization program, it would be useful to focus on 
the following issues: 
effective "commercial" corporatization of state-owned enterprises and economic 
activities that continue to be held at both the central government and municipal levels; 
addressing investors' risk concerns through the development of financial instruments such 
as guarantees when appropriate; 
ensuring a level playing field between foreigners and local investors; 
developing a coordinated regulatory and policy regime that is consistent with the needs of 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

90

 
 
 
• 

a privately held infrastructure sector; 
providing substantial financial and other supportive resources to deal with restructuring 
and commercialization costs. 
Strengthening cooperation and partnership between the private and public sectors. The 
general agenda for private sector growth in Egypt has been clear for many years - discussion of 
ways to create an improved business environment that leads to better competitiveness, 
privatization, support for SMEs, and financial sector strengthening have occurred many times. 
Insufficient progress in implementing this agenda could be explained, in large part, by ways in 
which the public sector and private sector interact or do not interact. It is generally recognized 
there is substantial room for improvement in this relationship.  
Moving forward on this issue requires the following: 
• Strengthening accountability mechanisms for public and private sectors: The impact and 
effectiveness of government/public sector organizations can be improved through the 
introduction of such accountability and incentive mechanisms as:  performance 
evaluations for senior management, performance based budgets, and unified accounting 
rules for the treatment of SOE profits.  Corporate governance improvements in the 
private sector could also be instrumental in building a broader and deeper capital market 
that would help place corporate finance on a sounder basis. 
• Developing public-private partnerships. This can be facilitated through legislation to: 
eliminate certain unnecessary restrictions that are presently imposed on the private 
sector’s participation in infrastructure projects; set a clear and unambiguous regulatory 
framework and quality standards for such participation; and establish a system to select 
investors through transparent and competitive procedures.   
• A concerted effort to strengthen the private sector's voice through the creation of stronger 
business agencies, and a willingness on the Government side to consult. 
Supporting development of small and medium enterprises. SMEs and micro enterprises 
are a significant force in the Egyptian economy. Enterprises with less than 10 workers are 
estimated to contribute 80 percent of private sector value added and account for 75 percent of 
private sector employment. SMEs typically face complex business regulations and have little 
incentive to join the formal sector. A high level of informality means that those businesses that do 
choose to operate within the formal sector suffer from unfair competition, as their competitors 
have significantly lower operational costs.  At the same time, the revenue base for the 
Government is reduced while the informal firms suffer from rent-seeking behavior on the part of 
revenue and other government officials. 
Supporting development of the SMEs could involve the following: 
• PEP-MENA has been and will continue to be active in the area of access to finance for 
SMEs.  This effort includes work with the financial sector to improve the capacity of 
local financial institutions to service this market, and generally improving access to 
finance through strengthening of the financial sector.  
• Micro enterprises would benefit from the encouragement of micro-financial institutions 
that are managed by the private sector or NGOs. 
• Reducing and simplifying the bureaucratic red tape that overwhelms Egyptian businesses 
but particularly SMEs. 
• Strengthening marketing channels, to ensure better information and support is available. 
Reforming the banking sector.  Public dominance of the banking sector in Egypt, especially 
the banking and insurance components, imposes a burden on both the private and public sectors.  

91

 
 
 
The private sector faces relatively high costs (real lending rates are now close to 10 percent) and 
poor access to credit while government faces contingent liabilities arising from high levels of 
non-performing loans among publicly owned banks, for example.  The Government of Egypt is 
considering a number of measures to improve the performance and soundness of the banking 
sector in the long run.  Among these are: divestiture of public shares in joint venture (public-
private) commercial banks; privatization of one of the four major public commercial banks and 
restructuring of the other three; consolidation among banks to create more efficient, larger 
entities; and strengthening prudential regulations and supervisory procedures.   
Improving quality of the infrastructure services. More and better infrastructure is 
needed in Egypt to help the private sector become more competitive.  While certain infrastructure 
services are provided at subsidized prices (e.g. power and water), inefficient or inadequate 
provision of other services (e.g., transportation) increase costs for the private sector.  In most 
cases, pricing and management reforms are called for while, in some cases, additional public 
investments are also needed.  In addition, institutional arrangements for infrastructure financing 
need to be addressed in many infrastructure sub-sectors in order to improve their overall 
efficiency. For example, while the technical performance of the generation, transmission and 
distribution systems is adequate, consumers receive a reliable service at a low price, and the 
power sector in Egypt has, over the last few years, experienced notable achievements, these 
arrangements have not been adequate to establish financial discipline and sound commercial 
practices in the power sector. The financial position of the sector is weak; there are subsidies in 
electricity tariffs and large arrears in the payment of electricity bills, mainly by several major 
customers in the public sector.  
Government plans 
to address 
the 
infrastructure problem by undertaking some 
infrastructure investments on its own account, by focusing on critical pricing and management 
reforms where possible and by facilitating the involvement of the private sector in other 
infrastructure services.   With respect to the latter, priority concerns include: 
• Removal of unjustified restrictions on private sector participation in infrastructure 
projects and creation of a level playing field between public and private sector players; 
Improvement of the regulatory framework for the private sector participation; 
• Review of the BOOT regulations for infrastructure; and  
• Establishing tariff structures and targeted subsidy systems compatible with opening of the 
sector to competition.  
World Bank Group Assistance Strategy 
Overview 
Egypt enjoys strong donor support from a wide variety of institutions including USAID, 
the EU, UNDP, AfDB, Kuwait Fund, KfW and the Islamic Development Bank. In broad terms 
the WBG strategy is to work in partnership with other donors to provide the following support: 
The IBRD will (i) facilitate knowledge sharing on the implementation aspects of the 
reform agenda and (ii) provide financial resources to fund some of the implementation and 
restructuring costs arising from the need to restructure the financial sector. One area where the 
Bank can help is in facilitating the public/private partnership dialogue. In parallel, specific 
technical assistance can be provided in areas that will accelerate change, such as privatization and 
private participation in infrastructure (PPI).  To deliver on this agenda the Bank will work closely 
with the Government and other members of the donor community to develop innovative "low 
cost" financing packages.   
IFC will focus on: (i) supporting PPI initiatives with either guarantee, capital or advisory 
services as the case may require, (ii) assisting the development of new financial sector institutions 

• 

92

 
 
 
and instruments for the private sector, (iii) catalyzing new private sector investment in 
manufacturing, petrochemicals, oil and gas, as well as the social sectors, and (iv) supporting SME 
initiatives. MIGA will remain available to provide guarantee instruments to facilitate new private 
sector investment, if required. 
Assistance Proposals 
This section provides a description of assistance proposals in the five major areas of  the 
PSD agenda in Egypt (improving business environment, integration in the global and regional 
economies, privatization, strengthening cooperation and partnership between private and public 
sectors, supporting development of small and medium enterprises), as well as two cross-cutting 
themes (financial sector reform and infrastructure services). In addition, it highlights areas of 
potential comparative advantage for the IBRD and IFC.  
Improving business environment. The Egypt ICA has identified a wide range of 
constraints to business development, including access to land and finance and significant red-tape 
and administrative barriers. Follow-up to the ICA could include a series of policy notes to move 
the ICA recommendations to the implementation stage. These would focus on: (i) how to start the 
reform of the industrial land market, (ii) the steps needed to simplify business entry, and (iii) how 
to reform some administrations in their dealings with businesses (e.g. inspections).  As the 
authorities embark on some of the reforms recommended in the ICA, further work could be done 
to help establish an impact evaluation framework to measure the effectiveness of the reforms in 
achieving their goals. These follow-up activities will be closely coordinated with other donors’ 
support, in particular the IFC’s new technical assistance facility for the region (PEP-MENA).  
The five pillars of PEP-MENA are technical assistance for the financial sector, support to SMEs, 
assistance for improvement of the business enabling environment, support to development of 
public-private partnerships (particularly for infrastructure) and assistance in privatizing or 
restructuring state-owned enterprises. 
Integration in the global and regional economies. The IBRD will assist Egypt in 
development of its sea- and airports, as well as in streamlining and rationalizing customs 
procedures. IFC plans to facilitate and encourage cross border investments into Egypt and to 
support expansion of the internationally competitive Egyptian companies into new markets.  
MIGA stands ready as well to support foreign investment by Egyptian companies through the 
provision of guarantees against non-commercial risks. MIGA is one of the few agencies available 
to provide this support to Egyptian companies, and has already done so in the past (Orascom for a 
$90 million investment in Pakistan). MIGA also plans to include specific sectors of the Egyptian 
economy in a MENA Enterprise Benchmarking Program, planned for FY06, which would 
provide specific data on the competitiveness of specific Egyptian industries. FIAS will continue 
to support efforts to improve the climate for foreign investors. 
Privatization. WBG assistance in this area could involve: (a) technical assistance to 
improve performance of public enterprises through the development of monitoring and 
management mechanisms, and corporatization; and (b) pilot turn-around funds to encourage 
privatization of selected public enterprises. In the longer term, depending on the speed of the 
privatization program, the IBRD could provide financial resources to facilitate the program. 
Privatization advisory services can be provided by the IFC in cases where the Government would 
prefer to give IFC a mandate for a particular transaction.  MIGA can also provide assistance in 
two different areas.  First, MIGA’s online services can allow the privatization agency and sectoral 
ministries to more widely disseminate information on pending privatizations to potential investors 
and lenders, deepening the potential investor pool. Second, MIGA guarantees can help alter the 
risk perception of investors and realize the projects by making them more attractive, particularly 
as MIGA can cover sovereign and sub-sovereign risk. 
Strengthening cooperation and partnership between private and public sectors.  The 

93

 
 
 
WBG will use its experience to facilitate the broad public-private sector dialogue in Egypt. In 
recent years the Bank Group has supported a variety of approaches (consultative forums, 
regulatory complaint offices, and strengthening professional associations) designed to foster 
ongoing public-private dialogue on the objectives, scope and details of reforms. Such activities 
have included the creation of Private Sector Foundations in Senegal, Ghana and elsewhere, 
Competitiveness Review Commissions (Cote d'Ivoire and Cameroon) and simpler networking 
activities which have helped to harmonize the activities of diverse PSD groups and focus the 
agenda for public-private debate. To enhance the government - private sector dialogue the WBG 
can support a series of workshops and strengthening institutional and organizational capacity 
along these lines. A specific component of this work could be to develop conflict resolution 
mechanisms as well as to upgrade the capacity and support systems of local professional 
associations and chambers of commerce. 
Supporting development of small and medium Enterprises. The Bank Group can 
provide assistance in three dimensions of SME development: (a) facilitating access to resources, 
especially finance; (b) providing business development assistance; and (c) helping to build 
linkages between Egyptian and foreign SMEs. The nature of this assistance, in turn, varies for 
different categories of SMEs. Egyptian SMEs represent very heterogeneous sectors that consist of 
a large variety of enterprises in terms of the number of employees, amount of assets, technical 
competencies, know-how and dynamism,  and range from informal to formal, self-employment to  
enterprises hiring 200 or more workers, artisanal products to high technology products, or 
subsistence enterprises to those that are more competitive and dynamic. 
Specific initiatives could include: 
• Focused lending opportunities to facilitate access to finance (e.g., IFC investments in  
non-bank financing instruments, such as leasing and factoring as well as IBRD assistance 
to develop modem export finance mechanisms, including guarantees etc.).The focus 
would be on sustainability. In addition, financial intermediaries will be targeted for 
assistance. Opportunities to issue credit lines for direct SME lending, especially in the 
leasing industry will be examined. 
• As part of the WBG assistance, the business partnership group could help to spur the 
development of new partnership activities between selected European and Egyptian 
Chambers of Commerce that would: transfer expertise on best practices of Chamber 
services for SMEs, encourage linkages amongst European and Egyptian SMEs, and 
provide SME skills development in joint ventures and e-commerce. 
• A particular focus of MIGA’s efforts in Egypt will be to support investments in the 
agribusiness, manufacturing and services sectors, which tend to be dominated by SMEs.  
MIGA will also market its Small Investors’ Program, which provides streamlined 
coverage to SMEs, throughout the MENA region. 
Financial sector reform. The IBRD is planning two operations in Egypt over the CAS 
period. The Financial Sector Restructuring Loan will assist the government in preparing 
privatization of one major public bank and restructuring of others, divestiture of public shares in 
joint venture (public-private) commercial banks, and consolidation of banking sector to create 
more efficient, larger private financial institutions. The Mortgage Finance Project, which will 
focus on establishment of a market-based liquidity facility for the mortgage market, strengthening 
the regulatory framework for mortgage lending, and modernization of the property rights 
registration system. In addition, the IBRD may provide assistance in development of the private 
pension funds.  
IFC would follow a three-pronged approach in the financial sector: creating or 
strengthening existing institutions, providing medium to long-term funding, and deepening the 
financial sector by developing the bond markets and introducing new financial instruments. IFC's 

94

 
 
 
institution building role will build on the successful experience of setting up joint ventures 
between local financial institutions and international companies that are industry leaders, to 
promote the transfer of expertise and best practice. IFC expects to be active in setting up 
institutions to engage in activities that are as yet underdeveloped, including mortgage finance 
(such as the recent investment in the Egyptian Housing Finance Company), underwriting and 
trading of bonds, and factoring. Developing mortgage finance will first entail the growth of a 
primary market, where existing or new institutions provide mortgages. A second stage will be the 
development of a secondary mortgage market, which will need the introduction of securitization 
and setting up secondary mortgage institutions. 
Extending financing to intermediaries engaged in the SME sector, such as leasing 
companies, will be the focus of particular attention. Developing the corporate bond market, and 
fixed income markets more generally, is an important component of general financial sector 
development. An active, well functioning primary market provides an important corporate 
finance tool that can reduce interest rate, foreign currency and refunding risk. Egypt has a 
somewhat active primary corporate bond market (although activity has dropped off sharply 
recently) with established procedures, but an illiquid secondary market. IFC could assist GOE in 
setting up a new institution(s) or strengthening existing ones that underwrite and trade debt 
instruments. This activity would also support development of an active government securities 
market, which provides benchmark interest rates across the maturity spectrum, among other 
financial sector benefits. 
Improving infrastructure services. Areas for IBRD and IFC activity include ports and 
airports, power, water and wastewater. The Bank Group could support investments in these areas 
through technical and financial assistance. The FY06-09 lending program contains projects to 
help increase electricity generation (the El Tebbin Power Project) and improve transportation of 
tradable goods (the Ports Sector Development Project). Analytic work is also envisaged in the 
area of transport sector development, especially with respect to the railways system.  
The water and sanitation sector has benefited from substantial donor funding over the 
past two decades. With donor funding expected to decline, policy advice will focus on attracting 
private sector participation in the provision of water and sanitation services. Low water tariffs are 
a major impediment to private sector participation. Reforms of the regulatory framework are 
expected to decentralize decision-making and grant more autonomy to municipal water and 
sanitation authorities in setting tariffs. The WBG can advise municipal authorities on PSP options 
and IFC could provide direct financing to the projects. 
It is expected that there will continue to be demand for IFC financing in power 
generation. IFC's strategy will be to explore the scope for private participation in the distribution 
sub-sector and in developing alternative sources for generation such as wind power. In this sector, 
Egyptian authorities are dealing simultaneously with the cornerstone elements of sector reform, 
namely sector structure, ownership policy and regulation, and pricing issues. Until recently, 
electricity supply was under monopoly control of the Egyptian Electricity Authority (EEA), but 
this has changed and the private sector is now authorized to build, own, operate and transfer 
BOOT power generation plants. IFC has two investments in the power sector and could consider 
others. In the renewable energy area work to develop self sustaining markets can also be pursued. 
Through PSAS, IFC can provide advisory services to facilitate private transactions. In the power 
sector, reforms need to be aimed at attracting private sector participation and financing of the 
large amount of investment needed in generation, transmission and distribution to cater for load 
growth. 
MIGA has recently issued a guarantee in the provision of solid waste services in Cairo, 
and expects that foreign investors interested in infrastructure opportunities, e.g. in privatizations 
and PPPs, will find considerable interest in MIGA guarantees – particularly against the breach of 
government (including sub-sovereign) obligations.  The extent of MIGA support will, however, 

95

 
 
 
depend on meaningful reform of the state sector and the opening of markets for foreign 
investment. 

96

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4: World Bank Institute Strategy 

To provide sustained support to the CAS implementation in the area of capacity building, 
WBI has articulated a strategy involving close alignment with the CAS in selective areas and the 
rolling of 
in-country multi-year 
targeted programs, complementary 
to country-focused 
operational interventions. The strategy builds on results of a baseline evaluation of WBI activities 
in FY03 and on a strong partnership between WBI and country operations thanks to the 
decentralization of a WBI senior staff in the Cairo Office. 
During the first years of the CAS, WBI activities, building on ongoing efforts launched in 
FY05, will focus primarily on two CAS pillars in response to GoE request to support reform 
implementation in these areas: (i) facilitating private sector development; and (ii) enhancing the 
provision of selected public goods. With respect to the third pillar,  WBI could become more 
engaged during the CAS period once focus shifts from formulation to implementation. Activities 
will be specifically targeted at Egyptian high-level officials to improve dialogue/discuss options 
on key policy reforms and support implementation. The targeting of senior officials with decision 
making capabilities has proven effective over the past two years in moving reform agendas. A 
second set of activities targeted to the “middle tier” and stakeholders will be developed to support 
reform implementation and broaden support. The in-country activities will be complemented by 
regional and global WBI activities.  
The indicative WBI program is shown in the results matrix (See Annex 1). The timing of 
specific activities will be closely linked to progress on the operations side and may be revisited as 
necessary to ensure a synchronized approach. By end FY06, a new baseline evaluation covering 
FY03-06 will be conducted to assess impact of current WBI approach in Egypt. Activities for 
FY07 and 08 will be reviewed at mid-year drawing on evaluation of the program and revised as 
necessary to best support the evolution of the CAS. 
In support of the objective of facilitating private sector development, WBI will focus on 
three areas. A Financial Sector and Capacity Enhancement Program will be conducted as a direct 
support to GoE ongoing financial reform and complementary to the preparation of the Financial 
Sector Restructuring Loan and the Mortgage Development Project. An Investment Climate 
Assessment Rapid Results Approach Initiative will be launched to jumpstart the implementation 
of reforms identified in the Investment Climate Assessment and a Trade Facilitation Program will 
also be initiated.  
To support the second CAS pillar, WBI will focus on Public-Private Partnerships and 
Infrastructure Finance, Local Governance Management, and a multi-year Education Enhancement 
Program to improve the quality of education and decentralization. For greater impact, a training 
of trainers component supporting the capacity of local training institutes will be incorporated. 
Other priority programs include a Social Protection Program covering issues related to social 
safety nets, labor market, pension reform and a Water Resource Management Initiative.  
WBI will also continue its support through a poverty impact assessment program 
currently being undertaken with other donors with a view to train the Social Fund to undertake 
impact assessment. 

97

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Annex 5: Macroeconomic Simulations 

The short-term impact of shocks is simulated below using the quantitative framework 
proposed by Devarajan and Go21 (2002).  
Following this framework, we firstly estimate the short-run growth effects of 
macroeconomic shocks and policies using a trivariate VAR model (with Egypt GDP growth, 
OECD GDP growth, and Egypt government consumption as a share of GDP as its variables) and 
assuming that relative prices and the composition of output are unchanged.  
Secondly, we use  the “1-2-3 Model,” a static, multi-sector, general-equilibrium model of 
a small open economy, to capture the effects of macroeconomic policies and shocks on relative 
prices and the composition of output, assuming that the aggregate output is fixed at the levels 
implied by the VAR simulations. The 1-2-3 Model divides the economy into two sectors: exports 
(E) and domestic goods (D). There is one other good in the economy, imports (M). The model 
assumes that a constant elasticity of transformation function links outputs of E and D, and 
consumers have a constant elasticity of substitution utility function in D and M. 
We simulate two deviations from the baseline macroeconomic scenario for the period 
2004-2007 – “External Shock” and “Policy Shock”.  
For the “External shock” scenario we assume that the growth rate of the OECD will fall 
by 2 percentage points in 2005 compared to its implied baseline level, and will remain 1 
percentage point below such level in 2006. We assume that this event will represent an aggregate 
demand shock rather than terms of trade shock for Egypt. We use the investment closure of the 
model, assuming that the primary response of the economic agents to the shock will be 
adjustment in the investment rates.  We also assume that the government will manage to meet the 
inflation targets.  
For the “Policy shock” scenario we assume that the government consumption’s share in 
GDP will increase by 10 percent in 2005. VAR simulations show that even short-term effect of 
increases in government consumption is likely to be adverse: in the simulations, they cause fall in 
growth rate over a three-year period. Most likely reason for this in Egyptian context is crowding-
out effects of higher fiscal deficits, which may offset the Keynesian stimulus to the economy 
from the increase in government spending (at least if a large portion of the latter was financed 
domestically). We use the investment closure of the model and assume that this policy will not 
allow the government to meet its inflation targets. 
The results of the simulations are presented in the Tables 1 and 2. 

21 For the general description of the approach, see Devarajan, S. and D. S. Go (2002). A Macroeconomic 
Framework for Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers with an application to Zambia. Africa Region Working 
Paper No. 38. For the detailed description of the model, see Devarajan, S., S. Robinson, A. Yúnez-Naude, 
R. Hinojosa-Ojeda, and J. D. Lewis. 1999. “From Stylized to Applied Models: Building Multisector CGE 
Models for Policy. North American Journal of Economics and Finance 10: 5-38. 

98

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Table 1: Simulations results for the scenario with external shock 
                            Year 
2004 
2005 
2006 

2007 

Variables   
Growth Rates 
Real GDP 
Real Consumption 
Real Gross Domestic Investment 
Export Volume 
Import Volume 
GDP deflator 
Ratios to GDP 
Gross Domestic Investment 
Fiscal Balance (excl. grants) 
Current Account Balance 

4.3 % 
2.9% 
3.7% 
4.6% 
4.5% 
7.7% 
3.7% 
5.0% 
3.0% 
-6.0% 
7.9% 
4.4% 
22.7% 5.5% 
7.5% 
9.8% 
13.4% 20.3% 11.1% 8.7% 
10.0% 5.5% 
5.5% 
5.0% 

16.5% 14.7% 15.1% 15.2% 
-6.6% 
-8.2% 
-7.4% 
-7.6% 
5.1% 
2.7% 
2.0% 
2.2% 

Table 2: Simulations results for the scenario with policy shock 

                            Year 

2004 

2005 

2006 

2007 

Variables   
Growth Rates 
Real GDP 
Real Consumption 
Real Gross Domestic Investment 
Export Volume 
Import Volume 
GDP deflator 
Ratios to GDP 
Gross Domestic Investment 
Fiscal Balance (excl. grants) 
Current Account Balance 

4.3% 
2.8% 
4.2% 
4.7% 
4.5% 
7.2% 
4.8% 
4.5% 
3.0% 
-6.4% 
8.7% 
4.3% 
22.7% 5.2% 
7.0% 
5.7% 
13.4% 20.8% 12.3% 9.2% 
10.0% 13.5% 6.6% 
4.9% 

16.5% 14.9% 15.3% 15.2% 
-6.6% 
-8.8% 
-7.8% 
-8.3% 
5.1% 
2.5% 
1.9% 
2.0% 

99

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex: A1 Egypt at a Glance 

Egypt, Arab Rep. at a glance

9/20/04

POVERTY and SOCIAL

2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
Average annual growth, 1997-03
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997-03)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment  (% of school-age population)
    Male
    Female

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1983
28.1
28.7
25.5
17.8
..
-5.4
1.4
57.2
9.3
..
..

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investment/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

1983-93

1993-03

4.2
1.7
7.8

4.6
2.6
2.3

M. East
Lower-
& North middle-
Africa
income

312
2,210
689

2,655
1,480
3,934

Egypt

68.1
1,360
92.9

Development diamond*

Life expectancy

2.0
2.9

17
42
69
33
4
97
..
97
100
93

1993
47.2
16.2
27.7
13.2
24.2
4.9
0.8
19.5
7.8
..
..

2002

3.2
1.2
-7.1

1.9
2.9

..
58
69
44
..
88
31
96
100
92

2002
87.8
18.3
18.4
13.8
18.8
0.7
0.2
34.2
3.8
30.4
135.6

0.9
1.2

..
50
69
32
11
81
10
112
113
111

2003
82.4
17.1
21.7
14.5
18.6
2.4
0.2
37.4
4.7
..
..

2003

2003-07

3.2
1.2
11.5

..
..
5.0

GNI
per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

Egypt, Arab Rep.
Lower-middle-income group

Economic ratios*

Trade

Domestic
savings

Investment

Indebtedness

Egypt, Arab Rep.
Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
   Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
   Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

1983

1993

2002

2003

Growth of investment and GDP (%)

19.6
30.0
13.2
50.4
65.0
17.2
36.4

16.7
33.1
16.7
50.2
76.6
10.2
30.7

16.5
34.8
19.1
48.7
73.7
12.5
22.8

30

20

10

0

-10

16.1
34.6
18.9
49.2
73.0
12.5
24.3

98

99

00

01

02

03

GDI

GDP

1983-93

1993-03

2002

2003

Growth of exports and imports (%)

2.6
4.3
5.3
4.3
4.2
-0.6
-5.4
-1.6

3.5
4.7
7.0
4.6
4.1
2.9
6.7
1.3

3.6
3.6
4.2
2.4
2.7
2.6
5.0
-6.0

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

4.9
1.9
3.4
3.3
2.5
2.8
-4.6
0.7

98

99

00

01

02

03

Exports

Imports

Note: 2003 data are preliminary estimates.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will 
    be incomplete.

100

 
 
 
 
101

Egypt, Arab Rep.

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1983

1993

2002

2003

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

..
8.3

11.1
9.9

2.8
2.2

3.2
6.2

..
..
..

27.8
1.5
-3.5

23.4
-2.3
-7.5

23.3
-3.1
-8.0

TRADE

1983

1993

2002

2003

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
   Cotton
   Other agriculture
   Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
   Food
   Fuel and energy
   Capital goods
Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

3,725
2,111
37
1,167
10,728
1,878
1,267
2,545
96
92
104

6,643
83
185
2,877
14,644
1,035
2,961
3,211
..
..
..

8,205
3,195
199
2,952
14,821
1,521
2,373
3,179
..
..
..

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1983

1993

2002

2003

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

6,682
10,766
-4,083
-630
3,191
-1,522
1,583
-61

11,174
14,044
-2,870
-572
5,737
2,295
2,016
-4,311

15,801
19,535
-3,734
95
4,252
614
-1,070
456

18,006
19,565
-1,559
-107
3,609
1,943
-1,397
-546

..
0.9

..
3.3

..
4.3

..
5.0

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1983

1993

2002

2003

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
    IBRD
    IDA
Total debt service
    IBRD
    IDA
Composition of net resource flows
    Official grants
    Official creditors
    Private creditors
    Foreign direct investment
    Portfolio equity
World Bank program
    Commitments
    Disbursements
    Principal repayments
    Net flows
    Interest payments
    Net transfers

16,090
723
649
961
84
6

9,218
1,357
912
1,236
304
19

30,001
542
1,280
745
100
43

30,863
539
1,339
1,007
101
46

383
724
..
490
0

883
388
..
493
0

650
-212
..
647
-212

0
-130
..
0
0

482
289
34
255
56
200

208
163
200
-37
122
-159

50
72
106
-34
38
-71

0
54
114
-59
33
-92

MNSED

9/20/04

-4

-2

0

2

4

97

98

99

00

01

02

03

Current account balance to GDP (%)

0

5,000

10,000

15,000

20,000

97

98

99

00

01

02

03

Exports

Imports

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

0

5

10

15

98

99

00

01

02

03

GDP deflator

CPI

Inflation (%)

A: 542

D: 25,655

B: 1,280

E: 2,524

Composition of 2002 debt (US$ mill.)

A - IBRD
B - IDA    
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

 
 
 
Annex: B2 Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

As of  04/12/2005 

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment 
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management 
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

2002

2003 

2004

20051/ 

18 
5.1 
22.2 
25.4 
27.8 
34.3 
7.1 

2-May
1,303
72.4

16 
5.0 
12.5 
16.1 
12.5 
16.1 
9.7 

No 
1,166 
72.9 

17 
5.1 
17.6 
1.6 
17.6 
1.6 
18.2 

No
1,219
75

13 
5.4 
15.4 
2.1 
15.4 
2.1 
15.4 

No
1,440
80

Memorandum Item 
Projects Evaluated by OED by Number 
Projects Evaluated by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 
81 
3,982.4 
24.4 
14.5 

Last Five FYs 
8 
510.9 
12.5 
12.2 

1/  2005 Portfolio Assessment is between July 1, 2004 and  March 31, 2005. 

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). 
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio. 
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP). 
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program. 
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning 
     of the year: Investment projects only. 
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, 
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year. 

102

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
West Delta Irrigation Infrastructure 
El Tebbin Power 
Mortgage Finance 
Ports Sector Development 
Subtotal 

2007 Urban/Alexandria Growth Pole 
Integrated Governorates Develop. 
Social Funds IV 
Education Enhancement II 
Pollution Abatement II 
Solar Thermal (plus GEF) 
Financial Sector Restructuring Loan  
Subtotal 

2008 Transport/Road Asset Management 
Integrated Governorates II 
Railways 
Delta Integrated. Sanitation & Sewerage Infrastr. 
Financial Sector Restructuring Loan II 
Subtotal 

2009 Power II 
Pilot Urban Water/Wastewater Infrastructure 
Population and Health 
Urban Transport SWAP 
Subtotal 

150.0
250.0
50.0
100.0
550.0

100.0
100.0
75.0
60.0
20.0
2.0
TBD
357.0

100.0
100.0
100.0
120.0
TBD
420.0

200.0
75.0
75.0
100.0
450.0

H 
H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 
H 

Total 

1,777.0

Annex: B3 Proposed IBRD Lending Program 

Fiscal 
Year 
2006 

As of 04/08/2005 

Project ID 

US$ 
(Million) 

Strategic 
Rewards 
(H/M/L)c 

Implementation 
Risks (H/M/L)c 

M 
M 
M 
M 

M 
M 
M 
L 
M 
M 
M 

M 
M 
M 
M 
M 

M 
M 
M 
M 

103

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex: B4 Summary of Non-lending Services 

Product 

Recent completions 
Rural Water and Sanitation 
Mortgage Market 
Poverty Strategy 

Underway 
Public Expend. & Fiduciary Mgt. (annually) 
Review of IWRM Strategy 
Poverty & Social Impact Analysis (annually) 
Nile Basin Initiative 
Country Environmental Analysis (TA) 
Public-Private Partnership 
Investment Climate 
Transport Sector 
Rural Development 
Railways (TA) 

Planned 
Urban Sector Strategy 
Public Expend. & Fiduciary Mgt. (annually) 
Poverty & Social Impact Analysis (annually) 
Nile Basin Initiative 
Poverty and Natural Resources 
Education Strategy 
Child Labor Prevention 
Health Sector 
Safety Net 
Public Expenditure & Fiduciary Mgt. (annually) 
Development Policy Review 
Nile Basin Initiative 
Poverty & Social Impact Analysis (annually) 

As of 03/23/2005 

Completion 
FY 

Cost 
(US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objectiveb 

2005 
2005 
2005 

2005 
2005 
2005 
2006 
2006 
2006 
2006 
2006 
2006 
2006 

2006 
2006 
2006 
2006 
2006 
2006 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 

166.3 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
96.7 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
50.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 

373.2 Government 
Knowledge generation 
148.8 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
150.0 Government 
Knowledge generation 
485.0 Government, Bank Knowledge generation 
Knowledge generation 
40.0 Government 
Knowledge generation 
90.0 Government 
210.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
25.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
200.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
50.0 Government 
Knowledge generation 

50.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
150.0 Government 
Knowledge generation 
100.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
75.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
20.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
150.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
35.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
100.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
100.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
150.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
200.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
75.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 
100.0 Bank, Government Knowledge generation 

_________________________________ 

a.  Audience = Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination. 
b.  Objective = Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving. 

104

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex: B5 Social Indicators 

MDG / Indicator 
  Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 
    Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20%  
    Population below $1 a day (%)  
    Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (%)  
    Poverty gap ratio at $1 a day (incidence x depth of poverty)  
    Poverty headcount, national (% of population)  
    Prevalence of underweight in children (under five years of age)  
  Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education 
    Net primary enrollment ratio (% of relevant age group)  
    Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant age group)  
    Proportion of pupils starting grade 1 who reach grade 5  
    Youth literacy rate (% ages 15-24)  
  Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women 
    Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)  
    Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)  
    Ratio of young literate females to males (% ages 15-24)  
    Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (%)  
  Goal 4: Reduce child mortality 
    Immunization, measles (% of children ages 12-23 months)  
    Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)  
    Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)  
  Goal 5: Improve maternal health 
    Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)  
    Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)  
  Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases 
    Contraceptive prevalence rate (% of women ages 15-49)  
    Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)  
    Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS  
    Prevalence of HIV, total (% of population aged 15-49)  
    Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)  
  Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability 
    Access to an improved water source (% of population)  
    Access to improved sanitation (% of population)  
    Access to secure tenure (% of population)  
    CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)  
    Forest area (% of total land area)  
    GDP per unit of energy use (2000 PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)  
    Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)  
  Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development 
    Aid per capita (current US$)  
    Debt service (% of exports)  
    Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)  
    Internet users (per 1,000 people)  
    Personal computers (per 1,000 people)  
    Unemployment, youth female (% of female labor force ages 15-24)  
    Unemployment, youth male (% of male labor force ages 15-24)  
    Unemployment, youth total (% of total labor force ages 15-24)  
  Other 
    Fertility rate, total (births per woman)  
    Life expectancy at birth, total (years)  
    Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above)  

1990 

1994 

1997 

2000 

2003 

.. 
4 
.. 
0.5 
.. 
10.4 

83.7 
.. 
.. 
61.3 

4 
81.3 
72 
20.5 

86 
76 
104 

36.5 
.. 

47.6 
41.8 
.. 
.. 
.. 

94 
54 
.. 
1.4 
0.1 
4.8 
.. 

103.5 
.. 
30.2 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

4 
62.8 
47.1 

.. 
2.6 
.. 
0.5 
.. 
16.8 

.. 
.. 
.. 
64.8 

.. 
.. 
76.2 
18.9 

89 
56 
71 

46.3 
.. 

47.9 
37 
.. 
.. 
43.5 

.. 
.. 
.. 
1.5 
.. 
5 
.. 

47 
.. 
42.8 
0.1 
3.4 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
50.3 

.. 
.. 
3 
.. 
22.9 
10.7 

90.9 
98 
.. 
73.2 

2 
91.6 
84.7 
18.9 

92 
.. 
.. 

56.4 
.. 

54.5 
33.8 
.. 
.. 
10.8 

.. 
.. 
.. 
1.8 
.. 
4.9 
.. 

32.9 
.. 
58.3 
1 
7.5 
42.8 
15.8 
23.1 

3.5 
66.3 
55.6 

8.6 
3.1 
.. 
0.5 
16.7 
4 

89.9 
100 
98.9 
.. 

2 
93.4 
.. 
19 

98 
40 
49 

60.9 
84 

56.1 
30.8 
.. 
0.1 
44.6 

.. 
.. 
.. 
2.2 
0.1 
4.9 
.. 

.. 
.. 
3 
.. 
.. 
8.6 

.. 
91 
.. 
.. 

2 
.. 
.. 
20.3 

98 
33 
39 

69 
.. 

60 
28.1 
.. 
0.1 
56.2 

98 
68 
.. 
.. 
.. 
4.6 
9.7 

20.8 
.. 
107.8 
7.1 
12.6 
36.7 
13.8 
20.4 

.. 
.. 
.. 

13.2 
.. 
211.7 
39.3 
21.9 
.. 
.. 
.. 

3.1 
69.1 
.. 

105

 
 
 
     Annex: B6 Key Economic Indicators 

Indicator 

Actual      
2001 
2002 

Estimate 
2004 
2005 

Projected 
2007 
2008 

2006 

2003 

2000 

2009 

National accounts (as % of GDP) 

Gross domestic producta 
   Agriculture 
   Industry 
   Services 

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
   Government investment 
   Private investment 

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings c 

Memorandum items 

Gross domestic product  
(US$ million at current prices) 
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 
1992 prices) 
   Gross domestic product at market prices 
   Gross Domestic Income 

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, 
calculated from 1992 prices) 
   Gross domestic product at market prices 
   Total consumption 
   Private consumption 

100 
17 
31 
52 

87 
21 
11 
10 

15 
23 

13 
20 

100 
17 
33 
50 

87 
18 
10 
9 

16 
22 

13 
18 

100 
17 
33 
50 

87 
18 
9 
9 

18 
22 

13 
19 

100 
16 
35 
49 

86 
18 
9 
8 

18 
23 

14 
19 

100 
17 
35 
49 

86 
16 
8 
8 

22 
24 

14 
19 

100 
16 
36 
48 

85 
16 
8 
8 

28 
30 

15 
20 

100 
15 
34 
52 

84 
16 
8 
9 

30 
31 

16 
23 

100 
14 
34 
52 

84 
17 
8 
9 

31 
31 

16 
24 

100 
13 
34 
53 

83 
17 
9 
9 

31 
31 

17 
24 

90711 102216 

97686 

87851 

81336 

76975 

85933 

93296 

99863 

100 
13 
35 
53 

82 
18 
9 
9 

31 
32 

18 
25 

10689
2 

1420 

1530 

1560 

1470 

1380 

1260 

1230 

1270 

1370 

1466 

6.1 
5.7 

4.1 
2.8 
3.1 

5.4 
6.7 

3.4 
3.9 
4.2 

3.5 
5.3 

1.6 
2.8 
2.8 

3.2 
4.4 

1.3 
0.8 
0.9 

4.3 
5.1 

1.3 
1.7 
1.7 

5.0 
5.6 

2.3 
1.2 
1.2 

5.0 
6.1 

0.6 
0.5 
1.1 

5.0 
4.6 

3.2 
2.0 
1.8 

5.0 
4.6 

3.4 
1.7 
1.5 

5.0 
4.6 

3.4 
2.3 
2.1 

106

 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Economic Indicators 
(Continued) 

Indicator 

Actual      
2001 
2002 

Estimate 
2004 
2005 

2003 

2006 

Projected 
2007 
2008 

2000 

2009 

Balance of Payments (US$ millions) 

  Exports (GNFS)b 
      Merchandise FOB 
   Imports (GNFS)b 
      Merchandise FOB 
  Resource balance 
  Net current transfers 
  Current account balance 
  Net private foreign direct investment 
  Long-term loans (net) 
    Official 
    Private 
  Other capital (net, incl. errors & 
ommissions) 
  Change in reservesd 

Memorandum items 
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR92 prices) 
  Merchandise exports (FOB) 
    Primary 
    Manufactures 
  Merchandise imports (CIF) 

13538 
4445 
21135 
17008 
-7597 
4869 
-1724 
655 
-522 
-488 
-34 

-526 
2117 

15981 
6388 
22755 
17860 
-6774 
4679 
-1163 
1614 
-788 
-628 
-160 

-2689 
3027 

16925 
7078 
21772 
16441 
-4847 
3742 
-33 
482 
-559 
-710 
151 

-761 
871 

15801 
7121 
19535 
14637 
-3734 
4253 
614 
413 
-105 
-751 
646 

-1379 
456 

18005 
8205 
19564 
14820 
-1559 
3610 
3729 
671 
-1596 
-770 
-826 

-472 
-546 

22948 
10453 
22938 
17975 
10 
3934 
3417 
217 
-1447 
-1067 
-380 

-2582 
158 

26140 
5369 
26672 
23620 
-532 
4850 
3457 
750 
2065 
-1113 
3178 

-3000 
-1586 

28560 
5791 
29085 
25790 
-525 
5007 
3769 
1200 
-612 
-1127 
515 

-3300 
-921 

31061 
6332 
31290 
27781 
-230 
5106 
4045 
1750 
-2625 
-1092 
-1533 

-3300 
-339 

33391 
6786 
33769 
30045 
-379 
5408 
4025 
2000 
-3464 
-1389 
-2075 

-3300 
-84 

-8.4 

-6.6 

-5.0 

-4.3 

-1.9 

0.0 

-0.6 

-0.6 

-0.2 

-0.4 

-9.1 
-26.1 
25.9 
4.5 

31.2 
24.6 
39.2 
5.5 

6.8 
1.5 
12.6 
-6.4 

6.3 
-3.6 
16.0 
-5.8 

4.8 
26.5 
-12.7 
-8.4 

7.7 
4.5 
11.4 
2.6 

-0.7 
-7.5 
7.2 
10.4 

5.7 
3.6 
8.1 
6.2 

7.2 
5.9 
8.8 
4.8 

5.0 
4.1 
6.0 
5.2 

  Merchandise import price index 
  Merchandise terms of trade index 
  Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f 

94.8 
97.9 
128.6 

94.4 
107.7 
125.6 

92.9 
113.5 
111.9 

87.8 
113.7 
100.9 

97.0 
113.0 
87.6 

114.7 
113.1 
78.1 

120.8 
55.6 
71.2 

124.1 
55.2 
69.9 

127.6 
54.8 
69.6 

131.1 
54.4 
69.3 

  Consumer price index  (% change) 
  GDP deflator (% change) 

2.8 
0.9 

2.4 
7.4 

2.4 
-0.4 

3.2 
2.3 

4.9 
6.9 

10.0 
9.2 

9.3 
3.6 

7.1 
6.5 

5.5 
5.0 

5.5 
5.0 

a.   GDP at market prices 
b.  "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services." 
c.  Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants. 
d.  Includes use of IMF resources. 
e.   Consolidated central government. 
f.  "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation. 

107

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex: B7 Key Exposure Indicators 

Indicator 

Actual      
2001  
2002  

2000  

Estimate 
2004  
2005  

Projected (using base case) 
2007  
2008  
2009  

2006  

2003  

Total debt outstanding and  
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a 

29187 

29333 

30001 

31383 

30077 28785 27620 

26260 24758 

23167 

Net disbursements (US$m)a 
Total debt service (TDS) a 

-514 
1833 

804 
1949 

-750 
2073 

-1404 
2763 

-1363 
2699 

-1056 
2272 

-1165 
2185 

-1311 
2275 

-1377 
2306 

-1373 
2278 

Debt and debt service 
indicators (%) 

   TDO/XGSb 
   TDO/GDP 
   TDS/XGS 
   Concessional/TDO 

151.7 
.. 
9.5 
77.5 

136.1 
28.7 
9.0 
72.3 

IBRD exposure indicators  
   IBRD DS / Public DS (%) 
9.6 
   Pref. creditor / Public DS (%)c 29.4 
   IBRD DS / XGS (%) 
0.8 
   IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
761  
   Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
0.6 
   IDA TDO (US$m)d 
1273 

8.1 
28.1 
0.6 
639  
0.5 
1266 

138.0 
30.7 
9.5 
67.0 

6.4 
25.9 
0.5 
550  
0.5 
1242 

159.4 
35.7 
14.0 
67.5 

5.5 
25.8 
0.5 
542  
0.5 
1316 

139.2 
36.3 
12.5 
75.0 

108.9 
37.4 
8.6 
71.6 

86.5 
32.1 
6.8 
67.6 

4.5 
28.7 
0.5 
539  
0.5 
1386 

4.9 
20.6 
0.4 
539  
0.4 
1398 

5.2 
18.7 
0.3 
472  
0.5 
1405 

74.3 
28.1 
6.4 
67.6 

3.4 
13.2 
0.3 
524  
0.6 
1415 

65.0 
24.8 
6.1 
68.2 

4.0 
16.4 
0.2 
591  
0.7 
1410 

57.1 
21.7 
5.6 
67.8 

3.2 
12.8 
0.2 
632  
0.8 
1388 

a.  Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private non guaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short- term capital. 
b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances. 
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for International 
Settlements. 
d. Includes present value of guarantees. 

108

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex: B8 Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA/Grants) 

Closed Projects:    97 

Active Projects 

Project 
ID 

Project Name 

P040858 
P049166 
P005173 
P050484 
P082914 
P005169 

SOHAG Rural Development 
East Delta Ag. Services 
Irrigation Improvement  
Secondary Education Enhancement 
Airports Development 
Education Enhancement 
Early Childhood Education 
P082952 
Enhancement 
P045175 Health Sector 
P056236 Higher Education Enhancement 
P049702 
Skills Development 
P052705 
Social Fund III 
P045499 National Drainage II 
P041410 
Pumping Stations Rehab III 
Overall Result 

Implementat
ion Progress 

Supervision Rating 
Developme
nt 
Objectives 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
MU 
S 
S 
HS 
S 

# 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

# 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 

IBRD/IDA * 
Total Disbursed (Active) 
 341.58 
          of which has been repaid 
 14.05 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
 4,268.06 
          of which has been repaid 
 3,268.63 
Total Disbursed (Active + 
 4,609.64 
Closed) 
          of which has been repaid 
 3,282.68 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
 633.59 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
 5.38 
Total Undisbursed (Active + 
 638.97 
Closed) 
* Disbursement data are updated at the end of the first week of the 
month.  

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 
As of 04/14/2005 

Last PSR 

Difference 
Between 
Expected and 
Actual 
Disbursements 

a/ 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

FY 

IBRD 

IDA 

Grant 

Cancel. 

Undisb. Orig. 

1999 
1998 
1995 
1999 
2004 
1997 

2005 
1998 
2002 
2004 
1999 
2000 
1999 

26.7 

335.0 

20.0 

50.0 
5.5 

50.0 
120.0 
607.2 

0.0008 

25.0 
15.0 
53.3 
50.0 

75.0 

90.0 

50.0 

358.3 

0.0008 

11.3 
8.4 
16.2 
16.8 
2.6 
23.2 

58.0 
26.7 
1.0 
-1.4 
18.4 
73.7 

14.1 
9.9 
9.9 
34.0 
302.9 
21.2 

20.0 
67.5 
42.8 
5.1 
2.6 
29.8 
73.7 
633.6 

Frm 
Rev'd 

2.8 
0.3 
3.8 
18.8 

23.8 

-1.2 

109

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex: B8 (continued) Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio 

As of 02/28/2005 
Amounts in US Dollar Millions 

Approval Fiscal Year 

1994/96 

1999/04 
1992/97/98/00 

1986/88/92 

1996/01 

1997/01 

Total Portfolio: 

Institution  
Short Name 

Loan  
Cmtd-
IFC 

Equity  
Cmtd-
IFC 

QL+QE  
Cmtd-IFC 

All 
Cmtd-
Part 

Loan  
Out-IFC 

Equity  
Out-IFC 

QL+QE 
Out-IFC 

All 
Out-Part 

ANSDK 
2004 Alexandria Fiber 
2001 Amreya 
CIL 
Carbon Black-EGT 
2002 Ceramica Al-Amir 
1994 Club Ras Soma 
1993 Cmrcl Intl Bank 
2001 EFG Hermes 
2004 EHF 
2001 
IT Worx 
2004 Lecico Egypt 
Meleiha Oil 
2004 Merlon Egypt 
2002 Metro 
1992 Misr Compressor 
2002 OCIC 
Orix Leasing EGT 
2001 Port Said 
2002 SEKEM 
2004 SPDC 
2001 SUEZ GULF 
UNI 

1.3 
8.0 
5.7 
0.0 
5.0 
4.1 
1.3 
0.0 
4.7 
0.0 
0.0 
15.0 
0.0 
15.0 
15.0 
9.7 
22.5 
1.6 
43.2 
5.0 
20.0 
42.6 
2.6 
222.3 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
10.0 
0.0 
1.7 
2.5 
0.0 
13.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
27.6 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
5.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
5.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
10.0 
0.0 
0.4 
2.5 
0.0 
2.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
15.9 

0.6 
0.0 
5.7 
0.0 
0.0 
4.1 
1.3 
0.0 
4.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
15.0 
15.0 
9.7 
22.5 
1.6 
43.2 
5.0 
0.0 
42.6 
2.6 
173.5 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
19.1 
0.0 
143.3 
0.0 
0.0 
140.4 
0.0 
302.8 

110

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
5.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
5.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
19.1 
0.0 
143.3 
0.0 
0.0 
140.4 
0.0 
302.8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex C: Egypt Country Financing Parameters 

Item 

Parameter 

Explanation/Remarks 

Cost Sharing.  Limit on the proportion of 
individual project costs that the Bank may 
finance. 

Up to 100% 

Recurrent Cost Financing.  Any limits that 
would apply 
to 
the overall amount of 
recurrent expenditures that the Bank may 
finance. 

No country level 
limit. 

Cost sharing arrangements for individual projects would be determined 
based on project context.  The Bank’s financing share is expected to be 
higher in social sector and lower in infrastructure investments. The Bank 
will continue to seek government counterpart funding in most projects and 
expects to co-finance many projects with other development partners.   
Recurrent cost financing would be applied on a case-by-case basis 
grounded on due diligence project reviews and approvals. The Bank will 
take into account sustainability issues at project and sector levels. Recurrent 
cost financing is broadly expected to stay at current modest levels.   

Local Cost Financing.  Are the requirements 
for Bank financing of local expenditures met, 
namely: (i) financing requirements for the 
country’s 
development 
program would 
exceed the public sector’s own resources 
(e.g., from taxation and other revenues) and 
expected domestic borrowing; and (ii) the 
financing of foreign expenditures alone would 
not enable the Bank to assist in the financing 
of individual projects. 
Taxes and Duties.  Are there any taxes and 
duties that the Bank would not finance? 

Yes 

The requirements for local cost financing are met. The Bank may finance 
local costs as needed to achieve individual project objectives. 

None 

No taxes or duties have been identified as excessive, unreasonable or 
discriminatory.  At the project level, the Bank would consider whether 
taxes and duties constitute an excessively high share of project costs. 

111

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
