d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of 
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 30849-SV 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

AND  

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

FOR 

THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR 

April 20, 2005 

Central America Country Management Unit 
Latin America and the Caribbean Region 

International Finance Corporation 
Latin America and the Caribbean Region  

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the 
performance of their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without 
World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Date of the last Country Assistance Strategy for El Salvador was 
November 29, 2001 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
1 US Dollar = 8.75 Colones as of January 11, 2005 

Fiscal Year: 
January 1 – December 31, 2005 

SELECTED ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

ARENA 
BNPP 
CABEI 
CACM 
CAS 
CBI 
CDU 
CEA 
CEM 
CFAA 
CND 
CNSP 
CPAR 
CSR 
DIGESTYC 
DPL 
DR-CAFTA 
EDUCO 
EHPM 
FDI 
FIAS 
FIRST 
FMLN 
FSAP 
FTA 
FTAA 
FUSADES 
GDP 
GEF 
GOES 
IADB 
ICA 
ICT 
IDA 
IDF 
IFC 
IMF 
INCAE 
LAC 
MDG 
MIGA 
MM 

National Republic Alliance  
Bank-Netherlands Partnership Program 
Central American Bank of Economic Development 
Central American Common Market 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Caribbean Basin Initiative 
Centro Democrático Unido 
Country Environmental Analysis 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
Comisión Nacional de Desarrollo 
National Public Security Council 
Country Procurement Assessment Review 
Corporate Social Responsibility 
National Directorate for Statistical and Census  
Development Policy Lending 
Dominican Republic - Central America Free Trade Agreement 
Community Education Program 
National Household Survey 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Foreign Investment Advisory Services 
Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening 
National Liberation Front (Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional) 
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
Free Trade Agreement 
Free Trade Agreement of the Americas  
Salvadoran Foundation for Economic and Social Development 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environment Facility 
Government of El Salvador 
Inter-American Development Bank 
Investment Climate Assessment 
Information and Communication Technology 
International Development Agency 
Institutional Development Fund (Institutional Facility Grant) 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 
Instituto Centroamericano de Administración de Empresas 
Latin America and the Caribbean 
Millennium Development Goal 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
Maternal mortality 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MOE 
MOH 
MSME 
NAFTA 
NGOs 
PAHO 
PCN 
PDC 
PER 
PHRD 
PPIAF 
PSMP 
REDI 
ROSC 
SAFI 
SIECA 
SIGET 
SMEs 
TA 
UACI 
UNAC 
UNAIDS 
UNDP 
UNICEF 
WBG 
WBI 
WDI 
WEF 

Ministry of Education 
Ministry of Health 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 
North America Free Trade Agreement 
Non-Governmental Organization 
Pan American Health Organization 
Partido de Conciliación Nacional 
Partido Demócrata Cristiano 
Public Expenditure Report 
Policy and Human Resources Development Fund 
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility 
Public Sector Modernization Program 
Recent Economic Developments in Infrastructure 
Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes 
Integrated financial management system 
Secretariat for Economic Integration of Central America 
Superintendencia General de Electricidad y Telecomunicaciones 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
Technical Assistance 
Unidad de Adquisiciones y Contrataciones Institucionales 
Unidad Normativa de Adquisiciones y Contrataciones 
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Children's Fund 
World Bank Group 
World Bank Institute 
World Development Indicators 
World Economic Forum 

IBRD 

IFC 

Vice President: 
Pamela Cox 
Country Director: Jane Armitage 
Task Manager: 
Nicolette Bowyer 
Lead Economist: C. Felipe Jaramillo 

Vice President: 
Director: 
Manager: 
Task Manager: 

Assaad Jabre 
Atul Mehta 
Eduardo Wallentin 
Junko Oikawa 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the close collaboration with the Government 
of El Salvador in the preparation of this CAS. 

The team would like thank the entire country team for their contributions and give special 
thanks to several colleagues in the LAC Region including Todd Crawford, Jessica 
Poppele, Manuel Sevilla, Ana Lucia Armijos, Ricardo Tejada, Sabine Perrissin, Elizabeth 
Percesepe-Wallace, Marlene Sims and Sonia Molina as well as SFCR, OPCCE and IMF. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 
AND  
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 
FOR 
THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................. i 
I. 
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................. 1 
II. 
COUNTRY CONTEXT.......................................................................................... 1 
III. 
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND KEY CHALLENGES .................................. 4 
A. Political Context...................................................................................................... 4 
B. Economic Performance ........................................................................................... 8 
C. Governance ........................................................................................................... 14 
D. The Growth Agenda .............................................................................................. 16 
E. Poverty .................................................................................................................. 20 
F. Human Capital and Socio-Economic Infrastructure ............................................. 23 
IV. 
EVALUATION OF COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FY02-04............ 27 
V. 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FY05-FY08 ....................................... 38 
A.  Bank Group Lending and Non Lending Services ................................................. 38 
B.  Country Financing Parameters .............................................................................. 47 
C.  Risks and Lending Cases....................................................................................... 49 

TABLES 

Table 1: Millennium Development Goals........................................................................... 3 
Table 2: El Salvador Key Economic Indicators (1996-2003) ............................................. 8 
Table 3: Medium Term Macroeconomic Scenario ........................................................... 11 
Table 4: Country Program Performance Indicators 2002-05 ............................................ 29 
Table 5: IBRD Loan Portfolio .......................................................................................... 30 
Table 6: IFC Commitments in FY02-04 ........................................................................... 34 
Table 7: Ongoing Donor Activities Supporting the three Government Pillars .......... Error! 
Bookmark not defined. 
Table 8: IBRD Active Portfolio and Proposed Base Case Bank Assistance Program FY05 
- FY08 ................................................................................................................... 42 
Table 9: Scale of Lending Performance Indicators........................................................... 51 

BOXES 

Box 1: Violence and crime: a critical cross sectoral issue .................................................. 7 
Box 2: Remittances in the Salvadoran Economy .............................................................. 10 
Box 3: Fiscal Cost of Pension Reform. ............................................................................. 12 
Box 4: FSAP update - Summary of Findings and Recommendations .............................. 13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Box 5: CFAA and CPAR - Summary of Findings and Recommendations ...................... 15 
Box 6: Actions to Maximize DR-CAFTA opportunities for El Salvador ........................ 17 
Box 7: Poverty Reduction and the Rural-Urban Divide ................................................... 22 
Box 8: Key Lessons on Portfolio Implementation from Operations Evaluation 
Department (OED) ................................................................................................ 31 
Box 9: Key areas supported by the Program of Development Policy Loans.................... 39 
Box 10: The AAA Program in El Salvador ...................................................................... 40 

FIGURES 

Figure 1: Government Strategy 2004 – 2009 ...................................................................... 5 

ANNEXES 

Annex A1: Country at a Glance 
Annex B1: Framework for Monitoring Results of the CAS Program (FY 2005- 2008) 
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 
Annex B3: Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program and IFC/MIGA Program 
Annex B4: Summary of non-lending Services 
Annex B5: Social Indicators 
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators 
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators 
Annex B8: Status of IBRD Operations Portfolio and Statement of IFC’s Held and 
Disbursed Portfolio 
Annex C: Country Financing Parameters 
Annex D: CAS Consultations with Salvadoran Stakeholders 

MAP 

IBRD Nr. 33401

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 
AND  
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 
FOR 
THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

i. 

Country Context 

Since the signing of the Peace Accords in 1991, El Salvador has made substantial 
progress in consolidating peace and democracy through three electoral cycles, the latest 
presidential election having been peacefully conducted in March 2004.  Despite the 
country’s impressive record of reforms and prudent macroeconomic policies, growth 
levels slowed in recent years due in large part to external shocks.   The new government’s 
plan “Safe Country 2004 – 2009” focuses on sound macro-management, foreign 
investment promotion, free trade, private sector-led development and a business 
environment free of exchange rate risk.  The new government is also placing greater 
emphasis on more inclusive growth and pro-poor policies, improving security and 
reducing vulnerability.  

ii. The Bank Group Strategy 

The Bank Group’s assistance over the four-year period covered by this CAS (FY05-08) 
proposes a strategic program of lending and non-lending services to support the three 
main pillars of the government’s development plan: (i) to accelerate broad-based, 
equitable economic growth and increase employment; (ii) to improve equity through 
building human capital and expanding access to socioeconomic infrastructure, assets and 
markets; and (iii) to enhance security and reduce vulnerability.  Bank Group assistance 
will include: support for implementation of the existing loan portfolio; new IBRD 
lending, including a Program of Development Policy Loans and investment operations in 
selective areas which build upon prior successful implementation of innovative 
operations in El Salvador; analytical and advisory work, technical assistance, and 
capacity development programs; and targeted private sector assistance provided by IFC 
and MIGA.     

Support to Pillar I – The main support under this pillar would be a programmatic series 
of Development Policy Loans (DPLs) and an investment operation to support small and 
medium-size enterprise (SME) development.  IFC would continue to support the 
Salvadoran private sector enhancing the prospects for competitiveness and growth.    Its  
priorities will include: (i) continuing to assist in the development of the housing sector 
via financing and technical assistance; (ii) helping to strengthen infrastructure (including 
power); and (iii) supporting the MSME sector; (iv) promoting sustainable business 
practices (including corporate governance, environmental and social management, and 
corporate social responsibility programs).  MIGA would support this pillar by facilitating 
foreign investment.  

 
 
 
Support for Pillar 2 - Main support under this pillar  would be through the 
implementation of ongoing operations and the development of two new investment 
operations for land administration and education.  IFC will help improve equity through 
the on-lending instruments being provided for SMEs, thereby broadening their access to 
financial markets.  

Support for Pillar 3 - The Bank would provide support though ongoing investment 
projects and three new investment operations for environmental services, social 
protection and modernization of the State.  IFC’s work on promoting sustainable business 
practices will also help enhance both investor and citizen security in El Salvador.  

The scale of Bank’s financial assistance would be determined by the Government’s 
ability to maintain its high level of performance across the three pillars of  the 2004-2009 
Strategy.  The base case could include up to $300 million in Development Policy 
Lending and $185 in investment lending. To access increased lending levels, 
performance will be assessed on progress toward objectives in strategic policy areas (See 
Table 9).  To move into a high case lending scenario, implying up to one additional $100 
million DPL, would require performance on specific fiscal sustainability measures.  

iii. Managing Risks 

Continued strong performance by the Government is subject to  several sources of risk 
including a deterioration in the external environment, the threat of natural disaster and 
possible political gridlock.  Moreover, El Salvador’s current debt burden, approaching 40 
percent of GDP, increases its vulnerability to potential shocks.  The CAS program aims 
to manage risks through careful monitoring of progress, scaling fast disbursing lending to 
policy performance momentum and focusing investment lending on areas which build on 
El Salvador’s previous strong record of innovation, sustained impact and results.  Should 
El Salvador be subject to shocks arising from natural disasters or other external factors a 
contingency scenario may be called for, which is not considered in this CAS.  In that 
case, the Bank team would develop an alternative program for discussion with the Board. 

iv. The following three issues are suggested for Board discussion 

(i) Do Executive Directors agree that El Salvador is a good candidate for a series of 
Programmatic Development Policy Loans as requested by the Government?  (ii) Is the set 
of proposed investment operations an appropriate and strategically selective complement 
to the DPL series in light of El Salvador’s development priorities, support from other 
development partners and the Bank’s comparative advantage?  (iii) Do Executive 
Directors endorse the proposed substantial increase in lending to El Salvador given the 
country’s strong policy performance record, the current attention to improving fiscal 
responsibility, and its continued low exposure to the Bank? 

 ii

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 
AND  
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 
FOR 
THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for El Salvador for FY02-FY04 was 
discussed by the Board on November 2, 2001, together with an Earthquake Emergency 
Reconstruction and Health Services Extension Project to assist with the rebuilding of 
critical damaged infrastructure following two powerful earthquakes in the first quarter of 
the year. Appropriately, the primary focus of the government of El Salvador (GOES) in 
2001 was to support the reconstruction of the economy within the framework of its long-
term development objectives, and this priority was reflected in the Bank’s assistance 
strategy for the country.  Over the past 2-3 years, however, considerable progress has 
been made in addressing the losses and setbacks to the economy wrought by the 
earthquakes, and attention has shifted squarely to the longer-term development 
challenges facing El Salvador.   In this context, the recently-elected Saca administration, 
which took office in June 2004, requested that the Bank prepare a new CAS in support of 
its core development strategy “Safe Country 2004-2009”.  As a consequence, this CAS is 
focused on supporting the three main pillars of the government’s  strategy as follows:   (i) 
accelerating broad-based economic growth and increasing employment; (ii) improving 
equity through building human capital and enhancing access to basic socioeconomic 
infrastructure and markets; and (iii) enhancing security and reducing vulnerability.      

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

2. 
Since the signing of the Peace Accords in 1991, following a 12 year civil war, El 
Salvador has made substantial progress in consolidating peace and democracy through 
three electoral cycles, the latest presidential election having been peacefully conducted in 
March 2004.  On the economic front, El Salvador has been a regional leader in economic 
reforms. Starting in the early 1990s, successive governments have tackled reforms in a 
host of key areas including trade liberalization, tax reform, strengthening of the financial 
sector, and promotion of private participation in telecoms, energy, and pensions. More 
recently, a decision to dollarize the economy in 2001 has resulted in lower inflation and 
interest rates and reduced business uncertainty.  Since the early 1990s, the country has 
also invested in schooling, health and other basic services, which, together with the 
economic reforms, have contributed to rising per capita incomes and a notable reduction 
in poverty.  As a result of this wide-ranging, deep and sustained reform effort since the 
early 1990s, El Salvador stands out as one of the leaders in reforms in LAC.  This is 
clearly reflected in the Index of Economic Freedom which places El Salvador in 2004 as 
24th in a field of 155, second among LAC countries (behind Chile).  

 
 
3. 
The re-establishment of peace and the country’s sustained economic reform 
efforts have yielded substantial gains for the population since the early 1990s. Economic 
growth in the 1990s rebounded to an average annual rate of 4.9% --the second highest in 
Central America behind Costa Rica -- after a decade of poor performance during the 
1980s.  Impressive progress was also made in social areas, including in basic education 
enrollment, infant and maternal mortality, access to reproductive health services and 
access to safe water. Gains in social indicators reflect not only the fruits of economic 
growth but increasing public sector attention in these areas, including important reforms 
and increased budgetary allocations. Remittances from family members working abroad 
have also helped some families emerge out of poverty.  The combined impact of 
economic growth, human development improvements and the cushion provided to some 
families by remittances has been a marked decline in poverty. Overall poverty declined 
significantly (over 27 percentage points) between 1991 and 2002, while extreme poverty 
was halved in the same period.   

4. 
El Salvador has posted important gains toward meeting most of the Millennium 
Development Growth targets since 1990 (see Table 1). The extreme poverty target had 
been met by 2002 and the child mortality target is likely to be achieved before 2015. 
Projections of school enrollment rates also indicate that El Salvador will be able to 
achieve universal primary education by 2015. Gender differences in enrollment rates are 
virtually nonexistent.  However, child malnutrition rates remain of concern, and trends in 
maternal health do not display an unambiguous improvement.  While the target for access 
to water seem likely to be met, recent trends are not encouraging with respect to 
achieving the target for halting forest degradation. 

5. 
Despite the country’s impressive record of reforms and prudent macroeconomic 
policies, growth levels have slowed down since the second half of the 1990s. The slow 
down has been in large attributable in large measure to external shocks – both the 
massive destruction caused by the 2001 earthquakes and unfavorable external economic 
developments.  El Salvador’s terms of trade deteriorated in the 1996-2000 period at a rate 
of about 4 percent per year on average and the recession in the U.S. affected the demand 
for Salvadoran exports in 2000-2001, severely affecting the country’s large maquila 
sector in particular. The significant decline in the world price of  coffee has adversely 
affected parts of the rural economy since about 2000.  More recently, the Salvadoran 
economy has been negatively affected by the rise in oil prices. As a result of these 
factors, growth since 2000 has averaged only 2.0%, barely enough to keep per capita 
incomes roughly constant.  

 2

Table 1: Millennium Development Goals 
Table 1: Millennium Development Goals/1 

Millennium Development 
Goals 1990-2015 

1. Poverty and Hunger 
• Reduce extreme poverty by 
half 
• Reduce malnutrition rate by 
half 

2. Achieve universal primary 
education 
• 
Increase enrollment ratio in 
primary school to 100% 

3. Promote gender equality 
• Raise ratio girls/boys in 
primary and secondary school to 
100%. 
4.  Reduce child mortality 
• Reduce child mortality in 
children under 5 by two-thirds 

5.  Improve maternal health 
• Reduce the rate of maternal 
mortality (for each 100,000 live 
births) by three-fourths. 

6.  Combat HIV/AIDS and 
other diseases 
• Have halted by 2015 and 
begun to reverse the spread of 
HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis. 

7.  Ensure environmental 
sustainability 
• Halve the proportion of 
individuals without access to an 
improved water source. 
• Halt forest degradation (% 
of total land area) 

Present Status 

• 
Extreme poverty declined from 
31% in 1990 to 15% in 2002. 
• Malnutrition  (height for age) in 
children under 5 decreased from 23.3% 
in 1993 to 19.6% in 2002. 

• Net enrollment in basic school 
increased from 74% in 1990 to 85% in 
2002. 

• 
There are no significant 
differences between the genders with 
respect to education. 

• 
The child mortality rate fell from 
60 to 39 per 1,000 live births between 
1990 and 2002. 
• 
Trends in maternal mortality 
(MM) are not clear. The MM rate 
declined from 158 to 120 between 1993 
and 1998, but then rose again to 172 in 
2002.  That said, there is no evidence of 
a strong downward trend in maternal 
mortality. 
• 
The # of cases of HIV/AIDS 
increased between 1990 and 2002. 

• 
The # of cases of Tuberculosis 
decreased between 1990 and 2002 

• Access to improved water source 
increased from 66% in 1990 to 77% in 
2002. 
• According to WDI (2004), forest 
area as % of total land decrease from 
9% in 1990 to 5.8% in 2001.  

1990 
MDG 
Benchmark/2 

2002  
Estimates/2 MDG 
Goals 

2015 
Likelihood of 
achieving 
results/3 

31% 

15% 

15.5% 

Completed 

23.3% 
(1993) 

19.6% 

11.6% 

Unlikely/4 

74% 

85% 

100% 

Likely 

100% 

101% 

100% 

Completed 

60 

158 
(1993) 

39 

172 

20 

40 

Likely 

Unlikely/4 

96 

2,367 

1597 

1,480 

Unlikely/4 

Likely 

Halt 

and  

reverse 

66% 

77% 

83% 

Likely 

9.3% 

9% 

Unlikely 

Source:  El Salvador-Poverty Assessment, 2004, based on information from World Development Indicators (WDI, various years); DIGESTYC (using EHPM 
data, various years); World Bank (WB) staff estimates (using EHPM data, various years); El Salvador National Family Health Survey, FESAL (various years).  
1/ Although the background data used in this table may differ from the one presented by the GOES in its 2004 report entitled “El Salvador, Primer Informe de 
Avance de los Objectivos de Desarrollo del Milenio”, the conclusions are the same in terms of the likelihood of achieving the Goals. 
2/ Data refers to 1990 or 2002 unless otherwise noted.  
3/ Likelihood was determined by extrapolating the linear growth trend observed between the MDG benchmark and the latest available estimate. 
4/ Unlikely without increases and improved targeting of pro-poor public expenditures and employment opportunities as envisaged in the Saca’s 
administration’s strategy which this CAS supports. 

5.8% 
(2001) 

 3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND KEY CHALLENGES 

A. Political Context  

6. 
On March 2004, El Salvador conducted its third presidential election since the 
signing of the Peace Agreements in 1991.  The election took place with the full 
participation of all political forces, including the former guerrilla movement, which has  
transformed itself into a legal party, Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional 
(FMLN).  The 38-year-old entrepreneur, Antonio Saca, representing the National 
Republic Alliance (ARENA) defeated his nearest rival with a solid margin of 57.7% to 
35.7%, and took office on June 1. The new President has assumed office with 
considerable legitimacy, since he was elected with a record turnout of around 60%.   

7. 
The political party ARENA has maintained control of the executive branch of 
government ever since signing of Peace Agreements but in the 1997 congressional 
elections it lost its absolute majority in the legislature.  In 2000, ARENA lost its position 
as the largest party in Congress and several of  the most important municipal 
governments to the FMLN.  Currently in the 84-member Legislative Assembly the 
FMLN holds 31 seats, ARENA has 29, the Partido de Conciliación Nacional (PCN) has 
14, and the Centro Democrático Unido (CDU) and Partido Demócrata Cristiano (PDC) 
hold 5 each.  The political evolution of El Salvador, and the resulting division of power 
between the FMLN and ARENA, have increased transaction costs for the Executive 
Branch, introducing some degree of uncertainty and slowing down the reform process. 
On the positive side, the fact that, since the 1991 Peace Agreements, El Salvador has 
been able to conduct municipal and congressional elections with full  transparency, 
legitimacy, and participation of all political parties, indicates robust progress in the 
process of democratic consolidation.   

8. 
President Saca’s administration is perceived,  nationally and internationally, as a 
guarantor of continued commitment to the market-friendly policies and reforms promoted 
since 1991. The Plan “Safe Country 2004 – 2009” adopted during the campaign by 
President Saca, and summarized in Figure 1 below, focuses on sound macro-
management, foreign investment promotion, free trade, private sector-led development 
and a business environment free of exchange rate risk. However, the new government is 
placing greater  emphasis on more inclusive growth and pro-poor policies and assigning 
higher priority to policy consensus with the opposition in the legislature and consultation 
with the private sector and civil society.  The government also views improving security 
as a key pillar in its development plan.  The vision of a “Safe Country” encompasses a 
broad definition of security, including improving physical safety through programs to 
combat and prevent crime and violence, increasing investor security through initiatives to 
combat corruption, increase transparency and impartial enforcement of the law and 
building greater public confidence in public institutions, including the judiciary.  The 
government is also committed to reducing vulnerability, giving priority to enhanced 
social protection and safety net programs for the poorest and most vulnerable households. 

 4

 
Figure 1: Government Strategy 2004 – 2009 
Safe Country 

Pillar I 

Pillar II 

Pillar III 

Accelerating  Broad-Based Equitable 
Growth and Increasing Employment 

Improving Equity through Building  
Human Capital and Expanding 
Access to Basic Infrastructure, 
Assets and Markets 

Government Priorities: 

Enhancing Security and Reducing 
Vulnerability 

Ensuring sound macro-management 
and fiscal responsibility. 
Deepening insertion in world markets 
through regional integration and 
trade. 
Increasing productivity and 
competitiveness through improving 
the investment climate and taking 
advantage of technology and 
connectivity. 
Generating employment and 
opportunities by supporting SMEs. 
Improving market regulation and 
supervision. 

Modernizing education and building 
the knowledge society. 
Improving quality and universal 
coverage of health services. 
Designing local and regional 
strategies- focused on expanding 
access to basic infrastructure, 
promoting agricultural diversification 
and facilitating private sector 
investment.  
Strengthening family assets by 
facilitating access to housing and 
expanding land administration and 
titling efforts. 

Making El Salvador a safe country 
through control  and reduction of 
violence.  
Ensuring social and economic 
rights of individuals and 
businesses by strengthening rule of 
law.  
Modernizing public administration 
and services, in order to improve 
transparency and efficiency of 
resource use.  
Promoting social cohesion and 
stronger families through a more 
effective social safety net and 
improving quality of life at the 
local level. 
Enhancing the interest of future 
generations by protecting the 
environment. 

PROMOTING PARTICIPATION AND CONSENSUS 
BUILDING  PARTNERSHIPS WITH SALVADORANS ABROAD  

9. 
The work ahead for the government will be challenging as a result of the slow 
down in economic growth and social progress over the last few years, persistent crime 
and violence (See Box 1) and the uncertain political environment.  The majority of the 
population expects improvements in the quality of their lives and better access to market 
opportunities and the election period witnessed some dissatisfaction with key institutions 
and a degree of reform fatigue. There are some policy or substantive issues where 
consensus may prove challenging to accomplish such as healthcare reform, privatization, 

 5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in particular with respect to energy1,  and in the area of public finances. Avoiding 
legislative delays and developing a national agenda goes beyond the Executive Branch 
and is one of the biggest challenges for the government, requiring positive support from 
political opposition, private sector and civil society at large.  President Saca has created a 
Presidential Commission 
for promoting consensus on critical 
issues – e.g., 
decentralization, tax reform, health reform, and others to be negotiated -- that require 
national long term commitment and support across party lines. This has already proved 
possible in the areas of education and tackling crime and violence,  for example. The 
Comisión Nacional de Desarrollo (CND)2
 will play a key role in building consensus for 
the adoption of a national vision and agenda for development.  

1 According to opinion surveys conducted by Latino Barometro, in 1998 El Salvador was the third country, out of a group of 17, with 
the strongest support for privatization but by 2001 support had dropped down dramatically, placing the country in the tenth place out 
of the same group of countries. In 1998, almost 53% of the population expressed support for privatizations but in 2001 support had 
been reduced to 25%. 
2 The CND was created during the Administration of President Calderon Sol, and succeeded in presenting a concrete set of 
recommendations that were going to be supported by an ambitious four year investment plan during the period 2000-04.  CND 
contribution however was reduced by the polarization of public opinion, the breakdown in dialogue that followed dollarization and  
the impact of the earthquakes. 

 6

                                                 
BOX 1: VIOLENCE AND CRIME: A CRITICAL CROSS SECTORAL ISSUE 

 Violence in El Salvador is a critical issue, with significant economic, social welfare, health, and governance 
impacts.  Homicides, crime, youth gang (Maras) violence, and domestic assault are widespread and high:  
seven people are killed every day; the homicide rate, at 45 per hundred  thousand, is among the highest in 
LAC; 90% of  Salvadorians feel generally unsafe, and 25% report feeling insecure even when at home. 
Maras are estimated at 20,000 members, and 150 out of  262 municipalities report active youth gangs in 
their jurisdictions1.      

The persistently high levels of  in crime and violence has negatively affected the image of the country and the  
investment climate: a recent survey finds that firms consider  it the number one constraint for business 
operations and investment.  Crime and violence in El Salvador also undermines social capital and erodes the 
assets and incomes of the poor, for example by devaluing property values in insecure neighborhoods , impeding 
safe access to education (when gangs take over schools) and reducing employment opportunities, particularly at 
night, because of the dangers of public transportation.   

After  much internal debate, consensus is emerging on how to tackle the complex social, economic, and 
political nature of violence and crime in El Salvador, while preserving human rights and civil liberties.  The 
government of President Saca has adopted an integrated strategy (Plan Pais Seguro) that includes:  

• 

Improvements in the Criminal Justice System: This component focuses on deterrence and control of 
violence through a more effective process of arrest, conviction, and punishment.  Activities include: a 
zero-tolerance campaign against crime and violence (Plan Super Mano Dura)2, support for the Judicial 
Branch’s process of modernization; strengthening of the National Public Security Council (CNSP) and 
its violence prevention programs; strengthening and modernization of the national police in areas such 
as  crime control and violence prevention ICT system, investigation capacity, training; drug and 
alcohol control and anti-money laundering systems, penal system reform.    
• Promoting Growth and Employment Creation: crime and violence are partly the result of social and 
economic conditions (close to 75% of youth gang members are chronically unemployed).  Thus, GOES 
policies to promote growth , together  with improvement of infrastructure and services, creation of 
local employment and income opportunities, construction of new decentralized training centers and 
strengthening labor  training will contribute to the reduction of crime and violence.   
• Building social capital to prevent crime and violence: including working with families, communities, 
and municipalities in the participatory identification of needs of communities affected by violence; 
improved coverage and quality of  education and health services; promoting home ownership; 
developing a more reliable safety net; providing parks and recreation to low-income barrios; promoting 
a culture of conflict resolution and curriculum adaptation in schools, together with a referral program 
for “at risk” youth, and enhanced teacher security.   
• Local and National Dialogue and Consensus Building: Sustainable peace and development are 
unlikely without open debate among all actors about the causes as well as the solutions to violence. 
Participatory processes can also identify local-level solutions to rebuild social capital and citizenship 
and to address the needs of priority target groups.  Important contributions to this effort are expected 
from the recently created “National Commission on Governance”, the National Council on Public 
Security, the Comisión Nacional de Desarrollo plus, at the local level, municipalities.   
• Creating partnerships for the prevention of crime and violence, including corporate social 
responsibility initiatives to improve local services and community infrastructure in areas with high 
incidence of  crime and violence and support for programs to generate youth employment for 
rehabilitated gang members . The “Consejo Nacional de Seguridad Publica” is coordinating initiatives 
implemented by government, municipalities, private sector, NGO’s, UNICEF, UNDP) and the donor 
community. 

1The Bank supported a study “The Social and Economic Factors associated with violent crime in El Salvador” prepared by the 
Instituto Universitario de Opinión Pública de la Universidad Centroamérica José Simeón Cañas. 
2The Plan “Super Mano Dura” was recently approved in Congress and included amendments to the Penal Code, the Law for the 
Control of Youth Violence and Crime, and their operational manuals.    

 7

 
 
 
 
  
 
B. Economic Performance 

10. 
Macro Economic Performance.  Since the end of the civil war in 1992, El 
Salvador has generally maintained a solid track record of macroeconomic policy and 
structural reform. This record has been characterized by low inflation rates, low fiscal 
deficits and stable debt levels. In recognition of this record, El Salvador has obtained stable 
and low-cost access to external financing since the late 1990s, maintaining high credit 
ratings.  In October 2004, El Salvador, along with Chile and Mexico were the only 
countries in Latin America to boast investment grade ratings by Moody’s.   

Table 2: El Salvador Key Economic Indicators (1996-2003) 

(as % of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)  

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

Real Growth Rates 

 GDP growth  
 GDP per capita 
 Inflation (end of period, % change) 

Macro-economic Indicators  
 Gross Domestic Investment  
 Gross National Savings   
 Current account balance 
 Foreign direct investment 

 Public Sector Accounts  
 Total NFPS revenues and grants 
 Total NFPS expenditures (incl. Pensions) 
 NFPS primary balance 
 Overall NFPS balance (with pensions)  

Public Debt  
 Total Public Sector Debt 
    O/w Domestic 
    O/w External 
  External Public Debt Service (% of XGS) 

Memorandum:   
Overall NFPS balance (w/o pensions) 

1.7 
1.4 
7.4 

4.2 
1.5 
1.9 

3.7 
1.5 
4.2 

3.4 
1.4 
-1.0 

2.2 
0.2 
4.3 

1.7 
-0.2 
1.4 

2.2 
0.3 
2.8 

1.8 
0.1 
2.5 

15.2 15.1
15.5 16.4 16.9 16.7 16.2 16.6 
13.5 16.0
16.8 14.5 13.6 15.6 13.3 11.7 
-1.7 
0.9 
-0.7 
-1.9 
-3.3 
-1.1 
-2.9 
-4.9 
0.1 
-1.0 7.2* 
1.3 
1.4 
2.1 
3.5 
0.5 

17.3 16.1
19.7 17.8
-0.7 
-0.2 
-2.4 
-1.8 

15.7 15.7 16.6 15.6 16.1 16.8 
18.4 18.5 19.6 20.0 20.5 20.6 
-1.1 
-1.4 
-1.5 
-3.0 
-2.7 
-1.7 
-2.6 
-2.8 
-3.0 
-4.4 
-4.4 
-3.8 

29.4 30.2
5.0 
6.1 
24.4 24.1
16.8 13.0

27.4 28.1 29.2 34.0 38.7 40.7 
5.4 
6.3 
6.6 
8.8 
11.7 11.5 
22.0 21.8 22.5 25.2 27.0 29.2 
17.2 18.1 10.1 14.7 17.7 13.3 

-2.4

-1.8

-2.6

-2.8

-3.0

-3.7

-3.3

-2.1

* Includes privatization proceeds of 6.8% of GDP  
       Source : Central Bank of El Salvador, Ministry of Finance and Bank estimates 

11. 
After almost a decade of keeping an unchanged level of the exchange rate vis-à-
vis the dollar, Salvadorans took the important step of making the dollar legal tender in 
2001, a decision which recognized the growing ties of the Salvadoran economy with the 
United States. The decision also reflected some frustration with domestic interest rate 
levels, which continued to reflect a sizable exchange rate premium, despite a proven 
record of solid macro management and ample international reserve holdings. With 

 8

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dollarization, inflation rates have converged to international levels, and interest rates have 
dropped to reflect world interest rates plus a country premium.  Exports have continued 
to grow under the new regime, thanks to a flexible labor market and efforts to boost 
competitiveness, despite depressed external demand and adverse terms of trade. In 
addition, reduced transaction costs from dollarization have facilitated financial flows, a 
phenomenon that has strengthened the regional standing of El Salvador’s financial sector 
and explains growing cross border lending.  

12. 
El Salvador’s fiscal accounts have shown some deterioration since 2000, as a 
result of reconstruction investments needed to reestablish infrastructure damaged with the 
2001 earthquakes, as well as the need to absorb some of the transitional costs of the 
pension reform of 1996. Consequently, El Salvador’s non-financial public sector deficits 
have risen since 2000, peaking at 4.4  percent of GDP in 2002. Due to El Salvador’s good 
standing as a sovereign debtor in international markets, much of the fiscal burden has 
been financed at moderate cost, although at the expense of a rise of about 10 percentage 
points in NFPS debt in the period 2000-2003,  reaching 40.7 percent of GDP by end 
2003.   

13. 
On the external side, El Salvador has seen some growth of the current account 
deficit since 2002, financed mainly by strong inflows of private lending -- through 
international bond issues and increased lending from commercial banks and other private 
sources – as well as FDI flows. Since most of the recent increase can be explained by the 
need to finance greater fiscal deficits, the shortfall in the current account can be expected 
to narrow gradually as the new government carries out its fiscal plans.  On the other hand, 
the large trade imbalance of recent years (about 15% of GDP in 2003), financed by the 
significant flow of remittances from Salvadorans living abroad (see Box 2), is likely to 
persist into the future. Remittances have exhibited a secular increase since the 1980s and 
have proven insensitive to cycles in the U.S. economy. 

 9

BOX 2: REMITTANCES IN THE SALVADORAN ECONOMY 

Large migration flows associated with the intensification of the civil war in the early 1980s, are responsible 
for the steady growth of remittances which has become the largest source of foreign exchange for the 
economy of El Salvador. Remittances have increased from an average of 2.6 percent of GDP during the 
1980s to 14 percent in 2003. In contrast to other flows of foreign exchange, remittances do not generate 
undesirable indebtedness cycles and have proven to be remarkably stable. The persistence of these flows, 
despite the downturn in economic activity in the U.S. in 2001-02, served to cushion the economic shocks 
that affected El Salvador, including the decline in coffee prices.   

The aggregate impact of remittances on the Salvadoran economy has been very significant.  In 
macroeconomic terms, they are the principal source of financing for the growing trade imbalance of recent 
years, which has risen from less than 7 percent of GDP during the 1980s to 15 percent in 2003. An 
injection of resources of this magnitude would normally be expected to cause significant macroeconomic 
effects, including a real exchange rate appreciation and a decline in exports. However, studies have 
confirmed that El Salvador has managed to maintain its external competitiveness and a healthy export 
performance, due to a relatively flexible labor market (The World Bank, 2004, CEM).  

Remittances reach directly about 14 percent of Salvadoran households, who use about 70 percent of their 
value to meet consumption needs. Household data suggests that the majority of the direct recipients have 
been households in the middle and upper deciles, as migration costs and barriers are daunting for the 
poorest. However, the importance of these flows in total income is highest for the poor. Remittances have 
become a critical source of income and an important safety net for many Salvadoran families that are 
subject to swings in incomes.  

While remittance flows already exert a strong impact on the Salvadoran economy, creative policies and 
initiatives could improve their development impact. Senders and recipients should be encouraged to open 
and use bank accounts, to reduce costs, minimize risks and gain access to credit. Governments can establish 
incentives to formalize remittance flows and to encourage their use for investment, including for the 
creation of small enterprises. Hometown associations, working together with local and central 
governments, and the private sector can play a useful role in aggregating flows to make significant 
investments in local infrastructure and other public goods. 

14. 
El Salvador medium-term outlook.  Looking towards the future, there is a 
pressing need to address the recent build up in public debt as El Salvador continues to be 
vulnerable to shocks that may require fiscal reaction space (e.g., natural disasters, 
commodity prices, international recession).  The new Saca Administration has made 
containment of the recent run up in debt levels a top priority. The medium-term plan is 
designed to lower the deficit and reduce overall debt levels, which are targeted to decline 
to about 39.2% of GDP by the end of the presidential term (2009) (see Table 3).3 The 
plan includes significant fiscal adjustment, as the government aims to reduce debt while 
at the same time absorbing the growing costs of pension reform and creating space for 
additional growth and social expenditures.  

15. 
In keeping with its track record of prudent macroeconomic planning and 
acknowledging that vulnerabilities to external shocks still remain, the government’s plan 
is based on conservative projections of 3 percent GDP growth during the period 2005-
2009. These projections are an improvement over the average rate of the period 1996-
2004 of 2.5 percent, but still low by historical and regional norms. In particular, the 
Bank’s recent Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) predicted that without negative 

3 In 2004 total public sector debt is estimated at 44.8 percent of GDP. The difference with the NFPS figures 
presented in Table 3 is accounted by outstanding net debt of the Central Bank and other public banks. 

 10

 
 
 
 
                                                 
exogenous shocks, continued implementation of reforms should yield annual growth rates 
in excess of 4.0 percent. The government hopes that its proposed fiscal plan will allow it 
to gradually increase public investment levels in growth-inducing expenditures over the 
medium term, with emphasis on human capital and infrastructure.  

16. 
While higher growth should facilitate continued progress in poverty reduction 
efforts in El Salvador, it is unlikely to be enough. The new government plan also 
recognizes that some of the poorest Salvadorans have been unable to take advantage of 
economic growth over the past decade and a half and require special efforts in terms of 
improved targeting and additional resources in social programs. To build effectively on 
past achievements, the government has proposed to implement a social policy aimed at 
improving access to basic services and developing a safety net for the poorest and most 
vulnerable households.  Despite difficult fiscal constraints, the government plans to 
increase social spending gradually over the next five years. The efficiency and targeting 
of social expenditures should also improve as the government proceeds with its program 
of social sector reforms, particularly in health and water. 

Table 3: Medium Term Macroeconomic Scenario 

(as % of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Macro-economic Indicators 
GDP growth (% change) 
Inflation  (end of period  % change) 
Gross reserves (months of imports)  
Foreign direct investment 

 Public Sector Accounts  
 Total NFPS revenues  
     Current Revenues  
            Tax revenues  
 Total NFPS expenditures 
      Current Expenditure (incl. Pensions)  
      Capital Expenditures  
 Overall NFPS balance  

 Total  NFPS Debt  

Balance of payments 
Current account balance 
   Exports of goods 
   Imports of goods (f.o.b.) 

Memorandum Item: 

1.8
5.5
4.5
1.0

16.8
16.3
12.2
19.3
16.7
2.6
-2.5

40.5

2.5
2.5
4.3
1.0

17.1
16.6
13.3
20.1
16.8
3.3
-3.0

40.9

3.0
2.5
4.3
1.5

17.0
16.7
13.6
19.3
16.3
3.0
-2.3

40.7

3.0
2.5
4.3
1.5

17.4
17.1
14.1
18.9
15.8
3.1
-1.5

40.3

3.0
2.5
4.3
1.5

17.9
17.6
14.6
18.9
15.4
3.5
-1.0

39.5

3.0
2.5
4.3
1.5

18.4
18.1
15.2
19.7
15.0
4.7
-1.3

39.2

-4.4
20.4
-36.2

-4.0
19.6
-35.6

-4.2
19.7
-35.5

-4.3
19.6
-35.6

-4.3
19.8
-35.5

-4.2
20.0
-35.6

Gross Domestic Product ($ million)  
Overall NFPS balance (w/o pensions) 

15,697 16,474 17,506  18,500  19,550  20,660
-0.7
-0.9
-0.1
0.7
1.2
0.8

Source: Ministry of Finance estimates (base case scenario). 

 11

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. 
The Saca administration has moved speedily with reforms in the fiscal front in 
its brief time in office. In June 2004, it obtained legal backing for the elimination of early 
retirement provisions in the pension law (estimated annual savings of about 0.2% of GDP 
– see Box 3). It also presented a prudent 2005 budget, which includes a freeze on public 
sector wages and an overall expenditure level consistent with a planned deficit for 2005 
of 3% of GDP. In late 2004, the administration obtained legislative approval of a package 
of fiscal reforms, centered on reducing loopholes, improving tax collection powers and 
raising excise taxes on cigarettes, alcohol and arms. The package is estimated by the 
government to yield some 1.2% of GDP in 2005. In addition, the government has 
announced its intention to pursue further fiscal reforms if necessary in order to gradually 
raise tax revenues to a target 15.2% of GDP by 2009. 

BOX 3: FISCAL COST OF PENSION REFORM. 

El Salvador adopted a pension reform in 1996 that replaced the existing pay-as-you-go system with a 
system of individual retirement accounts. The reform was aimed at improving long-term fiscal 
sustainability by replacing a system that was projected to yield large and growing deficits in the future by a 
sustainable one, implying transitional costs as younger Salvadorans move to the private account system 
while the state keeps the obligation to pay out pensions to older generations. In addition the reform made 
the conditions for access to benefits more homogenous among workers from the private, and public 
sectors, and aimed to gradually increase coverage and develop a private savings pool that could form the 
basis for long term investments.  

Managing the transition costs of the pension reform is currently an important challenge in El Salvador, 
particularly as the country also needs to finance other important social expenditures. The government has 
adopted several measures to manage these costs, the most important of which was the approval in June 
2004 of the elimination of early retirement provisions. This measure should reduce the fiscal costs of the 
pension system by  about 1 percent of GDP over the next five years (2005-2009).   

18. 
Financial Sector.  El Salvador made impressive progress in strengthening its 
financial sector in the 1990s with the introduction of new legislation, and consolidation of 
the banking sector following intense mergers and acquisitions in the latter part of the 
decade.  Development of the banking sector has benefited from free capital flows and low 
inflation, and the effect of dollarization.  In 2000, at the request of the government, the 
IMF and World Bank carried out a Financial Sector Assessment (FSAP) to assess the 
stability and performance of the financial sector as a whole.  In 2004, they conducted an 
Update of the FSAP (a summary of findings and recommendations appears in Box 4) to 
assess progress since 2000 which found that while the country enjoys one of the region’s 
stronger financial sectors, considerable scope exists for tightening prudential standards 
and reducing contingent liabilities4. Capital adequacy requirements need to be raised to 
meet international standards. In addition, direct contingent liabilities arise from the 
operation of three public banks for which a new financing structure needs to be 
developed in which the fiscal cost of this public lending activity is fully and transparently 

4 According to the latest IMF Article IV consultations under an adverse scenario the equivalent of 4.5% of 
GDP of contingent liabilities could become an explicit public liability. 

 12

 
 
                                                 
funded by existing fiscal resources. Challenges in the development of capital markets are 
discussed below under the section on the growth agenda. 

19. 
As part of El Salvador´s efforts to strengthen its financial sector, a strong Anti-
Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism regime are also important both 
in the public and the private sector. Measures on these fronts would deepen the efforts to 
combat corruption and to foster transparency, which reduces the vulnerability to money 
laundering and terrorism financing.  

BOX 4: FSAP UPDATE - SUMMARY OF FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  

Main Findings 

1. El Salvador has made progress clarifying the roles of the Banco Central de Reserva (BCR) and the 
Superintendencia del Sistema Financiero following  dollarization in 2001.  
2. Dollarization has had a positive impact on financial sector stability by mitigating  exchange rate 
risk, lowering interest rates, and diminishing the costs of borrowing from abroad.  Indicators on 
bank soundness suggest that the system weathered the economic downturn quite well. 
3. Regulation and supervision of the financial system has been strengthened since 2000,  notably in 
the framework for weak bank resolution and in issuing regulations to combat money laundering.  
4. Cross-border lending has increased rapidly in the past few years, and generally appropriate 
supervisory guidelines have been put in place.   
5. Under  dollarization, the BCR acts as fiscal agent for the government issuing Treasury securities 
to smooth out cash-flow for government financing. The BCR continues to issue its own paper to 
manage the stock of international reserves, because it does not have sufficient government paper 
for this purpose.  
6. The BCR holds the liquidity reserves of individual banks, but it has no commitment to act as 
lender-of-last-resort, except as an agent of the government in weak bank resolution.  
7. El Salvador provides a more friendly environment towards micro lending than most Latin 
American economies. 
8. Corporate credit could benefit from improvements in registration of pledges and  execution of 
claims, diversifying security methods, completing the reform of registries for real estate and 
immovable assets, and reducing the complexity of judicial enforcement proceedings for execution 
of both unsecured and secured claims.   

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

Main Recommendations  
Tighter loan classification and stricter provision is required to improve further the soundness of 
individual banks.    
Stronger capacity to conduct consolidated supervision is needed to keep pace with the growth of 
cross-border banking activity .  
The BCR needs to replace central bank paper with Treasury bills and capitalize government 
deposits in order to build up official reserves to cushion systemic liquidity.  
Approval of the new Securization Law is required to further stimulate access to credit and to   
allow for the efficient allocation of credit risk among borrowers, first and second floor financial 
intermediaries, and investors.  
Legislation on corporate insolvency should be reviewed to facilitate the reorganization of viable 
enterprises and/or  the liquidation of non-viable ones.  The environment for informal corporate 
restructuring agreements also needs to be improved.     

 13

 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Governance 

20. 
El Salvador is implementing a successful process of public sector modernization, 
streamlining and improving efficiency of key areas of the state.  Reforms were started in 
1994 and were strengthened in 1999 in order to improve service delivery, address the 
overextension and centralization of the State, as well as reform outdated and inadequate 
administrative infrastructures.  Important accomplishments in this area include: (i) the 
successful restructuring of the Ministry of Public Works, transforming it into a policy 
ministry and spinning off the maintenance activities to the public sector, with significant 
efficiency gains; (ii) development of a human resources management system for the 
public sector including the design of tools for selection, evaluation, classification, 
remuneration and promotion of government employees; (iii) issuance and implementation 
of modern financial management, procurement, tax, and customs legislation and the 
introduction of integrated financial management and tax information systems;  and 
(iv) partial decentralization of public services in water and health.   

21. 
Despite significant progress in this area, further efforts to modernize the public 
sector and strengthen governance are still required to improve the efficiency and 
transparency of public institutions and address public perceptions.  Continued efforts at 
institutional restructuring in other Ministries, such as Agriculture, are being planned and 
should provide continued momentum towards increasing efficiency and effectiveness of 
public institutions.  Furthermore, decentralization efforts are still incipient and should be 
framed within a comprehensive strategy, and certain key legal reforms—such as a new 
Civil Service Law—are still necessary.  The country is also exploring the potential of 
electronic government initiatives to bring efficiency gains and to improve the access to 
certain services.   

22. 
The low credibility of the impartiality and efficient functioning of judicial 
systems is also a major issue. Corruption and lack of transparency in the operations of 
some public sector agencies are  also often cited as problems. (Transparency International 
ranks El Salvador  51 out of 145, and fifth in LAC after Chile, Barbados, Uruguay and 
Costa Rica.) According to the Worldwide Governance Research Indicators Dataset,5 
when compared to the Latin America and the Caribbean average, El Salvador does well 
in preserving political stability, is around the average in terms of its regulatory 
framework and promotion of voice and accountability, but shows less than average 
performance in rule of law, government effectiveness and control of corruption. 

23. 
As 
regards 
the 
financial and procurement 
reform process, significant 
improvements in the performance of budget and procurement management institutions 
have been made.  To document the current state of public financial management in the 
country and propose priorities for action, the World Bank and the IADB carried out in 
2004 a Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and a Country 
Procurement Assessment (CPAR). The key findings and recommendations are 
summarized in Box 5. 

5 The Governance Indicators, compiled by the World Bank Institute, reflect the statistical compilation of responses on the quality of 
governance given by a large number of enterprise, citizen and expert survey respondents in industrial and developing countries, as 
reported by a number of survey institutes, think tanks, non-governmental organizations, and international organizations. 

 14

                                                 
BOX 5: CFAA AND CPAR - SUMMARY OF FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

The Country Financial Accountability Assessment Report (CFAA) and the Country Procurement 
Assessment Report (CPAR), prepared jointly with the IADB, analyze the performance and transparency of 
budget and procurement management institutions and systems in the public sector. The analysis and 
recommendations contained in these reports seek to identify areas where further improvements in public 
financial management could help to strengthen fiscal discipline, increase operational efficiency, and 
improve the country’s governance environment. 
The analysis concludes that the Government has built strong foundations for well-functioning budget and 
procurement management systems, with a basis on modern legislation. Still, the widening public sector 
deficit and deteriorating governance indicators pose important challenges ahead. Accordingly, a detailed set 
of recommendations has been put forward to the Government – a brief summary follows: 
(cid:131) 
Civil service. Further strengthening of the financial and procurement management institutions will 
benefit from the implementation of the government’s plans for a renovated legal and regulatory 
framework for human resource management and increased managerial accountability.  
Budget development. The sound methodologies used for budget formulation could serve as basis 
to improve disclosure of extra-budgetary funds, to aggregate and consolidate municipal budget data, to 
develop a medium term budget framework, to enhance information and indicators on the public 
investment program, and to bring the budget documentation up to international standards.   
Tax administration. The modern revenue administration systems could benefit from stronger 
coordination among the agencies involved, together with enhancements in the prosecution and 
sanctioning of tax and customs-related cases.   
Procurement management. The significant steps taken with the creation of a central regulatory 
body (UNAC) and decentralized procurement units (UACIs) can be better sustained through systematic 
staff training and technical assistance, issuance of regulations to the procurement law, and harmonization 
of bidding and contract documents.   
Budget execution. The integrated financial management system (SAFI) has significantly 
improved the procedures and information on government spending, but there is still work ahead to 
develop or consolidate related administrative systems; most notably, the upgrading of the payroll 
management system, and the development of a comprehensive procurement information system (under 
the e-Government initiative), coupled with tools to monitor procurement performance. 
Debt.  Active debt management will require the introduction of continuing programs for skills 
development in this highly specialized area – such programs to include the capacity to undertake 
systematic debt sustainability and risk analyses.   
Internal controls. Implementation of a more effective internal control and internal audit 
framework, based upon risk-based approaches, will be key to further guarantee efficiency and legality of 
public expenditures.   
Financial reporting and external oversight. The accounting function, which is properly 
institutionalized and shows sophisticated advances, could serve as basis for further improvements in the 
content and accessibility of financial information.  Comprehensive financial and procurement audits from 
the Court of Accounts, together with strengthened legislative oversight, would help fill current gaps in 
external fiscal control. 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

Noteworthy recent steps in the public financial management area have been the government adoption of a 
framework for internal controls consistent with international standards and the issuance of a four year 
program for the public procurement system. 

24. 
The new government of El Salvador is committed to addressing the governance 
challenges by strengthening anti-corruption and transparency initiatives, improving 
personal security through development of programs for the control and prevention of 
crime and violence, and undertaking further modernization and institution building in the 
overall public sector.  The government is also considering initiatives to continue 

 15

 
 
 
 
strengthening the regulatory frameworks, institutions and public-private contracting 
protocols 
that 
involve 
the provision of basic services 
(such as electricity, 
telecommunications, urban transport services and water).  Although significant progress 
has been made in certain sectors, these initiatives will help the government to consolidate 
the benefits of the privatization process begun in the 1990s and thus improve the quality 
of life of its citizens and the competitiveness of its businesses.   

25. 
An important component of the governance challenge—to which the government 
has also committed itself—is to improve the capacity of the judicial system to properly 
enforce 
legislation by strengthening management, adopting a more effective 
organizational structure and  improving the allocation of resources. 

D. The Growth Agenda  

26. 
During the 1990s, few countries experienced as much progress as El Salvador in 
the introduction of first generation reforms, creating a solid market-oriented framework. 
However, growth levels have been disappointing since the second half of the 1990s. 
While factors beyond the control of the authorities explain a large share of this result 
(e.g., commodity prices, natural disasters), there are still some key weaknesses in policies 
and institutions that need to be addressed. According to the Bank’s recent Country 
Economic Memorandum (CEM), which evaluated positively El Salvador’s reform agenda 
of recent years, key priority areas to reignite growth include (i) further expanding 
international trade, (ii) improving the investment climate, (iii) addressing remaining 
bottlenecks in infrastructure, (iv) fostering innovation and adoption of new technology 
and, (v) increasing the educational level of the population. This section presents an 
overview of challenges in the first four of these items, with education issues discussed at 
more length below in the section on human capital.  

27. 
Trade. El Salvador and four other Central American countries have negotiated a 
free trade agreement (DR-CAFTA) with the United States. If implemented, the 
agreement is expected to bolster trade and investment levels. The Bank’s recent 
analytical work in this area indicates that DR-CAFTA could add at least 0.5% per annum 
to El Salvador’s growth rate. The agreement would yield opportunities to turnaround the 
recent deceleration in export growth, which has been affected by greater competition 
from Asian textiles in external markets as well as low prices for coffee and other 
traditional exports. It is also expected to improve significantly the investment climate, as 
it contains rules and disciplines for investment relations, anti-corruption, as well as labor 
and environmental standards. Commitments in these areas are expected to yield 
improvement in key regulations, as well as a strengthening of local institutions. Greater 
trade opportunities and a stronger investment climate are expected to boost investment 
levels, both from abroad and from internal sources, which is the linchpin of the 
government’s plan to reignite growth. The agreement was ratified by the Salvadoran 
Assembly in late 2004 and is expected to enter into force as soon as it is approved by the 
U.S. Congress in 2005.   

28. 
DR-CAFTA is likely to enhance market access for some Salvadoran products, 
while making permanent the unilateral preferences offered in the past through the 

 16

Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI). Little if any trade diversion is expected, since the U.S. 
has been traditionally the largest natural market for Salvadoran exports, as well as its 
largest source of imports.  

BOX 6: ACTIONS TO MAXIMIZE DR-CAFTA OPPORTUNITIES FOR EL SALVADOR 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) Education and knowledge absorption and generation: DR-CAFTA is likely to bolster FDI and imports with 
the capacity to improve technology and productivity. However, to materialize the potential and enhance 
technological spillovers will require sufficient levels of human capital and an adequate knowledge and innovation 
system. In education, this means that El Salvador needs to close its ‘gap in skills’, expanding coverage and quality 
of its primary and secondary schooling system. In the innovation front, it will need to boost the quality of its 
institutions of research, increase expenditures on R&D and develop links between public researchers and private 
sector users. There are important synergies to be exploited between a functioning innovation system and critical 
higher education initiatives.  
Institutional development and governance: El Salvador has achieved considerable progress in the institutional 
and governance front over the past decade.  However, serious deficiencies still exist, particularly in the rule of law 
and personal security front, as evidenced by corruption, violence and crime indicators.  Weaknesses in rule of law 
are part of the reason for the apparent low growth yield of reforms in El Salvador in recent years. To reap the 
rewards of DR-CAFTA, continued improvement in institutions is required, especially those aimed to improve the 
rule of law and fight corruption. This will require substantial local efforts, as such improvements have not been 
automatic byproducts of North-South free trade agreements.  
Infrastructure: While El Salvador has made great strides in modernizing its infrastructure (esp. airports and 
roads) in recent years, there are deficiencies that need to be addressed, particularly in road networks and ports. 
The experience of Mexico has shown that the southern provinces have lagged behind the rest of the country in 
taking advantage of the growth opportunities offered by NAFTA, principally because of low education levels, and 
weak transport and communications infrastructure. To allow all regions of El Salvador to benefit from DR-
CAFTA, strategic investments in infrastructure will be required, with  increased emphasis on lagging regions.  
(cid:131) Macroeconomic management: Investors should be attracted by El Salvador’s record of stable macroeconomic 
management of recent years. Potential fiscal losses associated with DR-CAFTA will need to be compensated and 
macroeconomic management strengthened. Within the dollarization framework, the Central Bank’s role as lender 
of last resort to the financial system needs to be bolstered and efforts must be redoubled to ensure compliance 
with strict prudential norms and regulations. Further fiscal consolidation will also be required in order to pursue 
effective counter cyclical policies.  
(cid:131) Trade policy: In addition to strengthening institutions related to meeting DR-CAFTA commitments in the trade 
administration sphere, El Salvador is likely to benefit from continuing to pursue its agenda of unilateral, bilateral 
and multilateral actions to expand trade and broader integration opportunities. Deepening trade and other links 
with regional neighbors through the CACM will improve allocation of resources in the region and provide 
economies of scale needed to launch new viable export ventures. Further progress in reaching FTAs with Canada, 
the European Union and with other Latin American countries through FTAA will further broaden economic 
integration and minimize any possible trade diversion effects from existing FTAs.  
(cid:131) Broadening the benefits of DR-CAFTA: Attention is also required to ensure that benefits of DR-CAFTA are 
spread across all levels of Salvadoran society. This includes policies to foster development of financial services 
beyond large companies, so that MSMEs have access to finance. This is likely to require legal and institutional 
shortcomings regarding the protection of creditor and shareholder rights. Specially targeted programs for low 
income farmers/laborers may also be needed for those who are likely to be displaced from their current activities, 
to facilitate a smooth transition to other areas with more growth potential. 

Source:  The World Bank, CEM, 2004.  

29. 
Complementary actions will be required to ensure that El Salvador takes full 
advantage of the opportunities offered by DR-CAFTA, and to obtain the anticipated 
boost in growth rates, as indicated in the Bank’s recent analytical work on this topic (see 
Box 6). Actions will be especially needed in improving the investment climate, 
addressing critical infrastructural bottlenecks, fostering innovation and raising the 

 17

 
 
 
 
educational level of the labor force. Complementary actions are also needed to ensure 
that the opportunities of trade are accessible to small and medium size firms, which 
represent a significant percentage of El Salvador’s economy.  

30. 
El Salvador has also advanced in the reduction of institutional barriers to trade in 
the region by working with partners of the Central American Common Market (CACM) 
on the terms for creating a customs union.  In recent months, Guatemala and El Salvador 
have been unifying their border customs offices and are advancing on plans to share 
revenues in order to eliminate customs posts in common borders. 

31. 
Investment Climate. In this area, issues that need to be addressed include the 
poor functioning of some markets, insufficient competition in others, high costs of doing 
business and further development of capital markets, as described below. 

32. Market performance and regulation of competition. One of El Salvador’s key 
deficiencies in international competitiveness rankings is the persistence of perceptions of 
anti-competitive practices in some markets as well as the lack of modern anti-trust and 
bankruptcy laws. The appropriate functioning of some markets has been impaired by 
weak enforcement of current norms and the absence of a modern Commercial Code. 
Market performance is also affected by gaps in the overall regulatory framework and 
weaknesses in some regulatory agencies. Improvements in the effectiveness of the 
judicial system is also needed.  

33. 
Costs of doing business. Recent reports by the Bank have highlighted the high 
costs of doing business in El Salvador. In particular, local entrepreneurs still have to 
endure long and costly processes to establish a new business. Recently, the National 
Investment Office (ONI) reduced the time to register a foreign business form 8 months to 
2 weeks.  However the benefits of administrative simplification for starting and operating 
a business need to be extended to local firms, including SMEs. According to the 2005 
Cost of Doing Business Report, El Salvador needs additional efforts in reducing the 
number of days and the cost of registering new firms.  

34. 
Development of capital markets: El Salvador’s capital market has benefited from 
a regionally strong financial sector, generally effective legislation, banking consolidation, 
unrestricted capital flows and considerable integration of micro-lending institutions to the 
formal banking sector. However, the banking sector’s ability to provide capital to all 
types of productive activities is constrained by its limited capacity to assume un-
diversifiable risks, and by the need to permanently maintain high precautionary liquidity 
levels. Alternative financing instruments could develop through the securitization of 
claims on selected investment projects, as banks, brokerage houses, and the Stock 
Exchange offer the infrastructure required to place those securities in their primary 
market, and to provide liquidity to them by maintaining an active secondary market. 
Other areas that require further efforts to improve access to finance more broadly include 
improving credit analysis for micro lending institutions; introducing more flexible 
guarantees and more efficient registration of related pledges and execution of claims.  

 18

35. 
Infrastructure. Despite progress during the 1990s, and a major reconstruction 
effort after the 2001 earthquakes, El Salvador still faces challenges in the coverage, 
quality, access and sustainability of infrastructure services. To move in this front, the 
country needs to mobilize additional investment resources (public and private) and 
continue institutional and policy reforms. In particular, the country needs to improve the 
framework for efficient and equitable provision of infrastructure services, strengthening 
the 
institutional capacity of 
the “Superintendencia General de Electricidad y 
Telecomunicaciones” (SIGET) and issuing complementary legislation particularly in the 
energy, telecommunications, water and sanitation, and transport sectors. In addition, as 
the DR-CAFTA approaches implementation, improved access to market will be a key 
requirement for the benefits of the treaty to materialize, for which resolution of 
bottlenecks in road, aviation and port policies will be necessary. 

36. 
In energy, an electricity sector reform program begun in 1996 unbundled the 
national utility and, in 1998, privatized distribution and generation assets.  The 
privatization program led to investments of approximately US$850 million in the sector.  
This has significantly increased coverage and service quality, resulting in a decline in the 
production losses experienced by Salvadoran firms as a result of power interruptions.  
However, further regulatory and market structural reforms are needed to ensure 
competitive behavior and pricing as well as an investment program that keeps pace with 
demand.   

37. 
In telecommunications, the situation has improved significantly over the past few 
years, as the liberalization of the telecom market has led to impressive expansion of 
coverage for telephony and a drop in rates.  Nonetheless, El Salvador’s technological 
competitiveness is impacted by the low level of reliance on information and 
communications technology illustrated by an unusually low use of the internet.  This is 
likely due to tariff structures that price internet usage out of the market for homes and 
small businesses.  Regulatory and institutional strengthening in this area could help El 
Salvador to leverage its wide telephony coverage as a basis for more competitive ICT. 

38. 
In water and sanitation, the sector presents a mixed picture in regulation and 
supervision, and the country is lagging behind neighboring countries in the region, some 
of them with much lower per capita income, in terms of access to improved water 
sources. Many agencies from the public sector have jurisdiction over the water sector, 
resulting in inefficiencies, poor accountability, and lack of a comprehensive policy 
framework.  The situation and performance of the water and sanitation sector has impacts 
that not only affect public health but reduce the country competitiveness, increasing the 
cost of doing business and its capacity to attract foreign investments.    

39. 
Through the creation of the road fund (FOVIAL), El Salvador has made 
significant strides in rebuilding its primary and secondary road network since the 2001 
earthquakes. However, it still maintains the lowest level of paved roads in Central 
America—26 percent.  Among those roads less than 60 percent are in good or very good 
condition. In a survey conducted in 2002 as part of the Investment Climate Assessment, 
approximately 40% of firms reported losses or damage of goods in transport from plants 
to consumers. Inefficiencies in the transport and logistics chain generate losses equivalent 

 19

to 1.8 percent of total sales. Going forward, the country needs to improve—through both 
public and private investments—critical roads for international and interregional 
commerce, including the East and North Corridors, as well as the unpaved rural road 
network that connects rural areas to the primary roads.  

40. 
One out of every three firms in El Salvador found air transport to be a bottleneck 
for export competitiveness and FDI.  Private investment and a modern management 
arrangement are also needed to improve cargo services at the Comalapa International 
Airport. In ports, the national seaport, Acajutla, remains a relatively inefficient public 
terminal with limited container capacity while most shippers seeks access through 
Honduras.  While the government is considering the development of a new port facility 
with support from Japan, 
the port reform program has been highlighted 
in 
competitiveness studies as a priority for exporters and other shippers and consignees. In 
all cases, it is clear that actions should go beyond physical infrastructure and deal with 
the entire logistics chain that increases cost and reduces the capacity to export and the 
attractiveness of El Salvador for private investment. 

41. 
Innovation and technology. El Salvador is trailing in the area of innovation and 
technology, as diagnosed in the Bank’s recent CEM. The country is lagging in its efforts 
to develop an effective National Innovation System (NIS). By international standards, El 
Salvador underperforms in innovation outcomes (e.g., patents, scientific publications) as 
a result of a very low level of R&D investment in comparison to countries of similar size 
and level of development, despite evidence of high potential rates of return to this type of 
investment. In addition, the efficiency of the NIS system, measured as the productivity of 
turning R&D investments into patents, is low in comparison to similar countries. This 
inefficiency is in great part due to the lack of collaboration between the private sector and 
research organizations such as universities. El Salvador also performs poorly in 
international comparisons of technology transfer through FDI.  

42. 
Improving its NIS and levels innovation and technology transfer remains an 
important challenge in El Salvador going forward. The CEM suggested the following 
initiatives to improve El Salvador’s NIS: (i) improve the capacity of El Salvador to fully 
benefit from the available stock of knowledge, by emphasizing imports of capital goods 
and licensing; (ii) enhance the incentive-regime for private R&D to help technology 
absorption and support gradual technology adaptation; (iii) strengthen public-private 
partnerships particularly (although not only) in key areas of the economy such as 
agriculture and 
teleservices; and (iv) 
improve coordination, policy-making and 
effectiveness of public interventions. 

E. Poverty 

43. 
El Salvador has made significant progress in reducing poverty since the beginning 
of the 1990s.  The share of the population whose income falls below the poverty line 
declined by 27 percentage points from 64.4 percent in 1991 to 37.2 percent in 2002, 
while the fraction living in extreme poverty declined by almost 16 percentage points from 
31.2 percent to 15.4 percent during the period.  Poverty fell fastest in the first half of the 
decade and slowed considerably after 2000 – in the face of the coffee crisis, the 

 20

earthquakes of 2001, and the slowdowns in the global and domestic economies.  Indeed, 
extreme poverty has barely changed since 2000.  Moreover, income inequality, already 
high by international standards, has increased slightly since the mid-1990s, highlighting 
the challenges facing El Salvador’s poorest families.   

44. 
Several factors are associated with the broad improvements in poverty during the 
1990s.  Economic growth has been an important force for poverty reduction, and many 
poor families were able to share in the growth that occurred over the period.  Between 
1991-2002 period, for example, average incomes of the poor households grew by 3.1 
percent a year, not far from the nationwide average of 3.7 percent.  Structural changes in 
employment and household earnings have also contributed to poverty reduction over the 
period. 
 Specifically, there was a considerable movement of employment and 
diversification of household  incomes out of agriculture over the period, and those 
households that were able find new, non-agricultural income sources, generally 
succeeded in raising their living standards over the period.   

45. 
In addition, remittances played an important role in poverty reduction over the 
period.  Indeed, households that received remittances had income levels that were fifty 
percent higher than otherwise identical households that did not.  Only a relatively small 
proportion of the poor received remittances during the period, however; as such, 
simulation analysis suggests that the effect of households’ own income growth was likely 
greater than the effect of remittances in reducing poverty.  Finally, increased attention to 
the social sectors, which has tended to be low by international standards, has contributed 
significantly to increased access by the poor to human services.  This, in turn, has 
contributed to increased economic productivity among young graduates and paved a way 
toward further reductions in poverty in the future. 

46. 
Although there has been some narrowing of income differentials across 
departments since the early 1990s, regional and spatial dimensions of poverty remain 
important.  Moreover, recent estimates indicate that poverty in El Salvador continues to 
be disproportionately a rural phenomenon. According to the recent World Bank Poverty 
Assessment (2004), roughly half of Salvadorians living in rural areas was poor and a 
quarter of the rural population was extremely poor in 2002.  This compares with about 29 
percent of urban population which was poor, and only 9 percent who were extremely 
poor.  While according to official figures only about 40 percent of Salvadorans live in 
rural areas, 55 percent of all poor people lived in rural areas in 2002 (Box 7).  Extreme 
poverty is particularly concentrated in rural areas; in 2002, nearly two-thirds of all El 
Salvador’s extreme poor lived in rural areas.  Along other social dimensions, it is worth 
noting that there has also been some closing of the gender gap in well-being over time.  
While, on average, female headed households were significantly poorer than male-headed 
households in 1991, this was no longer true by 2002.  

 21

BOX 7: POVERTY REDUCTION AND THE RURAL-URBAN DIVIDE 

To date, poverty analysis in El Salvador has utilized official definitions of rural and urban, which are based 
on long-standing administrative boundaries.  Nonetheless, there is some debate in the development 
literature as to whether historical administrative definitions are the most appropriate.  One alternative 
definition, used by the European Union and applied to Latin American countries in a new World Bank 
Flagship report “Beyond the City: The Rural Contribution in Development in Latin America and the 
Caribbean”, defines rural communities in terms of their population density and distance from major urban 
centers.  Under this definition, the spatial distribution of the Salvadoran population – and, thus, the regional 
characterization of poverty in El Salvador – would differ notably.  Only 10 percent of the total Salvadoran 
population would be is characterized as rural, and much of what policymakers now call rural might be 
characterized as “semi-urban”.   

While it is possible to debate the merits of this alternative definition for El Salvador, one potential benefit 
of this definition is that it serves to highlight rural-urban linkages that will be increasingly important for 
future poverty reduction in El Salvador.  The increasing importance of non-agricultural incomes is already 
clear from the analysis presented in the Poverty Assessment.  Indeed, a key engine for poverty reduction 
over the last decade has been the structural change of the overall economy toward manufacturing and 
services and the important diversification of incomes among “rural” (and/or semi-urban) households into 
non-agricultural activities.  This structural movement out of agricultural into non-agricultural enterprises 
and income is likely to be a major force in poverty reduction in El Salvador in the coming years.   

This analysis reinforces several strategic areas of policy reform and investment highlighted in the Poverty 
Assessment that will be important to reducing poverty in the future.  This includes investments in human 
capital of the poor to enable them to better take advantage of emerging economic opportunities, and 
investments in rural road and transport infrastructure to strengthen linkages to markets and between the 
agricultural and non-agricultural economies. 

47. 
El Salvador’s recent successes in reducing poverty have highlighted a new set of 
challenges for continuing poverty reduction and social progress in the years to come.  
Economic growth will continue to be a central feature in El Salvador’s efforts to reduce 
poverty.  As such, one key challenge will involve reinvigorating economic growth.  A 
second, and equally important challenge, will be ensuring that the poorest Salvadorans 
are able to benefit from future economic progress.  This is important because while the 
more moderate (or “relative”) poor did benefit from economic growth since the early 
1990s, the poorest, most vulnerable Salvadorans have not been able to take advantage of 
recent progress.  Indeed, while the moderate poor experienced average household income 
growth of over 3 percent per annum, per capita incomes of the poorest Salvadorans grew 
only 1.3 percent per year, on average, over the period.  This, in turn, has fueled the recent 
increases in inequality in El Salvador, and raised the prospect of the poorest segment of 
Salvadoran society being further left behind in the future.  The recent World Bank 
Poverty Assessment for El Salvador (2004) finds that inability of the poorest to take 
advantage of economic progress is related both to the weak human capital endowments of 
the poorest, most vulnerable Salvadorans, as well as their continued lack of access to 
markets and basic services.  These factors help to frame the main policy areas for future 
poverty reduction in El Salvador. 

48. 
Environmental degradation has increased El Salvador’s vulnerability to natural 
disasters (earthquakes, floods, etc) and is closely related to rural poverty.  Low 

 22

 
productivity in production systems and pressures from the population have led to a 
depletion of natural resources in many rural areas, characterized by soil erosion and 
degradation, loss of habitat, biodiversity and natural forests, and growing problems in 
water management and conservation.    In order to address these vulnerabilities the new 
government is developing a national environmental policy and strategy, with broad 
citizen participation, that would consolidate the regulatory and legal framework  and 
support implementation of measures aimed at watershed recovery, reforestation, 
decontamination, clean production, management of ecosystems and biodiversity 
conservation.  The government is also considering piloting a system of charges and 
payments for environmental services that would compensate poor hillside farmers for 
adopting sustainable agricultural practices and producing positive environmental 
externalities.  This type of program has been successful in reducing rural poverty in a 
sustainable way in countries such as Costa Rica. 

F. Human Capital and Socio-Economic Infrastructure 

49. 
Education.  Continuing to strengthen the education sector will be central to El 
Salvador’s economic growth and poverty reduction strategies.  El Salvador has a strong 
history of education reforms and a good track record of cost-effective use of resources. El 
Salvador's education system made positive strides in the 1990s and is now very well 
positioned in the Central American context.  In particular, El Salvador has made 
considerable progress in raising primary enrollment rates (primary gross enrollment rate 
over 100% and primary net enrollment rate of about 85%), primary graduation rates  
(now about 80%) and  secondary coverage (gross enrollment rate of about 60%). 
Additionally, the  urban-rural and socio-economic gaps have decreased. It is likely that 
the country will meet the 2015 Millennium Development Goals for net primary 
enrollment, share of students that complete the fifth grade, and the universal literacy 
target for youth.  The targets related to gender in primary and secondary education as 
well as literacy rates have already been met. 

50. 
This performance is the result of a comprehensive education reform which started 
in the early 1990s and was formally endorsed by the ten year Education plan (1995-2005) 
which received broad-based support from Salvadoran society. The education reform 
included several innovative measures, such as: (a) the re-organization of  the education 
cycle into a basic (grades 1 to 9) and a secondary (grade 10 to 11 or 12) sub-cycle; (b) the 
introduction of  a pioneering community-based school management model, called 
EDUCO, in the rural areas; (b) full teacher certification; (c) the introduction of teachers’ 
selection and accreditation mechanisms and of  a team-based merit pay scheme; and (d), 
more recently, the introduction of multi-grade teaching and distance education in rural 
areas. 

51. 
Despite these recent achievements challenges remain, particularly with respect to 
equity, quality, and efficiency. The still-low education indicators--such as standardized 
assessments and pre-school and secondary education coverage--affect especially students 
from low income families.  Secondary enrollment rates are only about 20 percent among 
the poor (compared with about 50  percent among the non-poor) and, when the poor do 
enroll in school, they are less likely to continue to completion (less than 10% of the poor 

 23

complete secondary).  In addition, while the quality of education is a system-wide 
challenge in El Salvador, education quality appears to be particularly low in schools 
attended by the poor.  There is a need to increase the value of additional years of 
education at the lower secondary level where rates of return are very low and improve the 
relevance of upper secondary education.   Therefore the GOES is seeking not only to 
continue increasing access to secondary education but also to improve its quality and 
modernize its content.  In terms of efficiency, the system needs to find more cost-
effective strategies to strengthen and/or expand successful innovations such as 
community-based education management, multi-grade schooling, distance education, 
education for overage students, technology centers and extra-curricular programs for 
youth.  Efficiency gains will guarantee better use of proposed additional resources to the 
sector. 

52. 
Public education spending in El Salvador is still low compared to international 
standards and to the regional average.  Spending is also low relative to El Salvador’s per 
capita income level.  The new government of El Salvador has placed education at the 
centre of its development strategy and is fully committed to supporting educational 
reform.  A new fifteen year Long Term Education Plan  with specific preschool, primary 
and secondary education targets to 2021 - is being prepared using the same national 
dialogue and consensus process as before; and, in parallel, the government will 
implement the key activities of the 2004-2009 Education Development Program. The 
government will focus on key areas, which include improving education quality, 
providing access for all for secondary education (including poor and rural populations), 
strengthening secondary education linkages to productivity and technology, and 
increasing public (and overall) financing for education.  Quality improvements will be 
supported by a strengthened testing and evaluation system. Wider access to secondary 
will be supported by the consolidation of distance education and demand-side programs, 
as well as by innovations such as the development of rural school networks. The link with 
technology will be strengthened by the creation of regional technological poles. 

53. Health.  Continuing to improve Salvadorans’ access to healthcare and, through it, 
their health status, will also be a critical dimension of increasing the human development 
and well-being of all Salvadorans.  During the 1990s El Salvador made progress in life 
expectancy, infant mortality rates and child immunization.  These indicators are now 
similar or slightly better than LAC, and gaps between the poor and non-poor have closed, 
at least in some areas.  However, the prevalence of chronic child malnutrition has 
declined more slowly, and basic health and nutrition indicators continue to be 
significantly lower among the poor than the non-poor.  The prevalence of child mortality 
is fifty two percent higher in rural areas than in urban areas and infant mortality is almost 
twice as high for low-income families.  Fewer than 20 percent of all Salvadorans have 
access to medical insurance either through the Salvadoran Social Security Institute or 
through private sources.  Less than 10 percent and 3 percent of the moderate and extreme 
poor, respectively, are insured.  Therefore, a major responsibility of El Salvador’s 
Ministry of Public Health (MOH) is to cover the population without insurance. While 
there have been significant advances in recent years, it is estimated that nearly one-
quarter of the population, mostly the poor, still has limited or no access to public health 

 24

services.  Problems of access have been exacerbated by delays in repairing earthquake 
damage to hospitals and other health facilities. 

54. 
Continuing to improve basic health outcomes among the poor will require 
enhanced efforts to ensure access to affordable healthcare among those who lack it, as 
well as building greater trust in the public health care system through improving the 
quality of services.  This will involve: (i) ensuring that targeted health fee waivers are 
available, when necessary, to address demand-side constraints among the poor; (ii) 
assessing ongoing institutional reform and decentralization efforts, streamlining the 
stewardship and management roles of MOH and SIBASIS6 respectively, as well as 
expanding social security coverage on health; (iii) identifying cost-effective ways of 
strengthen the outreach and quality of the public health system, particularly at the 
primary level, and tapping the potential of NGOs and other private providers of health 
services for the benefit of the poor; (iv) reforming the health sector’s human resource 
policy to ensure a sufficient supply of well-trained health care professionals and quality 
care, particularly in poor rural areas; and (iv) completing rehabilitation of hospitals 
damaged by the 2001 earthquakes to ensure safe and adequate supply of secondary and 
tertiary health services, as well as rationalizing and modernizing the public hospital 
infrastructure.  

55. 
El Salvador’s overall budgetary allocation for health services as a share of GDP is 
low by regional standards, as are total public outlays (including health programs of the 
Social Security Institute) on a per capita basis.  In contrast to education, there is still no 
broad consensus on the direction of health sector reforms. The current government has 
reestablished the political dialogue with health stakeholders and revived the National 
Commission on Health Reform, after a severe deterioration of the dialogue process 
during the past few years. A critical element in making sustainable progress in health will 
be building a national consensus on the way forward in important issues such as progress 
in the decentralization of public services; public-private partnerships; expansion of health 
insurance and cooperation between social security and MOH; staffing levels, recruitment 
and payment policies to health personnel; and enhancement and enforcement of quality 
and safety of care. Efforts should focus on how to improve the efficiency and equity of 
resource use, as the government identifies new sources of additional funds to allocate to 
the sector. Reforms that define a strategic direction, including the appropriate roles for 
the private as well as the public sector, could pave the way to significant efficiency gains, 
and thus a greater leveraging of available resources.   

56. 
Socio-economic Infrastructure.  Access to basic services and to markets is key 
to expanding the productivity and income and employment generating opportunities of 
the poor.  Over the 1990s, El Salvador made significant progress in increasing access to 
safe water, sanitary installations, telecoms, and electricity.  Important gains were also 
made in reducing the isolation of poor, rural households and enhancing their access to 
markets through investments in expansion and improvement of the rural road network. 

6 SIBASIS (Sistemas Básicos de Salud Integral): Decentralized autonomous networks of MOH facilities 
providing primary and secondary care to defined geographical areas under unified management. 

 25

                                                 
Average distances and travel times to paved roads and to markets declined substantially 
for all rural households, and most dramatically for the poorest families.  

57. 
El Salvador has already surpassed the MDG target for urban water and sanitation 
and rural sanitation coverage and it is likely that by 2015, the target for rural access to 
water will be met. However, about half the poorest households still lack access to safe 
water, particularly in rural areas, and pollution has proven to be a serious health threat for 
consumers.  In addition, over 20 percent of the poorest households lack adequate 
sanitation facilities.  The current regulatory system allows for decentralized water 
provision but provides uneven “rules of the game” across water sector institutions leading 
to inefficiencies, considerable variability in the quality of water systems, and at times 
high water costs to the poor who access water through gray market purchases.  The sector 
also suffers from institutional weakness and dispersion: Many agencies from the public 
sector have jurisdiction over the water sector: the Ministry of Agriculture operates and 
administers the national irrigation system, the Ministry of Public Health monitors the 
quality of water for human consumption and 
industrial production, and 
the 
Administracion Nacional de Acueductos y Alcantarillados (ANDA) operates and 
regulates water and sewage. 

58. 
 Reforms were initiated in the 1990’s but  set aside because the focus shifted to 
system reconstruction in the aftermath of the earthquakes. The government has not 
completed development of a comprehensive policy framework for the water sector, 
mainly due to fragmentation in the management and control over its many segments. 
However, technical preparations for a reform of the sector are advanced, with ANDA 
drafting legislation to open up the market to competition by 2004 and establish a 
regulatory entity to oversee  national water policy. Despite concerns about the capacity of 
ANDA to lead the reform process the new government is potentially in a strong position 
to finalize the technical inputs and complete reforms.  This could vastly improve access 
to potable water among the poor.  

59. 
Improved coverage and quality of  rural roads during the 1990s has contributed 
to poverty reduction in rural areas, and has given household members access to markets, 
educational and health centers, water and security. However, the poor still face greater 
distances and costs associated with accessing services or markets.  Average distances to 
paved roads are still 80-90 percent higher among the extreme poor than the non-poor in 
rural areas, and average distances to the nearest market are roughly one-third higher 
among the extreme poor than the non-poor.  The government is committed to continue 
investing in rural roads and is focusing on: (i) expanding and improving the rural road 
network; (ii) developing a program for the maintenance of secondary and tertiary road 
networks to ensure sustainability of investments in roads and (iii) continuing 
development of local and municipal capacity to build and maintain rural road 
infrastructure. 

60. 
Significant improvements have also been made in coverage and quality of 
electricity service since 1990 particularly in rural areas. The proportion of households in 
rural areas with electricity increased by 28 percentage points between 1991 and 2002.  
However, in 2002 almost 29 percent of rural households still did not have electricity.  

 26

Strengthening the electricity sector is part of the President’s plan “Safe Country”. 
Specific challenges include: continuing to increase coverage in rural areas; the reduction 
of electricity costs through more efficient generation and distribution, and the 
improvement of service quality. The sector could benefit from more targeted resource 
allocation priorities: subsidies should be reduced for those who already have access to 
electricity to allow more resources to be allocated for the benefit of low-income 
populations and rural areas lacking service.   

61. Government priorities in poverty reduction. A key priority of the Saca 
administration is to address the needs of the poorest Salvadorans who have been unable 
to take advantage of economic growth over the past decade and a half and who have not, 
as yet, been able to benefit from traditional sector programs.  To build effectively on past 
achievements, the government has proposed to implement a social policy, based on broad 
national consensus, aimed at expanding access to markets and basic services,  including 
the coverage and quality of education and health care for the poor, and developing a 
social safety net for the poorest and most vulnerable Salvadorian families.  While 
improving targeting and the efficiency of public resources are also important, the 
relatively small size of overall expenditures in these areas indicate the need for additional 
investment, which will imply difficult trade offs in an environment with extremely tight 
fiscal limits.  The government’s medium term plan gives high priority to social 
expenditures and aims to gradually increase social spending as a percentage of GDP over 
the next five years. 

IV. EVALUATION OF COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FY02-04 

62. 
The World Bank’s Board of Directors discussed the last CAS on November 2, 
2001, covering the final three years of the Flores administration. The CAS supported 
three interrelated development objectives: (i) sustaining efforts to reduce poverty and 
promoting social development; 
(ii) accelerating growth and developing new 
opportunities; and (iii) fine tuning the role of the public sector. It proposed lending of 
US$270 million  over FY02-04, with a base case of five planned operations:  Earthquake 
Emergency and Basic Health Care Extension (FY02, $145 million), Judicial Reform 
(FY02, $10 million), Rural Productivity (FY03, $25 million), Environmental Services 
(FY04, $10 million), and Land Administration II (FY04, $30 million).  The high case 
proposed an additional US$50 million, including further support for Education Reform 
and the Social Investment and Local Development Fund.  Analytical and advisory 
services (A&A) were also proposed, including a Poverty Diagnostic, a Decentralization 
Study, a Social Protection Review, a Country Economic Memorandum, a Country 
Financial Accountability Assessment and a Country Procurement Assessment Report  and 
follow-up support to a recent Financial Sector Assessment.  

63. 
Country Program Performance Indicators.  Table 4 lays out the indicators 
developed in the last CAS for measuring Country Program Performance, with significant 
progress in some areas, while others are lagging.  As discussed earlier, growth rates 
slowed in the last few years, due largely to external shocks.  As a result per capita growth 
rates were lower than planned. However, the targets for the share of households in 
poverty and in extreme poverty were already met by end 2002. All targets in education 

 27

have been met  or exceeded, including the increase in net primary enrollment rate, 
achievement of gender parity in primary enrollments, and rehabilitation of schools 
damaged by the earthquakes.  However, the declines in the rates of infant mortality and 
malnutrition were lower than expected, and there was little progress in reconstruction of 
hospitals.  The design for the Modernization Plan for the Supreme Court was completed 
in 2002.   Some important measures were taken to improve the investment climate: the 
time to register a foreign business was reduced from 8 months to 2 weeks, the export 
matching grant mechanism was successfully launched, and a fuel tax was introduced to 
finance road maintenance.  Concessions of the airport, ports and mail service were not 
approved, due to the slow-down in reforms as a result of increased political polarization 
in the latter part of the Flores administration; however, modernization of the airport and 
ports remain on the agenda of the new government. 

 28

Table 4: Country Program Performance Indicators 2002-05 

Country Overall Indicators 
Per capita growth rate averages 2 percent in 2002-05 

Reduction in the share of households in poverty to 35-40 
percent by 2005. 

Increase in net primary education enrolment rate to pre-
earthquakes levels (78 percent) by 2004. 
Reduction of the infant mortality rate to 25 per 1,000 live 
births by 2005. 
Reduction of the number of under weight children by 20 
percent by 2005. 

Increase in the amount of foreign investment flows by 20 
percent by 2004. 

Other Indicators of the International Development Goals 

Bring the share of households in extreme poverty to pre-
earthquakes levels (16.7 percent) by 2004. 

Girls’ school primary enrolment maintained at least at the 
same level as boys. 
Reduce underreporting of HIV/AID cases from 50 to 25 
percent by 2005. 
Bank Indicators 
Number of hospitals rebuilt/rehabilitated:  7 hospitals by 
2005. 

Reconstruction/replacement of 413 schools by 2005. 

Completion of the design of the Modernization Plan  for 
the Supreme Court by 2002. 
Reduced time for complying with foreign investment 
licensing requirements by 2003. 
Set up the export matching grant mechanism for 50 firms 
by 2003. 

Approval of a road maintenance financing mechanism 
and concessions of airport, ports and mail services to the 
private sector completed by 2004. 

Results 

For the period 2002-2005 it is expected that per capita 
GDP will grow by 0.32 percent. In the period 2002-2003, 
per capita GDP grew 0.25 percent. 
By 2002, the share of the population that was poor had 
declined to 37.2 percent, while the share of households in 
poverty fell to 30.8% (World Bank Poverty Assessment).  
According to official GOES estimates, the share of 
households in poverty was 36.8% in 2002. 
This result has already been exceeded. Primary NER = 
85% in 2002. 
In 2002 Under-5 Mortality rate was 31 (a 40% reduction 
over the last decade). No updated data is available. 
Prevalence of child (under-5) chronic malnutrition was 
19.6 in 2002 (a reduction of 16% over the last decade). 
No updated data available.  The incidence of underweight 
declined from 11 to 10% from 1993-2002, a decline of 
about 9%. 
Based on the latest available annual data (2003), Gross 
Foreign Direct Investment increased by 16.1% since 
2001. 

By 2002, the share of the population that in extreme poor 
had declined to 15.4%, while the share of households in 
poverty fell to 12.1% (World Bank Poverty Assessment).  
According to official GOES estimates, the share of 
households in poverty was 15.8% in 2002. 
Target fully reached. In fact, females do slightly better 
than boys. 
Under reporting reduced to 30 percent by 2004 

Not yet completed due 
to delay of 
the 
loan’s 
effectiveness. MOH has carried out numerous temporary 
or partial works to improve the physical condition of the 
hospitals until they are finally rehabilitated. 
102 secondary schools have been rehabilitated and: more 
than 1,000 primary school classrooms have been replaced 
or reconstructed 
Plan Completed. 
The time to register a foreign business was reduced from 
8 months to 2 weeks. (National Investment Office) 
As of December 2003, 55 firms received export matching 
grants 
through 
the FOEX program 
(Fomento de 
Exportaciones) 
Road Maintenance Financing Mechanism: In Oct.2001, 
Congress approved a gas tax of US$ 0.20 per gallon to 
finance FOVIAL, the national road maintenance agency. 
Concession of Airports: The airport has not been 
concessioned. It 
is under 
the management of an 
autonomous state entity. 
Port Concession: The Acajutla Port has not been 
concessioned so far. For La Union Port, a procurement 
process  for consultancy on the best alternatives for port 
concession was recently launched. 
Mail Services Concession: Has not been done. 

 29

 
 
 
64. 
Only two of the five planned projects were delivered during FY02-04: the 
Earthquake Emergency Reconstruction and Basic Services for US$192.6 million and 
Judicial Modernization for US$18.2 million. This was largely because some of the 
projects were postponed by the government as it faced severe fiscal constraints in the 
aftermath of the earthquakes.  However project preparation for Land Administration II, 
Education Reform II, Environmental Services and Social Protection advanced and these 
operations are included this CAS.  Table 5 presents the current IBRD portfolio.  The 
Bank’s current lending portfolio in El Salvador includes six projects totaling US$380.8 
million net of cancellation, of which US$190 million has been disbursed as of December 
31, 2004. 

Table 5: IBRD Loan Portfolio 

Project

Approval

Key Dates
Effectiveness

Closing

Amounts in US Millions
Total 
Undisbursed

CAS Pillar
Pillar I: Accelerating 
Equitable Broad-Based 
growth and Increasing 
Employment

Pillar II:  Improving Equity 
through Building Human 
Capital and Expanding 
Access to Basic 
Infrastructure and 
Markets

Pillar III: Enhancing 
Security and Reducing 
Vulnerability

Secondary 
Education
Earthquake 
Reconstruction
Public Sector 
Modernization
judicial 
Modernization

Land Administration

5-Mar-1997

21-Mar-1997

30-Jun-2005

Education Reform

7-May-1998

30-Jun-2000

30-Jun-2005

28-Aug-1997

20-Aug-1998

31-Dec-2005

50.0

88.0

58.0

0.0

16.5

11.4

4-Dec-2001

11-Sep-2003

30-Apr-2007

142.6

139.4

3-Sep-1996

11-Mar-1997

31-Aug-2006

1-Aug-2002

8-Mar-2004

31-Dec-2008

24.0

18.2

6.1

17.4

65. 
IBRD Lending.  Overall the results of the Bank’s ongoing portfolio in El 
Salvador has been satisfactory, although project implementation has generally been rather 
slow and operations have taken longer than expected to disburse fully (See Table 5).  Box 
8 presents the findings by OED on projects which closed over the last seven years. 

 30

 
 
BOX 8: KEY LESSONS ON PORTFOLIO IMPLEMENTATION FROM OPERATIONS EVALUATION 
DEPARTMENT (OED) 

The World Bank’s Operations Evaluation Department (OED) conducted Implementation Completion 
Report Reviews for 4 projects which closed between 1998 and 2004: Agriculture Sector Reform and 
Investment Project, Energy Sector Modernization, Basic Education, and Power Sector Technical Assistance 
Loan.  OED rated the outcome of these projects as “satisfactory” in three cases, and “moderately 
satisfactory” for the Agriculture Sector Reform and Investment Project.  Key lessons include: (i) 
institutional reforms are more successful when there is unwavering commitment from the government for a 
sustained period of time and reforms are done incrementally and in sequence; (ii) dialoguing with key 
stakeholders and gaining consensus on reforms is a critical element to successful implementation of sector 
reforms; (iii) there may be advantages in packaging institutional reforms and sectoral investments as 
separate operations to avoid complexity and overloading implementation capacity; and (iv) it is important 
for smooth project implementation to set up the project executing unit well before loan effectiveness and 
have it staffed with senior professionals with adequate experience in technical, administrative and legal 
matters. 

66. 
In key areas of Bank support, El Salvador has been a regional leader, and has 
successfully piloted innovative approaches that have subsequently been adopted 
elsewhere.  For example the Land Administration  project is considered a best practice in 
the region and throughout the world and has provided an example for a series of similar 
Land Administration projects in Central America.  The Competitiveness Enhancement 
Technical Assistance Project which closed in June 2004 had great success in supporting 
the government’s program 
to accelerate private sector development and raise 
productivity.  It was the first of its kind in the LAC region, and its lessons are now 
reflected in similar projects in Nicaragua, Honduras and Guatemala, as well as in other 
LAC countries.  The Bank has been a major supporter of El Salvador’s education sector 
over the years, and a key partner in the design and implementation of the highly 
successful EDUCO community-based education program. The EDUCO model is 
considered a global best practice and was  showcased at the  Global Forum on Poverty 
Reduction in Shanghai in April 2004.  The  Bank-supported Public Sector Modernization 
project was instrumental in pushing forward very important structural reforms in the 
public sector.  The new CAS will build on these successful programs. 

67. 
The two new projects approved during FY02-04 suffered from significant delays 
in getting Congressional approval and took virtually two years to become effective.  
During this time, the Health project has evolved in a more strategic direction and the 
MOH is now using the project as an opportunity to rationalize and modernize the hospital 
network. The current objective is not only to restore hospital services to their pre-
earthquakes levels, but to make the rehabilitated hospitals more responsive to new  
demands for expanded basic services, reduce unnecessary hospitalization, implement 
more efficient modalities of hospital care and introduce modern management policies and 
systems. With support from the project the MOH has developed a Hospital Master Plan.  
The MOH has carried out the technical and administrative preparatory work necessary to 
use faster construction modalities (turn-key and design-build modalities). An assessment 
of availability of medical equipment is underway, as well as development of construction 
and equipment standards and environmental assessments.  A top priority is a MOH 
reorganization to strengthen management of public hospitals by setting up decentralized 

 31

 
 
autonomous units and implementation of performance-based service agreements and 
territorial health plans. The MOH has also strengthened its technical capacity and toolkit 
to contract and monitor health services. The package of health services has been refined, 
its costs updated, NGOs providing health services in remote areas have been assessed,  
innovative reimbursement mechanisms have been defined, technical standards for the 
delivery of care have been developed, and monitoring indicators and guidelines 
produced. 

68. 
Despite the delay in effectiveness of the Judicial Modernization Project, there has 
been some progress in three key areas:  (i) a modernization plan for the judiciary has been 
completed; (ii) administrative streamlining at the central level is well advanced and 
regional administration coordinators have been established; and (iii) a citizen information 
center and a judicial document center has been set up in San Salvador and training needs 
assessments have been completed. 

69. 
Non-Lending Services.  Throughout the CAS period the Bank maintained an 
effective partnership with El Salvador through non-lending services, including Economic 
and Sector Work, advisory services, conferences and workshops, technical assistance as 
well as grants for studies and capacity building.  In the last two years, the Bank 
completed five core diagnostic studies: a Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), a 
Poverty Assessment, a Public Expenditure Review, a Country Financial Accountability 
Assessment (CFAA); and a Country Procurement Assessment (CPAR).  The CFAA and 
the CPAR were both completed as 
joint documents with 
the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB).  Other major AAA activities include follow up to the FSAP 
through technical assistance and capacity building to the Central Bank; the preparation of 
an  education strategy paper; and a study on Disaster Loss Exposure and the Viability of 
Using Insurance or Catastrophe Bond Instruments for Financial Protection Following 
Natural Disasters.  The Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) worked with the 
government and other key stakeholders in an assessment of labor and environmental 
standards in key export industries in order to strengthen corporate social responsibility 
programs through strategic collaboration between the private and the public sector.  FIAS 
also assisted 
in 
the 
implementation of an education-focused Corporate Social 
Responsibility Strategy.  

70. 
In a number of areas the Bank’s program of AAA services has helped to build 
consensus among key stakeholders and to shape the direction of  national policies and 
priorities.  For example, the El Salvador Poverty Assessment is part of an ongoing 
program developed by the Bank in response to a request from the government for 
assistance in the aftermath of the earthquakes.  The first phase included: (i) analysis of 
poverty in El Salvador and policy advice on how to improve the impact of social policy 
and social sector spending; and (ii) analysis of vulnerable groups and of existing 
programs to confront vulnerability, and recommendations on how to strengthen the 
country’s social safety net.  The analytical work was accompanied by technical assistance 
to the statistical agency DIGESTYC to enable analysis of the municipal-level poverty 
impacts of the earthquakes.  The work culminated with the delivery of two policy notes –  
Poverty and Social Expenditures and Elements to Strengthen the Social Safety Net - and 
follow-up discussions with the Economic and Social Cabinets.  The first phase provided 

 32

an important foundation and generated demand for further analysis and dialogue aimed at 
strengthening the impact of El Salvador’s poverty and social sector policies and 
programs. 

71. 
The second phase of the program was produced in response to a specific request 
from GOES for more in-depth analysis in selected areas, including: (i) an update of the 
poverty profile with special emphasis on the impact of the earthquakes; (ii) a detailed 
analysis of social sector spending and its impact on the poor – including spending on 
rural water and roads, as well as on education, health, and social protection; and (iii) an 
examination of the likely fiscal costs of achieving further poverty reduction and socio-
economic progress.  The Poverty Assessment team also provided technical assistance and 
guidance including: (i) support to DIGESTYC as part of broader GOES efforts to 
construct a municipal-level poverty map and (ii) support to a multi-stakeholder exercise 
undertaken by the GOES on progress and challenges related to the MDGs. 

72. 
In education, the Bank has carried out analytical work and provided technical 
assistance to help prepare a comprehensive diagnostic of the sector and define strategic 
priorities.  The Bank recently finalized and disseminated a policy note on the education 
sector.  The Bank also provided support to a multi-stakeholder and multi-donor exercise, 
led by the Ministry of Education, to produce an integrated diagnostic of the education 
sector in El Salvador.  This diagnostic combines the findings of various local and 
international organizations in all major areas of the education sector. The Bank helped in 
all key steps of the process by: (i) providing its own diagnostic of the sector; (ii) helping 
with the organization of workshops to share the findings/studies of the different 
organizations; (iii) providing technical assistance for the integration of the studies; and  
(iv) supporting a final workshop to validate the results of the integrated diagnostic.   

73. 
During the CAS period 02-04, more than 350 representatives from Salvadoran 
government agencies, civil society organizations, academia, and the private sector 
participated in World Bank Institute courses, conferences, Global Distance Learning 
Network dialogues, and other learning programs.  Programs in El Salvador included 
courses on education reform, urban management, health sector reform and environmental 
management. WBI also organized together with FUSADES a regional conference on 
knowledge and innovation strategies. 

74. 
International Finance Corporation (IFC). IFC’s strategy as outlined in the 
previous CAS was to continue to work with the private sector in support of its recovery 
and medium term growth, with focus on investments in the country and regional financial 
and physical infrastructure.  Special focus was given to, and opportunities explored, in 
the financial markets, infrastructure and agribusiness sectors with projects materializing 
during this period in the first two sectors. 

75. 
Although the private sector in El Salvador still faces many challenges, the 
investment climate was generally perceived as positive over the last CAS period--owing 
to reform progress made to date.  Reflecting this perception in part, during this period 
IFC provided a total of $229.5 million (including $75 million for participations) for 6 
projects in El Salvador.  The investments were made in diverse sectors, such as financial 

 33

market, infrastructure (power), and retail.  In FY04, new commitment activity reached a 
record high at $92.5 million (in four projects).  As a result of this activity, as of end-
FY04, the committed portfolio (of IFC’s own account) stood at $170 million, more than 
three times the end-FY01 level. 

Table 6: IFC Commitments in FY02-04 

US$ million 

IFC 
84.5 
45.0 
25.0 
154.5 

Participants 
-- 
75.0 
-- 
75.0 

Sector 
Finance & Insurance 
Utilities 
Wholesale & Retail 
Total 

76. 
During the previous CAS 
period, IFC continued to be very 
active in the financial sector and 
supported housing finance, SME 
finance, microfinance, and a 
pension fund. IFC provided a 
mortgage credit line to Banco 
Agricola 
to 
help 
develop 
housing finance, which would 
bring broad social and economic 
benefits.  In addition, with donor 
fund support, IFC has been undertaking a study covering El Salvador, Costa Rica, and 
Panama (where there is a developing primary mortgage market and some secondary 
mortgage market activity) with the aim to develop a regional platform for creating the 
primary mortgage market which would subsequently help establish a regional secondary 
mortgage market.  IFC also supported broadening smaller businesses’ access to finance 
with  investments in Banco Agricola and Calpia (or currently known as Banco 
ProCredit).  Furthermore, with an equity investment in AFP Confia, one of the leading 
pension fund administrators, IFC supported the private pension system in El Salvador.  
This was IFC’s second investment in the sector where the Corporation provided advice to 
the government on the private pension law in the past. 

77. 
As part of Central American regional projects, IFC also supported TUCA (Trans 
Union Central America), the first private credit bureau that would operate throughout 
Central America, with an  equity investment.  The support for private credit bureaus is 
expected to facilitate the extension of credit to previously underserved segments of the 
population, in particular small businesses.  IFC also provided Banco Cuscatlán de El 
Salvador with a  subordinated convertible loan to be treated as Tier II capital, as part of 
$40 million financing package to the Cuscatlán group.  Additionally IFC supported with 
an investment Aureos CA Fund, a private equity fund that acquires minority interests in 
medium-sized Central American enterprises that would provide appropriate shareholder 
rights and would pursue a regional integration strategy. 

78. 
IFC’s largest investment during this period, including participants, took place in 
the infrastructure sector. IFC provided a $110 million loan (including $75 million from 
participants) for CAESS and EEO, power distribution companies to finance their capital 
expenditure program.   

79. 
Finally, IFC also supported the wholesale and retail sector with a long term loan 
to Metrocentro for the first-phase construction of a multi-purpose complex, which would 
first develop a shopping mall and later offices, a residential complex, a park, and a hotel.  
In addition to the rarely available long-term financing, IFC also assisted the company 

 34

with technical assistance in enhancing the business skills of its micro and small business 
tenants (funded by a donor support and the Corporate Citizenship Facility). 

80. Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). MIGA began its 
technical assistance work with El Salvador in late 1999 providing input on the design of 
PROESA, the national investment promotion agency. From its initial work on the 
structure and staffing of the agency to the sophisticated promotional systems that have 
generated important FDI flows for the country, MIGA has been very involved with 
PROESA.  This long term program has achieved substantial results including hundreds of 
projects that have contributed to employment generation.  Moreover new sectors, 
particularly business process outsourcing, have begun to invest in El Salvador. MIGA has 
provided technical support including: staff training in promotion techniques, campaign 
planning and execution, sector selection, and assistance in the creation of a public 
relations campaign, the role of the Board of Directors, the creation of an aftercare 
program for existing investors, and many more short interventions at the request of the 
government. MIGA believes that PROESA is now fully established to execute its 
mandate.  Further technical assistance will be based on ad-hoc client requests as opposed 
to a structured assistance program. 

81. 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). El Salvador maintains a close policy 
dialogue with the IMF, and does not plan to seek a formal arrangement. At the conclusion 
of the 2003 Article IV consultation (July 18, 2003), the Executive Board praised El 
Salvador for its record of fiscal prudence and impressive reforms since the early 1990s, 
even in the face of the adverse shocks. However, the Directors also noted a fiscal 
deterioration and sluggish growth in recent years, and encouraged the authorities to 
address these challenges. In particular,  the Directors urged the authorities to build on the 
credibility of the dollarized regime by strengthening fiscal and financial sector policies, 
and sustaining the structural reform effort.  During the 2004 Article IV consultation 
discussions (from October 25 to November 10, 2004), the staff encouraged the 
authorities’ ongoing efforts to strengthen the fiscal position and pursue reforms with a 
view to improving growth prospects and fortifying the economy against shocks.  The 
authorities explained that strengthening tax collections and deepening banking reforms 
were key policy priorities. A Board meeting to conclude the 2004 Article IV consultation 
is tentatively scheduled for January 2005. 

82. 
Aid Coordination. There is no formal aid coordination mechanism in place for El 
Salvador (the last CG meeting, chaired by the IDB, was held in March 2001 following 
the earthquakes) and the government coordinates assistance programs directly with each 
of its creditors.  Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) is El Salvador’s main lender, 
with 19 active projects at present totaling $679.1 million in earmarked funds. Over the 
years the Bank has established a broad division of responsibilities with the IDB, and this 
last CAS period proved no exception, with the IDB taking the lead on road infrastructure; 
water and sanitation; environmental sustainability and local and urban development 
projects. In turn the World Bank has taken the lead in assistance to primary and 
secondary education, land administration and property rights reform, private sector 
competitiveness, re-establishment of critical health services and judicial reform.  

 35

83. 
The Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI). CABEI has an 
active portfolio of nine projects of US$298,2 million in El Salvador.  As of June 30, 2004 
it had disbursed US$104.8 million. Looking forward to the new CAS period, CABEI will 
continue to focus on the first pillar in the government strategy, with large-scale lending 
operations to improve the country’s physical infrastructure – these projects will span 
ports development, telecommunication networks and nation-wide roads programs. 
CABEI’s lending program will also complement the Bank’s support for sustainable rural 
development projects. 

84. 
The World Bank Group, IDB, CABEI, and other donors’ operations and their 
links to development challenges are shown in the Table 7. 

 36

 
Table 7: Ongoing Donor Activities Supporting the three Government Pillars 

CABEI 
(cid:131) Ports Development 
(US$25m) 
(cid:131) San Salvador Ring Road 
(US$62.7m) 
(cid:131) Rehabilitation of Paved 
Roads (US$52.9m) 
(cid:131) San Salvador Central Market 
(US$7.4m) 
(cid:131) National Roads Program 
(US$135m) 
(cid:131) Telephone Network 
(US$8.3m) 
(cid:131) Sustainable Rural 
Development (US$7m) 

Government Strategy 
2004-2009 
I.   Accelerating 
Broad-Based 
Equitable Growth 
and Increasing 
Employment 

World Bank 
Group 
IFC’s support for 
utilities, 
manufacturing, the 
wholesale and retail 
sector and the 
financial markets 

IDB 
(cid:131) Agro-industry Program 
(US$24.9m) 
(cid:131) Central American 
Electricity Connection 
(US$30m) 
(cid:131) Competitiveness 
(US$100m) 
(cid:131) Fiscal Reform 
(US$15.5m) 

II.  Improving Equity 
through Building  
Human Capital 
and Expanding 
Access to Basic 
Infrastructure and 
Markets 

(cid:131) Education Reform 
(US$88m) 
(cid:131) Emergency Earth-
quake Recon-
struction and Health 
Services Extension 
(US$142m) 
(cid:131) Secondary Edu-
cation (US$58m) 
(cid:131) Land 
Administration I 
(US$50m) 

(cid:131) Education Infrastructure 
(US$70.8m) 
(cid:131) Education Technology 
(US$72.9m) 
(cid:131) Sustainable Rural Roads 
(US$57.7m) 
(cid:131) Local Development 
Program II (US$69.8m) 
(cid:131) Health Sector 
Modernization (US$20.6m) 
(cid:131) Housing (US$70m) 
(cid:131) Drinking Water & 
Sewage (US$43.6m) 

III. Enhancing 
Security and 
Reducing 
Vulnerability 

(cid:131) Public Sector 
Reform Project 
(US$24m) 
(cid:131) Judicial Reform 
Project (US$18.2m) 

(cid:131)Judicial Reform 
(US$22.2m) 
(cid:131) Sustainable Management 
of La Cuenca Rio Lempa 
(US$14m) 
(cid:131)National Program for the 
Environment (US$30m) 
(cid:131) Decontamination Critical 
Areas (US$29.8m) 
(cid:131) Strengthening of Regula-
tory Institutions (US$3.8m) 
(cid:131) Modernization of the 
Legislative (US$3.5m) 

 37

Other Donors 
(bilateral programs) 
(cid:131)USAID: Private sector competitiveness; Capacity to implement 
DR-CAFTA and remove key barriers to trade; SME lending and 
opportunities. 
(cid:131) GERMANY: Productive development ($US8.7m); Basic 
infrastructure (US$7m) 
(cid:131) SPAIN: Agricultural and fishing development; Budget support 
(US$772m) 
(cid:131) JAPAN: Productive development; Basic infrastructure 
(US$10.1m); Ports (US$92.1m) 

(cid:131) IFAD: Rural development (US$35m) 
(cid:131) USAID: Basic education; Health services;  HIV/AIDS prevention  
(cid:131) European Union: Secondary technical education; Rural develop-
ment;  Reconstruction;  School rebuilding; Basic health, local water 
and sewage; Solid waste; Basic education for women; Housing; 
Urban and justice Safety; Governance, Housing. 
(cid:131) GERMANY: Local development; Social protection; Basic 
health; Housing (US$27.1m) 
(cid:131) FRANCE: hydroelectric project and rural electrification 
(US$3.4m) 
(cid:131) SPAIN: Local development; Cultural heritage; Higher education; 
Employment, Gender; MDGs, Social protection, and M&E; Health 
system improvement; Housing (US$14.1m) 
(cid:131) JAPAN: Urban safety, Local development, Statistical systems; 
Technical education; Basic health; Housing (US$9.6m)  
(cid:131) USAID: Management and conservation of critical watershed; 
Social sector investment; Efficiency judicial processes; Alternative 
Dispute Resolution (ADR) 
(cid:131) European Union: Environmental management; Youth 
delinquency prevention; Environmental education; Contamination 
programs; Risk mitigation; Civic, Human Rights and NGO 
programs (US$39.1m) 
(cid:131) GERMANY: Risk management; water (US$11.6m) 
(cid:131) SPAIN: Institutional strengthening; waste management and 
potable water; financial sector interventions; watershed 
management (US$2.5m) 
(cid:131) JAPAN: Waste management; agriculture development; 
watershed management (US$3.6m) 

 
 
 
 
V. COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FY05-FY08 

A.  Bank Group Lending and Non Lending Services 

85. 
The Bank Group’s assistance over the four-year period covered by this CAS 
(FY05-08) proposes a strategic program of lending and non-lending services to support 
the three main pillars of the government’s development plan “Safe Country 2004-2009: 
(i) to accelerate broad-based, equitable economic growth and increase employment; (ii) to 
improve equity through building human capital and expanding access to socioeconomic 
infrastructure, assets and markets; and (iii) to enhance security and reduce vulnerability.  
Bank  Group assistance (See Table 8) will include: (i) support for implementation of the 
existing loan portfolio; (ii) new IBRD lending, including a Program of Development 
Policy Loans, and investment operations in selective areas where the Bank has global 
expertise and comparative advantage and which complement the activities of other key 
development partners; (iii) analytical and advisory work, technical assistance, and 
facilitation of access by El Salvador to grants administered by the World Bank; (iv) 
learning and capacity development programs through the World Bank Institute (WBI) 
and the Global Distance Learning Center (GDLN) and (v) targeted private sector 
assistance provided by IFC and MIGA.  Country Financial Parameters have been 
prepared for El Salvador and this should facilitate the implementation of the proposed 
program.   

86. 
The assistance strategy was developed in close partnership with the Government 
of El Salvador.  A workshop on the CAS was held in October 2004, with participation by 
a broad range of stakeholders including Members of Congress, civil society, think-tanks, 
private sector representatives and members of the international development community.  
Participants discussed the findings and recommendations of recent Bank analytical 
studies and provided input on proposed areas of future Bank assistance.  In addition, a 
series of smaller meetings were held with specific stakeholder groups to solicit their 
views on how the Bank could best support El Salvador over the next four years.  Annex 
D provides a summary of the key points of the discussions.  Overall, responses and views  
were positive.  Participants showed great interest in all the recent diagnostic reports 
prepared by the Bank, and requested that there be opportunities for more dialogue and 
feedback throughout the process of preparing future reports.   Some stakeholders were 
concerned about the recent increase in the level and cost of external debt in El Salvador 
and asked the Bank to help the Government to develop a debt management strategy.  In 
this context, most participants welcomed the proposed Development Policy Lending 
approach as a way to lower the costs of external financing.  There was general support for 
DPLs as a appropriate way for the Bank to support the country's own development 
strategy and priorities, as long as efforts continued to strengthen the transparency and  
effectiveness of budget expenditures.       

87. 
The central component of the Bank's assistance strategy in El Salvador would be a 
programmatic series of Development Policy Loans (DPL) to support the Saca 
government's medium term development strategy to accelerate broad based and equitable 

 38

 
economic growth.  The DPLs would provide quick-disbursing budget support in line with 
policy performance that would be synchronized with the government's annual budget and 
would allow the government to reduce its external financing costs by partially replacing 
higher cost bonds issued in the international capital markets.  El Salvador's past track 
record of sound macroeconomic management, significant policy and institutional reforms 
and marked improvements in social indicators, as described earlier in this document, 
make it a strong candidate to receive DPL assistance.  The  key areas to be supported by 
the program of DPLs are summarized in Box 9. 

BOX 9: KEY AREAS SUPPORTED BY THE PROGRAM OF DEVELOPMENT POLICY LOANS 

• Accelerating broad-based growth, including measures to expand international trade, improve the 
investment climate, increase private participation in infrastructure and build innovation and 
technological development.  
• Restoring a sound fiscal framework, including measures to increase tax revenues and strengthen the 
financial sector. 
• Public sector modernization, including procurement reform and other measures to improve public 
financial management and governance.   

88. 
The first DPL which will be submitted together with the Country Assistance 
Strategy is based on critical prior actions in all three key areas, with a particular focus on 
actions to improve the fiscal situation and generate the resources needed for additional 
social spending.  It also lays out indicative triggers for the second operation and 
monitorable indicators of progress towards long-term goals related to the three key areas. 
The design of key prior actions, triggers and indicators is underpinned by a substantial 
body of analytic work carried out by the Bank in partnership with the Government of El 
Salvador over the last few years, including the five core diagnostic reports.  The DPL 
series will support gradual implementation of measures identified in the CFAA and 
CPAR to enhance governance, transparency and efficiency in public spending. Future 
DPL operations are expected to shift gradually to focus on the international trade and 
business environment, drawing on the DR-CAFTA study, the Investment Climate 
Assessment, the follow up to the FSAP, the REDI and technical assistance to enhance 
public-private participation in infrastructure. A Country Environmental Analysis will be 
carried out to review the policy and institutional framework and make recommendations 
especially in relation to infrastructure policies and trade expansion under DR-CAFTA.  

89. 
As described in the following sections, and summarized in Table 8,  the series of 
DPLs will be accompanied by selective investment lending in key areas where the Bank 
has global expertise and which build upon prior successful implementation of innovative 
operations in El Salvador, and which complement activities of other partners.   In order to 
be responsive to the government’s needs, and taking into account election cycle 
considerations, investment lending will be clustered in FY05-07. The CAS also includes 
a program of regional and country specific AAA (See Box 10). 

 39

 
 
 
BOX 10: THE AAA PROGRAM IN EL SALVADOR 

Over the last few years, despite the limited level of lending the Bank made a significant investment in the 
delivery of AAA to El Salvador, including preparation of the five core diagnostic reports, follow up to the 
FSAP and a Corporate Social Responsibility Framework.   The recent Country AAA Assessment for El 
Salvador by the Quality Assurance Group (QAG) rated the program as highly satisfactory overall, noting 
that  AAA played a central role in the Bank's assistance in El Salvador during FY02-04, allowing the Bank 
to rebuild its relationship  with the client through the provision of knowledge services after a period when 
the Bank was largely absent from the country.  The QAG Assessment found that the AAA program 
responded to the government's policy agenda,  that tasks were timely and took into account the political 
cycle, and that the work focused on key issues and brought analytical depth that was highly respected by 
the government authorities and many stakeholders.  Overall, the Assessment concluded that the AAA 
program made a substantial intellectual contribution on the structure of thinking about reforms and in the 
quality of the debate in the country and that it contributed to a change in the governments approach to 
poverty reduction.  The quality and strategic relevance of the  AAA work has also contributed to changing 
the Government's traditional reluctance to borrow from the Bank and has underpinned the design of the 
Development Policy Loan Program.   

While recognizing the dissemination efforts made - through posting reports on the Internet and organization 
of large workshops with substantial press coverage - the QAG Assessment recommends more resources for 
and greater attention to dissemination in the future, in order to move from "presentations" to continuous 
substantive dialogue and consultation with stakeholders.  They recommend that all reports be translated 
into Spanish to broaden public access and build advocates for policies the Bank would support.    Noting 
that Salvadorians like to be "more than an audience and consultants" the Assessment recommends more 
effort to develop local partners and engage in one-to-one dialogue outside the government, including with 
those who may not share the government’s and the Bank's views on development.  

AAA will continue to be a critical part of the Bank's assistance during FY05-08.  Initial focus will be on 
analytical work to inform the Government's growth agenda, including finalization of the Investment 
Climate Assessment and the DR-CAFTA regional study  in FY05, and the Recent Economic Developments 
in Infrastructure (REDI) report in FY06.  This work will help underpin the dialogue and design of 
subsequent Development Policy Loans.  A Country Environmental Analysis, to be completed in FY06, 
which will assess the country's environmental institutional set-up and policy framework and make 
recommendations, particularly in the area of sustainable infrastructure development and implementation of 
DR-CAFTA.  Regional studies on Education (FY05), Shocks and Social Protection (FY05) and Health 
(FY06) will contribute to the government's efforts to improve equity and develop a more effective social 
protection strategy.  The core diagnostic reports will be updated in FY07 and FY08, with the particular 
areas of focus to determined in close consultation with the Government and other partners and stakeholders 
to ensure strategic relevance and avoid duplication.        

90. 
Support to Pillar I – Accelerating broad-based equitable economic growth.  
A fundamental element of the government’s strategy is the maintenance of a stable 
macroeconomic framework including fiscal responsibility and further improvements in 
the investment and business climate and trade policies as the foundation for private 
sector-led broad-based economic growth.  The main support to the government’s policy 
agenda under this pillar would be a series of DPLs as described earlier.  The Bank would 
also provide technical assistance to the government to review the development and 
implementation of a debt management strategy.  In addition to assisting the government 
in broadening access to economic opportunities, an investment project Ensuring SME 
participation in DR-CAFTA, US$10m (FY06), would focus on improving critical 

 40

 
 
 
 
elements of the investment climate for SMEs and would complement a fast disbursing 
budget support operation to enhance competitiveness financed by IADB. An Investment 
Climate Assessment (ICA) FY05, will collect and analyze information and formulate 
recommendations to overcome the main constraints to investment, productivity growth 
and exports. A Recent Economic Developments in Infrastructure Report, REDI (FY06) 
will carry out a comprehensive assessment of El Salvador’s electricity, 
telecommunications, transport (roads, ports, airports and urban transport), and water and 
sanitation sectors.  Technical assistance to Improve Infrastructure through Public-Private 
partnerships (PPIAF) is also planned to promote the new infrastructure investment 
needed to enhance El Salvador’s capacity to compete in the global economy and attract 
foreign investments. 

 41

 
Table 8: IBRD Active Portfolio and Proposed Base Case Bank Assistance Program FY05 - FY08 

Pillar 

Active 
Portfolio 

FY05 
Non Lending 

Lending 

FY06 
Non-Lending 

Lending 

FY07 
Lending 

Non 
Lending 

FY08 
Lending* 

Non 
Lending 

Development 
Policy III  
($100 m) 

CEM Update 

Development 
Policy II 
($100 m) 

Ensuring SME 
participation in 
DR-CAFTA 
($10 m) 

Education 
Reform 
($85 m) 

Financial Sector 
Reform and 
Strengthening 
(FIRST)  
Investment 
Climate 
Assessment (ICA) 
DR-CAFTA 
Regional Study 

ROSC (A+A 
module) 

Education 
Strategy 
(Regional) 
PSIAs on Tax and  
Pension Reforms 
and DR-CAFTA 

Recent 
Economic 
Developments in 
Infrastructure 
(REDI) 

TA to improve 
infrastructure 
through public-
private 
partnership 
(PPIAF) 

CSR Strategy 

Regional HIV-
AIDS Grant 
($8 m) 

Health Strategy 
(Regional) 

Poverty 
Assessment 
Update 

PER/CFAA/ 
CPAR Update 

Accelerating equitable 
broad-based growth and 
increasing employment  

Regional IDF 
Grant for DR-
CAFTA 

Development 
Policy I ($100 m) 

Regional  BNPP 
Grant for DR-
CAFTA 

Land 
Administration I 

Land 
Administration II 
($40 m)  

Improving equity through 
building human capital and 
expanding access to basic 
infrastructure, assets and 
markets 

Enhancing security and 
reducing vulnerability 

Secondary 
Education 
Education 
Reform 
Earthquake  
Reconstruction & 
Health Services 
Extension 

Judicial Reform  
Public Sector 
Modernization 

IDF Grant Public 
Procurement 

Social 
Protection and 
Local 
Development 
($35 m) 

Country 
Environmental 
Analysis (CEA) 

Modernization of 
the State ($10 m) 

Environmental 
Services ($5 m) 
and GEF Grant 
component ($5 m) 

GEF Grant for 
protected areas 
($5 m) 

BNPP Regional 
Grant for MBC 

GEF Regional 
Grant for 
Integrated 
Ecosystem ($9 m) 

Shocks and Social 
Protection Study 
(Regional) 

$145 m 

$230 m 

$110 m 

Base Case 
Total ($485 m) 

*A fourth DPL of $100 million is included in the high case lending scenario.

 42

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
91. 
Given the challenges and opportunities the Salvadorian private sector faces, IFC’s 
aim is to help it position itself competitively inside and outside the Central American 
region.  IFC is prepared to support local companies to become regional players in the 
financial and other sectors, and encourage cross-country investments.  Complementing the 
Bank’s support to this growth pillar through assistance, such as DPLs and a US$10 
million investment project to improve the investment climate for the SME sector, IFC’s 
activities during this CAS period are expected to focus on supporting the strengthening of 
the private sector’s competitiveness and IFC’s priorities will include: (i) continuing to 
assist in the development of the housing sector via financing and technical assistance; (ii) 
helping to strengthen infrastructure (including power); (iii) supporting the MSME sector 
via financing or technical assistance; and (iv) promoting sustainable business practices 
(including corporate governance, environmental and social management, and corporate 
responsibility programs).  As in other countries in Central America, IFC’s support to El 
Salvador is also provided through regional projects.  IFC’s priorities in the Central 
America region include: helping improve physical infrastructure; strengthening and 
broadening the financial sector, including access to term financing by micro, small and 
medium enterprises; supporting competitive firms in agriculture, industry and services; 
and promoting investments from other LAC and emerging market countries into Central 
America.  FIAS has collaborated closely with the Government in the strengthening of an 
education-based Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) strategy and is prepared to work 
with the new administration to assist in making CSR an integral part of its 
competitiveness strategy. 

92. 
As mentioned previously, MIGA has been assisting PROESA since its inception 
and has achieved significant results. The systems MIGA has worked to create with 
PROESA are in place and operational, and El Salvador now has a fully functioning 
investment promotion agency that has the tools it needs to achieve solid results.  MIGA is 
prepared to respond to specific requests from the Government for further technical 
assistance. In the area of investment guarantees, MIGA does not have any outstanding 
coverage. The Agency is actively examining opportunities to provide coverage to foreign 
operations interested in locating in El Salvador and also able to assist Salvadoran 
companies as they seek opportunities overseas. MIGA has worked with the government 
and Central Bank to reduce reserve requirements for Salvadoran banks that lend with 
MIGA insurance.  MIGA expects this to permit Salvadoran banks to expand their 
financial operations in the Central America region and beyond. 

93. 
To support the government in deepening insertion in world markets through 
regional integration and trade, the Bank is actively involved in the Trade Capacity-
Building group for DR-CAFTA and has developed an assistance program that includes 
analytical and advisory support, as well as grant funds.  While El Salvador boasts one of 
the most open trade regimes in Latin America, DR-CAFTA could eventually affect the 
welfare of some segments of Salvadoran society that still benefit from some residual 
protection. Admittedly, these potential impacts would take some time to materialize, as 
Central American negotiators obtained lengthy grace periods (5 to 10 years) and gradual 
phase out periods for sensitive commodities (up to 20 years). However, a PSIA will be 
undertaken to assess the expected impact of DR-CAFTA on the poor and to identify 
potential effects on protected segments. This study would complement the ongoing 

 43

regional ESW on the impact of DR-CAFTA in Central America  (scheduled for delivery 
in FY05) and ongoing work to support programs that ensure that small and medium 
enterprises can also benefit from the benefits of the agreement through an Institutional 
Development Fund Grant of US$ 500,000 administered by SIECA and a regional grant of 
US$ 500,000 from the Bank-Netherlands Partnership Program (BNPP). 

94. 
To assist the government in the area of market regulation and supervision 
Technical Assistance for Financial Sector Assessment (FSAP) follow-up is planned and 
support from the Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening (FIRST)7 Initiative is 
envisaged.  An Accounting & Auditing (A&A) module of the Reports on the Observance of 
Standards and Codes (ROSC) is planned for FY05 which will to assess the degree to 
which corporate entities and auditors effectively comply with international accounting and 
auditing standards.  

95. 
As noted earlier, the Bank recently completed a Country Economic Memorandum 
(CEM) which identified the key constraints to sustained growth and identified priority 
areas to help promote faster economic growth.  The CEM would be updated toward the 
end of the CAS period in order to measure progress in reaching the Government’s 
development objectives and look forward to future challenges.  Analysis would be focused 
on areas identified by the Government as of specific interest and relevance to El Salvador, 
for example the informal sector and remittances. 

96. 
Support for Pillar 2 - improving equity through building human capital and 
enhancing access to basic socioeconomic infrastructure and markets. The CAS will 
support the government’s strategy to improve equity through the implementation of 
ongoing operations, the development of two new investment operations and  selected 
economic and sector work, analytical and advisory services, grants and technical 
assistance.  Complementing the Bank’s work, IFC will help improve equity through the 
on-lending instruments being provided for MSMEs, thereby broadening their access to 
financial market.  In addition, IFC’s LAC SME Facility may be tapped on to build 
capacity of SMEs should it become operational in El Salvador. 

97. 
In order to assist the government in its goal to modernize education and build a 
knowledge society, the ongoing Secondary Education Project is working to extend a 
participatory approach to secondary education, broadening its coverage in rural areas, 
financing school rehabilitation and maintenance, improving its cost-effectiveness with an 
enhanced role for the private sector and upgrading the content and relevance of the 
curricula.  An ongoing Education Reform Project aims to ensure that at least 90 percent of 
children complete basic education with emphasis on the poorest rural and urban areas. In 
terms of new lending, new Education Reform Project, US$85m (FY06) is planned and 
would support the new long-term education plan of El Salvador.  A PHRD project 
preparation grant will finance key preparatory studies for the education project.  The Bank 
will continue to support the preparation of the long term Education Plan (Plan 2021) by 

7 This is a multi-donor joint venture undertaken by the World Bank, IMF, the UK, Switzerland, Canada, the 
Netherlands, and Sweden to provide technical assistance for capacity building and policy development in 
the areas of financial sector regulation, supervision and development.   

 44

                                                 
helping finalize the integrated diagnostic and supporting a wide consultation process on 
the priorities of the plan. 

98. 
To assist in the improvement of the quality and universal coverage of health 
services, the ongoing Earthquake Emergency Reconstruction and Health Services 
Extension Project supports the reconstruction of seven major hospitals, the modernization 
of the Ministry of Health, the improvement of hospital care and the extension of essential 
health and nutrition services through community-based outreach, and supports selected 
priority national health issues including detection and control of  HIV/AIDS and the most 
prevalent vector-borne diseases, health waste management and environmental health, 
community health promotion and education. El Salvador along with the other Central-
America countries is the beneficiary of a upcoming Central America Regional HIV/AIDS 
Grant Project (FY05 US$8 million) that aims to strengthen the regional capacity to 
monitor the spread of the HIV epidemic through the upgrade of a regional clinical 
laboratory able to carry out the pathology exams necessary to detect and follow-up 
HIV/AIDS patients.   

99. 
In order to assist the government in the strengthening of family assets, the 
ongoing Land Administration I project is supporting the establishment of a national 
cadastre and  the modernization of the National Property Registry that integrates the land 
and real estate property registry, the intellectual property registry, the commercial registry, 
the cadastre and the mapping agency. By the end of 2004, the project was projected to 
have cadastred 60% of the parcels and transferred all properties into a new computerized 
property registry, and started providing more efficient and accessible services country 
wide. An upcoming Land Administration II, US$40m (FY05) project will build on the 
ongoing program and will focus on the legal base of urban and rural property. It would  
extend geographically to cover the rest of the country and include two new activities, the 
training of municipalities in cadastre management and limited urban and rural titling 
programs in areas of social interest which are not yet titled.  In parallel, a GEF-funded 
operation is being prepared, which would provide up to US$ 5 million in GEF Grants to 
fund complementary conservation-related activities. 

100. To support the government in the local and regional development the upcoming 
REDI study and PPIAF grant will provide additional data on coverage, quality and access 
to infrastructure and help support dialogue and consensus building on the sector policy, 
regulations and institutional reform needed to enhance access to basic infrastructure 
services, and promote greater participation of the private sector. 

101. As noted earlier, the Bank recently completed a Poverty Assessment and Public 
Expenditure review which provided inputs into the diagnosis of key constraints and 
identification of priority policy and institutional reforms and investment needs to build 
human capital and generate growth.  These studies would be updated towards the end of 
the CAS period in order to review progress in reaching El Salvador’s development goals.  
Fiscal measures supported under the proposed CAS lending program are not expected to 
exert significant impact on the poor. To confirm this conclusion, a PSIA on fiscal and 
pension issues will be conducted during 2005. The analysis will focus on the distributive 
impact of recent changes to the Salvadoran tax code and pension regime.  

 45

102. Support for Pillar 3 - Enhancing security and reducing vulnerability  
Improving security is a key pillar in GOES’s development plan.  The vision of a “Safe 
Country” encompasses a broad definition of security, including improved physical safety, 
increased investor security through initiatives to combat corruption and increase 
transparency and greater public confidence in public institutions including the judiciary.   
The government plans to reduce vulnerability through the development of a social 
protection program for poor households and improvement of environmental and disaster 
management. The Bank would provide support to the government in reaching its goals 
though ongoing investment projects and three new investment operations, as well as 
advisory services, technical assistance and grants in the area of social protection, public 
procurement and environmental management.  IFC’s work on promoting sustainable 
business practices will also help enhance both investor and citizen security in El Salvador.  

103. To assist in the improvement of transparency and efficiency of resource use, 
the ongoing Public Sector  Modernization Project supports El Salvador in implementing a 
public sector modernization program to define new roles for the public sector and its most 
important entities, strengthen performance, accountability and transparency for those 
entities that remain in the public sector, and involve the private sector in the provision of 
public services. The future Modernization of the State II, US$10m (FY07) project would 
continue to support the modernization of the state, and the implementation of 
recommendations made in the recently completed CFAA, CPAR and PER, including 
assistance for initiatives to combat corruption and further improve transparency, and 
modernization of local governments and support to the decentralization agenda. An 
Institutional Facility Grant (IDF) will assist in implementing the Government of El 
Salvador’s public procurement modernization plan.   

104. 
In order to assist GOES in improving the rule of law, the ongoing Judicial 
Reform Project supports a plan to enhance the effectiveness, accessibility and credibility 
of  judicial branch. Special attention is given to broadening access to justice by the poor 
and disadvantaged groups, developing alternative dispute settlement arrangements, 
improving court procedures and legal assistance programs, enhancing quality services 
through a new supervision mechanism and developing a judicial career.  

105. To support GOES’ goals of enhancing the environment for future generations, 
a Pilot Environmental Services Project (FY05, US$5 million) would be prepared to 
support the design and implementation of an environmental services system that sells 
services to both the public and private sectors.  Pilot activities have already been tested in 
El Salvador co-financed by the private sector—the only example in the region.  A GEF 
Grant (FY05, US$5 million) would help set up the legal and institutional framework for 
this to operate. 

106. While DR-CAFTA is expected to improve enforcement of environmental norms 
and regulations due explicit commitments in the treaty to this effect, future DPL 
operations are expected to give more emphasis to investments in infrastructure and DR-
CAFTA is expected to lead to greater levels of trade and investment, which could pose 
some challenges to El Salvador’s capacity to manage potential environmental risks. The 
Bank will work with the government to prepare a Country Environmental Analysis (CEA) 

 46

to be finalized in FY06. The CEA will develop a sound analytic understanding of the 
country and sector-wide institutional set-up and policy framework and provide guidance 
and advice to the national environmental strategy and policy which is being developed. 
The analysis will be done in close coordination with the REDI diagnostic and preparation 
of the DPLs to provide the Government with recommendations that would be relevant as 
it pursues new policies to spur sustainable infrastructure development and expand trade 
under DR-CAFTA.  El Salvador will also benefit from a Central American Regional 
Grant for US$2 million from Bank Netherlands Partnership Program (BNPP) for the 
Mesoamerican Biological Corridor which is aimed at consolidating actions taken in 
Central America to conserve and sustain their natural resources.  Special emphasis in the 
future will be given to finding markets for sustainable products. A Central American 
Regional GEF Grant, Integrated Ecosystem Management by Indigenous People and 
Communities (FY05, US$9 million) will help achieve more effective biodiversity 
conservation in Central America by strengthening the capacity of indigenous communities 
to protect and manage their natural and cultural resources, and by recuperating and 
promoting their cultural values and sustainable traditional land use practices. 

107. 
In order to aid the government in the development of a more effective safety net 
the upcoming Social Protection and Local Development Project, US$35m (FY06), would 
support the development of a national social policy with a primary objective of developing 
and implementing a social safety net targeted to the poorest and most vulnerable families 
in the country. The development of the government’s overall social policy is informed by 
the Poverty Assessment and the appropriate chapters of the Public Expenditure Review.  
As mentioned before, the Bank would propose to update these reports towards the end of 
the CAS period. Also, a Central America-wide study on Shocks and Social Protection 
(FY05) will assess the recent experience of households in coping with external shocks 
such as the coffee crisis and the efficacy of public programs in protecting households’ 
consumption and human capital development during economic shocks.  The study will 
provide inputs into the Social Protection project, and more broadly will help the 
government in the development of its overall social policy. 

B.  Country Financing Parameters 

108. The Country Financing Parameters for El Salvador have been prepared and agreed 
upon by the government (See Annex C). As regards cost sharing the Government has 
shown strong commitment to and ownership of its development program.  Bank-financed 
projects are fully integrated into the budget and are well aligned with the government’s 
development plans.  The Government finances a large share of its social development 
spending8 (about 74% after taking into consideration other multilateral and bilateral 
disbursements).  The Bank’s lending program represents a small share of the country’s 
social development spending. Between 2000 and 2003, Bank disbursements have 
averaged US$46 million annually – equivalent to 0.3 percent of GDP. This amount 
represents a small portion of El Salvador Central Government social  development 
spending of about US$1,095 million or about 7.3 percent of GDP in 2003.  Quality of El 

8 Social Development expenditures were used as a proxy for overall development expenditures as the former 
represent the vast part of the latter and exact data on overall development expenditures was not available. 

 47

                                                 
Salvador’s budget processes are good.  Given these factors, the Bank may finance up to 
100 percent of costs of individual operations.  100 percent financing is expected to be 
applied selectively to stay within the overall CAS 
lending envelope. Specific 
arrangements would be determined for individual projects, taking into account the project 
context and the borrower’s financing from its own resources of the sector concerned.  
Land administration and social sector projects (mostly education and social protection) are 
expected to be in the 70 to 85 percent range while projects with a technical assistance 
focus (e.g., modernization of the state) could finance up to 100% of the cost. 

109. Recurrent cost financing.  The Bank’s current portfolio devotes a relatively 
modest share of its funds to the financing of recurrent costs ranging from 15 percent (for 
infrastructure and other projects), to approximately 40 percent for social sector projects. 
These costs have traditionally been related to project administration (vehicles, equipment 
and software), teachers salaries and textbooks.  Given the nature of projects in the 
proposed lending pipeline, recurrent cost financing is expected to stay closer to the level 
and types observed for social sector projects. As discussed earlier, the overall fiscal 
situation is stable, and is being strengthened under the Government’s “Safe Country 2004-
2009” plan, which includes measures to increase tax revenues, strengthen the financial 
sector and reduce external debt ratios. According to the recent CFAA, public investment 
expenditures (including those financed by Bank projects) are well integrated into the 
budget formulation and execution cycles. This accomplishment could serve as basis for 
the Government to begin undertaking systematic calculations of the recurrent spending 
portion of investment projects and their implications in future current expenditures. More 
importantly, El Salvador has been a regional leader in key areas of Bank support, 
maintaining an excellent record of sustainability of Bank-financed projects in areas such 
as Land Administration, Education, Competitiveness and Public Sector Modernization.  
Based on the above, no specific country-level limit on Bank-financing of recurrent costs is 
proposed. In determining recurrent-cost financing for individual projects, the Bank will 
take into account sustainability issues at the sector and project levels, as well as implied 
future budgetary outlays.  

110. Local cost financing.  The country’s development expenditures are about 7.3 
percent of GDP in 2003. The Government’s own resources (from taxes, non-taxes, and 
domestic borrowing) dedicated to cover such development expenditures are approximately 
5.6 percent of GDP in 2003;  therefore, projected domestic revenues are insufficient to fill 
the development program gap, which amounts to 1.7 percent of GDP.  In addition, the 
financing of only foreign investment expenditures will not be sufficient to provide 
required resources to projects.  The Bank has been financing significant local costs in El 
Salvador:  disbursements against local costs have accounted for 74%, 90% and 90% of 
investment lending disbursements in FY02, FY03 and FY04 respectively. This important 
level of local costs is expected to continue in future investment projects, specially with the 
land administration, social protection and education projects. Therefore, as the two 
requirements for Bank financing of local costs are met, the Bank may finance local and 
foreign costs in any proportion required for individual projects. 

111. Taxes and duties.  The country’s tax structure depends basically on revenues from 
the value added tax (VAT) and the income tax, which generated jointly over 82 percent of 

 48

the total in 2003.  The VAT rate is 13% and contributes over half of tax revenues, while 
the income tax rates range from 10 to 30 percent for individuals and is 25 percent for 
firms. The remainder is collected through import duties (with a 5 percent average tariff at 
end 2003) and excise taxes on specific products (mostly taxed at a 20 percent rate).  Bank-
financed projects are taxed at the same rates as the country’s normal rates, which are 
reasonable and non-discriminatory. Therefore, the Bank may finance all taxes and duties 
associated with its projects. At the project level, the Bank will consider whether taxes and 
duties constitute an excessively high share of project expenditures.  
C.  Risks and Lending Cases 

112. The CAS program has been designed in close partnership with the Government of 
El Salvador to respond to financial and development needs identified by the Saca 
administration as best suited to support from the World Bank Group. It aims to maximize 
the Bank’s responsiveness to the Government’s requests, while minimizing risks 
through careful monitoring of progress; scaling fast disbursing lending to policy 
performance momentum; focusing investment lending on areas where the Bank has 
established global expertise and which build on El Salvador’s previous strong record of 
innovation, sustained impact and results; and linking the pace of investment lending to 
continued proactive implementation and problem solving by the Government. 

113. The slow down in Government borrowing from the Bank under the previous CAS 
has reduced Bank exposure to El Salvador from what had been projected under the 
previous CAS, creating space for the proposed series of Development Policy Loans and a 
more robust investment lending program.  An increase in Bank lending at this juncture 
would help, at more reasonable cost and consistent with a strategy to diversify financing 
sources, to bridge the country to a stronger fiscal position -- resulting from reforms in 
revenue generation and expenditure containment (pension reform measures)-- without 
sacrificing the Government’s commitment to increasing social spending and meeting the 
needs of the poor. 

114. The scale of Bank’s financial assistance would be determined by 
the 
Government’s ability to maintain its high level of performance across the three pillars of  
the 2004-2009 Strategy, with special attention to fiscal sustainability measures.  To access 
increased lending levels, performance will be assessed on progress toward objectives in 
the set of strategic policy areas identified in Table 9. The base case could include up to 
$300 million in Development Policy Lending and $185 in investment lending, provided 
progress can be documented (using the indicative indicators in Table 9, or other 
appropriate measurements). To move into a high case lending scenario, implying up to 
one additional $100 million DPL, would require performance on the specific fiscal 
sustainability measures indicated in Table 9. Progress on Table 9 indicators and measures 
and their relevance to broader policy performance will be assessed in a CAS Progress 
Report (FY07). In addition, to ensure appropriate scaling of fast-disbursing financial 
support to policy performance on key fronts, the number and timing of DPLs in both the 
base and high cases would be further determined by the specific prior actions and triggers 
included in the DPL documents (which management and the Board would review 
separately from this CAS). 

 49

• Steady policy performance across the three pillars, continuing financial needs, and 
proactive problem solving in implementation of the investment portfolio would be 
the basis for support in the higher end of the base case range; up to $485 million 
over 4 years, including $300 million in a series of 3 fast-disbursing DPLs. 
Policy performance would be monitored based on progress toward a few 
strategically significant policy objectives described in Table 9, including fiscal 
sustainability, trade policy, social expenditure and basic education targets.  These 
in effect amount to “pre-conditions” for the higher lending range. At the high end 
of the base case, Bank exposure would increase from about US$360 million in 
FY04 to around US$700 million in FY07.  

• 

 Less rapid progress in policy reform, but continued commitment and a lack of 
action on portfolio implementation issues would be the basis for support in the 
lower end of the base case range; $375  million over 4 years. In this scenario  
the program would be limited to two fast disbursing DPLs and one or two 
investment loans would be postponed until action on project effectiveness were 
solved.  At the lower end of the base case range, exposure would increase to 
around US$600 million in FY08. 

• Aggressive policy performance would give the Government access to the high 
case which would comprise one additional $100 million DPL in FY08.  This 
would entail maintaining momentum across the three CAS pillars while 
demonstrating a reduction in both public sector debt and bringing the NFPS deficit 
at or below 2%.  Additional triggers for a fourth DPL would be elaborated in DPL 
3.  Bank exposure to El Salvador under the high case would increase to just over 
$800 million (constituting less that 1% of the total IBRD portfolio). 

• Halting or back-tracking on policy reform would result in a low-case scenario.  In 
this case the Bank would seek to reduce its exposure by curtailing further 
development policy lending. Additional investment lending would be considered 
on a case-by-case basis based on social need and likelihood of impact. 

115. Continued strong performance by the Government is subject to three sources 
of risk during the CAS period: possible political gridlock, threat of natural disaster, 
and a deteriorating external environment which could forestall needed growth. 
Moreover, El Salvador’s current debt burden, approaching 40 percent of GDP, increases 
its vulnerability to potential shocks. Such fiscal vulnerabilities are further compounded by 
El Salvador’s dollarized regime, which limits potential macroeconomic responses in times 
of stress. As rating agencies have increasingly voiced over the past year, a credible plan to 
address the fiscal area is required to prevent a deterioration of El Salvador’s hard earned 
creditworthiness.  As discussed earlier in this document, the Saca administration is aware 
of the country’s fiscal vulnerability, has put forward a credible plan to address it and has 
begun putting the plan into action. 

 50

 
 
Pillar of 
Government 
Strategy  

Accelerating 
Broad-based 
Growth and 
Increasing 
Employment 

Table 9: Scale of Lending Performance Indicators 

(the “high end” and “high case” columns indicate additional performance needed for more lending) 
Priority areas for 
Low end of base case 
High end of base case 
High Case 
development results 
(lending of $375 
(lending up to $485 
(lending up to $585 million, 
million, including 2x 
million, including 3x 
including 4x $100 million 
$100 million DPL) 
$100 million DPL) 
DPL) 
Objective: Maintain 
Objective: Improve fiscal 
NFPS debt below 40%1 of 
fiscal performance 
performance 
GDP  
NFPS deficit at or below 2% 

Fiscal sustainability 

Indicative indicator: 
Tax revenues at or 
above 12.2%of GDP 

Indicative indicator: 
Tax revenues at or above 
13% of GDP 

Improving Equity 
Through Building 
Human Capital 
and Expanding 
Access to Basic 
Infrastructure, 
Assets  and 
Markets 

Trade policy 

Access to primary 
Education  

Social expenditures 

Objective: More open 
trade regime 

Indicative indicator: 
Ratification of DR-
CAFTA by end 2005 
Objective: Maintain  
primary education 
performance 

Indicative indicators: 
Net enrollment in 
primary education 
(NER) of 85% or 
above 

Primary completion 
rate 75% or above 
Objective: Maintain  
social expenditures 

Government’s 
Indicative indicator: 
Social expenditures at 
or above 5.2% of 
GDP*  

Enhancing 
Security and 
Reducing 
Vulnerability 

Households most 
vulnerable to poverty 

Objective: Steady 
progress toward universal 
primary education 

Objective: Steady progress 
toward universal primary 
education 

Indicative indicators: 
NER of 87% or above 

Indicative indicators: 
NER of 89% or above 

Primary completion rate 
78% or above 

Primary completion rate 
80% or above 

Objective: Gradually 
increase social expenditures 

Government’s Indicative 
indicator: 
Social expenditures of at 
least 5.6% of GDP*  

Objective: Gradually 
increase social 
expenditures 

Government’s Indicative 
indicator: 
2006 budget consistent 
with social expenditures 
of at least 5.4% of GDP* 
Objective: Develop and 
implement strategy to 
improve social protection 

Indicative indicator: 
Formulate a national 
strategy for a more 
effective social protection 
program 
Proactivity about 80% 

Proactivity above 50% 

Proactive portfolio 
mgmt. 
1 NFPS debt is defined to include both short- and long-term domestic and external public debt, excluding the net debt of the Central 
Bank and other public banks.  If these unconsolidated data are not available, then the High Case benchmark will be public sector 
debt (inclusive of net debt of the Central Bank and other public banks) below 47.4% of GDP at end-2007. 
* Social expenditures (gastos para Desarrollo Social) as defined in the national budget, excluding  transfers for pensions and 
municipalities. 

 51

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116. On the political front, a divided Assembly could become an obstacle to important 
reforms, despite the strong electoral mandate obtained by President Saca. The inability to 
push through measures to increase tax revenues and control expenditures would likely 
raise public debt, which could adversely affect investor sentiment and the availability of 
external finance. Likewise, failure to move on financial sector reform could lead to 
materialization of contingent liabilities in state-run banks.  To date, the Government’s 
approach to consensus building appears to be bearing fruit, but political obstacles to 
reform can not yet be fully ruled out. Potentially tense relations with the Assembly could 
also impede prompt ratification of external loans limiting access to funds for social 
development or forcing use of higher cost financing, as has been the case historically.  
Two aspects of this CAS mitigate against such an outcome. For the DPL series, through 
which the bulk of lending is expected to be channeled, the Government expects that 
concurrent submission of the DPLs and the annual budget to the Assembly will give it the 
leverage needed for prompt loan ratification. For investment loans, the Government’s plan 
to bunch operations early in its tenure is expected to facilitate timely ratification. 

117. As to possible exogenous external risks, many of the same sources of fiscal 
vulnerability could cloud the horizon, delay the expected recovery and worsen debt 
dynamics. For 2004, growth is expected to reach only 1.8%. This poor performance is in 
part related to short-term factors, such as political jitters surrounding the presidential 
election, delays in government investment plans due to the late approval of the 2004 
budget, high oil prices and weakness in maquila exports and investments in anticipation of 
the scheduled end of textile quotas by 2005 in the United States and other markets which 
is expected to intensify competition from China and other Asian countries.  Going 
forward, sustained high oil prices or a new international recession could also affect El 
Salvador’s economy, as well as a worsening of the domestic political atmosphere that 
delays passage of important fiscal initiatives.  Early approval of DR-CAFTA, together 
with continued steady implementation of the Government’s plans to improve the 
investment climate, further strengthen of the financial sector, and increase investments in 
human capital should provide a new impetus to investment and growth. 

118. Finally, the country remains vulnerable to natural disasters (e.g., earthquakes and 
hurricanes) which can hurt the performance of the economy in the short-term and may 
require 
significant unanticipated expenditures 
for emergency assistance and 
reconstruction. The Government’s focus on improving fiscal responsibility and restoring 
broad-base growth while building a stronger social safety net position it to better absorb 
such shocks in the future.  Should El Salvador be subject to shocks arising from natural 
disasters or other external factors, a contingency scenario may be called for, which is not 
considered in this CAS. In that case, the Bank team would develop an alternative program 
for discussion with the Board. 

119. The Government of El Salvador and the Bank have agreed to monitor the program 
on an annual basis to assess progress which would determine any revisions to the scale 
and timing of the Bank’s lending program. This formal stocktaking would be 
complemented by periodic policy discussions aimed at identifying areas of strengths and 
weaknesses and possible assistance needed to maintain momentum toward the 
Government’s planned medium-term outcomes and address possible downside risks. 

 52

120. CAS Results Framework.  The Government of El Salvador and the Bank have 
agreed to a results  framework shown in  Annex B1.  The results  framework was 
constructed on the basis of El Salvador's development challenges outlined in this proposed 
country strategy. The monitoring indicators were developed jointly with the Government 
and Government is fully committed to achieving the results specified.  Progress toward 
the medium-term outcomes, to which the government and all its partners, including the 
Bank Group, contribute, should be achievable within the CAS period (2005-2008) and 
will be monitored using intermediate indicators and the Government’s own data collection 
and monitoring and evaluation systems.  The results monitoring framework lays out 
planned lending and non-lending Bank activities which contribute towards specific 
outcomes during the CAS implementation period. Progress within the framework will be 
reviewed during periodic joint program reviews between the government and the Bank’s 
country team. It should be noted that the indicators to be monitored are already effectively 
collected on a regular basis by the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank and the sectoral 
line ministries.  Bank staff has reviewed the existing systems for data collection and 
information related to the results identified and found them to be of adequate quality to 
enable meaningful monitoring of development progress. 

James D. Wolfensohn 
President 

Peter L. Woicke 

By: 

Shengman Zhang  

Washington DC 
January 18, 2005 

 53

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
El Salvador at a glance

9/15/04

Latin
America
& Carib.

Lower-
middle-
income

POVERTY and SOCIAL

El
Salvador

2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

6.5
2,200
14.4

534
3,260
1,741

2,655
1,480
3,934

Average annual growth, 1997-03

Population (%)
Labor force (%)

1.7
2.9

1.5
2.1

0.9
1.2

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997-03)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment  (% of school-age population)
    Male
    Female

..
59
70
33
12
77
20
112
114
109

..
77
71
28
..
86
11
129
131
126

..
50
69
32
11
81
10
112
113
111

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1983

1993

2002

2003

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investment/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

3.5
12.1
24.5
6.6
5.6

7.0
18.6
19.4
3.8
15.1

14.3
16.4
26.7
1.9
13.7

14.4
16.6
27.6
0.8
13.0

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

-5.6
2.0
49.8
19.8
..
..

-7.5
1.7
29.2
13.9
..
..

-2.7
1.5
40.8
7.8
43.5
106.5

-3.7
2.0
43.8
8.5
..
..

1983-93

1993-03

2002

2003

2003-07

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

2.8
1.3
0.4

3.2
1.3
10.6

2.1
0.4
5.7

2.0
0.2
3.4

3.9
1.8
5.0

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1983

1993

2002

2003

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
   Manufacturing
Services

31.2
22.3
16.6
46.5

14.0
28.2
22.4
57.8

8.7
30.3
23.5
61.0

9.4
31.8
24.5
58.7

Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

77.5
15.8
29.9

87.6
8.6
34.1

89.9
8.2
41.2

87.9
11.3
43.4

1983-93

1993-03

2002

2003

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
   Manufacturing
Services

0.7
3.0
3.2
3.3

0.9
4.8
4.9
3.0

-0.5
2.8
2.5
2.3

6.0
4.8
4.0
-0.2

Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

5.2
-4.1
8.8
7.9

3.6
1.9
2.9
7.9

1.3
-7.2
-1.5
0.5

3.6
4.2
0.5
5.2

Note: 2003 data are preliminary estimates.
This table was produced from the Development Economics central database.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will 
    be incomplete.

-10

0

10

20

30

98

99

00

01

02

03

GDI

GDP

Growth of investment and GDP (%)

El Salvador
Lower-middle-income group

Development diamond*

Life expectancy

Access to improved water source

GNI
per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

-10

0

10

20

30

98

99

00

01

02

03

Exports

Imports

Growth of exports and imports (%)

El Salvador
Lower-middle-income group

Economic ratios*

Trade

Domestic
savings

Investment

Indebtedness

 
El Salvador

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1983

1993

2002

2003

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

13.3
10.6

18.6
12.8

1.9
1.3

2.9
-1.2

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

..
..
..

..
..
..

11.8
0.4
-3.9

12.4
0.6
-3.7

TRADE

1983

1993

2002

2003

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
   Coffee
   Cotton
   Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
   Food
   Fuel and energy
   Capital goods

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

605
235
35
309
1,924
441
124
565

1,234
107
44
1,073
4,082
1,198
175
883

1,357
..
..
1,080
3,926
..
..
906

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

..
..
..

68
88
77

55
83
66

55
84
66

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1983

1993

2002

2003

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

912
1,085
-173

1,273
2,487
-1,213

3,810
5,887
-2,077

3,980
6,255
-2,275

Net income
Net current transfers

-131
108

-129
823

-287
1,980

-325
2,069

Current account balance

-196

-519

-384

-531

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

392
-195

663
-144

260
124

550
-19

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

..
2.8

645
8.7

1,623
8.8

1,607
8.8

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1983

1993

2002

2003

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
    IBRD
    IDA

1,745
106
26

2,033
220
22

5,829
371
15

6,305
372
14

Total debt service
    IBRD
    IDA

202
14
1

294
32
1

453
46
1

514
54
1

Composition of net resource flows
    Official grants
    Official creditors
    Private creditors
    Foreign direct investment
    Portfolio equity

158
294
-19
28
0

611
317
-3
16
0

107
164
1,211
208
0

..
78
310
..
..

World Bank program
    Commitments
    Disbursements
    Principal repayments
    Net flows
    Interest payments
    Net transfers

0
7
6
1
8
-8

93
51
18
33
15
18

143
63
28
35
19
17

0
38
38
0
17
-17

Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics central database.

9/15/04

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

97

98

99

00

01

02

03

Current account balance to GDP (%)

0

1,000

2,000

3,000

4,000

5,000

97

98

99

00

01

02

03

Exports

Imports

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

-2

0

2

4

6

98

99

00

01

02

03

GDP deflator

CPI

Inflation (%)

991

372

1942

14

2382

604

Composition of 2003 debt (US$ mill.)

A - IBRD
B - IDA    
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

Annex B1 -FRAMEWORK FOR MONITORING RESULTS OF THE CAS PROGRAM (FY 2005- 2008)  

Longer-Term 
Development Agenda for El Salvador 
Strategic and Longer 
Term 
Higher Order Country 
Outcomes 

Related issues which hinder the 
ability to achieve the Higher 
Order Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program 
During the four year period  
Outcomes that the Bank  
Intermediate Indicators to 
Group expects to 
track implementati on towards 
influence through its 
expected outcomes to which the 
interventions and outcome 
Bank Group CAS will 
level indicators 
contribute  

Bank Group Assistance 

Bank Group Activities 

Pillar One: Accelerating Broad-based Growth and Increasing Employment 

Page 1 of 8 

Reigniting Growth 

Promote Trade Expansion 

SMEs unable to compete and 
establish linkages to export 
markets 

Non maquila exports 
(excluding coffee) as a 
share of GDP increase to 
9% (from 8% in 2004) 

Progress implementing programs 
to expand benefits of trade 
towards SMEs could include 
inter-alia: Infocentros, 
BONOMYPE, FAT and FOEX; 
SME association programs; 
access to new market and 
business opportunities; and 
strengthening of Export and 
Investment promotion agency 

Expanded benefits  of  trade 
towards SMEs, measured 
by indicators to be defined 
as part of  project 

Conferences and workshops to 
disseminate findings and promote 
dialogue on CAFTA policy 
issues . 

Minimize short -term effects 
of imports in sensitive 
sectors 

Launching of programs to 
facilitate “reconversion 
productiva” of firms and sectors 
affected by trade liberalizatio n 
and the elimination of tariffs 

New lending  
• Development Policy Loan series 
(FY05- 08) 
• Ensuring SME participation in CAFTA 
(FY06) 

• 

AAA/Grants 
• CAFTA Regional Study 
IDF to strengthen trade and export 
capacity of SMEs (Regional) 
• BNPP grant to help SMEs take 
advantage of CAFTA (Regional) 

IFC&MIGA 
• MIGA support to PROESA 
• FIAS competitiveness strategy 
IFC possible support for viable service 
and/or manufacturing projects 

• 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longer-Term 
Development Agenda for El Salvador 
Strategic and Longer 
Term 
Higher Order Country 
Outcomes 

Related issues which hinder the 
ability to achieve the Higher 
Order Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program 
During the four year period  
Outcomes that the Bank  
Intermediate Indicators to 
Group expects to 
track implementati on towards 
influence through its 
expected outcomes to which the 
interventions and outcome 
Bank Group CAS will 
level indicators 
contribute  

Page 2 of 8 

Bank Group Assistance 

Bank Group Activities 

Reigniting Growth 

Improve Investment 
Climate 

Complex procedure for the 
creation of b usiness 

Lack of enforcement of 
commercial contracts 

Lack of development of capital 
markets 

FDI flows average at least 
1.5% of GDP in the 2005-
2008 period  

Reduce El Salvador’s cost 
(128% of per capita GDP) 
and time (115 days) needed 
to start a business to levels 
similar to those of OECD 
countries (60.4% of per 
capita GDP and 70 days) 

The sum of bank credit to 
the private sector plus the 
stock of registered private 
securities grow at least as 
much as GDP during 2005 -
2008 

Reigniting Growth 

Improve Market 
Performance 

Insufficient market regulation and 
supervision, especially in areas of 
competition policy, regulation of 
service providers, and consumer 
protection 

Improvement in World 
Economic Forum 
competition or anti-
monopoly index  

Centro de  Tramites 
Empresariales expanded to at 
least three new locations outside 
San Salvador 

New lending  
• Development Policy Loan series 
(FY05- 08) 

Further actions to improve 
investment climate (consistent 
with ICA and Cost of Doing 
Business Survey 
recommendations) 

Securitization and Mutual Funds 
Laws presented to Assembly . 

Implementation of Competition 
L aw 

Actions taken to improve market 
performance, including the 
pre sentation to Congress of 
Consumer Protection Law.  

AAA 
Investment Climate Assessment (ICA)  

• 

FIAS 
• FIAS competitiveness strategy 

New lending  
• Development Policy Loan series 
(FY05- 08) 

AAA 
• A&A ROSC 
Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) 

• 

IFC 
• Possible investments in the financial 
sector 
• Doing business study 
• SME Facility support 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longer-Term 
Development Agenda for El Salvador 
Strategic and Longer 
Term 
Higher Order Country 
Outcomes 

Related issues which hinder the 
ability to achieve the Higher 
Order Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program 
During the four year period  
Outcomes that the Bank  
Intermediate Indicators to 
Group expects to 
track implementati on towards 
influence through its 
expected outcomes to which the 
interventions and outcome 
Bank Group CAS will 
level indicators 
contribute  

Page 3 of 8 

Bank Group Assistance 

Bank Group Activities 

Reigniting Growth 

Increase Provision of 
Infrastructure (Public and 
Private) 

Insufficient investment by public 
and private sector in infrastructure 

Issues of coverage, quality and 
access 

Completion of critical PPI 
transactions: Cutuco, 
Acajutla, Air Cargo 
Terminal, 2 roads and one 
in the energy sector 

Indicators of progress in 
public investment in 
infrastructure to be defined 
in DPL series 

Supporting 
Macroeconomic Stability 
and Fiscal Consolidation 

Reduce government debt 
Increase tax revenues 

Tax revenue low by regional and 
global norms 

Fiscal cost of pension reform 

Upgrade of credit ratings 
by international credit 
agencies 

Maintain budget deficit 
(with pensions) on a 
downward trajectory in 
2005- 2008 

NFPS debt ratio at or 
below 40% by end 2008 

Tax revenues at or above 
14.5% of GDP by end 
2008 

Implementation of fiscal reform 
package approved in  2004 

Further actions to increase tax 
revenues, including efforts to 
incorporate the informal sector 
into the tax base and to 
compensate for shortfalls in 
meeting tax revenue targets if 
necessary 

Redesign financing structure of 
the pension system to contain its 
fiscal impact 
Actions to reduce contingent 
liabilities in public financial 
institutions 

Adoption of Plan to improve the 
air and maritime transport 
sector’s legal and regulatory 
framework. 

New lending  
• Development Policy Loan series 
(FY05- 08) 

Actions to improve provision of 
infrastructure (consistent with 
REDI recommendations) 

AAA/Grants 
• Recent Economic Developments in 
Infrastructure (REDI) 
• TA to improve infrastructure through 
public -private partnerships (PPIAF) 

IFC 
IFC possible support for housing via 
financing  

New lending 
• Development Policy Loan series 
(FY05- 08) 

AAA 
• PER follow-up 
• CEM upda te 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longer-Term 
Development Agenda for El Salvador 
Strategic and Longer 
Term 
Higher Order Country 
Outcomes 

Related issues which hinder the 
ability to achieve the Higher 
Order Country Outcomes 

Strengthen financial sector 

Risks from financial sector 
contingent fiscal liabilities 
deriving from financial 
intermediation from public bank 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program 
During the four year period  
Outcomes that the Bank  
Intermediate Indicators to 
Group expects to 
track implementati on towards 
influence through its 
expected outcomes to which the 
interventions and outcome 
Bank Group CAS will 
level indicators 
contribute  
Stronger financial sector 
Financial Supervision Law 
and reduced fiscal risk 
presented to Congress consistent 
with  FSAP recommendations 
related to consolidated 
supervision and strengthening of 
supervisory powers 

Page 4 of 8 

Bank Group Assistance 

Bank Group Activities 

AAA 

•Financial Sector Reform and 
Strengthening (FIRST) 
•FSAP follow-up 

New rules implemented on loan 
classification and provisioning, 
and on credit -risk administration, 
consistent with international best 
practices. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 8 

Pillar Two: Improving Equity Through Building Human Capital and Expanding Access to Basic Infrastructure Assets and Markets 

Longer-Term 
Development Agenda for El Salvador 

Strategic and Longer 
Term 
Higher Order Country 
Outcomes 

Related issues which hinder the 
ability to achieve the Higher 
Order Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program 
During the four year period  
Outcomes that the Bank 
Grou p expects to 
influence through its 
interventions and 
outcome level indicators 

Intermediate Indicators to track 
implementation towards 
expected outcomes to which the 
Bank Group CAS will contribute  

Bank Group Assistance 

Bank Group Activities 

Achieve universal 
primary education  

Insufficient public expenditure for 
education 

Primary completion rate 
of 8 3% by end-2008 

Repetition rate in grade 1 of 12% 
by end -2005 

Primary completion of 85% 
by 2009 

Incomplete coverage especially in 
poor rural areas 

Quality of education 
improved 

Net enrollment in primary 
education of 95% by 2009 

Quality varies and needs 
improvement 

Academic performance for  
evaluation of quality implemented 
for grade 1 

Infrastructure rehabilitation 
targeting EDUCO schools started 

On-going lending 
• Secondary Education Project  
Education Reform APL   

New lending 
• Education Reform APL II (FY06) 

Improve access and 
quality of secondary 
education 

Net enrollment in 
secondary education of 
55% by 2009 

Low enrollment in secondary 
education 

Poor quality of curriculum and 
school infrastructure 

Net enrollment in 
secondary of 53% by end-
2008 

New modalities of flexible 
secondary education implemented 
(distance, mixed and accelerated) 

AAA 
• Education Strategy (Reg) 

Establishment of 
Educational Assessment 
System 

Ongoing teacher trainin g 

Establishment of learning resource 
centers (CRAs) 

Rehabilitation of schools started 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longer-Term 
Development Agenda for El Salvador 

Related issues which hinder the 
ability to achieve the Higher 
Order Country Outcomes 

Strategic and Longer 
Term 
Higher Order Country 
Outcomes 

Expand coverage of 
quality health services to 
350,000 persons in most 
deprived areas. 

10% reduction of 
underweight children in 
targeted areas 

90% of complete child 
immunization rates in 
targeted areas. 

80% of complete prenatal 
care 

Containment of HIV 
infection rates   

Page 6 of 8 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program 
During the four year period  
Outcomes that the Bank 
Group expects to 
influence through its 
interventions and 
outcome level indicators 

Intermediate Indicators to track 
implementation towards 
expected outcomes to which the 
Bank Group CAS will contribute  

Bank Group Assis tance 

Bank Group Activities 

Lack of access to basic health and 
nutrition services in poor and rural 
areas 

Improved access to basic 
health services in targeted 
areas   

Inadequate hospital infrastructure 
(bad physical condition, weak 
management, imbalance of human 
resources and other inputs, poor 
coordination with primary health 
and negative environmental 
impact)· 

Lack of a socially accepted health 
reform vision 

90% of children under 
five years receive 
complete vaccination in 
targeted areas. 

80% of pregnant women 
receive complete prenatal 
care in targeted areas 

Improved access to 
quality hospital services 
in targeted areas  

Improve detection and 
control of HIV/AIDs 

150,000 beneficiaries in poor 
communities with effective access 
to basic services through private 
providers, as measured by 
improved utilization, immunization 
and prenatal control rates 

Reconstruction of 7 hospit als 

At least 7 hospitals with 
satisfactory environmental health 
plans functioning 
25% of HIV positive pregnant 
women receive treatment 

Voluntary HIV testing for 50% of 
women seeking treatment for 
HIV/AIDS 

50% of HIV positive women 
receive treatment 

On-going lending 
• Earthquake Emergency Reconstruction 
and Health Services Project (on-going) 

• 

Grant  
 Central America Reg. HIV/AIDs project 
(FY05) 

AAA  
• Health Strategy (regional) 

Improved land tenure 
security and land 
transactions 

Provision of efficient, 
equitable and accessible 
land administration 
services 

Underdeveloped land 
administration system and 
insufficient titling 

Insufficient institutional capacity 

85% of land parcels 
cadastered, included and 
maintained in registry 

Financial self -sus ta in -
ability of the National 
registry Center 

Approval of LAP II by Congress 

Steady execution of 
regularization process  

the 

land 

On-going lending 
• Land Administration I Project  

New lending 
• Land Administration II Project (FY05) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pillar Three:  Enhancing Security and Reducing Vulnerability 

Longer-Term 
Development Agenda for El Salvador 
Strategic and Longer 
Term 
Higher Order Country 
Outcomes 

Related issues which hinder the 
ability to achieve the Higher 
Order Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program 
During the four year period  
Outcomes that the Bank 
Intermediate Indicators to track 
Group expects to 
implementation towards 
influence through its 
expected outcomes to which the 
interventions and 
Bank Group CAS will contribute  
outcome level indicators 

Bank Group Assistance 

Bank Group Activities 

Page 7 of 8 

Improved Governance 

Improve transparency and 
efficiency of government 

Insufficient transparency and 
efficiency of government 

All public sector entities 
have implemented 
effective internal controls 

Increase Transparency 
International ranking 

Launch an e-government strategy 

Further progress in PFM 
improvement program (e.g. 
Ministry of Finance has finalized 
its project for internal controls 
systems regulation) 

Improve Governance 

Implement a competitive 
public procurement regime 

Sound procurement law passed in 
2002, but non-is suance of 
implementing regulations has led 
to inconsistent practices 

Government procurement 
follows international best 
practice 

Issue implementing regulations for 
Procurement Law 

Implementation of operational 
directives for procurement unit 
(UNAC) and of four-year program 
for the public procurement system 

Harmonized bidding documents for 
use by all public agencies 
developed 

Improve Governance 

Improve protection of 
social and individual rights 
by ensuring rule of law 
through judicial reform 

Weak judicial systems 

Increase in user 
satisfaction and i mproved 
judicial services as 
measured by citizen 
confidence in system 

Increase in the efficiency in 
allocation of judicial branch 
resources 

On-going lending 
• Public Sector Reform Project 
New lending 
• Development Policy Loan series (FY05-
08) 
• Modernization of the State Project 
(FY07) 
AAA 
• CPAR/CFAA/PER update 

On-going lending 
Public Sector Reform Project 
New lending 
• Development Policy Loan series (FY05-
08) 
• Modernization of the St ate Project 
(FY07) 
AAA/Grant 
IDF for procurement modernization 
• CPAR update 

• 

On-going lending 
• Judicial Reform Project  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 8 

Longer-Term 
Development Agenda for El Salvador 
Strategic and Longer  
Term  
Higher Order  
Country Outcomes  

Related issues which hinder the 
ability to achieve the Higher 
Order Country Outcomes 

Outcomes Influenced by the CAS Program 
During the four year period  
Outcomes that the Bank 
Intermediate Indicators to track 
Group expects to 
implementation towards 
influence through its 
expected outcomes to which the 
interventions and 
Bank Group CAS will contribute  
outcome level indicators 

Bank Group Assistance 

Bank Group Activites 

Insufficient funding to achieve 
social development objectives 

Weak targeting of social assistance 
programs 

Reduce vulnerability 

Social expenditures 
increased to or at least 5% 
of GDP by 2009 

Targeting, coverage, and 
design of social assistance 
programs for the poor 
improved 

Better  environmental 
protection 

Significant Environmental 
Degradation 

Social expenditures 
increased to at least 5.4% 
of GDP by end 2008 

Follow-up ac t ions to 
improve targeting, 
coverage and design of 
social assistance programs 
for the poor 

GOES preparation of 
National Environmental 
Strategy 

National strategy on social 
protection formulated 

Gradual increases in social 
expenditures  

New lending 
• Social Protection and Local 
Development (FY06) 

AAA 
• PER (follow-up ) 
• Shocks and Social Protection Study 

CEA Action Plan, especially for 
infrastructure and trade expansion 

AAA 
Country Environmental Analysis 

A system of 
environmental services 
piloted 

Charges and payments for 
environmental services initiated 

Lending/ Grant 
Environmental Services Project (FY05) and 
GEF Grant Component (FY05) 

Tested and replicable 
strategy for protected area 
consolidation and 
biodiversity conservation 

Two pilot protected areas selected 

Participatory management plans 
developed for pilot protected areas 

Grant  
GEF Land Administration and Protected 
Areas Project (FY06) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

CAS Annex B2 - El Salvador

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2002

2003

2004

2005

7
5.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
32.8

No
706
78

7
5.1
28.6
40.5
28.6
40.5
16.9

No
790
99

6
5.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
15.0

No
525
75

6
5.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.9

No
..
..

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
16
3
460.8
108.5
12.5
0.0
6.0
0.0

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the 
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3

El Salvador Proposed IBRD Base Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year

Project

US$(M)

Strategic Rewards b 
(H/M/L)

Implementation b  
Risks (H/M/L)

2005

2006

Development Policy I (DPL I)
Land Administration II
Environmental Services Project

Development Policy II (DPL II)
Education Reform II
Social Protection and Local Development (FISDL)
Ensuring SME Participation in CAFTA

Total Low end of Base Case

2007

Development Policy III (DPL III)
Modernization of the State II

Total High End of Base Case

 100.0
 40.0
 5.0

 100.0
 85.0
 35.0
 10.0

 375.0

 100.0
 10.0

 485.0

H
H
M

H
H
M
M

H
M

M
L
H

M
L
M
M

M
L

a This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M) or low (L).

CAS Annex B3
El Salvador - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2002-2005

2002

2003

2004

2005

IFC commitments (US$m)

        45.0         17.0         92.5 

n.a.

Sector (%)
Utilities
Finance & Insurance
Wholesale and Retai
Total

Investment instrument(%)
Equity
Loan
Quasi-equity (Loan type)
Total

         100             -               -   
            -            100            73 
            -               -              27 
         100          100          100             -   

            -              12              8 
         100            88            86 
            -               -                5 
         100          100          100             -   

1/10/2005

CAS Annex B4

Summary of Nonlending Services - El Salvador

Product

Completion FY

Amount (US$000)

Audience a

Objective b

AAA: Recent completions

Public Expenditure Review
Country Economic Memorandum
Poverty Assessment
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Review
FSAP Update

AAA: Underway

Recent Economic Developments in Infrastructure
Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Study
Investment Climate Assessment
CAFTA Regional Study
Shocks and Social Protection Study
Education Study (regional)

AAA: Planned

ROSC (A+A module)
PSIAs on Tax and Pension Reforms and CAFTA   
CSR Strategy
Country Environmental Analysis (CEA)
Health Strategy (regional)

Public Procurement Modernization
Strengthening Afro Communities. (regional)
CAFTA Trade Capacity Building (regional)

GEF - Central America Regional HIV/AIDS
GEF - National Environmental Management Project
PHRD - Social Protection & Local Development
PHRD - Education Reform APL II
PHRD - Land Administration Project
PHRD - National Environmental Management Project

____________
a.  Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b.  Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

FY04
FY03
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04

FY06
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05

FY05
FY05
FY06
FY06
FY06

IDF Grants

Approval FY

FY03
FY03
FY03

Other Grants

Approval FY

FY05
FY05
FY05
FY04
FY04
FY02

…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…

497.0
76.7
100.0

1,333.3
350.0
670.0
400.0
549.5
250.0

G, PD, B
G, PD, B
G, PD, B
G, B
G, B
G, B

G, PD, B
G, B
G, PD, B
G, PD, B
G, PD, B
G, PD, B

G, PD, B
G, PD, B
G, PD, B
G, PD, B
G, PD, B

G, PS
G, PS
G, PS

G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

 
CAS ANNEX B5

El Salvador Social Indicators

Latest single year

Same region/income group

POPULATION  
Total population, mid-year (millions)
    Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Share of income or consumption
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
    Health (% of GDP)
    Education (% of GDP)
    Social security and welfare (% of GDP)

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
    Total
        Male
        Female

Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
    Total
        Urban
        Rural

Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
    Measles
    DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
    Total
        Male
        Female

Mortality
    Infant (per 1,000 live births)
    Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
    Adult (15-59)
        Male (per 1,000 population)
        Female (per 1,000 population)
    Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

1970-75

1980-85

1996-2002

4.1
2.7
41.5
5.8

490
5
..

..
..
..

..
3.2
..

66
66
65

..
..
..

..
..
..

58
54
62

111
162

259
193
..
..

4.8
0.8
46.6
4.2

750
19
14

..
..
..

..
3.0
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

71
55
..

61
56
66

84
118

410
178
..
..

6.4
1.7
62.4
2.9

2,110
128
125

53.2
2.9
57.1

3.7
2.5
3.2

89
89
89

77
91
64

93
81
12

70
67
73

33
39

250
148
150
..

Latin

America

& Carib.

524.9
1.5
76.4
2.5

3,280
..
..

Lower-

middle-

income

2,408.5
0.9
49.4
2.1

1,400
..
..

..
..
..

3.4
4.5
..

94
94
95

86
94
65

91
88
9

71
68
74

28
34

222
125
..
..

..
..
..

2.7
4.0
..

91
92
92

81
95
70

78
84
9

69
67
72

32
40

212
131
..
..

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age.
2004 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

 
CAS ANNEX B6

El Salvador - Key Economic Indicators

Estimate
2004

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product a
   Agriculture
   Industry
   Services

2000

Actual
2001

2002

2003

2005

2006

Projected
2007

2008

2009

100.0
10.0
30.0
60.0

100.0
9.0
30.0
61.0

100.0
9.0
30.0
61.0

100.0
8.8
32.0
59.3

100.0
8.5
33.0
58.5

100.0
8.3
33.0
58.8

100.0
8.0
33.0
59.0

100.0
8.0
33.0
59.0

100.0
7.8
33.0
59.3

100.0
7.7
33.0
59.3

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
   Government investment
   Private investment

98.1
16.9
2.9
14.0

99.3
16.7
4.4
12.3

98.8
16.2
4.3
11.9

99.4
16.6
3.6
13.0

98.2
15.8
2.3
13.5

96.3
16.7
3.1
13.6

97.0
17.0
3.0
14.0

95.5
17.5
3.1
14.4

95.0
18.0
3.5
14.5

95.5
18.5
3.5
15.0

Exports (GNFS) b
Imports (GNFS)

27.0
42.0

26.0
42.0

26.0
41.0

27.0
43.0

26.0
40.0

25.0
38.0

26.0
40.0

28.0
41.0

29.0
42.0

29.0
43.0

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings c

1.9
13.6

0.7
15.6

1.2
13.3

0.6
11.7

1.8
11.2

3.7
12.2

3.0
13.0

4.5
13.5

5.0
14.0

4.5
14.5

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product (US$ million)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

13,134
2,000

13,813
2,040

14,312
2,080

14,940
2,230

15,697
2,230

16,474
2,310

17,506
2,410

18,500
2,510

19,550
2,610

20,660
2,715

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
   GDP at domestic prices
   Gross Domestic Income

2.2
0.3

1.7
1.8

2.2
1.6

1.8
1.2

1.8
1.3

2.5
3.1

3.0
4.4

3.0
3.2

3.0
3.2

3.0
3.2

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
   Gross domestic product at market prices
0.2
   Total consumption
1.7
   Private consumption
1.9

-0.2
1.2
1.1

0.3
-0.2
-0.2

-0.1
0.1
0.2

-0.1
-3.6
-4.6

0.7
0.6
-0.1

1.2
1.2
0.4

1.3
1.0
0.1

1.3
1.0
0.1

1.4
1.0
0.1

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
  Exports (GNFS) b
      Merchandise FOB
   Imports (GNFS) b
      Merchandise FOB
  Resource balance
  Net current transfers
  Current account balance

3,599
2,900
5,573
4,640
-1,974
1,797
-431

3,568
2,864
5,753
4,797
-2,185
2,298
-151

3,773
3,021
5,933
4,892
-2,160
2,023
-411

3,986
3,162
6,429
5,436
-2,443
2,117
-734

4,011
3,220
6,252
5,728
-2,241
2,544
-702

4,092
3,262
6,351
5,906
-2,259
2,748
-671

4,707
3,461
7,074
6,228
-2,367
2,955
-743

5,345
3,633
7,868
6,582
-2,523
3,133
-799

5,945
3,867
8,568
6,943
-2,623
3,305
-831

6,310
4,120
9,050
7,337
-2,740
3,480
-876

  Foreign direct investment
  Long-term loans (net)
    Official
    Private
  Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
  Change in reserves d

178
257
200
57
-50
46

289
54
620
-566
-370
178

496
695
1270
-575
-904
124

68
1005
587
418
-23
-316

150
269
242
27
113
170

149
416
563
-147
116
-10

254
515
587
-72
69
-95

268
582
526
56
69
-120

283
599
450
149
69
-120

299
628
543
85
69
-120

Memorandum items
CAB (% of GDP)

-3.3

-1.1

-2.9

-4.9

-4.5

-4.1

-4.2

-4.3

-4.3

-4.2

Real annual growth rates
  Exports (FOB)
  Imports (FOB)

16.5
15.9

-2.9
1.5

4.4
0.3

2.2
8.6

-0.9
1.5

-1.2
0.7

4.0
3.6

2.9
3.8

4.3
3.6

4.4
3.8

(Continued)

     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
El Salvador - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

Actual
2001

2000

2002

2003

Estimate
2004

2005

2006

Projected
2007

2008

2009

Nonfinancial Public Sector finance (as % of GDP)
  Total revenues and grants
     Current revenues
        Tax Revenues
  Total expenditures
     Current expenditures (incl. pensions transfers)
     Capital expenditure

  Overall NFPS balance
      Foreign financing
      Domestic Financing

Monetary indicators
  M2/GDP
  Growth of M2 (%)
  Private sector credit growth (%)

Price indices( 1990 =100)
  Merchandise export price index
  Merchandise import price index
  Merchandise terms of trade index

  Consumer price index (end period, % change)
  GDP deflator (% change)

16.6
15.7
11.0
19.6
16.3
3.3

-3.0
1.5
1.5

45.9
1.0
1.1

15.6
15.2
11.1
20.0
15.5
4.5

-4.4
4.5
-0.1

44.9
3.7
-1.8

16.1
15.3
11.8
20.5
15.6
4.9

-4.4
8.7
-4.3

42.1
-3.1
7.3

16.8
16.3
12.1
20.6
16.9
3.7

-3.8
3.0
0.8

40.1
2.3
6.9

16.8
16.3
12.2
19.3
16.7
2.6

-2.5
1.6
0.9

39.1
2.5
4.9

17.1
16.6
13.3
20.1
16.8
3.3

-3.0
3.1
-0.1

37.9
3.0
5.0

17.0
16.7
13.6
19.3
16.3
3.0

-2.3
2.3
0.0

36.9
3.0
5.0

17.4
17.1
14.1
18.9
15.8
3.1

-1.5
1.5
0.0

35.7
3.0
5.0

17.9
17.6
14.6
18.9
15.4
3.5

-1.0
1.0
0.0

34.7
3.0
5.0

18.4
18.1
15.2
19.7
15.0
4.7

-1.3
1.3
0.0

33.5
3.0
5.0

117.5
121.3
96.9

4.3
3.2

116.0
125.4
92.5

1.4
3.4

122.4
127.9
95.6

2.8
1.4

128.1
142.1
90.1

2.5
2.5

130.4
149.8
87.0

5.5
4.2

132.1
154.5
85.5

2.5
2.5

140.2
162.8
86.1

2.5
2.5

147.2
172.1
85.5

2.5
2.5

156.6
181.5
86.3

2.5
2.5

166.9
191.9
87.0

2.5
2.5

a.   GDP at market prices
b.  "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c.  Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d.  Includes use of IMF resources.

CAS ANNEX B7

El Salvador - Key Exposure Indicators *

Indicator

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m) a

Net disbursements (US$m) b

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m) b

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
   TDO/Exports GNFS c
   TDO/GDP
     o/w Domestic
     o/w External

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
   IBRD DS/public DS
   Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%) d
   IBRD DS/XGS
   IBRD TDO (US$m) e
   IBRD TDO / TDO (%)

IFC (US$m) f
Loan and Quasi-equity (Loan type)
Equity and Quasi-equity (Equity type)

2000

Actual
2001

2002

2003

Estimate 
2004

2005

2006

Projected
2007

2008

2009

3,822

4,696

5,539

6,081

6,357

6,738

7,125

7,456

7,722

8,099

161

341

94.2
29.1
7.5
21.6

15.7
54.9
0.8
309.0
8.1

42.0
3.4

474

369

76.0
34.0
11.2
22.8

15.5
58.9
0.9
334.0
7.1

45.0
3.2

364

423

67.6
38.7
10.7
28.0

12.3
47.9
0.8
371.0
6.6

67.1
3.2

278

644

66.0
40.7
9.1
31.6

9.6
37.4
1.0
372.0
5.6

73.4
5.2

306.5

281.2

150.2

246.2

357.2

369.8

600

601

724

602

602

602

64.3
40.5
5.3
35.2

10.6
51.8
1.0
351.0
5.8

78.2
5.2

63.8
40.9
4.6
36.3

10.0
53.3
0.9
463.0
7.2

n.a.
n.a.

69.6
40.7
3.9
36.8

7.9
41.7
0.8
589.0
8.7

n.a.
n.a.

73.1
40.3
3.2
37.1

11.4
..
0.8
712.0
9.9

n.a.
n.a.

78.6
39.5
2.8
36.7

11.4
..
0.8
828.0
11.5

n.a.
n.a.

79.3
39.2
3.1
36.1

11.4
..
0.7
935.0
12

n.a.
n.a.

*   Assumes a 2005 - 2009 CAS envelope of USD 580 million 
a. Non Financial Public Sector external debt only.
b.  Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
     term capital.
c.  "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
    Bank for International Settlements.
d. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, IFC, regional multilateral development banks, IMF and Bank of International Settlements.
e. Includes present value of guarantees.
f. Actual data based on fiscal years ending in June of the indicated year.  Not including the Participants' account.

1/13/2005

       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
Closed Projects

30

IBRD/IDA *

Total Disbursed (Active)
          of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
          of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
          of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

 190.0
 31.1
 585.4
 414.3
 775.4
 445.4
 190.8
 0.0
 190.8

Active Projects

Project ID

Project Name

CAS Annex B8 - El Salvador
IBRD Operations Portfolio

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating

Development 
Objectives

Implementation 
Progress

Amount in US$ Millions

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/

Fiscal Year

IBRD

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

P050612
P064919
P007174
P007164
P041680
P067986

Education Reform
Judicial Modernization
Land Administration
Public Sector Modernization
Secondary Education
Earthquake Reconstruction

S
S
S
S
S
S

S
S
S
S
S
S

1998
2003
1996
1997
1998
2002

88
18.2
50
24
58
142.6
380.8

16.5
17.4
0.0
6.1
11.4
139.4
190.8

16.5
9.6
0.0
6.1
11.4
-3.1
40.6

16.5

0.0
1.3

17.9

1/10/2005

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for El Salvador

El Salvador
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
(In US Dollars Millions)
As of November 2004

Held

Disbursed

Approval Fiscal 
Year

2001
2004
2001
2002/2004
1997/2000
1998/2003
2004
2004
1997/1999
Total Portfolio:

Institution 
Short Name
AFP Crecer
Banco Agricola
CAESS/EEO
CALPIA
CESSA
CUSCATLAN-ES
Confia AFP
Metrocentro
SEF IMACASA

Loan

Equity

QL+QE

Part

Loan

Equity

QL+QE

Part

0.0
50.0
42.6
5.0
0.0
11.1
0.0
25.0
0.0
133.7

0.4
0.0
0.0
2.0
2.2
0.0
7.5
0.0
0.2
12.3

0.0
0.0
0.0
5.0
0.0
15.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20.0

0.0
0.0
68.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
68.7

0.0
37.0
29.2
5.0
0.0
11.1
0.0
25.0
0.0
107.3

0.0
0.0
0.0
2.0
2.2
0.0
6.7
0.0
0.2
11.1

0.0
0.0
0.0
5.0
0.0
15.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20.0

0.0
0.0
46.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
46.4

1/10/2005

EL SALVADOR: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS 

Annex C 

Item 
Cost sharing.  Limit on the 
proportion of individual project costs 
that the Bank may finance 

Parameter 
Remarks / Explanation 
Up to 100 percent 100 percent financing is expected to 
be applied selectively to stay within 
the overall CAS lending envelope. 
Specific arrangements would be 
determined for individual projects, 
allowing technical assistance projects 
to finance up to 100 percent of the 
cost if necessary, while land 
administration and social sector 
projects are expected to be in the 70 
to 85 percent range. 

Recurrent cost financing.  Any 
limits that would apply to the overall 
amount of recurrent expenditures that 
the Bank may finance 

No country-level 
limit 

Yes 

Local cost financing.  Are the 
requirements for Bank financing of 
local expenditures met? Namely that: 
(i) financing requirements for the 
country’s development program 
would exceed the public sector’s own 
resources (e.g., from taxation and 
other revenues) and expected 
domestic borrowing; and (ii)  the 
financing of foreign expenditures 
alone would not enable the Bank to 
assist in the financing of individual 
projects 

Taxes and duties.  Are there any 
taxes and duties that the Bank would 
not finance? 

None 

In determining recurrent cost 
financing in individual projects, the 
Bank will take into account 
sustainability issues at the sector and 
project levels and implied future 
budgetary outlays.     

The two requirements are met.  The 
Bank may therefore finance local 
costs in the proportions needed in 
individual projects. 

No taxes or duties are currently 
identified as unreasonable or 
discriminatory.  At the project level, 
the Bank would consider whether 
taxes and duties constitute an 
excessively high share of project 
expenditures. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex D - CAS Consultations with Salvadoran Stakeholders 

Consultations on the World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy for El Salvador were 
held in San Salvador from October 4-6, 2004.  The Bank was represented at these 
consultations as follows: Jane Armitage (Country Director), Nicolette Bowyer (Country 
Officer), Manuel Sevilla (FPSI Sector Leader), Felipe Jaramillo (Lead Economist and 
PREM Sector Leader), Ana-Lucia Armijos (Country Economist) and Eduardo Wallentin 
(Manager, IFC).  In addition, David de Ferranti, (Vice President, Latin America and the 
Caribbean) held a series of small meetings with members of the executive branch, 
representatives from the different political parties and with the private sector and 
foundations/think tanks. 

The more formal round of consultations on the CAS centered on a one-day workshop 
attended by approximately 150 participants, including representatives of the executive 
branch of government, the judicial sector, members of the Salvadoran congress, local 
governments, academia and think-tanks, foundations, civil society, the international 
donor community, the private sector and media. During the morning session, the Bank 
team made presentations on two core diagnostic reports (the Poverty Assessment and the 
Public Expenditure Review), followed by a general discussion and a lively question and 
answer session. The Country Director made a power-point presentation summarizing the 
Bank Group’s current assistance program in El Salvador, together with a brief 
explanation of the different entities comprising the World Bank Group and its main 
lending and non-lending instruments and outlining the proposed areas of emphasis for the 
new CAS for  FY05-08.  Prior to the meeting, summaries in Spanish of the two core 
diagnostic reports and of the Country Economic Memorandum were posted on the Bank’s 
website, together with a document summarizing the Bank’s current portfolio and recent 
AAA activities in El Salvador, and a tentative list of proposed new lending and non-
lending activities.  

In the afternoon, a participatory methodology—known as tecnica Delphi—was 
implemented with the help of a local consultant with extensive experience in facilitating 
dialogue.  The methodology allowed for a set of productive and frank discussions with 
the different stakeholders, aimed at soliciting participants’ views on the key development 
challenges facing El Salvador and on the possible role of the Bank in helping the country 
to respond to these challenges.  Based on the three pillars of growth, equity and security 
underpinning the Government’s development plan “Safe Country”, thematic working 
groups were set up with participants invited to join the thematic group of their choice.   
Each working group elected a team leader, a rapporteur and a secretary.  The groups were 
provided with a set of core questions (See Box 1) designed to orient and stimulate the 
discussion, without constraining the scope and content of the dialogue.  The groups were 
extremely well attended, and the discussions were lively and frank, with participants 
showing a high degree of engagement, technical knowledge and enthusiasm.  At the end 
of the day, each working group made a short presentation highlighting the main points 
from their discussions.  A report on the workshop including the list of the participants, 
description of the methodology, detailed notes from  the discussions of each working 

1

 
 
 
 
group and a summary of the key points, has been prepared by the local consultant and can 
be found on the Bank’s website at www.worldbank.org/elsalvador .  

Box 1 – Set of Questions used with Consultations participants 
1. Esta correcto/completo el análisis y las recomendaciones de los estudios presentados por la 
mañana? Hay nuevos datos o analisis que pueden enriquecer o cambiar las conclusiones? (Are the analysis 
and recommendations of the studies presented in the morning correct/complete? Is there any new data or 
analysis that could enrich or change the conclusions?) 
2. Como mejorar la preparación de los estudios del Banco, buscando otros socios y 
aprovechando mas el conocimiento salvadoreño o regional? (How can the preparation of Bank studies be 
improved, while looking for new partners and taking advantage of Salvadorean and regional knowledge?) 
3. Como ampliar y mejorar la divulgación de los estudios del Banco para contribuir a un debate 
publico informado? (How can we improve and expand the dissemination of Bank studies to contribute to an 
informed public debate?) 
4. Que tipo de estudios serian los mas útiles para El Salvador en el futuro? Cuales son las áreas 
claves donde se necesita mas investigación? por ejemplo, remesas, sector informal, otros? (What kind of 
research studies would be more useful for El Salvador in the future? Which are the key areas where more 
research is needed? For example, remittances, informal sector, other?) 
5. Hay retroalimentación o sugerencias sobre como mejorar el impacto de la cartera actual y de las 
operaciones nuevas que están en discusión? (Is there any feedback or suggestions on how to improve the 
impact of the current portfolio and of the new operations under discussion?) 
6. Cuales son los ventajas y posibles desafíos con la propuesta de concentrar un gran porcentaje  
del apoyo financiero futuro del Banco en apoyo presupuestario a través de una serie anual de 
prestamos de rápido desembolso, apoyando el programa de desarrollo del Gobierno? (Which are the 
advantages and possible challenges of the proposal of concentrating a big portion of the upcoming 
financial support of the Bank on budgetary support, through an annual series of fast disbursement loans, 
supporting the development programs of the government?) 
7. Cuales son los riesgos principales que El Salvador enfrentaría, y como puede el Banco actuar 
para reducir o mitigar esos riesgos? (Which are the main risks that El Salvador would face, and how can 
the Bank proceed to reduce those risks?) 
8. Que tipo de indicadores y sistemas de monitoreo serian útiles para evaluar el impacto del 
apoyo del Banco en El Salvador? (What kind of indicators or monitoring systems would be useful to 
evaluate the impact of the support of the Bank in El Salvador?) 

Below is a summary of the views expressed by the different groups of stakeholders 
during the workshop and in other meetings. 

Executive branch of government  
The Government endorsed the Bank’s proposed areas of support, allocation of lending 
(split between quick-disbursing budgetary support and specific investment projects) and 
non-lending activities, and the trigger conditions for the different lending scenarios.  With 
respect to the timetable for lending, the government requested that the timing of the 
Development Policy Loans (DPLs) be aligned with El Salvador’s budget cycle so as to 
allow the National Assembly to approve and ratify DPL2 (and subsequent DPLs) together 
with the national budget.  The Government also confirmed that the proposed areas for 
Bank investment lending supported key priorities of their development plan, and 
explained that other development partners were providing support in areas such as 
agriculture and rural development.  The Government requested the Bank’s support in its 
efforts to obtain resources and technical assistance for other areas of strategic importance 
such as promoting private participation in infrastructure, strengthening the financial 

2

 
 
 
 
sector, enhancing the development impact of remittances and increasing the productivity 
of the informal sector.  They also requested technical assistance from the Bank to develop 
a debt management strategy, and expressed interest in tapping the full range of IBRD’s 
financial instruments, possibly in the context of a Master Derivatives Agreement.  The 
Government expressed strong interest in greater involvement by IFC in El Salvador.  
Finally, the Government requested that the Bank open a small office in El Salvador in 
order to assist the Government more closely in the implementation of the Bank’s program 
and to strengthen coordination with other stakeholders and partners, especially given the 
larger proposed assistance package. 

International Donor Community 
The donors emphasized the need for greater coordination between Cooperation Agencies 
in El Salvador to promote efficiency in the use of scarce resources.  In particular, they 
noted the need for greater coordination, and where possible, joint preparation of key 
studies, to avoid duplication and overloading the Salvadoran Government and other 
stakeholders with multiple reports on the same topics (e.g. growth and poverty 
reduction), which sometimes reached conflicting conclusions due 
to different 
methodologies or definitions.  They further agreed that improving the statistical data 
bases in El Salvador, including carrying out a new Census and Households Living 
Standards Measurement Survey, was a top priority.  Some donors expressed concern that 
the Bank was not planning new investment operations to support agriculture and rural 
development.  The Country Director explained that the Government had indicated that 
these areas were already supported by other donors, such as IDB, CABEI and IFAD.  
With respect to the DPLs, while some donors expressed skepticism about the benefits of 
delinking financial assistance from specific project activities others such as the European 
Community supported the concept of providing support to the Government’s own 
development program and priorities through quick disbursing budget support.   

Civil Society 
A broad sample of civil society organizations participated in the CAS consultations 
(including leaders from organizations advocating on behalf of women, indigenous 
groups, and other minorities). They reiterated the important role they play in the 
development of the country.  Participants welcomed the opportunity to discuss the 
diagnosis of the country’s key challenges set out in the Bank’s core analytical reports.  
Some participants expressed frustration that they had not received copies of the reports in 
advance (Spanish summaries of the reports were posted on the web about ten days before 
the meeting, but clearly some participants had not been able to access them).  More 
generally, participants asked that in the future the Bank engage directly with civil society 
throughout the entire process of preparing analytical reports, including organizing regular 
public fora to discuss specific themes,  and that opportunities for joint studies be 
exploited, for example by developing strategic alliances with local academic institutions, 
professional associations, think-tanks, etc.   

Other specific ideas were proposed to enhance the dissemination of Bank reports, 
including through the web, via videoconferences, mass media, and preparation of less 

3

 
 
 
 
technical packages for broader dissemination and for use by educational institutions.  
Many suggestions were made for deeper analysis, including the treatment of gender, 
issues affecting senior citizens, security/violence, natural disasters and external shocks, 
structure and costs of external debt, and the impact of migration and remittances.   Many 
participants emphasized the poor quality of the data in El Salvador, including the absence 
of a recent population or agricultural census, and the need for household surveys.  

With relation 
to 
the proposed Bank’s current and proposed 
lending program 
representatives of civil society concluded that the proposed areas of activity were well 
aligned with the country’s development priorities.  Many participants expressed interest 
in getting more information about Bank-financed operations (including via the internet) 
and recommended that the Bank strengthen the involvement of civil society in the 
formulation, implementation and evaluation of projects to cost-effective use of resources 
and that benefits reach the largest number of poor people.  Most participants were 
supportive of the proposal for the Bank to provide budget support to El Salvador through 
an annual series of DPLs as a way to reduce the costs of external financing and provide 
an “international seal of approval” for El Salvador’s development strategy.  While some 
expressed concern about the fact that DPLs “provide a blank check”, most liked the idea 
that the Bank would be supporting the country’s own development program and 
priorities, and appreciated the speed and flexibility offered by this instrument, while 
emphasizing the need for continued improvements in the efficiency and transparency of 
public expenditures and in combating corruption.   

Many participants highlighted the need for a small Bank office in El Salvador to ensure 
more regular communication and continuous dialogue and feedback on both projects and 
analytical work, to improve coordination and reduce duplication with other members of 
the international community and to enhance partnerships with local stakeholders.   

Members of Congress 
Members of Congress representing all political parties agreed on the urgent need to 
reactivate economic growth and to increase tax revenues to finance basic social and 
infrastructure investments, while addressing the institutional weaknesses affecting 
government agencies.  Many “diputados” and leaders of some political parties expressed 
concern about the recent increase and costs of external debt, and requested the Bank to 
provide technical assistance to the Government to develop an external debt management 
strategy. On the fiscal side, legislators from the opposition parties expressed their views 
about the need to adopt a package of fiscal reforms that goes beyond improved tax 
administration, introducing new taxes to promote equity and increase revenues to finance 
social and growth related expenditures. They also emphasized the need to build 
consensus in support of fiscal reform. Other issues that were given priority by 
“diputados” from the opposition include: dollarization, the situation of the agricultural 
sector and the potential adverse effects of CAFTA, migration and family remittances.     

Members of Congress and the Bank mission discussed the approval and ratification 
process of new loans, and some delays experienced in past loans. Some key comments 

4

 
 
 
 
 
made include: (i) congress would like to be involved in the substance of the loans and 
their contribution to existing policies; (ii) approval could be facilitated by improved 
information flows between the Executive and the Legislative during the process of 
project preparation; (iii) contacts between Bank teams responsible for project preparation 
and the relevant congressional commissions to inform about future projects early in the 
preparation cycle could contribute to reduced delays in Congressional approval. 

During the conversation, Members of Congress mentioned other issues currently in the 
legislative and/or political agenda:  (i) electoral reform, including campaign financing 
and the role of the media, (ii) competition and consumer protection, (iii) the organization 
of new political parties and the need to reduce the risk of polarization. Some “Diputados” 
expressed interest in the World Bank Institute’s activities in support of parliaments, 
especially those related to strengthening parliaments’ capacity to oversee the allocation 
and use of public funds as well as the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank. 

Private Sector 

The Bank mission met with representatives of different private sector groups, including 
those associated with FDI firms, large local investors, as well as SMEs.  Messages were 
consistent even though emphases differ across groups.  In general, private sector 
representatives express their satisfaction about the Bank’s increased presence in El 
Salvador, both in policy dialogue as well as with new lending and technical assistance. 
The country, according to the private sector, is well-positioned to deal with future 
challenges because of  its stable macroeconomic and financial environment, increased 
FDI flows and family remittances, and important changes in the political area.  New 
parties are emerging that could lead to less polarization and the strengthening of 
democracy.   Major concerns of the private sector include: restoring growth, reducing 
poverty in sustainable ways, providing incentives that allow for more productive use of 
remittances, having clear and strong leadership from the Executive on economic policy.  
Private sector representatives mentioned other problems that require immediate and 
urgent actions: crime and violence, employment generation, health reform, urban 
transport, and the water sector.   

CAFTA has all the support of the private sector even though there are concerns about the 
country’s readiness to compete and succeed under the new scenario and rules. The 
Government of President Saca is recognized by the private sector for its more 
participatory style but some suggestions for improving outcomes were made.  Most 
importantly, the private sector considers that consensus building should focus on “how to 
grow”,  “how to finance growth” and finally “how to improve the international image of 
El Salvador”. 

5

 
 
 
 
 
