Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 30717-HR

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF CROATIA
November 24,2004

South Central Europe Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
Southern Europe and Central Asia Department

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
o f their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR:
The date o f the last Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report was September 18, 2001.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate as of October 31,2004)
Currency Unit = Croatia Kuna (HRK)
US$ = 5.875 HRK
GOVERNMENT’S FISCAL YEAR:
(January 1 - December 31)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
APL
BIDFacility
BRA
CARDS
CAE
CAS
CEEC
CEFTA
CEM
CFAA
CHF
CNB
CPAR
CPF
DFID
EBRD
EC
ECA
EIB
EIOP
EU
EU8
EU15
EUROSTAT
FDI
FFED
FIAS
FSAP
GDP
GEF
GNI
HBOR
HDZ
HEP
HIViAIDS

HRK

HZ
Analytical and Advisory Services
HZZO
Adaptable Program Loan
IBRD
Balkans Infrastructure Development Facility
IDPs
Bonds for banks’ rehabilitation
IFA
Community Assistance for Reconstruction,
IFC
Development and Stabilization
IF1
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
ILO
IMF
Central and Eastem European Countries
IT
Central European Free Trade Agreement
JPY
Country Economic Memorandum
JPR
Country Financial Accountability
KfW
Assessment
Swiss franc
M&E
MATRA
Croatian National Bank
MFI
Country Procurement Assessment Report
MIGA
Croatian Fund for Privatization
Department for Intemational Development
MoF
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development NBJ
NGO
European Commission
OECD
Europe and Central Asia
European Investment Bank
OED
European Investor Outreach Program
OSCE
European Union
PAL
E U New Member States as o f May 1,2004,
PEIR
excluding Malta and Cyprus
R&D
EU Member States prior to May 1,2004
Statistical Office o f the European Communities
SAA
SAL
Foreign direct investment
Frozen foreign exchange deposits
SBA
SDR
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Financial Sector Assessment Program
SIDA
SME
Gross Domestic Product
SOE
Global Environment Facility
TA
Gross National Income
Croatian Bank for Reconstruction and Development TB
UK
Croatian Democratic Union
Hrvatska Elektroprivreda (Croatia’s national electric UNDP
UNHCR
utility)
USAID
Human Immunodeficiency VirusiAcquired
USD
Immunodeficiency Syndrome
WBI
Croatian Kuna

Croatian Railways
Croatian Institute for Health Insurance
Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Intemally displaced persons
Institutional Fiduciary Assessment
Intemational Finance Corporation
Intemational financial institution
Intemational Labor Organization
Intemational Monetary Fund
Information technology
Japanese Yen
Joint Portfolio Review
Kreditanstalt Fur Wiederaufbau
Monitoring and evaluation
Social Transformation Program
Multilateral financial institution
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry o f Finance
National Bank o f Yugoslavia
Non-governmental organization
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development
Operations Evaluation Department
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Programmatic Adjustment Loan
Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
Research and Development
Stabilization and Association Agreement
Structural Adjustment Loan
Stand-By Arrangement
Special Drawing Rights
Swedish Intemational Development Agency
Small and medium enterprises
State-owned enterprise
Technical assistance
Tuberculosis
United Kingdom
United Nations Development Program
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United States Agency for Intemational Development
United States dollar
World Bank Institute

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MANAGERS AND STAFF RESPONSIBLEFOR THIS CAS
IBRD
Vice President:
Country Director:
Acting Country Manager:
Country Economist:
CAS Team Leader:

IFC

Shigeo Katsu
Anand Seth
Albert Martinez
Sanja Madzarevic-Sujster
M y l a Taylor Williams

Vice President, Operations:
Director, SECA:
Country Manager:
Task Leader:

Assaad Jabre
Khosrow Zamani
Roberto Albisetti
Gjergi Konda

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the collaboration and contributions o f the Croatian
government in the preparation o f this CAS. The additional contributions by many who were consulted
during CAS preparation, including representatives o f civil society, private sector and other groups and
individuals, are equally appreciated. The preparation o f this CAS has been a team effort with the active
participation o f the entire Croatia Country Team as well as staff from other units o f the World Bank
Group.

NOTE: While this CAS adopts a results-based format, it i s not an official results-based CAS pilot.

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients o n l y in
the performance o f their official duties. I t s contents may n o t be otherwise disclosed

w i t h o u t W o r l d B a n k authorization.

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................................... i

I.

I1.

I11.

I V.

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

COUNTRY CONTEXT ..................................................................................................................
Introduction......................................................................................................................................
Political Context ...............................................................................................................................
Social Context .....................
...........................................................................................................
Recent Economic Developments......................................................................................................
Debt Sustainabilityand Debt Management ......................................................................................
.t

1
1
1
1
3
4

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENTPROGRAM AND CHALLENGES.............................................. 5
A . Govemment Priorities ...................................................................................................................... 5
B. Challenges to Sustainable Growth.................................................................................................... 7
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ..............................................................................
CAS Objectives ..............................................................................................................................
Implementation of the Previous CAS ..............................................................................................
Planned Assistance Program ..........................................................................................................
Medium-TermProspects and FinancingRequirements .................................................................
Monitoring for Results ...................................................................................................................
Partnerships ....................................................................................................................................

MANAGING RISKS ....................................................................................................................
A . Implementation Risks.....................................................................................................................
B. Extemal Risks.................................................................................................................................

12
12
14
17
23
26
28
30
30
31

CAS ANNEXES:
Annex A1 :
Annex A2:
Annex A3:
Annex A4:
Annex A5:
Annex A6:
Annex B 2
Annex B3a:
Annex B3b:
Annex B3c:
Annex B3d:
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8a:
Annex B8b:
Annex B9:

K e y Economic and Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS
Country at a Glance
Debt Sustainability
Feedback from CAS Consultations
WBI Activities in Croatia
I F C Strategy in Croatia
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD/GEF Program Summary - Base Case
IBRD/GEF Program Summary - High Case
IBRD/GEF Program Summary - L o w Case
I F C and MIGA Program Summary
Summary o f IBRD Nonlending Services
Social Indicators
K e y Economic Indicators
K e y Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRD and Grants)
Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
CAS Results Matrix

BOXES:
B o x 1:
B o x 2:
B o x 3:

Relatively Sound Banking System
Client Survey
Croatia’s Relationship with the IMF

FIGURES:
Figure 1:
Figure 2:
Figure 3:
Figure 4:
Figure 5:

Evolution o f Increased External Vulnerability
Croatia’s Reforms Lag EU8
Rule o f L a w
Government Effectiveness
Education Completion Comparator

TABLES:
Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:
Table 5:
Table 6:
Table 7:
Table 8
Table 9 :
Table 10:

Croatia and the Millennium Development Goals
Alternative Scenarios for the Short-Run Sustainable Primary Surplus
FY05-FY08 EU Accession Agenda for Croatia
PublicPrivate Sector Comparators
CAS and EU Accession Agenda Synergies
Lessons and Recommendations from OED CAE
Base and High Case Triggers
IBRD Exposure Indicators for Croatia
Key Indicators for Tracking Progress Toward Achievement o f CAS Outcomes
Areas o f Other Partner Activity

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The main strategic objective of the Croatian government is successful accession to the
European Union (EU), so that Croatia enters the EU as a dynamic and competitive economy that can
rapidly achieve convergence to EU living standards. Actions for successful accession call for reforms
that will lead to improved macroeconomic sustainability and more sustainable economic growth, even
prior to accession.
Croatia has enjoyed solid but moderating economic growth and low inflation since 1999. Real
GDP growth averaged 3.2 percent during 1999-2003 with inflation in the l o w single digits (below 4
percent). These numbers compare well with eight countries that joined the EU on M a y 1, 2004 (EU8) as
well as the other EU member states (EU15). However, i t will be a challenge for Croatia to catch up, as i t s
gross national income per capita (at purchasing power parity) was at about 32 percent o f that o f the EU15
in 2003.
The economic recovery has been accompanied by a growing external current account deficit.
The current account deficit mirrors the widening trade deficit. The current account deficit has gradually
widened from 2.5 percent o f GDP in 2000 to 8.4 percent in 2002. The growing current account deficit
has been financed primarily by a sharp rise in extemal debt, which has increased the external vulnerability
o f the Croatian economy. Despite significant foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows, extemal debt
soared from 60 percent o f GDP and 128 percent o f exports o f goods and services in 2000 to 82 percent and
158 percent, respectively, in 2003.
Fiscal performance has been disappointing. The government gradually reduced the fiscal
deficit from 8.1 percent o f GDP in 1999 to 4.4 percent o f GDP in 2002. These gains were, however,
partly reversed in 2003 as heavy pre-election spending, especially on large public investments, resulted in
a jump in the fiscal deficit to an estimated 5.8 percent o f GDP. The higher deficit was largely financed
through foreign borrowing: total public and publicly guaranteed debt as a share o f GDP rose to 51.9
percent in 2003, and annual public debt service costs increased by 2.5 percentage points o f GDP after
2000.
Consolidation offiscal spending of at least three percentage points of GDP is needed to control
the debt and to eventually meet the Maastricht criteria required for the European Monetary Union.
Public expenditures in Croatia account for over 50 percent o f GDP, which i s high compared to EU and
other candidate countries. Areas where Croatia spends beyond EU and other candidate countries include
the social sectors, infrastructure, subsidies, and the public sector wage bill. Fiscal adjustment in these
areas would need to be complemented with improvements in public debt management.
The presence of the state in the economy is significant and would need downsizing. Croatia’s
private sector share o f GDP i s 60 percent, lower than in any EU8 country. A poorly functioning
judiciary, uncompetitive business environment, and soft budget constraints on enterprises have limited
enterprise restructuring and new business creation, and have constrained growth.
Poverty in Croatia is relatively low and shallow. The absolute poverty rate was 11.1 percent in
2001, and income distribution only slightly less equitable than the EU15 average. The poor are predominantly less educated and elderly, and poverty tends to be concentrated in war-affected areas and
certain ethnic groups (especially Roma). Limited employment opportunities and inadequate targeting o f
the social safety net are the main economic causes o f income poverty. Croatia has one o f the lowest
employment-to-population ratios: only about 43 percent o f the working age population i s employed.
This ratio reflects relatively l o w labor force participation (50.2 percent) and high unemployment (14.3
percent), nearly double that o f the EU.
-1-

The main objective of the CAS is to support the government’s growth and reform strategy for
successful EU accession, while ensuring broad participation i n growth and sustainable natural
resource management. Reflecting the lessons learned from implementation o f the previous CAS, the
strategy calls for a shift to private sector-driven growth through rationalization o f the public sector,
establishment o f a supportive investment climate, and macroeconomic sustainability.
The CAS includes base, high, and low case lending programs aligned with sustained,
accelerated, and slow growth scenarios, respectively, and with triggers for movingfrom one program to
another. Experience in EU8 and candidate countries has shown that once EU accession negotiations are
under way, momentum for reform i s established and sustained, independent o f which government i s in
office. Hence with good prospects for sustained reform during Croatia’s pre-accession negotiations, the
planned four-year base case lending volume i s about U S $ l billion, with an additional USS0.5 billion in
the high case. The four-year low-case lending volume i s about US$300 million. The increase from past
lending levels (which have been on average US$l55 million annually for the past three years) i s justified
by the need to support the acceleration o f difficult structural reforms and institution building during
Croatia’s accession candidate period.
I n the base and high case programs a series of Programmatic Adjustment Loans or PALs
(sequenced single-tranche development policy loans) will support a government program focusing on
improvement of the investment climate, fiscal consolidation, and strengthened governance, including
rationalization of the public sector. T w o sector expenditure support investment operations will
complement the PALs by addressing structural and institutional weaknesses in education and health.
Investment operations in other sectors will focus on capacity building for EU accession, trade and
transport integration with Europe, mitigation o f adverse social impacts o f reforms, and sustainable natural
resource management. Advisory and analytical services will provide analytical underpinnings for lending
operations and policy advice to government in a timely manner. T o help private sector companies
become more competitive in regional markets, IFC will support privatization and post-privatization
restructuring in key sectors, facilitate private sector investment in infrastructure, and combine i t s financial
support with technical assistance. Croatia will continue to participate in the joint World BanWIMF Public
Debt Management and Domestic Debt Market Development Program, and the Bank will step up i t s
assistance to optimize the structure o f Croatia’s portfolio o f IBRD financial products and services, in line
with the govemment’s debt strategy.

The results focus of the CAS program, and i n particular PALs, requires an effective
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system to assess effectiveness. The PAL has begun the process o f
designing an M&E system, which will be extended to cover the entire CAS. Country-level intermediate
indicators for tracking progress toward CAS outcomes have been quantified where possible, and progress
against these indicators will be reviewed as part o f the P A L program and investment projects. A CAS
Progress Report will be prepared following a mid-termreview o f CAS implementation and reassessment
o f the planned FY07-08 assistance program.
The CAS has been developed in consultation with the government and stakeholders (with
whom CAS consultations were held infive cities i n mid-2004), as well as the European Commission to
ensure it supports EU accession requirements, in particular the economic criteria. Bank instruments
over the four-year CAS period are aligned to support these requirements, and some loans will be
specifically aimed at helping Croatia to maximize i t s utilization o f EC grant funds. The CAS and
Croatia’s Stand-By Arrangement with the IMF will also be mutually reinforcing, as they both aim at
reducing Croatia’s external vulnerability through fiscal consolidation, increased transparency and
efficiency o f public expenditure and debt management, and financial discipline and transparency for stateowned enterprises.
The main risk for the sustained growth scenario comes from potential policy slippages,
including some of the post-election pledges. These would derail Croatia fi-om i t s sustainable growth path
and result in a higher and unsustainable fiscal deficit, a growing external balance, a worsening debt
profile, and consequently macroeconomic instability. The risk o f such slippages to implementation o f the
- ii-

base and high case CAS programs i s addressed through the self-regulating mechanism o f the PAL program.
In the event that base and high case triggers (which are closely linked to PAL conditions) were not
substantially met or were reversed, Bank assistance would revert to the l o w case.

As the current HDZ-led government is a coalition with a one-seat majority in Parliament, there
is a risk that it will not be able to retain power over the medium term. However, all parties are
committed to Croatia’s accession to the EU, and so continuity on the associated reform agenda i s likely
over the longer term. Experience elsewhere in the region has shown that buoyed by widespread public
support, the goal o f EU accession provides continuity in a candidate country’s development program,
from one government to the next.
A continuing risk for Croatia as an emerging market with high foreign currency exposure in

its public debt is its vulnerability to contagion from adverse developments in international flnancial
markets. Implementation by the Ministry o f Finance o f the draft reform plan developed under the joint
World BanWIMF Program on Sovereign Debt Management and Debt Markets Development, would
directly help to address Croatia’s extemal vulnerability.
In discussing the CAS, the Executive Directors may wish to address the following:

D o the CAS objectives and themes adequately support Croatia’s objective o f EU accession as
a dynamic and competitive economy that can rapidly achieve convergence to EU living
standards?
Are the lending programs - in particular, the PAL program - and triggers appropriate in light
o f Croatia’s high external debt, small share o f the private sector in the economy, and high
levels o f public spending?
Have risks to successful CAS implementation been adequately addressed?

CROATIA:

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. Introduction

1.
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) i s prepared in consultation with the government o f
Croatia and i t s main objective i s to support the government’s growth and reform strategy embedded
in the European Union (EU) accession process. The last full CAS for Croatia was discussed at the Board
in June 1999, and a CAS Progress Report was discussed at the Board in October 2001. This CAS i s the
Bank’s first four-year CAS for Croatia, covering the Bank’s fiscal years 2005 through 2008. I t has been
prepared jointly by the Bank and IFC in consultation with MIGA. A Progress Report will be prepared
following a mid-term review o f CAS implementation and reassessment o f the planned FY07-08 assistance
program.
B. Political Context

2.

There has been significant political change in Croatia since the last CAS Progress Report was
discussed at the Board. Within months o f being elected, the Social Democrat-led, center-left coalition
government furthered i t s open economy agenda by signing the Stabilization and Association Agreement
(SAA) with the EU as well as the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA), and in February 2003
i t formally submitted Croatia’s application for EU membership. Despite continued strong public support
for Croatia’s integration with the EU, the Social Democrat-led coalition was voted out o f office in
November 2003, one month after completing politically difficult reforms supported by the Bank’s
Structural Adjustment Loan (SAL).

3.
The successor government, another coalition, i s led by the center-right Croatian Democratic
Union party (HDZ), which now projects itself as a centrist party aligned with Croatia’s ambition o f
EU accession. During the coalition’s first four months in office, the new administration focused i t s
attention mainly on the EU. The efforts have paid off, with Croatia’s winning a favorable opinion from the
European Commission (EC) in April 2004 and the granting o f candidate status by the European Council
two months later. The accession negotiations are due to begin in early 2005, Notwithstanding these early
diplomatic successes, i t will be a challenge for the HDZ to govern. With eleven parliamentary seats short
o f a majority, HDZ negotiated with representatives o f national minorities and a newly started Pensioners
Party, to form a coalition government that holds a mere one-seat majority in Parliament.
C. Social Context

4.

Poverty in Croatia i s relatively low and shallow by international as well as national standards.

A government-sponsored study using nationally representative household budget survey data calculated the
absolute poverty rate for 2001 at 11.1 percent. The study concluded that to lift all poor out o f poverty with
perfect targeting would cost only about one percent o f gross domestic product (GDP). I t also found n o
significant differences in the prevalence o f poverty by gender. Income distribution’ i s only slightly less
equitable than the average for the countries belongmg to the EU prior to M a y 1, 2004 (EU15), and
according to the Central Bureau o f Statistics Croatia’s relative poverty rate for income2 in 2003 (at 16.9
percent) was only slightly higher than the EU15 average (below 15 percent) and an improvement from 18.2
percent in 2002.

5.
Some regions (especially war-affected areas) and certain ethnic groups (especially Roma)
have higher poverty rates. GDP per capita in the poorest county (Vukovarsko-Srijemska) i s one-third that

’ Measured by the Gini coefficient at 0.29 in 2003.

D e f i n e d as the percentage o f persons whose n e t i n c o m e i s less than 60 percent o f the m e d i a n n e t income o f a l l
households.

-1-

o f the c i t y o f Zagreb. Overall, the poverty profile i s dominated by two groups o f Croats: the poorly
educated and the elderly. Nearly three-fourths o f the poor live in families whose head has only a primary
education or less. The poverty profile reveals two main economic causes o f income poverty: limited
employment opportunities and inadequate targeting o f the social safety net. With a population o f 4.4
million, Croatia has one o f the lowest employment-to-population ratios: only about 43 percent o f the
working age population (age 15 or more) i s employed. This ratio i s a reflection o f relatively l o w labor force
participation (50.2 percent) and high unemployment. Although the unemployment rate has been falling
since i t peaked at 16.1 percent in 2000, i t remains high at 14.3 percent in 2003; nearly double that o f the
EU. (See Annex B5.)

6.
Despite Croatia’s post-war economic recovery, reconstruction and refugee return remain
important issues in the government’s program. In the country’s Areas o f Special State Concern, basic
infrastructure s t i l l requires rehabilitation, and over 1,700 square kilometers are mined or suspected o f being
mine-contaminated. Sustainable return o f refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs)~will require
complementing physical prerequisites (security, infrastructure, de-mining) with reintegration and economic
revitalization. The government i s committed to creating an atmosphere conducive to the return and
reintegration o f displaced persons.
7.

Croatia’s prospects for meeting the Millennium Development Goals are considered likely in
all areas but H I V / A I D S and TB and environmental sustainability, for which prospects are clearly
possible but considered less certain at this stage (see Table 1).

Poverty and Hunger

Note Prospect categones are Likely, Maybe, Unlikely, or No Data Assessment i s based on Achieving the Human Development Gods in
E C A (2003) Data is most recent f r o m the Bank’s Development Economics Group The U N D P supported consultative process in Croatla
may lead to a revised and more nationally based assessment

Using the International Labor Organization (ILO) definition o f unemployment.
As o f June 2004 the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (OSCELJNHCR) reports that about 110,000 Croatian Serb refugees have returned while the displaced
population originating from Croatia which remains in neighboring countries i s estimated at 2 15,000.
-L-

D. Recent Economic Developments

8.
Since the 1999 recession, Croatia has enjoyed solid but moderating economic growth and low
inflation. Real GDP growth averaged 3.2 percent during 1999-2003 with inflation in the l o w single digits
(below 4 percent). These numbers compare well with countries that joined the EU on M a y 1,2004 (EU8’)
as well as the EU15. However, the challenge o f catching up with the EU15 remains high, as gross national
income (GNI) per capita (at purchasing power parity) was at about 32 percent o f EU15 in 2003.
9.
The current growth pattern, mainly public sector investments and consumption driven, i s not
sustainable. Public investment, particularly in motonvays, has averaged an extraordinary 6.5 percent o f
GDP in recent years. Accompanied by a credit-financed surge in domestic demand and a sharp reversal o f
fiscal policy as spending discipline broke down in the run-up to the November 2003 elections, this caused a
rise in extemal vulnerability o f the economy. (See Figure 1.)

10.
The economic recovery has been accompanied by a growing external current account deficit.
The current account deficit mirrors the widening trade deficit. The current account deficit has gradually
widened from 2.5 percent o f GDP in
Box 1: Relatively Sound Banking System
2000 to 8.4 percent in 2002. Late
response o f the Croatian National According to the joint Bank-Fund Financial Sector Assessment Program
(FSAP, 2002), Croatia has a relatively sound banking system. Since 1996
Bank (CNB) in 2003, through
the system has undergone major consolidation, and banking regulation and
introduction o f administrative credit
supervision have improved. The banking system today i s 91 percent
ceilings
and
increased
local
foreign owned, and there i s increasing competition for products and
currency component o f reserve
services. B y the end o f 2003, non-performing loans had declined to 5.1
percent o f total loans, banks’ net open foreign exchange position had
requirements on banks’ foreign
currency liabilities, has succeeded in increased only slightly to 13 percent o f capital, and profitability and
capitalization remained strong. Nevertheless, given the high degree of
curtailing credit growth from 30
euroization in the financial system, the financial sector remains vulnerable
percent in 2002 to 15 percent in to extemal shocks and the possibility o f reduced confidence. Recent
efforts by the national bank to quell credit expansion have led to
2003; however, the current account
proliferation o f non-bank financial activity and unregulated leasing
deficit remained high at 7.3 percent
companies, which has led the govemment to plan a unification of
o f GDP. ‘Circumvention o f credit
supervision o f non-bank financial institutions.
ceilings has resulted in rapid
expansion o f unregulated leasing
operations, and corporate borrowing has switched from domestic to foreign banks.
11.
The growing current account deficit has been financed primarily by a sharp rise in external
debt, which has increased the external vulnerability o f the Croatian economy. Despite significant
foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows, external debt soared from 60 percent o f GDP and 128 percent o f
exports o f goods and services in 2000 to 82 percent and 158 percent, respectively, in 2003. Net international
reserves have remained at about 5.7 months of imports o f goods and non-factor services.
12.
Fiscal performance has been disappointing and has worked against tightened monetary
policy. The government gradually reduced the fiscal deficit from 8.1 percent o f GDP in 1999 to 4.4 percent
o f GDP in 2002. These gains were, however, partly reversed in 2003 as heavy pre-election spending,
especially on large public investments, resulted in a jump in the fiscal deficit to an estimated 5.8 percent o f
GDP.6 The higher deficit was largely financed through foreign borrowing: total public and publicly
guaranteed debt as a share o f GDP rose from 50.6 percent in 2002 to 51.9 percent in 2003’.

The EU8 excludes Malta and Cyprus, which also joined the EU o n M a y 1,2004.
The IMF and W o r l d Bank fiscal data slightly differ, since the IMF does not include a l l local govemment units and
excludes all capital revenues (in addition to privatization receipts) f r o m revenues.

’Direct debt (public debt excluding guarantees) grew f r o m 42.1 t o 44.0 percent o f GDP.
-3-

Figure 1: Evolution of Increased External Vulnerability

...

...driven by domestic demand led to...

Strong economic performance

__
600
500

1

,

i -

6.0"/--01GDP.
4'0

i

c

~

-A-

-Fiscal

.~
- -

-Cwent account deficit
deficit (accrual)

~

'

-~

~

..

1

4 00
300

~~

I

2 00

I

0 00

895

1997

1996

2000

1998

2001

2002

2003,

d

...a surge o f public debt ...

60

...and external debt.

% of GDP

Mill I IMI

55
50
45

25,000

I I-----

BPUbtlCtY guaranteed

].P"Mlcdet4

20,m

40

15,m

35

10,m

30

5PQ

25

20

30.000

1997

1998

1999

2ooo

2001

2002

0

2W3

1999 1998 19992000 20012002 2003

May

2004

I

E. Debt Sustainability and Debt Management

13.
Over the last seven years the level of Croatia's public debt has been rising steadily in absolute
and relative terms to about 52 percent of GDP by the end o f 2003, high when compared to Central
and Eastern European countries (CEEC) that stand at 35 percent of GDP on average. In fact, most o f
the CEEC have succeeded to reduce their debt levels over the last seven years, while Croatia has observed a
sharp growth o f i t s debt o f more than 30 percentage points o f GDP during the same period. Annual public
debt service costs have increased by 2.5 percentage points o f GDP after 2000, compared with the 19951999 period. Fiscal developments in the last four to five years have also revealed two other important
sources o f debt accumulation: unpaid internal obligations o f the public sector (arrears) and contingent
liabilities in the form o f state guarantees.

14.
Debt sustainability analysis shows that further consolidation of fiscal spending of at least 3
percentage points of GDP i s needed to control the debt and to eventually meet the Maastricht criteria
required for the European Monetary Union? With the current growth rate, inflation, and historically
low interest rates, a primary fiscal deficit consistent with debt sustainability i s 0.38 percent o f GDP. The
~

A deficit not exceeding 3 percent o f GDP in normal circumstances, and a ratio o f public debt to GDP not exceeding
60 percent.

-4-

required primary balance is, however, sensitive to the changes in growth assumptions (see Table 2). For
example, if projected growth averaged 3 percent, the government would need to run a primary surplus o f
about 0.5 percent o f GDP. The high inflation elasticity o f money demand suggests that the scope for raising
seignorage through higher inflation i s at best limited, a common feature o f countries where currency
substitution i s widespread. The macroeconomic effects o f long-term fiscal policy instability could be
exacerbated by Croatian pro-cyclical fiscal policies. Were Croatia to face short-run difficulties (e.g., fiscal
difficulties in the EU or, more likely, a financial or currency crisis in a neighboring country) leading to
higher interest rates, lower growth or a depreciation o f the real exchange rate, the already unstable fiscal
stance would initially be aggravated as declining revenues would lead t o even faster increases in debt. Procyclicality o f expenditures would then kick in and amplify the economic downturn. (See Annex A 3 .)

1.1

L

3

5.5

3

46.8

5

Real Interest Rate
Scenarios
Inflation Rate

Scenarios

4.5

4.5

7.5

-0.9
3

46.8

9.5
5.5

0.6
1.6
-0.6

5.5
4.5

0.5
-0.7

7.5
9.5

46.8

-0.7
-0.8

*Initial public debt (direct public debt including arrears) was set at 46.8 percent of GDP.
Source: World Bank staff estimates

15.
The fiscal adjustment efforts would need to be complemented with improvements in public
debt management. Sound institutional arrangements for managing the volatility o f debt servicing costs are
important in the same way as sound fiscal institutions are important for managmg the level o f debt arising
from the primary balances. Given the under-developed nature o f the domestic debt markets, about 60
percent o f total public debt i s extemal. And with most o f the domestic debt indexed t o the euro, as much as
85 percent o f the total debt i s subject t o currency risk. T h i s highlights the importance o f improving the risk
structure o f the debt and further developing the domestic market for kuna debt, which would permit a
reduction in overall currency risk. This, in turn, points t o the need for increased debt management capacity
within the Ministry o f Finance.
11.

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND CHALLENGES

A. Government Priorities

16.
Croatia’s top priority i s to enter the EU with a competitive and growing economy and the
institutionalcapacity to meet the demands of membership. The new government’s strategy, as described
in the Program o f the Government o f the Republic o f Croatia for the 2003-2007 Mandate, emphasizes
undertahng structural reforms that would lead t o sustained growth within a framework o f social equity.
The government’s economic policy program for 2004-2005 i s supported by the IMF Stand-By Arrangement
(SBA) and aims to limit extemal vulnerability arising from the high current account deficit and the heavy
extemal debt burden, and t o prepare Croatia for successful EU accession, so that Croatia enters the EU as a
dynamic and competitive economy that can rapidly achieve convergence to EU living standards. To
achieve these objectives, the program relies on fiscal adjustment to stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio and
structural reforms to reduce the role of the state in the economy and promote private sector activity. This
reflects the priorities and directions in the World Bank’s Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) o f 2003.
-5-

17.
With the EU accession negotiations now set to begin in early 2005, the government’s priority
is t o ensure successful conclusion o f accession negotiations. The EC’s April 2004 Opinion on Croatia’s
application for membership in the EU assesses the current situation and prospects for fulfilling the
conditions o f membership. The priority areas underlined in the Opinion coincide with the priorities set out
in the Government Program. Under the Stabilization and Association Agreement with the EU, Croatia has
begun aligning i t s legislation with the acquis communautaire, but the Opinion concluded that the necessary
administrative structures, includingjudicial capacity, have not developed at the same pace. Table 3 lists the
key EU accession agenda items that would need to be tackled.
Table 3: FYO5-FYO8 EU Accession Agenda for Croatia

diting government revenue

I
1

Establish modern vocational education and training
Align with EU on public health legislation
Design and implement regional development plans

Regional Development
Source: EC’s April 2004 Opinion on Croatia’s application for membership in the EU

18.
T h e experience o f the EU8 N e w M e m b e r s States i s that there has been a focus on compliance
a n d harmonization with the acquis communautuire, with less progress o n broader structural reforms.
This has resulted in important gaps towards becoming efficient, well-functioning market economies with
the ability to cope with competitive pressure in the EU. Croatia would need to maximize the opportunities
during the pre-accession period to bring its policies and institutions closer to the EU, beyond compliance
-6-

I

and harmonization required by the negotiations on the 29 chapters o f the acquis communautaire. More
specifically, Croatia could embark on a program o f accelerated reforms to move towards a high growth
path, creating the conditions for Croatian companies to become more competitive in the regonal markets.

19.
T o become a successful member of the EU, Croatia will need to create conditions that will
attract investment and produce growth. These conditions can be categorized broadly as: (a)
macroeconomic and financial stability; (b) stable, progressive and predictable laws and institutions; (c)
efficient labor and financial markets; (d) social and environmental sustainability; (e) effective integration
into the European infrastructure networks ensuring competitive cost and quality; and (f) a dynamic
business-oriented environment which facilitates the production o f high value-added goods and promotes the
adoption o f efficient processes and innovative technol~gies.~
The section below addresses the four major
areas where actions are ufgently needed to ensure the above conditions are met: (i)
rationalization and
improvement o f the efficiency o f public spending, (ii)improvement o f investment climate, (iii)
improvement o f govemance, and (iv) strengthening o f social and environmental sustainability.
B. Challenges to Sustainable Growth

i.

Rationalizing and Improving Efficiency of Public Spending

20.

The key constraint to Croatia's sustainable economic growth is the dominance of the public
sector. Public expenditures, at over half o f GDP, remain high, with Croatia having one o f the largest public
sectors in the world, second only to Poland among all ECA countries and slightly higher than Germany.
Current spending levels could create difficulties in the EU accession process, w h c h requires the creation o f
fiscal space to finance the requirements
o f accession, assessed at 3.8 percent o f
GDP per annum". In addition, the tax
burden on Croatia's economy i s
extremely high compared with that o f
the EU8 as well as most o f the EU15.
Croatia taxes directly and indirectly
more than 40 percent o f its gross value
added, thus significantly reducing i t s
competitiveness," To sustain the current
debt level, cross-country international
comparisons indicate that there i s scope
for significant reductions in public
health, pensions, social benefits, public
wage bill, subsidies and transport
spending. *

'

Source: Transition Report 2003, EBRD (2002 data)

Croatia currently spends over
2 1.
9 percent of GDP on health care, very high compared with other EU countries, while health outcomes are
s t i l l well behind EU averagesi3 With the same l i f e expectancy at birth as that o f Croatia, health spending in
Poland i s at 6.4 percent o f GDP, Macedonia at 6.5 percent, and Slovak Republic at 7.2 percent. Eighty
percent o f Croatia's public expenditure on health care comes from public sources, representing over 15
percent o f the total government budget.I4 Recent policies to contain health care costs are leading to
Croatia Country Economic Memorandum (World Bank, 2003) proposes a reform strategy for faster economic growth
embedded into the European integration agenda.
loCroatia Country Economic Memorandum (World Bank, 2003)
The average tax burden for the EU accession and candidate countries was below 33 percent o f GDP in 2002.
A broader analysis can be found in the World Bank Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR) 2001.
l3Infant mortality rates are 7.4 per 1000 live births (EU average i s 4.9), maternal mortality i s 6.9 per 100,000 live
births (EU average i s 5.5), and the incidence o f TB i s almost three times the EU average.
l4Croatia Health Finance Study (World Bank, 2002)

-7-

problems o f access to care. Yet cost pressures persist due to the aging population and new technologes,
and changing epidemiologcal profiles have continued to exert an upward pressure on costs. Like many
countries, Croatia faces a complex and inter-related set o f challenges concerning the health sector’s fiscal
efficiency, effectiveness o f service delivery in the face o f national needs, organization and management at
central, regonal and local levels, and the capacity o f i t s staff and institutions to deliver services. Pnorities
for health sector reform are improving outcomes through cost containment and system rationalization for
improving service delivery, restructuring o f the supplemental insurance system, greater leverage for the
public health financing entity, Croatian Institute o f Health Insurance (HZZO), in its contractual relationship
with health care providers, and expansion o f disease prevention and health awareness programs.

22.

Pension system costs are high at 13.5 percent of GDP, above the EU15 average of 10.4 percent
of GDP and EU8 average o f 8.3 percent of GDP.15 Only Austria (14.5 percent) and Italy (13.8 percent)
spend more in relative terms on pensions than Croatia. Replacement o f combined wage-price indexation
with nominal wage indexation in 2004 will inevitably maintain this high burden. In combination with
“pensioners debt restitution”, which has created the contingent public debt liability o f around 10 percentage
points o f GDP, wage indexation reverses the path o f implicit pension debt that would rise above 200
percent o f GDP. Multi-pillar pension reform o f 1998 was designed to curtail pension to GDP ratio to below
11 percent in the first ten years and reduce implicit pension debt below 100 percent in order to fiscally
sustain second pillar transition cost that was successfully introduced in 2002. Since current pension policy
has reversed the projected pension spending trends, it would need to be revisited in order to restore social,
fiscal and intergenerational sustainability o f the multi-pillar pension system.

23.

Croatia’s spending on social benefits has rapidly increased over the last year to an estimated
3.4 percent o f GDP, owing to an expansion o f poorly targeted categorical benefits. At the same time,
spending on the best targeted (and means tested) social support allowance remained at 0.7 percent o f GDP,
lower than in most comparator countries. Parallel and numerous benefit systems provided at different
government levels and by different institutions suggest a need for rationalization as well as for reducing
disincentives to retum to the labor market. H a l f o f social assistance beneficiaries are able-bodied
unemployed. In some war-affected cities, 30 percent o f the population are social assistance beneficiaries.
There i s a long tradition o f supporting public social services, but overall the social service system i s
outdated, over-centralized, and over-institutionalized, even as i t faces increased demand.I6 Reform
priorities in the area o f social assistance include better targeting (including through promotion o f local
service intervention), improved system organization and management, a more streamlined cash benefits
system, and monitoring o f household incomes, expenditure, and behavior t o better inform policy makers.

24.
There i s also a need to reduce public sector wage bill and subsidies. The share o f public sector
wage bill in GDP remains high at 11 percent o f GDP in comparison to an average 7.2 percent o f GDP in the
CEEC or 10 percent in EU15. Subsidies to the enterprise sector,I7 including those to railways, shipyards,
the Postal Bank, agriculture, and tourism, amounted to over 3.3 percent o f GDP in 2003, compared to the
EU15 average o f approximately 0.8 percent of GDP. Faster privatization and enforcement o f the
competition policy i s expected to lead to less reliance o f the corporate sector on state aid. For example, the
annual fiscal burden o f the railways sector has reached about 1.3 percent o f GDP, about double that o f
Bulgaria and Italy (0.6 percent) and Romania (0.7 percent). Restructuring o f the sector through
discontinuance o f non-economic lines, adoption o f an optimal investment plan to meet EU standards,
reduction o f excess labor costs, increase of operational efficiency with support from the private sector, and
privatization o f subsidiaries should reduce the fiscal drag o f the railways.
R. Holzmann, Toward a Reformed and Coordinated Pension System in Europe: Rationale and Potential Structure,
Watson Wyatt Lectures Series, April 2004. In addition to EUS countries, sample includes Cyprus, Malta, Romania,
Bulgaria and Croatia.
l6The aging o f the Croatian population i s projected to increase demand for beds in old age homes b y about 2,200 by
2040, on top o f already long waiting lists for placements. There i s also an increase in the number o f young children
and young adults who are being institutionalized. Many o f the institutions are too big (the average capacity o f
children’s homes i s SO), and residents tend to stay for long periods.
17
Includes subsidies provided b y central and local governments to public enterprises, privatized enterprises, and SOEs.

-8-

25.

An ambitious transport investment program for roads and highways has driven public
spending to 2.5 percentage points of GDP higher than in comparable countries. Public expenditure on
transportation currently comprises 5 percent o f GDP in Croatia, versus 1.5 percent in the UK and France.
Yet transportation contributes only 8 percent to GDP, only slightly higher than the EU average o f 6.5
percent. Unit costs for investment in the motonvays system are high due to excessive standards and crowd
out expenditure for much needed maintenance and rehabilitation o f existing road networks. For fiscal
sustainability in the roads sector, i t will be important that the government provides adequate budgetary
support for critical road maintenance and reviews options for bringmg in the private sector for road and
highway construction and maintenance.

26.

Weaknesses in public expenditure are contributing to the worrying fiscal situation. The
forecasting function in the Ministry o f Finance needs to be strengthened for greater transparency and better
quality, and shift to a three-year budget framework structured so that i t can ensure monitoring and
evaluation o f budget programs.”
Wlule budget execution processes were recently strengthened, the
effectiveness o f the government’s single account Treasury System i s a concem. As recommended in the
Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) and Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA), drafts o f which were recently shared with the government, Croatia needs t o adopt public
procurement and financial management legslation and implement associated institutional reforms in order
t o align its systems with EU requirements to access EU pre-accession finds as well as t o realize signaficant
resulting cost savings.

ii. ImprovingInvestment Climate

27.

I n addition to reducing Figure 2: Reforms lag EU8
and
restructuring
public
IritidRasedM.#ft3
spending, improvements in the
business climate and reform of
the judicial system are needed
to increase private sector
investment and productivity.
Croatia’s private sector share o f
GDP at 60 percent i s lower than
iI
iI
that o f any E U 8 country (see
Table 4). There i s a significant
4
%
,
unfinished privatization agenda,
35
31
39
41
43
45
2
25
3
3.5
and progress in restructuring has
been disappointing. The high
*Ind Pnce Iiberallzatioo.Small Scale pnvatmtion,
‘lncl Enterprise restrudunng,Large Scale
and Trade and forex systems
pnvatizahon,Cwnpetthonpolicy. Banking reformand
incidence o f loss-making among
interestrate liberalization. Secunties makeis and
nmbank financial institutiw~s,and Overall
state-owned enterpnses (SOEs)
infrastmcturereform
(56 percent) and privatized %“e. FRRn Tmnwtinn Ronnrt 7/10?
enterprises (39 percent) in 2000
suggests that restructuring in these f i r m s t o date has been largely insufficient. According to the Croatian
Fund for h v a t i z a t i o n (CPF), only about 180 companies remain with majority state-owne&pi .
However,
many o f these companies are both loss-making and heavily indebted. They include five shipyards, nine
agro-kombinats (state farms), and a large number o f hotels. In addition, in the energy sector, the electricity
utility (HEP) needs to be restructured to meet Croatia’s obligations towards the Athens Memorandum on
South East Europe Regional Energy Market and expectations to be part o f the European Community’s
internal energy market. T h i s would imply the creation o f autonomous transmission and distribution
companies leading to electricity prices that would be competitive, as currently HEP’s electricity tariffs are
high compared to neighboringcountries.
18

Preparation o f rolling three-year budgets and restructuring o f the debt management function in the Ministry o f
Finance as well as completing a register o f government debt guarantees are structural benchmarks under the Fund
program.

-9-

28.

Actions are also needed to facilitate private firm entry. The dominant trends in employment and
productivity show that by far the most dynamic sector has been the private (non-privatized) sector,
primarily small and medium enterprises (SMEs). However, this sector s t i l l only accounts for about 35
percent o f the value added and owns fewer than 30 percent o f the assets. Much o f the dynamism o f
Croatia's economic growth and employment potential will thus depend not just on the efficiency o f the exit
mechanism for large enterprises but also on the ease with which new businesses can be created. A number
o f administrative barriers identified in the Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) 200 1 assessment
were subsequently tackled by the former government, such as labor market flexibility, company law,
bankruptcy law, and business registration. However, the findings o f a recent administrative and regulatory
cost survey show that conducting business in Croatia remains costly compared with neighboring countries
in terms o f new business registration (time consuming at 50 days and expensive at US$843"), inspections,
hiring flexibility, land acquisition, and site development. Simplified procedures for land title transfer,
physical planning, and public utilities, together with improved coordination between government agencies,
should be pursued to help facilitate the creation o f new firms.

29.

Croatia's judicial system also suffers from inefficiencies, specifically, the court system cannot
ensure timely and impartial adjudication of commercial disputes. Also, Croatia lags behind six o f the
EU8 countries in secured transactions law and enforcement2', despite the number o f judges per 10,000
inhabitants in Croatia being among the highest in Europe. (See Figure 3.) One o f the sources o f large
inefficiencies and backlog in the court system i s the non-adjudicative agenda with which judges are tasked,
such as maintenance o f land and company registers. The court system needs to be rationalized, judicial
procedures need to be streamlined, accountability and performance monitoring o f judges need to be
introduced, and professionalism o f judges and court personnel improved.
Figure 3: Rule of Law

Rule of Lau (Eastern Euroee
reeion.
.
-

2002)

Figure 4: Government Effectiveness

Governrant EfFectiveness (Eastem E u ~. n m
e i-o n . 2002)
...... .

e

iii.

...........I

.

€5
sa
h"'s
P S C e n r i l C Rank (CIBB)

. ..

... ... . -

I)

Improving Governance

30.

Croatia's public administration i s costly, fragmented, and ill equipped to deal with the
combined challenge o f structural reform and the related EU accession. (See Figure 4.) Public
administration reform will be critical for Croatia to build the capacity needed to take on the challenge o f
l 9 Higher on both counts compared with Bulgaria (30 days and US$148), Romania (27 days and US$217), Lithuania
(26 days and US$231), and the UK (18 days and US$264). Source: Doing Business in 2004 - Understanding
Regulation (World Bank and Oxford University Press, 2004)
2o Source: Transition Report 2003 (EBRD)

- 10-

accession negotiations and to maximize effective use o f resources. There are five priorities for public
administration reform: (i)
the de-politicization o f the senior civil service; (ii)
integration o f budget reform
with policy planning; (iii)
strengthening o f central agency capacity for the implementation o f policy
reforms; (iv) continuation o f the administrative restructuring process initiated in 2003, in order to align
institutions t o EU norms and facilitate policy coherence rather than fragmentation; and (v) development o f a
carefully sequenced and affordable decentralization strategy aligned with EU standards.

iv. Ensuring Social and Environmental Sustainability

31.
Croatia will need to implement policies aimed at facilitating broad participation in growth.
While Croatia's poverty rates are low, inclusion in the growth process i s constrained by high unemployment
and l o w labor force participation. Inclusion in the growth process i s especially challenging for some
segments o f the population, in particular those with l o w levels o f education (who comprise one-half o f the
unemployed), those living in economically depressed areas still
Figure 5: Education Completion
reeling from the effects o f the war, and the elderly.
Comparator
Croatia vs. OECD: Highest

32.

Approximately 40 percent of the adult population has
Level Education Completed
only eight years or less of schooling. Compared t o the average
OECD five year-old, the average five year-old Croat can expect to
complete about four years less o f education over his or her
lifetime. Among those who have completed some form o f
secondary education, a very high percentage has completed only
basic vocational programs (32 percent versus only 3 percent for the
OECD) that ill equip them for the modem workplace. The
secondary education o f some 38 percent o f the unemployed does
not go beyond basic vocational training. Croatia has only one-half
o f the OECD's share o f tertiary completers (see Figure 5). The
tertiary education dropout r a t e i s very high, at nearly 70 percent. While Croatia will j o i n intemational
educational assessments in 2006, regional indicators o f education performance on most measures are
sobering. Many Croatian employers have expressed alarm over the quality o f graduates o f Croatian
secondary schools, where students are exposed to a fact-based curriculum that does not nurture critical
thinking and creativity or provide the leaming slulls needed to contribute to innovation-led growth. This
situation presents a major challenge for Croatia, if it i s to have a competitive workforce v i s 6 vis EU
member states, where education sector indicators are much higher. Education sector priorities for Croatia
include curriculum development, evaluation o f education outcomes, and strengthening o f policy
development and accountability.
C

__l""~

33.

I n areas marginalized by war, local infrastructure investment, social reintegration programs,
and continued de-mining are needed to lay the necessary pre-conditions for private sector-led growth.
Economic growth in rural areas i s constrained by dominance o f state-owned agro-kombinats and
cooperatives with soft budgets and large subsidies, fragmented private agncultural landholdings, crop and
livestock yields significantly below EU standards, weak commodity markets, and poor access to credit. T o
reduce urbadrural disparities, priorities for the agriculture sector (which contributes about 8 percent o f
GDP) include land regstry modernization, privatization o f the agro-kombinats, and alignment with EU
standards for food safety to position Croatia as an apcultural exporter.

34.

Water i s the natural resource most critical to Croatia's sustainability, especially given i t s
importance to the tourism sector. K e y objectives in the water sector are (i)
to extend the public water
supply to 90 percent o f the population; and (ii)
to extend wastewater collection to virtually all o f the
population, a significant increase from the 60 percent at present. On the institutional side, water utilities
need to make efficiency gains through cost recovery as well as efficiency gains, and the regulatory
framework goveming their relationship with water utilities needs strengthening. In addition, innovative
financing mechanisms will need to be explored, given the large scale o f investments needed in the water
sector. Also, environmental management at both the national and municipal level needs strengthening.
~

11 -

Given the magnitude o f incremental investment needed (estimated at 5 to 10 billion euro over a 20-year
period”) and the complexities o f attracting private investment, Croatia’s compliance with accession criteria
in this area can be achieved only over the longer term. Priorities identified by the EC call for the Croatian
government to “develop horizontal legislation, including on environmental impact assessment and public
participation; strengthen the administrative capacity at national and regional level t o ensure planning,
including preparation o f financial strategies; strengthen the capacity o f national and regional inspection
services and enable them to effectively enforce environmental legslation; and adopt and start implementing
a waste management

III.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE S T R A T E G Y

A. CAS Objectives

35.
The main objec tive of the C A S i s to support the government’s growth and reform strategy
for successful EU accession. The strategy calls for a s h i f t in the sources o f growth from public sector
expenditures and consumption to private sector investment and productivity. T h i s in turn requires the
reduction and rationalization o f the role of the public sector, the establishment o f a supportive investment
climate, and the establishment o f macroeconomic stability. The growth strategy would focus on increasing
and diversifjmg exports, as well as encouraging innovation. T o address quality o f growth issues, the CAS
also supports a systematic effort to ensure broad participation in growth as well as sustainable natural
resource management.

36.
The C A S is designed to support much of the effort Croatia needs to undertake during the
next four years to meet EU accession requirements. However, the C A S goes beyond supporting
harmonization initiatives required by the acquis communautaire and focuses on accelerating important
structural and institutional reforms to ensure faster growth and enhance Croatia’s ability to cope with
competitive pressures in the EU. T h e C A S aims to support the government’s objective t o achieve a threeway convergence o f the EU, IMF, and World Bank Group programs. The common a i m o f these programs
i s t o focus on macroeconomic stabilization, reduce the size o f the public sector, promote private sector-led
growth, and build capacity to implement some key aspects o f the acquis commllnautaire. The CAS i s built
around outcomes aligned with the development challenges discussed above as well as with Croatia’s
priorities for fulfilling i t s EU accession agenda. World Bank Group instruments proposed for the four-year
CAS period are aligned to these outcomes and accession priorities. Table 5 illustrates these linkages.

Croatia Country Economic Memorandum (World Bank, 2003)
Source: European Council Decision on the Principles, Priorities and Conditions Contained in the European
Partnership with Croatia (Brussels, April 20, 2004).
22

- 12-

Table 5: CAS and EU Accession Agenda Synergies

Business Environment

Cadastre and Land Registry
Debt Management

PALs; Science and Technology Project; Investment
Climate Assessment; Financial Infrastructure Study; Policy
Workshops; IFC advisory services in corporate governance
and environmental standards; IFC investment in
infrastructure and utilities
PALs, Real Property Registration and Cadastre Project
Debt Management TA

Note: The P A L s are sequenced single-tranche development policy loans.

37.
The World Bank Group has a comparative advantage in five areas, consistent with the
policy advice and analytical
activities that are not or are only partially addressed by other partners: (i)
work based in particular on EU8 experience, to underpin the design and sequencing o f reforms for
macroeconomic sustainability and promotion o f sustainable private sector-led growth; (ii)low-cost
adjustment lending as an incentive framework for implementing the associated yet often politically difficult
structural reforms; (iii)
institution building to facilitate implementation o f the reform agenda; (iv) design o f
sector programs that provide systemic solutions which could be financed by both the Bank and partners;
and (v) provision o f value-added services together with funding, as opposed to just providing capital. As
for specific sectors, the EU acquis communuutaire will require Croatia to undertake numerous institutional
and legislative reforms but does not offer specific guidance on how to fulfill the requirements. Given its
global as well as EU8-specific experience, the World Bank Group i s p l a y n g a critical role in filling these
gaps. The EU’s role i s policy signaling with some provision o f resources which require co-financing from
the budget. I F C i s uniquely positioned to use its global experience in markets around the world t o help
Croatian companies engage in sustainable projects beyond national borders. T h i s i s particularly important
as domestic financial institutions do not yet have the necessary expertise, and international banks have
withdrawn from long-term cross-border finance. IFC will offer Croatia a combination of diverse and
innovative financial products, global reach and experience in markets around the world, combined with i t s
sustainability expertise in key industries, to help local companies engage in sustainable projects beyond

- 13 -

their national borders, and a broad array o f advisory services. The Bank and IFC have a strong role to play
in helping the infrastructure industry and social sectors overcome the regulatory, financing and
implementation constraints facing these sectors. Both the Bank and IFC will form partnerships to address
sector-wide constraints in a comprehensive manner.

B. Implementation of the Previous C A S

38.

The 2001 C A S Progress Report laid out base case and low case assistance scenarios for FY0203: US$277 million in the base case and US$60-80 million in the low case. The Progress Report
confirmed the strategy set out in the 1999 CAS, namely, support for restoration o f fiscal sustainability,
maintenance o f financial sector stability, reduction in the size o f the public sector, improved governance,
strengthened market institutions and competitiveness, infrastructure investment, and more effective social
protection programs.

39.
Delivery of the C A S Progress Report's FYO2-03 lending program went as planned, with a S A L
in FY02, followed by two investment loans (Pension, and Real Property Registry and Cadastre) in FY03 at
slightly lower amounts than set out in the Progress Report, for two-year total commitments o f US$255
million.
40.

Reforms supported b y the S A L were successfully implemented. The SAL program was focused
in design to support ambitious reform in three specific areas: fiscal consolidation, business climate
improvement, and labor market flexibility. The reforms included adoption o f l e gslation to improve public
expenditure management and control, reduce worker severance benefits and increase fixed -term contract
labor, improve bankruptcy and competition legal frameworks, improve investment policy, continue
privatization, establish a multi-pillar pension system, and rationalize social benefits for war veterans and
privileged pensioners. A more comprehensive reform agenda (e.g., imposition o f hard budget constraints
and privatization o f large SOEs) would not likely have' met with the same success, gven the political
constraints in the period leading up to the November 2003 national elections.

41.

T h e active IBRD and GEF portfolio as of end-FY04 included 13 operations for a total of
US$507.2 million, of which approximately US$342 million was undisbursed. (See Annex B8a.) The
bulk o f Bank operations in Croatia continue to be concentrated in the infrastructure and energy sectors: 58
percent in terms o f numbers o f operations and 8 1percent in terms o f dollar commitments.

42.

While OED reviews have indicated good quality of projects at time of closing, and the overall
IBRD disbursement ratio i s very high (at 4 1 percent at end-FY04, well above that of 18 percent for
the ECA Region as a whole), implementation of the Bank's ongoing investment portfolio during the
past year has been disappointing.
With 37 percent o f commitments currently at risk due to
implementation problems during the second half o f FY04, the Croatia portfolio was the subject o f a
Bankwide portfolio review in November 2004. The portfolio quality i s especially affected by the lack o f
sufficient progress in the areas of railways sector restructuring, and cost reduction and legal reforms
supported by the Real Property Registration and Cadastre loan and the Court and Bankruptcy
Administration loan. The deterioration in portfolio quality i s the combined result o f a new government
tackling a steep learning curve with the Bank evidenced by coordination problems and loss o f focus on
ongoing projects, and the project teams taking a firm stance with new counterparts in order to inject fresh
momentum in project performance. Experience has shown that setting high standards early keeps
implementation focused and well paced. The Bank held a series o f intensive meetings with the government
in July 2004 to address the issues in the five problem projects, and expectations are that at least four o f them
will be upgraded around end-CY2004.

43.

Drawing lessons for implementation of the next CAS, the Bankwide review reached four
conclusions: (i)
development policy lending i s a more effective instrument than sector investment lending

- 14-

for supporting structural reforms, and therefore the Programmatic Adjustment Loansz3(PALS) planned for
the new CAS period should be more effective in this regard; (ii)
increased emphasis on analytic work in the
new CAS program should serve to build more support for reform as well as strengthen the linkage between
the EU agenda and the design o f Bank operations; (iii)
six loans are expected to close during the next 18
months as scheduled; and (iv) the upcoming Joint Portfolio Review (planned for January 2005) will assess
the portfolio in the context o f the new CAS, and lead to cancellation and/or restructuring as needed, to
ensure relevance o f ongoing operations to the EU agenda.

44.
IFC has been successful in supporting several commercially productive enterprises in Croatia
with strong foreign exchange earnings and employment opportunities, as well as in developing the
financial sector. IFC has also been helping strategcally important Croatian companies to grow into
regional industry leaders. As o f September 2004, IFC’s committed portfolio in Croatia totaled US$132
million for i t s own account and US$26 million in syndicated loans, with seven investments, some in
commercially productive enterprises with strong foreign exchange eamings and employment opportunities,
and some in the financial sector. IFC has also been helping Croatian companies grow into regional industry
leaders. IFC activity in Croatia has been constrained, however, by the country’s slow pace o f privatization,
corruption concerns, high labor costs, and the importance o f not crowding out the private sector in an
investment-grade country. (See Annexes B 3 d and B8b.)
45.

MIGA guarantees have facilitated approximately US$221.3 million in five projects in
Croatia’s financial services sector since Croatia became a member of MIGA in 1993. In addition,
MIGA’s online information resources include well over 100 documents pertaining to investment
opportunities in Croatia and related legal and regulatory issues.

46.

With preparation o f the next C A S under way and the need to launch the next phase of
reforms to make visible progress on the eve of accession negotiations, the new government is now
actively engaged with the Bank. A recently launched series o f sector-specific workshops i s also having a
beneficial effect on the Bank’s dialogue with the new Croatian authorities. I t i s expected that t h s greater
engagement and the new government’s resulting improved understanding o f how to work with the Bank as
a valued partner will also have a salutary effect on implementation of the ongoing portfolio. In addition,
having now granted candidate status to Croatia, in the coming months the EC will in all likelihood begin to
encourage the authorities to reduce the country’s macroeconomic vulnerability and embark on the next
phase o f deep structural reforms, in order to begin to close the gaps in economic performance between
Croatia and the CEEC. It i s the government’s expectation that the EC, the Bank, and the Fund will shift
into a mutually reinforcing, joint collaboration with Croatia, as they have done with the other candidate
countries, thereby increasing the effectiveness o f their support.
i.

Lessons Learned from CAE

47.

OED recently completed a Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) for Croatia which was
discussed at a meeting of the Informal Subcommittee of the Board’s Committee on Development
Effectiveness on April 21, 2004. The C A E assessed the role o f Bank assistance to Croatia during 19912003, during which the Bank made 22 loans totaling US$1.2 billion in commitments. The key findings o f
OED’s CAE are that while the reconstruction loans in the initial phase o f Bank assistance had successful
outcomes, loans to reform public finance, promote growth, and strengthen public administration have been
less successful. OED concludes that Bank assistance has fallen short in promoting the privatization process
and had limited impact on improving the efficiency o f the judiciary or o f public expenditure for highways
or railroads. However, the Bank has been instrumental in helping to launch labor and pension reforms and
was highly successful in the financial sector. Going forward, OED recommends that Bank lending for
major infi-astmcture, whether investment or adjustment lending, should be predicated on implementation o f
sector policy reform. (See Table 6 for a summary o f CAE lessons and recommendations).

23

Sequenced single-tranche development policy loans.

- 15 -

48.

T h e CAE also assessed the role of IFC, with a committed portfolio o f US$97.5 million in
equity and loan investments at the time of OED’s assessment as o f end-October 2003. OED found that
IFC’s investments had been successful in several commercially productive enterprises with strong foreign
exchange earnings and employment opportunities, as w e l l as in the financial sector. In particular, IFC has
helped strategically important companies grow into regional industry leaders. IFC’s investment in a
shipyard has not been successful because o f the company‘s lack o f strategic and effective operational
management in a difficult sector.
Table 6: Lessons and Recommendations from OED CAE

CAE Lessons:
Government ownership is critical to the success o f
Bank-supported structural adjustment operations. The
Bank needs to supervise these operations closely and
modify or cancel them if necessary, rather than allow
faulty implementation to proceed.

OED Recommendations:

>

Bank assistance in the forthcoming CAS should focus on private
sector development and reform areas critical to Croatia’s accession
to the EU, drawing from the recent CEM.
Private Sector Development: Bank assistance for private
sector development should focus on promotion o f growth,
reduction o f unemployment, and strengthening o f debt
sustainability. Successful privatization will b e especially
important, and insider buy-outs should therefore not be
favored. In addition, the impact o f SAL-supported reforms
should be monitored t o assess whether k r t h e r measures for
improving the business environment are needed.

Large infrastructure projects are not necessarily
beneficial in the absence o f policy reform as signaled
by the lack o f a firm tie-in to an adjustment program.
Large infrastructure sector or investment operations
should not substitute for adjustment operations to
make up for shortfalls in lending programs.
The case for structural reform i s more difficult in a
country such as Croatia, where GDP i s recovering
from war-induced depressed levels largely from
sources such as tourism and workers’ remittances that
are less dependent on productive sectors. Solid ESW
is therefore critical to make the case convincingly at
the highest levels.
Insider buy-outs often give^ special incentives which
may make corrupt outcomes. Guaranteed buy-backs
further undermine the quality o f privatization and
leave the problem unresolved.

Reforms for EU accession: Bank assistance should support
(i)a fiscally responsible and well-targeted role for
government through rationalized and retargeted public
expenditure in line with public revenues; (ii)improved
govemance and judiciary reforms; (iii)
privatization; and (iv)
health and education sector reforms.
P The Bank needs to make more clearly and at the highest levels the
case for health and education reform, where these and related
aspects o f social development are not directly addressed by EU
programs.

P

Continuing lack o f reform in the transportation sector, especially
highways and railways, i s draining large amounts o f resources
away from other higher priority programs. A large component of
the CAS lending program should therefore be conditional on
effective reforms in public investment.

- 16-

ii.

Client Survey Feedback and CAS Consultations

49.

A client survey was conducted by an independent Croatian market research firm in 2003 (see
B o x 2). Results indicate that the Croatian public would be receptive to reforms in many o f the areas
flagged in the World Bank CEM (2003) and the CAE (2004) as priorities for Croatia’s unfinished reform
agenda, especially if the rationale for the agenda were widely disseminated. N o w that Croatia i s set to
begin EU accession negotiations within the next 12 months, the next two years offer a good opportunity for
the Bank to support a reform program aligned with the public’s concerns as expressed in the survey results:
macroeconomic stabilization, capacity building, reform o f the education and judicial systems, and structural
adjustment for private sector-led growth.

Box 2: Client Survey
The 2003 Client Survey had a 26 percent response rate, One-quarter o f the respondents were employees o f a government ministry.
ministerial departnient or implementation agencies; and 17 percent were employees of the (.Mice o f the President, Prime Minister,
Ministers or Parliamentarians. The reminder included employees of tion-govemmental organizations (NGOs), the private sector.
iicadetnia, bilateral or niultilateral agencies, the media, and local government offices.

On a scale o f 1 (low) to 10 (high), the Rank received an overall rating of 6.9 for effectiveness. Tliz Iow3estoverall effectiveness rating
by any group was 5.0, the rating by the NGOs, particularly environmental NGOs The Bank‘s greatest perceived value to Croatia was
its knowledge, ranked first or second by nearly 60 percent o f respondents. Nearly 50 percent identified financial resources as one o i
the Bank’s two greatest d u e s to Croatia. Proper prioiity for poverty reduction was rated the lowest. Regarding its impact on Croatia’s
development. respondents ranked the Bank most effective i n infrastructure developnient, and least effective in education and the
judiciary. 7”ne economy was rated the most in~portantgeneral issue facing Croatia, followed by the ivle o f law and legislation,
education, institution building, and employment and job creation.

50.
I n mid-2004 the World Bank Croatia Country Office held a series of CAS consultations in
five cities with a range of stakeholders, including representatives of the central and local government,
parliamentarians, small business and union representatives, civil society, and non-governmental
organizations. There was general agreement that the top priority i s an improved education system,
followed by judiciary and public administration reform, an improved investment climate, privatization but
with mitigating social measures, reduction in regional development disparities, greater effectiveness o f
social assistance, and strengthened agriculture sector competitiveness. This CAS consultation feedback i s
closely aligned with the Bank’s assessment o f Croatia’s development challenges and could help to
strengthen government’s resolve to accelerate the EU accession agenda. The findings o f these consultations
are summarized in Annex A4 and are described in more detail on the Bank’s Croatia website
(www.worldbank.hr) in Croatian and English. Consultations were also held with the EC t o ensure the
CAS’Scomplementarity with the EU accession agenda.
C. Planned Assistance Program

i.

Lending Scenarios and Triggers

51.
The CAS lays out a base case and a high case program, as well as a low case program for
Bank assistance, aligned with performance that leads to the sustained, accelerated, and slow growth
scenarios, respectively. Experience in EU8 and current candidate countries has shown that once EU
accession negotiations are under way, momentum for reform i s established and sustained, independent o f
which government i s in office. Hence with strong prospects for sustained reform during Croatia’s preaccession negotiations even with turnovers in government administration, the planned four-year base case
lending volume i s about US$1 billion, with an additional US$O.5 billion in the high case, while the planned
four-year low-case lending volume i s about US$300 million. This increase over the past CAS i s justified
by the major and accelerated reforms needed to enable Croatia to maximize the benefits of EU membership.
52.
There are three triggers to determine whether Croatia i s in the base case at any time during
the CAS period: (a) maintenance o f a satisfactory macroeconomic framework and fiscal consolidation; (b)
implementation o f policies and improvement in governance for a more competitive business environment;
and (c) improvement in targeting, sustainability, quality and efficiency of social services. Performance in

- 17 -

these three areas will be monitored against various indicative actions in order to make a judgment on the
pace and depth o f policy reform during the CAS period, for Croatia to move into and thereafter sustain the
base case. Table 7 presents this framework. The PAL series would ensure substantive progress in meeting
the first two triggers, while the social sector operations would support progress in meeting the third.

53.
Three additional triggers for Croatia to move into the high case program are designed to
recognize and support implementation of major infrastructure reforms that have been a primary
cause of the current high debt and fiscal situation, and have proven difficult in the past and where
increased investment will be needed to prepare for European integration. These high case triggers are:
(i)
road transport sector expenditure reforms (as recommended by the CAE), (ii)
accelerated restructuring o f
the railways sector, and (iii)
accelerated implementation o f energy sector reforms required prior to EU
accession. The high case i s effectively an extension o f the base case, with additional Bank lending
available o n a sliding scale to reflect the progress on meeting the high case triggers and the depth o f the
associated reforms under implementation.
ii.

Bank Group Instruments
a.

Base-Case Program

54.

The base case lending program would support key reform priorities with a range of Bank
Group instruments. The planned lending program would be in the range o f US$200-320 million per year
(see Annex B3a), higher than the actual annual average o f U S $ l 5 5 million during the past three years and
higher than annual averages set out in the 1999 CAS (US$160 million) and 2001 CAS Progress Report
(US$139 million). T h i s increase i s justified by the need to support the acceleration o f difficult structural
reforms and major institution building efforts during Croatia’s accession candidate period. The recent
granting o f accession candidate status to Croatia brings with it a heavy reform and investment agenda to be
achieved within a relatively short period. In particular, fiscal consolidation and reform would be
paramount, given the financial demands o f EU accession.

55.
The PAL program would drive the base case lending, with PAL conditionality reinforcing the
base case CAS triggers for macroeconomic sustainability and private sector-led growth. The PAL
program i s envisioned as a series o f annual, single-tranche operations over the next three years, with loan
amounts o f US$l50 million. A Growth Policy Support loan i s planned in FY08 t o address remaining issues
not taken up by the PAL program. The PAL program would support actions to:
improve the investment climate through privatization, a reduction in subsidies to the enterprise
sector and enterprise arrears, a reduction in the administrative and regulatory costs o f doing
business, and strengthening o f the judiciary;
strengthen governance through increasing the efficiency o f public administration by rationalization
o f government administration structures and implementation o f a merit-based hiring and pay
system, as well as improvement o f public expenditure management; and
enhance the fiscal sustainability of sector programs through a reduction in health sector spending
with more efficient and reduced drug and hospital expenditures, rationalization o f social benefits by
reducing the number o f benefits and improving targeting which will also help Croatia realize the
full benefits o f growth in reducing poverty, improved fiscal and social sustainability o f the pension
system, and increased operational efficiency o f the railway company.

56.
The base case program aims to reduce poverty in Croatia not only by stimulating economic
growth, but by supporting improved targeting of social programs, rehabilitation and social
integration in Areas of Special State Concern, and investments and policies for economic
revitalization in areas affected b y restructuring of SOEs. Investment loans would focus o n systemic
solutions with financing programs where partners could participate. The use o f sector development
investment loans within an acceptable policy and institutional fkamework will facilitate this approach by
- 18-

providing incentives for improving and harmonizing with the EU/World Bank fiduciary systems at both the
sector and country levels. It also allows for participation o f other development partners in the financing o f
investment requirements o f the sector. Croatia has specifically requested for this instrument, which i s
viewed to be appropriate in the context o f EU accession where partnershps and harmonization are critical
success factors. Disbursements under this instrument would be dnven by the pace o f reforms, strength o f
institutions, and quality o f expenditures. T o be responsive to the EU accession requirements o f accelerated
reform, the project preparation cycle will be adjusted t o less than 12 months, with implementation to be
completed in three years, and with less reliance on Project Implementation Units and more capacity
building within existing government structures. The projects would build close operational links with EU
initiatives and programs.

57.
The social sector operations would support the PAL program objective of fiscal consolidation
b y addressing structural issues. In addition, these operations intend to improve broad participation in
growth by upgrading service delivery and effectiveness. The Health Sector Development loan would
complement fiscal reforms in the health sector supported under the PAL program, by financing investments
and other sector reforms aimed at improving the quality o f health outcomes. The operation would establish
expenditure priorities and support better incentives for improved service delivery through the roll-out o f
performance-based contracts for general practitioners, investments in the state budget t o strengthen primary
health care delivery and pre-natal care, and design and expansion o f disease prevention and health
awareness programs. The Social Protection loan would complement the PAL'Ssupport o f fiscal reform o f
social assistance programs by financing the strengthening o f administrative, policy-makmg, and monitoring
capacity for the social benefits system, including information systems. The operation would also support
efficiency measures to free up resources for enhanced service delivery t o a wider group o f beneficiaries. To
address poverty in Croatia directly, the P A L would aim t o increase the share o f the best targeted and means
tested social support allowance in total social spending. The Education Sector Development loan would
focus on competitiveness by financing investments t o establish a national curriculum framework for general
education based on active learning, strengthen teacher education and professional development, introduce
monitoring and evaluation systems (including a mandatory secondary school leaving examination), and
strengthen education management and leadership.
58.
Several other sector investment loans complementing the PALSwould be implemented b y the
respective line ministry responsible and so would not detract from the government's reform agenda
supported by the PAL program. Some would address fiscal-related institutional issues and mitigate the
adverse impact o f the PAL program o n vulnerable groups. The Municipal Services operation would
rationalize municipal fiscal relations and contain the likely demand for budget support through improved
tariffs and choice o f cost effective technology in meeting EU environmental standards. The Social and
Economic Recovery loan focuses on rehabilitation and settlement o f refugees in Areas o f Special State
Concern, and the Regional Economic Rehabilitation loan would support measures to mitigate social costs
and promote economic revival in areas affected by SOE restructuring.

Table 7: Base and High Case Triggers

EASE CASE -.-..,-

&&gg:
* Satisfactory macroeconomic framework
and fiscal consolidation

teform Areas:
iOE Financial Discipline

rransport Sector Expenditure

3ustainable Private SectorLed Growth

c o r m Areas:
Divestiture

-”

Indicative Actions:
Make steady progress toward reduction in
enterprise subsidies from US980 million in
2003 to US$760 million in 2008, with an
intermediate target o f US$850-900 million in
2006
Adopt and implement a Railway
Restructuring and Modemization Strategy
agreed with the Bank
Make steady progress toward reduction o f
operating costs to bring down Croatian
Railways’ working ratio from 240 percent in
2003 to 150-170 percent b y 2008
Adopt a Highway Network Expenditure and
Financing Strategy agreed with the Bank
Trimer:
Implement policies and improve
governance for more competitive business
entironment

Adopt road lransporf expenditure priorities
agreed w i t h the Bank

I

~

I

Indicative Actions:
Make steady progress toward privatization or
liquidation o f the 1,I30 SOEs held by the
CPF in 2003 by end-2008, with an
intermediate target o f 600-800 SOEs b y end-

Judicial System

Broad Participation in
Growth
Reform Areas:
Education

~

_

_

Additional Trigeers:
Restructure railways sector
Restructure electricity utility (HEP) to meet EL’
accession requirements
Additional Indicative Actions:
Make steady progress toward completion o f
divestiture o f I O subsidiaries o f Croatian Railways
b y 2008, with an intermediate target of divestiture
o f half of their asset value b y end-2006
Establish an autonomous and funchonal
transmission system operator
Establish autonomous and functional distnbution
system operator(s)
Liberalize the elecmcity market in accordance w t h
Croatia’s commitments for the development o f the
Energy Community o f South East Europe per the
Athens Memorandum o f Understanding and
forthcoming Treaty

*

*

I

Reduce total spending in the roads sector, and
increase share of maintenance and rehabilitation
expenditure consistent wth the agreed Highway
Network Expenditure and Financing Strategy

e

Public Administration Reform

_

Additional Indicative Action:

Make steady progress toward full
implementation o f ment-based hinng and
pay system by end-2008, including
enactment o f Civil Service Law
Implement program, including restructunng
o f responsibility for land registration, aimed
at achieving 50 percent reduchon in case
backlog by 2008

m:
*

Improse targeting, sustainability, qualiQ,
and effrciency o f sorial se\-@s
Indicative Actions:
Implementprogram aimed at increasing

secondary education completion rate from 78
percent in 2003 to 85 percent b y 2008
Social Assistance
Streamline and monitor social benefits and
services and reduce their share o f GDP,
while increasing the relative amount
allocated to the best-targeted social support
allowance
Health Care
Make steady progress toward increase in the
share o f primary health care expenditure in
total health spending from about16 percent in
2003 to 18 percent in 2006 and 20 percent in
2008.
Note: The P A L series would ensure substantive progress in the macroeconomic sustain ilitv and orivate sector-led mowth trigem.
-.+

.

- 20 -

I

I

1
I

59.
Other investment and Global Environment Facility (GEF) operations are closely linked to the
EU accession agenda in areas where the Bank has global experience and comparative advantage, e.g.,
b y helping Croatia meet the environmental challenges. T h e Agriculture Acquis Cohesion loan,
complemented by a GEF operation, would improve access to EU markets for food products and enable
better absorption o f EU grant resources. Under the P A L program Croatia will introduce environmental
impact assessments into the regulatory framework, and the Bank will support (through an ongoing technical
assistance loan and bilateral grant cofinancing) environmental audits o f large SOEs (e.g., shipyards) as part
o f the privatization process. The Environment Management loan would focus o n improving institutional
capacity to address environmental liability issues, and to implement projects and monitor environmental
outcomes as required by the acquis communautaire. The Trade and Transport Integration loan would assist
building links with EU markets, e.g., by providing vital transshipment road corridors to the heart o f Europe,
through the Rijeka Port. The Science and Technology loan would support efforts to improve R&D capacity
and competitiveness in response to the Lisbon agenda. A GEF grant under the World Bank-GEF Strategic
Partnership for Zagreb Municipal Nutrient Reduction in the Danube River Basin would finance reduction in
water pollution from the Zagreb wastewater treatment plant. And a Renewable Energy Resources GEF
operation would assist the government to meet acquis communautaire requirements and help reduce
Croatia’s dependence on fossil fuel imports.

60.
The analytical and advisory (AAA) services program i s frontloaded to meet the huge
analytical and technical assistance needs of an accelerated reform program. The program aims to
establish the analytical underpinning o f lending operations and provide technical assistance to government
in a timely manner, jumpstart the reform process, and prepare for high case. The AAA for the high case
would be launched only after an initial assessment o f the probability o f reaching the high case in FY06.
(See Annex B4.) The Bank’s analytical work will draw heavily from EU8 experience. A series o f policy
notes and workshops on critical issues would inform the decision makers o f policy options and cross
country experience and at the same time serve as the basis and forum for debate as well as dissemination
among stakeholders. The Regional Living Standards and Development Study and the Public Finance
Review are part o f the core analytic work. The Fiduciary Country Systems TNInstitutional Fiduciary
Assessment (FA) support both CPAR and CFAA implementation, as well as the planned sector
expenditure support loans. WBI regional programs would contribute to capacity enhancement in the areas
o f public sector and governance, private sector development, and social sustainability. (See Annex A5.)
61.

Croatia will continue to participate in the joint W o r l d BanMMF Public Debt Management
and Domestic Debt M a r k e t Development Program, which it joined in early 2004. Under this program
a draft reform plan to strengthen debt management capacity withn the Ministry o f Finance, including for
system support, risk management, and institutional framework, has been presented to the Ministry for
approval. Implementation o f the reform plan would help t o strengthen Croatia’s macroeconomic
sustainability.

62.

The Bank will step up i t s assistance to the Ministry of Finance to optimize the structure o f
Croatia’s portfolio of IBRD financial products and services b y focusing on the potential use of a
broader range of IBRD financial products to manage Croatia’s financial risks in line with the
government’s debt strategy. In this regard, the government may wish to consider signing a Master
Derivatives Agreement (MDA) with IBRD, as this would provide access to a range o f risk management
products (e.g., currency swaps, interest rate swaps, interest caps and collars, commodity swaps, the
customized repayment schedule, interest rate hedgmg products, and possibly local currency funding for
Croatia’s program) linked to the existing portfolio o f IBRD loans. These products could be applied at the
level o f the country portfolio as well as for individual projects, both in the existing portfolio and the new
pipeline.

63.

IFC’s broad strategy i s to facilitate Croatia’s accession to the EU by supporting private sector
companies to become more competitive in regional markets. IFC will support privatization and postprivatization restructuring in key sectors o f the country with priority to manufacturing industries, tourism,

-21 -

agribusiness/food processing, utilities, and infrastructure. IFC will combine financial support with technical
assistance in areas such as corporate governance and environmental standards to help domestic companies
become more competitive. IFC will work with domestic banks to support Croatian companies that are
ambitious to expand in other counties in the region. A priority will be facilitating FDI through debt and
equity investment with strategic partners, particularly where a green-field project i s involved. In the
banking sector, IFC will continue the dialogue with the government and consider helping to finish the
privatization o f the banking sector through appropriate financing schemes. I F C will focus on non-bank
financial institutions and on structured finance transactions strengthening the capacity o f specific financial
institutions, including their capacity for SME finance in order to serve this market segment profitably. IFC
will explore possible opportunities for introducing new products in the financial markets, such as the
development o f energy efficiency finance. In the infrastructure sectors, IFC will continue i t s efforts to
promote private sector investments. Given the importance o f solid waste management and water treatment
in the tourist areas along the coast, Croatia will be a target market for IFC’s new Balkans Infrastructure
Development Facility (BIDFacility). The Municipal Fund, a joint I F C - B R D initiative, can be instrumental
in promoting more private sector investments in the water and wastewater sector. IFC i s also helping the
institutional effort t o develop public-private partnership opportunity in a cross-border oil pipeline and other
regional infrastructure projects. Together with the govemment, IFC will assess opportunities for providing
advisory assistance in structuring and implementing public-private partnerships to improve healthcare for
public patients. See Annex A 6 on IFC’s strategy in Croatia.

64.
MIGA’s work in Croatia will be built on the European Investor Outreach Program (EIOP)
which seeks to strengthen the capability of beneficiary countries to attract investment from Western
Europe. The program will identify and contact potential investors in selected priority sectors, with a view
to generating interest in direct investment projects, through green-field investment, acquisition o f SOEs, or
joint ventures with indigenous firms. The initiative will start out as a two and a half-year pilot program,
supported by an initial contribution from the Austrian govemment under a grant agreement. MIGA i s cofinancing the initiative, and U S A I D has agreed to co-finance a position in their Vienna office to help
facilitate business in Croatia. It i s expected that over time, additional donors will j o i n the initiative, and i t
will expand to cover additional countries as well as a wider range o f sectors and industries.
b. High-Case Program

65.
The high case i s designed to serve as an incentive for acceleration of the more difficult
reforms that are linked to the EU accession agenda and which were stalled in earlier efforts and have
caused a build up in debt and become a fiscal burden. These reforms involve a shift in expenditure
priorities in the roads sector, privatization o f railways subsidiaries, and restructuring o f the energy sector.
Because o f the sector’s past heavy burden on debt and fiscal space, the three infrastructure operations have
been relegated to the high case with additional policy conditionalities which would reduce their fiscal and
debt demands through privatization and expenditure re-orientation. O f the high case program’s US$450
million increase over the base case lending volume, US$200 million would be for higher amounts o f PALS
I1 and I11and the FY08 Growth Policy Support Loan (bringing each o f them to US$200 million), US$50
million would elevate the Trade and Transport Integration loan to a Transport Sector Reform Expenditure
Support investment loan, US$lOO million would allow the addition o f an Energy Sector Reform
Expenditure Support investment loan near the end o f the CAS period, and US$50 million would increase
the amounts o f the social sector development operations already included in the base case program
(education and health). The remaining US$50 million would allow acceleration o f the Coastal Cities
Pollution Control 11 adaptable program loan (APL) into this CAS period. (See Annex B3b.) Should the
high case triggers be partially met, the incremental PAL support planned for FY06 would be appropriately
pro-rated. Plans for FY07-08 would be subject to the assessments in the CAS Progress Report planned for
mid-termo f the CAS period.
66.
Support for an improved system of road maintenance and modernization of the railway
system in the transport sector via the proposed Transport Sector Development loan would be
contingent upon the government’s implementation of a fiscally sustainable medium-term transport

- 22 -

infrastructure plan linked to EU integration which it would support. The plan would give priority to
road rehabilitation and maintenance and a more rational road sector investment program that includes
mobilization o f EU grant and private sector funding. The transport loan would also be contingent upon
steady progress in the privatization o f 16 railway subsidiaries. The operation would support: (i)
social
mitigation schemes for the railway sector; (ii)
expenditure support for investment in track and railway
infrastructure, elimination o f road maintenance backlog, modernization o f road and network management,
and construction o f urban by-passes; and (iii)institutional strengthening for attracting private sector
participation schemes in transport.

67.

An Energy Sector Development loan would be contingent on implementation of reforms
required o f Croatia under “the Athens Memorandum,” which it would supp0rt.2~The reforms include
the restructuring o f HEP for market liberalization. The loan would finance priority investments such as a
load dispatch and communication system, transmission interconnections with Hungary and Italy, and
rehabilitation o f thermal and hydro generation plants. These reforms have been under discussion for some
time and are relatively easy to prepare and implement. There also may be scope for IFC engagement in the
power sector, once HEP restructuring i s advanced.

68.

The planned Coastal Cities Pollution Control sequel operation aims to have a direct, positive
impact on the quality of bathing and fishing waters on the Adriatic Coast. The operation would
develop a framework in which other partners can participate. The operation would finance: (i)
wastewater
treatment facilities in selected coastal municipalities, and (ii)
strengthening o f institutional arrangements for
financing and management o f wastewater treatment.

c. Low-Case Program

69.
The volume of low case lending i s less than 30 percent of that o f the base case. The planned
l o w case for Bank assistance would be comprised o f two investment operations per year with emphasis on
the following areas where major policy reform i s not required: local infrastructure investment and
institutional capacity building in the Areas o f Special State Concern, institutional reform to facilitate the
commercialization o f R&D, capacity building for harmonization with EU food safety standards, education
reform on a more limited scale than in the base case, strengthening o f trade corridor logstics to link Croatia
more cost effectively with i t s trading partners, institution building for environment management aligned
with the EU acquis communautuire (smaller in scope than the base-case operation), investment in municipal
infrastructure and related institutional development, and stimulation o f private sector-led growth in an area
dominated by a single loss-making industry. (See Annex B3c.)
D. Medium-Term Prospects and Financing Requirements

70.

Croatia’s medium term prospects are linked to the goal of EU accession. Lessons from the
experience o f the EU8 New Member States indicate the need to accelerate completion o f structural reforms
and improve institutions to implement membership requirements and facilitate absorption o f accession
funds. In the Croatian context, this means focusing on fiscal consolidation and public debt reduction to
provide the fiscal space for accession requirements, completing the privatization program, restructuring the
social sectors and improving competitiveness. T o improve i t s ability to use EU funds, Croatia would need
to strengthen institutional capacity to develop and implement a suitable pipeline o f projects, especially at
the sub-national level. In addition, fiduciary country systems require upgrading to EU standards.

Along with the other countries o f South East Europe, Croatia signed “the Athens Memorandum” in December 2003
codirming i t s commitment to the development o f the South East Europe Regional Electricity Market, which i s de
facto a condition for EU accession calling for market liberalization to align with EU energy policies. The Bank plays a
lead role in donor coordination with the EC, EIB, EBRD, and bilaterals.

24

- 23 -

i.

Sustained Growth Scenario

71.
The sustained growth scenario envisages implementation of a rigorous structural reform
program and sound macroeconomic policies. Policy performance under this scenario includes immediate
steps to reduce external vulnerability, promote sustainable growth, and ensure the preparedness for EU
accession in the medium term. Under such assumptions, GDP growth i s estimated t o stay at 4.2 percent on
average annually over the medium term, with relatively l o w inflation o f about 2.5 percent. Tightening of
monetary policy i s expected to continue during the next several years, gradually bringing the ratio o f
domestic credit t o GDP to 66 percent in 2007. Consequently, a gradual reduction o f the trade deficit, and
accordingly o f the current account deficit, are expected t o be somewhat slower in 2004 but stronger
thereafter t o decline t o 3.1 percent o f GDP in 2007.

72.
The adjustment underlying this reduction in the current account deficit would come
predominantly f r o m private and government sector investment cuts during 2004-05. The fiscal policy
adjustment leading to higher public savings during this period would be gradual due t o the realization o f
some o f the post-election promises. The base case reforms associated with the sustained growth scenario
are consistent with a sustainable debt profile. Increased social spending and continued subsidization o f
public enterprises would allow the fiscal deficit to fall to only 3.7 percent o f GDP in 2005, as targeted under
the IMF Stand-By Arrangement. As a gradual reduction in the current account deficit in the face o f robust
private investment growth would require prudent fiscal policies, the reduction o f government consumption
and the end t o the public highways construction program would then take the bulk o f the current account
deficit adjustment in 2006-2007. The fiscal deficit i s expected to reach 2 percent by 2007 (0.9 percentage
points o f GDP below government projections in the Medium-Term Fiscal Framework for 2005-2007), with
the primary balance reaching the sustainable level o f 0.2 percent o f GDP.
73.
Under the sustained growth scenario, medium-term financing requirements during 2004-07
are estimated to be about U S 4 . 7 billion on average per year. FDI flows are expected to provide a little
more than one-fourth o f external financing in the years ahead, with net FDI expected t o slow from 4.4
percent o f GDP in 2004 to 3.4 percent in 2007. Any additional increase in FDI would allow for lower
financing requirements from the commercial sector (a non-preferred lender) and thus lower indebtedness.
The external financing gap would be mainly financed from new foreign borrowing, but as the current
account deficit shrinks, external debt (measured in U S dollars) i s expected t o decrease gradually t o 73
percent o f GDP in 2007. The majority o f h d s would come from banks and other private creditors, while
official creditors’ participation in new borrowing would gradually decline t o below 1 percent o f GDP in
2007. Any increase in borrowing from multilaterals over the modestly projected disbursements as well as
any increase in FDI would further reduce the future debt service cost. Official grants, mainly from the EU,
to help Croatia’s public sector meet some o f its EU accession-related investment needs are projected at
about US$125 million for the 2004-2007 period. Utilization o f EU pre-accession funds soon to be made
available together with multilateral financial institutions’ (MFI) co-financing could further improve the
level and structure o f external indebtedness.
74.
W o r l d Bank disbursements under the sustained growth scenario at about US$255 million a
year would cover slightly more than 5 percent of total financing needs. The Bank‘s exposure would
remain l o w in the medium term, with I B R D ’ s share o f public debt service below 5 percent. (See Table 8
and Annex B7.) With i t s favorable terms and the option o f local currency denomination, IBRD lending
would help to improve the overall structure o f Croatia’s debt.

- 24 -

Table 8: IBRB Exposure Indicators for Croatia

DS* (%)
IBRD Share o f Public and
Publicly Guaranteed DS* (%)
IBRD Share of Total Debt
Outstanding and Disbursed (%)

-~

5.5

5.2

5.9

4.1

4.6

5.2

6.1

4.2

4.8

5.2

5.4

4.0

4.6

3.2

3.1

4.0

5.0

6.0

3.1

4.1

5.7

7.2

3.1

3.4

3.7

3.7

* Debt Service
ii.

Accelerated Growth Scenario

75.
Under the accelerated growth scenario, Croatia would undertake a fast-track reform
program that increases the economic growth rate towards 5.5 percent by 2007 with inflation falling to
2 percent. In addition to policies envisaged under the sustained growth scenario to reduce external
vulnerability, Croatia would undertake third generation reforms in the infrastructure sectors, accelerate the
fiscal consolidation process and administrative and judicial reforms, and complete the privatization process.
The scope and pace o f such a reform program would change investors’ sentiment and stimulate a significant
increase in annual FDI flows close to 7 percent o f GDP in 2007. Under such assumptions, i t i s estimated
that external debt would fall to below 66 percent o f GDP with current account deficit falling to 2.5 percent
as a result o f export-oriented private sector investments. Pnvatization receipts and fiscal sustainability
reached in 2006 would allow the ratio o f direct public debt to GDP to fall towards 38 percent.
76.

Under the accelerated growth scenario, medium-term financing requirements during 2004-07
are estimated to be about US$4.7 billion per year, but with a trend falling towards US$3.6 billion in
2007. Pnncipal repayment requirements on external debt would decrease to 6.3 percent o f GDP by 2007.
FDI flows are expected to provide more than 40 percent o f external financing. The external financing gap
would be financed mainly from new foreign commercial borrowing, depending on the volume o f lending by
the other international financial institutions (IFIs), availability o f pre-accession funds, and Croatia’s
absorptive capacity. New disbursements o f long-term debt would gradually fall to 5 percent o f GDP, out o f
which official creditors’ participation in new borrowing would account for one-third and remain at 1.5
percent o f GDP in 2007. IBRD disbursements are estimated at US$302 million a year, which would cover
about 6.4 percent o f total financing needs.

iii. Slow Growth Scenario

77.
Under the slow growth scenario Croatia’s structural reform program has yet to gain
momentum and broad public support. Slower progress in fiscal consolidation and administrative and
judicial reform would adversely affect private investment. Less profitable private investments would lower
prospects for growth, cause deterioration in competitiveness, and lead to higher fiscal and external
imbalances. Under such assumptions, i t i s estimated that GDP growth would fall to 2.7 percent on average
annually over the medium term with still relatively l o w inflation.
78.
Under the slow growth scenario, medium-term financing requirements during 2004-07 are
estimated to be about US$4.9 billion per year. FDI flows are expected to provide only one-fifth of
external financing. The external financing gap would be financed mainly from new foreign commercial
borrowing, but as the current account deficit shtlnks very gradually, external debt (measured in USD) i s
expected to decline only modestly to 80 percent o f GDP in 2007. New disbursements o f long-term debt
would remain high on average at 11 percent o f GDP over the whole projected period, out o f which official
creditors’ participation in new borrowing would diminish towards 0.6 percent o f GDP in 2007. IBRD
disbursements under the slow growth scenario are US$116 million a year and cover approximately 2
percent o f total financing needs. (See Annex B6 for macroeconomic indicators under the three scenarios
discussed above.)

- 25 -

‘

E. Monitoring for Results

79.
The results focus of the CAS program, and in particular the PALs, requires an effective
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system to help assess effectiveness. The PAL has begun the process
of designing an M&E system covering the PAL program, with the PAL coordinating body that includes
state secretaries from different ministries as the focal point. The work will be extended to cover the entire
CAS. M&E i s being designed at several levels, reflecting (i)
the multi-tiered nature o f the CAS objectives
and desired outcomes and (ii)
the time dimension o f the CAS period. Country-level intermediate indicators
for trachng progress toward CAS outcomes to be influenced by the W o r l d Bank Group’s CAS program are
quantified where possible. Country-level indicators are shown together with some key intermediate
indicators in Table 9 below. (See Annex B9 for more comprehensive elaboration.) The data needed t o
monitor progress against these indicators, together with related institutional arrangements, will be generated
on a timely basis and reviewed as part o f the PAL program and during preparation o f Bank-financed
investment projects. Croatia’s statistical infrastructure has expanded i t s survey coverage and has started to
align i t s data collection and generation with that o f EUROSTAT, including the production o f regional and
county level information. As for sectoral data coverage, significant steps have been taken to align with the
requirements from the specific chapters o f the EU acquis, such as environment and business environment
data, and as the quality o f the data improves over time, more will be reflected.
80.
The evaluation component of the system will be enhanced b y the PAL instrument itself, as
during preparation of the successor PALs the Bank and the government will assess the outcomes of
the PAL program to date and determine whether adjustments are necessary. T o that end, surveys
(such as the FIAS Administrative and Regulatory Cost Surveys) and focus groups (such as those o n
business environment) will be used t o provide stakeholder feedback. This will complement quantitative
information from the monitoring component (e.g., the processing time for business registration and
productivity measures).
8 1.
To improve institutional capacity in both the ministries and the Bank’s Country Office, a long
distance learning program through the World Bank Institute (WBI) was launched with an
introductory course in the fall of 2003 followed by an intermediate course held in June 2004. The
learning program aims to build capacity in the Country Office as well as in key ministries for monitoring
policy and program performance over the medium term. In the context o f investment operations (e.g., in
the social sector), upgrading institutional capacity for M&E i s also being addressed. The public
administration component of the PAL will also support reforms to improve government capacity to evaluate
policies and programs.

82.
Some elements of the planned AAA program will assist in the evaluation o f progress against
country outcome indicators. In addition, the annual Joint Portfolio Reviews (JPRs) will increasingly
focus on results and outcomes, beginning with the JPR planned for the fall o f 2004. The JPRs will also take
account o f anticipated new Bank policies aimed at facilitating project restructuring to maximize
development impact in light o f project implementation experience.

- 26 -

Table9: K e y 1 iicators for Trackin Progress Toward Achi
Macroeconomic
Sustainable Private
Sustainability
Sector-Led Growth
Country-Level
tndicators

Annual inflation
rate held below 3
percent during
CAS period

Average annual real
GDP growth o f 4.0
percent to 4.5 percent
during CAS period

Reduction o f
public and
publicly
guaranteed debt
from 54 percent to
5 1 percent o f
GDP by 2008

Increasedprivate
sector share o f GDP
from 60 percent in
2003 to 70 percent by
2008

Reduction o f
primary fiscal
deficit from 3.7
percent to below
0.4 percent o f
GDP by 2008
Reductionof
govemment
expenditure from
50.5 percent o f
GDP in 2003 to
below 45 percent
o f GDP by 2008

Selected
tntermediate
tndicators to
Track Progress
During CAS
Implementation

Steady reduction
in enterprise
subsidies to
US$850-900
million in 2006
and US$760
million by 2008
Implementation o f
forthcoming
Public Finance
Review
recommendations
Development and
implementation o f
a debt
management
strategy
Reduction in
prescription
drugs’ share o f
HZZO’s total
expenditure from
2 1 percent in 2003
to 17 percent in
2008

ement of C A S Outcom
Broad Participationin
Growth
Increase in adult
population with
secondary education
from less than 40
percent in 2003 to 44
percent in 2008, and
decrease in tertiary
education net dropout
rate from 70 percent in
2003 to 50 percent in
2008

Average total factor
productivity o f 6
percent during CAS
period
Average annual
inflows o f F D I at 3.8
percent o f GDP
during CAS period

Sustainable Natural
Resource
Management
Sustained progress
toward alignment
with EU acquis
communautaire on
environment
Improved water
quality in coastal
areas and Croatian
Danube River
Basin

Student achievement at
competitive European
level

Increasedwater
service delivery
coverage

Sustained increase in
employed share o f
working-age
population, including in
“disadvantaged and
war-affected areas,”
from national level o f
43 percent in 2003

Reduced
dependence on
fossil fuels

Health outcomes
approaching those o f
EU averages for infant
and maternal mortality
rates and incidence o f
Divestiture by end2006 o f 600-800
SOEs held by CPF,
and 1,130 SOEs by
end-2008
Enactment o f
amendments to the
Laws on Physical
Planning,
Construction, and
Utility Services
Enactment o f Civil
Service Law
Alignment o f
financial management
systems and controls
and public
procurement
procedures with EU
standards
Rationalization o f the
court system

Introduction o f external
secondary school
leaving examinations
and a professional
development system
for teachers and school
principals
Means-testing for
increased share o f
social benefits
e

Increase in share o f
primary health care
expenditure in total
health spending from
16 percent in 2003 to
18 percent in 2006 and
20 percent in 2008

Investment in
environment
ministry staff
training and
certification
programs
Upgrading o f aging
wastewater
treatment plants to
EU environmental
standards
Development o f
strategy for meeting
Kyoto Protocol
commitments

Implementation o f
regional development
strategy for
economically
depressed areas, in line
with EU requirements

Note: Both the IMF SBA and the Bank PAL program will monitor progress of the macroeconomic sustainability measures. The PAL program has
components relating to sustainable private sector-led growth. The various investment operations dealing with broad participation in growth and
sustainable natuml resource management have a results framework for monitoring the related outcome indicators.

25 Infant mortality rates are 7.4 per 1000 live births (EU average i s 4.9), maternal mortality i s 6.9 per 100,000 live
births (EU average i s 5.5), and the incidence of TB i s almost three times the EU average. (See Table 1.)

- 27 -

F. Partnerships

83.
With the opening of accession negotiations and Croatia’s resulting eligibility for pre-accession
grant funds in 2005, the EC will have a comparative advantage in terms of financial support. In
addition, after signing the S A A in 2001, Croatia has been eligible for grant funds under the EC’s
Community Assistance for Reconstruction, Development and Stabilization (CARDS) Program. The 2004
CARDS Program i s for a total o f 76 million euro, to be committed over the next three years. Priorities for
CARDS funding are focused in five areas: judicial reform (29 percent), economic and social development
(23 percent), return o f refugees and civil society development (23 percent), institution building and public
administration reform (20 percent), and environment and natural resources (5 percent).

84.

The Bank i s closely coordinating with the EC and will continue to give high priority to
supporting reforms and developing programs and operations to maximize Croatia’s utilization of EC
grant funds?6 It i s worth noting that the World Bank C E M (2003) was instrumentalin informing the EC’s
favorable opinion issued in April 2004, and CARDS support for cadastre and land reastry reform (4.5
million euro) i s being administered by the Bank as cofinancing under the Bank‘s ongoing project in this
area. The Bank will deepen collaboration with the EC on the next CAS and i s continuing to do so as the
P A L program i s developed, to ensure convergence with Croatia’s accession agenda. The Bank will aim to
coordinate with the small bilateral donor community to maximize the synergy between the PAL-EU
accession reforms and meet the TA needs. (See Table 10.)

I

Box 3: Croatia’s Relationship with the IMF
Croatia has signed three precauliona~ySBAs with the IMF. The second SBA, approved hy the IMF Board i n February 2003, in
an aniount equivafent to SUR 105.9 million for a period of 14 months, went off track in late 2003 and expired in April 2004.
‘The (;oveminent did not make any purchases. The third review was not completed as fiscal policy went o f f track in the nin-up
to the November Parlianientary elections, The fiscal deficit target f%r2003 was missed by inore than Ipercent o f GDP: and
quasi-fiscal operations and contingent liabilities expanded. In early Febm.ry 2004 the new governnient requested a successor
SBA. On August 4, 2004 the Fund Board approved the Staff Report for the k r t i c l e I V Consultation and Request for SBA, The
new arrangement, in an amount equivalent to S I X 97 million for i] period of 20 months, will be treated as precautionary, as
were the two preceding arrangements. ‘The major objective of the new SRA i s to reduce external vulnerability through more
forceful fiscal connsoIidatictn. A fiscal and quasi-fiscal adjustment o f 2.75 perceiitage points of GL>P should help to reduce the
savings-investment imbalance and s t M i x the extemat debt-to-GI>P ratio. The authorities have explained their reliance 011
one-off measures in 2004 and postponenient of some adjustment efforts to 2005 as resulting from their having inherited
spending obligations and needing time for cost-savings measures to take o f f The structural reforms under the Fund prograin
we closely aligned with the refomis to be undertaken under the WorId Rank’s Progranmmatic Adjustment Loan Program.

I

85.
The government has recently concluded discussions with the IMF for a new SBA. The Staff
Report for the 2004 Article I V Consultations was approved by the IMF Board on August 4,2004. (See B o x
3.) The Bank will continue to take the lead in supporting Croatia’s structural reform agenda, while
collaborating closely with the IMF to ensure synergies between the macroeconomic reforms supported
under the SBA and the structural reforms to be supported under the proposed P A L program, especially
those dealing with fiscal consolidation and public expenditure. The new SBA and the proposed P A L
program will be mutually reinforcing, as they both aim at reducing Croatia’s external vulnerability through
fiscal consolidation, increased transparency and efficiency o f public expenditure and debt management, and
financial discipline and transparency for SOEs. In addition, the SBA i s supporting development o f a
domestic debt market as well as structural reforms to unify supervision o f non-bank financial
~~

EC pre-accession funds will b e available to help Croatia meet EU standards o n the environment (water, wastewater,
and solid waste management), t o develop pan-European transportation networks (mainly roads), and t o finance
institution building as w e l l as investments for rural development. To absorb these grant funds fully and effectively,
Croatia will need to: (i)
develop the institutional capacity to prepare and implement projects; and (ii)
make counterpart
matching funds available. As i t has done with other accession countries, the B a n k will assist in both o f these areas,
working j o i n t l y with the govemment and the EC.

26

~

28 -

intermediaries, strengthen supervision o f banks' credit risk, ensure the long-term sustainability o f the
pension system, and improve the quality o f balance o f payments data.
Table 10: Areas of Other Partner Activity

Active IFIs and Donors

Areas Of Reform

Political Criteria:

IUDICIAL REFORM
4NTI-CORRUPTION MEASURES
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION REFORM

I
I

EC - CARDS (TA and investment)
EC - CARDS (TA)
EC-CARDS(TA)
DFID(TA)
The Netherlands- MATRA Program
- (TA)
. ,
USAID - Local Government Reform Program (TA)
EC - CARDS (access to legal aid)
EC - CARDS (TA and investment)
USAID (TA and investment)
Council of Europe Development Bank (investment)
Italy - Program for reconstruction o f Eastem Baranja
The Netherlands (investment)
SIDA (TA and investment)
Germany (TA and investment)

PROTECTION OF ROMA
COMPLETION OF REFUGEE RETURNS

Economic Criteria:

MACROECONOMIC STABILIZATION AND
FISCAL FRAMEWORK
ENTERPRISE RESTRUCTURING
AND PRIVATIZATION
BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT

CADASTRE AND LAND REGISTRY
DEBT MANAGEMENT

I

*

1

I

*

Ability to Assume Obligations of Membership:
FINANCIAL CONTROLS

0

AGRICULTURE

TRANSPORT AND CUSTOMS

1

I

0

ENVIRONMENT

HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
(labor, education, health, social protection)
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

I*
I*
0

IMF-SBA
EC - CARDS (TA in public finance)
USAID (TA in financial management systems)
USAID - TA (shipbuilding and agro-kombinat SOEs)
EBRD (investment)
Finland (TA for R&D reform)
EBRD (credit for SMEs)
USAID (TA for SMEs in tourism and IT)
Austria (TA, credit, and investment for SMEs)
EC - CARDS (TA and investment)
IMF-SBA
EC - CARDS (TA)
USAlD(TA1

EC - CARDS (TA to State Auditing Ofice and Public Procurement Office)
USAID - Local Government Reform Program (TA and investment) and TA
to Ministry of Finance
EC - CARDS (TA for veterinary and phytosanitary controls)
EC pre-accession funds, to be followed by structural funds (post-accession)
USAID (TA for market linkages)
EC - CARDS (TA)

EIB (investment in gasification)
EBRD (investment)
EIB (investment)
KfW (investment)
EC-CARDS
EC pre-accession funds, to be followed by structural funds (post-accession)
TheNetherlands(TA)
EC - CARDS (TA for mobility centers and vocational education and
training)
UNDP (TA for social protection)
ECCARDS(TA)
EC pre-accession funds, to be followed by structural funds (post-accession)

- 29 -

I

86.
EBRD assistance focuses on investment in municipal infrastructure investment and SMEs as
well as investment for financial sector capacity building, while EIB financing i s focused largely in
transport, environment, and local infrastructure, with opportunities for cofinancing with the W o r l d
Bank. Bilateral assistance i s primarily in the form o f twinning and other technical assistance to meet
specific institution and capacity building needs. Examples include public procurement (Germany and
Slovenia), financial management systems (USAID), and public administration reform (The Netherlands).
See Annex B 9 for a more complete listing o f partners’ areas o f activity.
MANAGING R I S K S

IV.

A. Implementation Risks

87.
The main risk for the sustained growth scenario comes from potential policy slippages,
including some of the post-election pledges. These would derail Croatia from its sustainable growth path
and result in a higher and unsustainable fiscal deficit, a growing external balance, a worsening debt profile,
and consequently macroeconomic instability. Any fiscal policy slippages or relaxation o f fiscal policy could
seriously undermine macroeconomic stability and Croatia’s creditworthiness. The risk o f such slippages to
implementation o f the base and high case CAS programs i s addressed through the self-regulating mechanism
o f the PAL program. In the event that base and high case triggers ( w h c h are closely linked t o PAL
conditions) were not substantially met or were reversed, Bank assistance would necessarily revert to the l o w
case.
88.

Some of the reforms needed for EU accession will have significant social costs, and therefore
carry political risk for the government. However, strong public support for EU accession, especially
following the EU’s favorable decision in June 2004, and implementation o f social mitigation measures
should facilitate the govemment ’s implementation o f the EU accession agenda. Social consensus on the
reform agenda has yet to solidify. Building such consensus will therefore be critical. T o help address this,
the Bank will continue to hold sector policy seminars with stakeholders led by government counterparts to
explain costs and benefits o f the reforms. The Country Office will organize a program t o enhance
understanding o f the Bank Group and its Croatia program in the Ministry o f Finance and among other key
counterparts for the PAL program.

89.
As the current HDZ-led government i s a coalition with a one-seat majority in Parliament,
there i s a risk that it will not be able to retain power over the medium term. Political distractions, a
change in government, and the resulting transition period would delay implementation o f needed reforms.
However, all parties are committed to Croatia’s accession to the EU, and so continuity on the associated
reform agenda i s likely over the longer term. Experience elsewhere in the region has shown that buoyed by
widespread public support, the goal o f EU accession provides continuity in a candidate country’s
development program, from one government to the next. In the case of Croatia, the core agenda o f the
CAS, the PAL program, has high-level attention o f the entire government. This i s critical to successful
implementation, given that reforms will need to be undertaken by many line ministries. Government
ownership o f the program i s grounded not only in the EU accession agenda but also in the SBA and the
findings o f the World Bank’s CEM o f 2003
~

90.
The government understands the need for reforms and i s committed to the reforms’
underlying objective of EU accession, but there are capacity constraints. A stronger process and
structure are needed for economic analysis and policy formulation. The technical and administrative
capacities in this regard, if not improved, may slow down the reform process, with a resulting loss in
momentum and the loss o f credibility with enduring effects. An ambitious reform program depends on
strong and dynamic institutions in order to be effective and sustainable. Improving governance through
public administration reform, public expenditure management, and judicial reform, all t o be -supported
under the PAL program, i s therefore critical to implementation o f other reforms.

- 30 -

B. External R i s k s

91.
Although current developments in South East Europe support regional stability and trade,
thus offering better business opportunities for Croatia as well, any setback in the security situation in
the region could have a severe impact on Croatia’s external position and i t s optimal economic
growth. In addition, a mild recovery in the EU15 where Croatia sends around 55 percent o f i t s exported
goods, but more than two-thirds o f its service exports, i s extremely beneficial t o Croatia’s growth and
external balance. Conversely, any slowdown o f the EU’s economic growth, especially after the accession
o f ten new countries in M a y 2004, could seriously affect economic growth in the country and erode the
otherwise weak country’s international competitiveness, increasing external imbalance and viability.

92.
A continuing risk for Croatia as an emerging market with high foreign currency exposure in
i t s public debt i s i t s vulnerability to contagion f r o m adverse developments in international financial
markets. In light o f the limited development o f the domestic debt markets, i t would be risky to reduce the
currency risk rapidly, as this would replace foreign currency long maturity debt with short-term, h a denominated debt. The pace o f development o f the kuna debt market and capacity building in debt
management will therefore affect the risk structure o f Croatia’s public debt. Implementation by the
Ministry o f Finance o f the draft reform plan developed under the joint World BanldlMF Program on
Sovereign Debt Management and Debt Markets Development, would directly help to address Croatia’s
external vulnerability.

-31 -

Annex A2
Page 1 o f 2

Croatia at a dance
Europe &
Central
Asia
Croatia

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas mefbod, US$ billions)

11/23/04

Uppermiddleincome

4.4
5,380
23.9

473
2,570
1,217

335
5,340
1.788

-0.5
0.2

0.0
0.2

1.2
1.a

11
69
75
7

63
69
31

76
73
19

91
3
103
104
102

89
9
104
104
104

1993

2002

2003

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenffGDP
Exports of goods and servicedGDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

10.9
15.5
52.4
14.3
16.2

22.8
28.4
45.4
19.1
21.6

28.8
30.4
47.1
20.7
21.3

Current account balance/GDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debffGDP
Present value of debffexports

5.8
0.9
22.8
4.9

-8.4
2.2
67.6
24.3
65.8
122.8

-7.3
2.4
81.8
19.6

1993-03

2002

2003

2003-07

4.0
4.6
6.2

5.2
5.1
1.3

4.3
4.3
10.1

4.2
4.8
5.2

1983

1993

2002

2003

13 8
358
30 6
50 3

89

Development diamond.
Life expectancy

-1

Average annual growth, 1997-03
Population (%)
Labor force ('A)

GNI
per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997-03)
Poverty (% ofpopulation below nationalpoverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,OOOlive births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

95
2
95

Gross
PnmW
enrollment

Access to improved water source
-Croatia
~

- Upper-middleincome group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1983

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

1983-93

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

203

193

..
.

62 2
23.5
53.6

599
21.0
54.7

587
20.6
56.8

1983-93

1993-03

2002

2003

-05
36
33
48

20
57
27
55

34
-04

75
-1 8

7.5
5.6

22.5
88

12.0
10.9

i Economic ratios'
Trade
T

Indebtedness

II

Croatia
Upper-middle-income group

p iofinv-i?&iG5XaxGDP@,p-

----I

,-IO
-20

o~expo~-a;~
imports~pi)

'
,

-

Expats

'-0-kTlpOlts

Note: 2003 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

I

Annex A2
Page 2 o f 2

Croatia
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1993

2002

2003

1.516.6
1,466.8

2.2
2.9

1.a
3.2

36.9
-0.1
-2.0

44.9
2.0
-3.1

44.3
1.9
-4.0

1993

2002

2003

3,910
237
377
1,762
4,620
266
447
749

5,004
274
458
2,456
10,652
794
1,310
3,662

6,285
350
594
3,061
14,206
1,001
1,552
5,261

141
139
101

120
119
101

1993

2002

2003

6,196
5,767
429

10,571
13,065
-2,494

14,907
17,186
-2,279

-120
328

-502
1,076

-1,213
1,394

Current account balance

637

-1,920

-2,099

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

-171
-467

2,617
-697

3,490
-1,391

616
3.6

5,886
7.9

8,191
6.7

1993

2002

2003

2,486
89
0

15,421
611
0

23,570
762
0

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

325
43
0

2,967
52
0

3,314
86
0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Porhfolio equity

0
-52
12
102
0

60
165
2,352
59 1
-230

196
3,572
1,875
1,009

0
1
33
-33

202
126
30
95
22
73

155
58
97
28
69

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
implicit GDP deflator

1983

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surpluddeficit (with privatiz.receipts)
TRADE
(US$ mi//ions)
Total exports (fob)
Raw materials, excluding fuels
Mineral fuels and lubricants
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1983

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=1OQ)

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ mi//ions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

1983

Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DfC, /ocaWS$)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ mi//ions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

1983

9
-42

i

r-__________
~

~

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

I

116 000

1 Current account balance to GDP (%I

-14

-

-

-

___-

_ _

Composition of 2003 debt ( U S mill.)

I

E 1.637

\

I

I

I

'.

,

F. 19,867

A - IBRD
B IDA
C IMF

-

D -Other multilateral

E - Bilateral

F - Pnvate
G -Short-term

11/23/04

Annex A3
Page 1 o f 11

Croatia's Public Debt
Summary
Over the last seven years the level of Croatia public debt has been rising steadily in absolute and relative
terms, reaching around 55 percent of GDP at the end o f 2003. In addition, the annual public debt service
costs have increased for 2.5 percentage points of GDP after 2000, compared with the 1995-1999 period.
In order to sustain macroeconomic stability, with the current growth rate, inflation and historically l o w
interest rates, the government would need to reduce i t s primary deficit to the sustainable level o f 0.38
percent of GDP or less. T o control the debt level, the government will therefore need to pursue further
consolidation o f its fiscal spending of at least 3 percentage points o f GDP. The fiscal adjustment efforts
would need to be complemented with improvements in public debt management, by strengthening debt
management capacity and addressing a non-existence o f risk management function.

Croatia's Public Debt Profile
Figure 1: Croatia's Public Debt as % of GDP
I.
The recent redefinition of Croatian
public debt under the 2003 IMF Stand-By
Arrangement pointed to the urgent need
for improving debt management and
continuation of
Jiscal consolidation
process. There i s n o internationally accepted
consensus about the definition o f public debt
as well as the acceptable limit' o f public
debt. Different countries have different
definitions. The Croatian government
broadened the definition o f i t s public debt to
include, apart from the central government,
off-budget agencies and local government
debt,
i.e.,
Consolidated
General
Government'.
I t also includes some
contingent-explicit liabilities o f the public
sector (outstanding financial government
lurce: Croatian National Bank and the Ministry of Finance
guarantees).
However,
it
excludes
performance guarantees and some arrears
amounting to approximately 7.6 percent of GDP at the end of 2003.3 For the purposes o f this analysis, the
officially recognized debt has been increased for the arrears-part o f the debt.4

'

The most commonly used public indebtedness criteria in Croatia i s the one from European Union Maastricht
Agreement (signed in 1992) which sets the upper limit for the public debt at 60 percent o f GDP, but does not include
indirect debt.
Consolidated General Government o f Croatia consists of: the State Budget, Extrabudgetary Funds (Croatian
Institute of Pension Insurance, Croatian Institute o f Health Insurance, Croatian Employment Bureau, Croatian
Waters), State Agencies (Croatian Highways, Croatian Roads, State Agency for Deposit Insurance and Bank
Rehabilitation, Croatian Privatization Fund) and Local Government units.
3
WB staff estimate based on the M o F and the Health Fund data.
Arrears are defined as all overdue state and local government liabilities and all short-term unpaid liabilities of the
health sector. T h i s definition differs from the IMF definition that includes only overdue liabilities over the
contracted period. However, the Health Fund issues contracts with payment periods even over 240 days.

Annex A 3
Page 2 o f 11

2.
The total gross stock of Croatia's public debt, without performance guarantees, has nearly
doubled over the last eight years. Public debt increased f i o m 30.3' percent o f GDP in 1995 to 54.7
percent o f GDP in 2003. The highest growth was observed in 1999 when the debt to GDP ratio increased
by 11.6 percentage points o f GDP in only one year. Although the rate o f growth declined in subsequent

years, fiscal consolidation
efforts undertaken were not
Box 1: Internal and External Public Debt
enough to completely subdue
Croatia's internal public debt consists o f frozen foreign exchange deposits
of
debt.
the
increase
(FFEDs), bonds for restructuring (so-called Big Bonds), bonds for banks'
Obviously, Croatia's public
rehabilitation (BRA bonds), Treasury Bills, bonds syndicated through
sector capability t o finance its
domestic banks (G-Bonds), Croatian Institute o f Health Insurance Bonds and
expenses with its revenues has
other short-term debt. At end 2003 intemal direct public debt was HRK 33.4
considerably deteriorated in billion or 17.4 percent o f GDP (a 0.5 p.p of GDP increase over 2002). When
the observed period, as
outstanding government guarantees to domestic banks and arrears are added,
total domestic public debt sums up to HRK 45.2 billion (23.5 percent of
reflected in increasing public
GDP).
debt and inability to fully
clear the stock o f arrears.
Extemal public debt o f Croatia consists o f London and Paris Club
There are two important
obligations, credits from IFIs, and increasing share o f debt to commercial
phenomena affecting public
banks and sovereign bonds. After attaining the lowest investment credit
rating in 1997, the Govemment o f Croatia issued a series o f bonds and took
sector debt growth: (i)a
several syndicated loans. Total direct extemal public debt o f Croatia
significant
portion
of
amounted to HRK 45.4 billion or 25.4 percent o f GDP at end 2002 and
Croatia's
public
debt
increased
to HRK 51.5 billion or 26.8 percent o f GDP in 2003. Including
(approximately 23 percent o f
the outstanding govemment guarantees, total extemal public debt adds into
the total public debt in 2003)
HRK 59.7 billion (31.1 percent o f GDP).
was inherited f r o m the former
Yugoslavia
(e.g.,
frozen
after obtaining the
foreign exchange-deposits6, and the London Club and Paris Club debt7), and (ii)
investment credit rating in 1997, external borrowing o n the international capital market became
affordable, which the authorities used t o postpone temporarily the fiscal consolidation process.

1

Large levels of public expenditure in the 1990s and in the early 2000 have been the main cause
3
of rising and high fiscal deficits and, consequently, rising public debt. The government took steps since
~

2000 to repay accumulated arrears, to implement expenditure cuts, and t o undertake structural reforms
that will have a long-term positive impact o n fiscal sustainability (defense, pension, health reform, budget
management reform). While reduced primary current spending managed t o restore positive current
savings, higher public investment implied that the primary fiscal deficit was only partially reduced
between 1999 and 2002 f i o m over 6 percent of GDP to around 3 percent o f GDP. T h i s i s in sharp
contrast with average primary deficits o f less than 1 percent during 1995-98 and a surplus o f over 2
percent o f GDP in 1994.
1995 debt data i s corrected for London and Paris Club debt recognized in 1996.
FFEDs originate from the right of the former Yugoslav citizens to hold foreign currency accounts in domestic
banks, which re-deposited t h i s foreign currency in the National Bank o f Yugoslavia (NBJ) in return for domestic
currency. At the time o f the break-up o f former Yugoslavia, Croatian banks held more than HRK 17.75 bill in the
NBJ, which subsequently retained all o f these funds. The government decided to accept these commercial banks
assets as public debt as they represented the lifetime savings o f a sizeable portion o f the population.
The official recognition o f that debt was done after reaching an agreement with the Paris Club in 1995 and with the
London Club in 1996. The basic formula for the allocation o f former federal liabilities was devised b y the IMF in
order to distribute the former Yugoslavia's so-called "non-allocated" debt to the Paris Club. Croatia acknowledged
28.49 percent o f the debts owed or guaranteed by the former Yugoslavia not attributable to any successor republic.
Under the agreement with t h e London Club creditors, Croatia assumed 29.5 percent o f Refinancing Loans under the
net foreign assets and 19.7 percent o f the Trade and Deposit Facility Agreement. In July 1996, this debt was
exchanged for Croatian Series A and B Bonds, and by this Croatia normalized relations with all i t s foreign creditors.

'

Annex A 3
Page 3 o f 11

4.
I n addition to the financing of budget deficits, public debt has also grown to finance the
bailouts and further recapitalization of several banks and public enterprises, or to cover under-funded
obligations ofthe deposit insurance scheme and the health fund deficit Based on CNB and Ministry o f
Finance (MoF) data, staff estimates indicate that 7 percent o f total public debt stemmed from bank
rehabilitation and deposit insurance, 5 percent from health system rehabilitation including i t s arrears, 10
percent from shipyards, 13 percent from transport (including railways and highways construction), 3
percent from pension reform, 2 percent from local government borrowing and 1 percent from ugrokombinats.

Figure 2: Croatia's Public Sector Balances, % of GDP
5.
Fiscal developments in the last
four to five years have also revealed
two other important sources of debt
4
accumulation:
unpaid
internal
obligations of
the public sector
(arrears) and contingent liabilities in
the form of state guarantees. The
government accumulated significant
arrears amounting to 1.5 percent o f GDP
per year in the 1996-99 period.
Government guarantees have increased
significantly since 1996, reaching an
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Moo
2031
2W2
2003
Note 2003 data are preliminary All data refer to accrual deficitkutplus
amount equivalent to 13 percent o f GDP
I
in outstanding guarantee2 by end-2003.
Source: Ministry of Finance and staffestimates
Such guarantees represent a major
source o f contingent liabilities for the
budget. Since 2003 there was n o firm legal criteria for selecting guarantees' beneficiaries, and
furthermore, guarantees were most often issued without a clear plan or risk containment measures.

In

n n

n

Although the external debt share is 57percent of the total, the wide use of foreign currency
6.
clauses in domestic borrowing significantly changes the currency structure. A share o f foreign
currency denominated or indexed to foreign currency debt in total public debt at 85 percent, as well as the
currency composition o f external debt, reveal the vulnerability o f a cowntry towards external shocks and
changes in the exchange rate o f
Figure
___ ___ 3: Gross External and Domestic
- Public Debt
___
particular currencies. Apart from the
Treasury bills and one HEUS-bond
6oo,
issuance at domestic market, a l l
domestic borrowing is linked to the
Euro.
Kuna-denominated debt
amounts to only 15 percent o f total
debt. Euro-denominated debt amounts
to approximately 58 percent o f the
total. There i s a growing exposure to
the Japanese Yen (JPY), while U S
dollar-denominated debt i s getting a
reduced shareinthe total. T h e current
1995
'~9'
2ooo
2o02
currency
of Croatian debt
1-.
... .. .
.... ..
_

~_

~

reveals significant currency risk.

8

Source: Ministry of Finance and WB staff estimates

-

Includes financial and performance guarantees. The outstanding amount i s W o r l d B a n k staff estimate based o n
official MoF data.

Annex A 3
Page 4 o f 11

7.
The structure of public sector debt by main debtor did not change much during the last eight
years. The highest concentration, although reduced f i o m 96 to 87 percent o f the total, i s s t i l l at the central
govemment level. T h i s points to the key role o f the Treasury Debt Department in managing the overall
public debt. More recently, the off-budget agencies (mostly Croatian Highways and Croatian Road
Agency) were able to borrow independently domestically and f r o m abroad. Their share in the total debt,
excluding the guaranteed debt by the Treasury,
Figure 4: Croatian Public Debt by Debtors
was 6 percent at the end of 2003. The Croatian
Bank for Reconstruction and Development
HBm
(HBOR), having obtained the sovereign credit
5%
EBFs
rating, i s increasing i t s debt exposure but also
LGI
I 6%
carries an increasing contingent liability for the
2%
Treasury (central govemment). Most o f HBOR
lending to the domestic sector i s contracted with
the Treasury guarantee. Due to a weak fiscal
capacity (apart from the City o f Zagreb and few
more towns) and very stringent legal provisions
for local govemment borrowing,
local
CG
government units are active mostly on the
87%
domestic commercial banks' market. There have
been only a few local govemment borrowings
from the IFIs. Most o f the increase in the
Source: Ministrv of Finance
extemal debt after 1997 has been dnven by
central government borrowing and by off-budget agencies (in particular, Highways and HBOR), while
local levels o f govemment have mostly faced statutory and procedural restrictions on extemal borrowing.

,

8.
Since 1997 there has been a shijl in the sources offlnancing. At the beginning o f the 1990s
most new financing was coming from non-market sources (e.g., Central Bank, bilateral and multilateral
agencies) and state-owned banks. A s a result o f the institutional change o f the public finances and
monetary authorities independence, as well as settling relations with the London and Paris Clubs, the
government today borrows almost 86 percent o f its debt from market sources. The share of the preferred
debtors (e.g., I F I s or multilateral agencies) i s an additional 8 percent of the total. In contrast, sovereign
external bonds gained considerable ground over this period, reaching almost one-third o f the total debt by
the end o f 2003. With the launch o f the pension reform and establishment o f second pillar pension hnds
(new players in the capital market) in 2002, the govemment started t o tap into the domestic bonds market.
The aim was to foster development o f the domestic capital market but also t o develop the kuna yield
curve and deepen the market. So far, however, there has been only one HRK-bond issuance, while the
others have been linked to the Euro; obviously, the govemment did not answer the market needs.
9.
Croatia's public debt as well as its trend compare unfavorably with accession and EU
countries. Its public debt has been increasing ever since Croatian independence. On average, accession
and EU countries have in the last seven years succeeded to reduce the public debt level by 2.8 percentage
points and 8.3 percentage points o f GDP, respectively. By contrast, Croatia expanded i t s debt by 23.4
percentage points o f GDP. Accession countries' debt level remained on average at 36 percent o f GDP, far
below the EU average o f almost 63 percent or the level regstered by Croatia in 2002 and 2003. Also, due
to the rising stock o f debt, annual interest payments in Croatia's budget have increased, whereas they
have declined in comparator groups.

Annex A3
Page 5 o f 11

Lithuania l i
Latvia"
Estonia"
Czech Republic"
Poland
Romania
Hungary
Bulgaria
Slovenia
Slovak Republic
Av. CEEC
Croatia*
Croatia*'*

EU

1995
17.8
16.2
8.6
15.6
54.3
25S3!
86.4
120.6
18.8
22.8
38.7
30.3
30.3
70.93i

2002
29.5
14.6
5.2
41.74i
46.0
28.9
54.3
69.74i
26.9
42.7
36.0
42.2
53.7
62.6

Debt
Difference
+11.7
-1.6
-3.4
+26.1
-8.3
+3.4
-32.1
-50.9
+3.6
+19.9
-2.8
+11.9
+23.4
-8.3

Interest Payments

1995
0.4
1.2
0.2
1.2
4.5
1.4
9.3
14.7
1.2
2.1
3.6
1.4
1.4
5.4

2001
1.6
1.1
0.3
1.o
3.0
3.1
4.8
3.7
1.6
3.2
2.3
2.2
2.2
3.8

Figure 5: Interest Payments as % of GDP
10.
Until now, financing of these
- _
-- __ - -_ -large deficits has been facilitated by
relatively easy access to international
capital markets, which allowed issuing
debt at low country risk spreads, and by
significant privatization receipts. In fact,
financing costs have declined considerably
in the last four years. Spreads on
Government Eurobonds have plunged
from over 500 basis points over
benchmark securities in 1999 to 70 basis
points in 2004. At the same time,
maturities have lengthened. Nevertheless,
these terms are not as favorable as those of
source:Ministry oj-Finnnce
accession countries. Concerns about debt
sustainability or contagion from other countries in the region or reversals in the market's assessment o f
Croatia's prospects for eventual EU membership could reverse the improving trend in the terms o f
government debt. In such a scenario, interest payments could easily derail the gradual fiscal adjustment
strategy which the government i s currently pursuing, through an explosive growth of debt service.
Similarly, if macro-adjustment were to lead to a depreciation o f the kuna, the debt and debt service t o
GDP ratios could easily jump to unsustainable levels.

Annex A3
Page 6 o f 11
11.
Debt management as well as
Figure 6: External Debt Repayments in mill US$
budget
management should be
improved to properly address the above
risks. First, the use o f privatization
receipts to finance deficits has so far
,200
served to release some budgetary
,000
pressures, but it i s not a viable long-term
800
strategy as privatization receipts are
expected to diminish after 2005-06.
600
Second, the existing arrears and the lack
400
of control o n the provision o f
200
government guarantees indicate that
0
m
r0
0
substantial improvements in debt
D
:: :: 00 0 00 0 00 0
management are urgently required to put
government contingent liabilities under Source: Croatian National Bank
control. Third, the amortization schedule
o f public debt for the next three years, as well as for the 2009-201 1 period, suggests the need for heavy
refinancing. Coordinated and sound fiscal policy would respond to such situations by planning primary
surpluses for the years with heavy debt repayments to avoid any unexpected payment risks. Fourth,
sustainability analysis clearly shows the need for pursuing more rapid fiscal adjustment and avoiding procyclical fiscal policy if the government wants to sustain macroeconomic stability in the medium term.
N

(1

0
N

In
0
N

W
N

0
N

W
N

0
N

N
0

-

N
0

Issues and Diagnosis

The Primary Balance and Debt Sustainability
12.
Pro-cyclical fiscal policy during the 1990s seriously undermined fiscal sustainability,
underpinned by the Russian and Kosovo crises, both of which resulted in an economic downturn.
Fiscal deficits averagmg 2.3 percent o f GDP from 1995 to 1998 turned to 6 percent o f GDP in the period
thereafter. The fiscal policy stance over the second half o f the 1990s has not been sustainable, as evident
from fast debt growth. W h i l e from 2000 there has been a change in the trend, such change i s not yet
sufficient to restore inter-temporal solvency. In the long run the government must accumulate real debt
(as a share o f GDP) at a rate lower than the real rate o f interest in order t o be able to amortize at least
some small fraction o f i t s debt. The fiscal sustainability exercise suggests that the sustainable level for
the primary balance (a balance required to maintain a financiable level o f debt based on assumptions
regarding growth, inflation and the public demand for money) over the medium term' i s 0.38 percent of
GDP. T h i s comes from a combined estimated real debt service cost o f 0.47 percent o f GDP (this i s net o f
growth's effect on the stock o f debt), plus seignorage revenue o f 0.85 percent o f GDP." With the current
real growth rate that Croatia achieves, the government will have to find additional savings o f at least 3
percentage points o f GDP to control the debt level. If the government faces a higher premium on i t s
nominal debt, a primary surplus will be needed to keep the level o f debt stable. Once the real interest rate
exceeds the real growth rate, debt can accumulate very rapidly.

The long-run inflation i s estimated at 3 percent, long-run real growth rate at 4.5 percent, world real interest rate at
5.5, base money at 14.7 percent o f GDP and short-term interest rate at 3.
lo
The previous analysis has already shown that money demand i s so elastic in Croatia that the maximal seignorage
the Government could raise is not much higher: seignorage i s maximized, by a 20 percent inflation rate, at just 1.7
percent o f GDP. T h i s means that even in a high inflation environment the primary fiscal surplus could be no lower
than -1.2 percent o f GDP.

Annex A 3
Page 7 o f 11

Table 2: Alternative Scenarios for the Short-Run Sustainable Primary Surplus
Growth Rate Real interest Inflation Initial Public Debt Sustainable primary
of GDP (%)
rate (?A) rate (?A)
(% of GDP)
s u q h s (?Aof GDP)
BWCLilX

Growth
scenarios
Real interest rate
scenarios
Inflation rate
scenarios

.s

2
3
5

4.5

4.5

5.5

3

0.46

5.5

3

0.468

4.5
7.5
9.5

3

0.468

5.5

5.5
7.5
9.5

0.468

-0.33
1.1
-~~
0.5
-0.7
-0.9
0.6
1.6
-0.6
-0.7
-0.8

13.
The required primary balance is the most sensitive to the changes in growth assumptions.
Alternative scenarios illustrate, for example, that i f projected growth averages 3 percent, the govemment
would need t o run a primary surplus o f about 0.5 percent o f GDP. Alternatively, if growth increases to 5
percent, the allowed primary deficit would be 0.7 percent o f GDP. The high inflation elasticity of money
demand suggests that the scope for raising seignorage through higher inflation i s at best limited, a
common feature of countries where currency substitution i s widespread. The macroeconomic effects of
long-term fiscal policy instability could be exacerbated by Croatian pro-cyclical fiscal policies. Were
Croatia t o face short-run difficulties (e.g., fiscal dificulties in the EU or, more likely, a financial or
currency crisis in a neighboring country) leading for example t o higher interest rates, lower growth or a
depreciation o f the real exchange rate, the already unstable fiscal stance would initially be aggravated as
declining revenues would lead t o even faster increases in debt. Pro-cyclicality o f expenditures would then
kick in and amplify the economic downtum.
Vulnerability to Financial Risks in the Debt Structure

Given the limited development of domestic markets and the absence of hedging instruments,
14.
Croatian public debt is highly exposed to
Figure 7: Currency Composition of Public Debt
currency risk. The structure o f intemal
and external components o f public debt
Other
reveals the vulnerability to external and
9%
HRK
USD
JPY
currency shocks that could influence the
15%
10%
8%
capacity o f the govemment t o repay its
debt. At end-2003, the share o f direct
external public debt to total direct public
debt was 57 percent. It i s recommended
that the share o f external debt be reduced
by increasing domestic debt, in order to
EUR
reduce the exposure to external shocks
58%
and exchange rate risks and also to help
develop the domestic debt market (e.g.?
Source: MoF
for
second pillar pension funds'
* EUR part of the debt includes also debt linked to EUR although payable in
HRK (its share represents halfof the EUR part of the debt)
investments). Approximately 60 percent
of Croatia's public debt i s denominated in

Annex A3
Page 8 o f 11
a foreign currency, and about 65 percent o f domestic debt i s linked to EUR, though payable in HRK. On
closer analysis, factoring in the domestic debt linked to EUR and payable in HRK will bring the ratio o f
foreign currency-linked debt to 85 o f total public debt, making the government vulnerable to currency
risk. T h i s highlights the need to develop local currency debt instruments that are not indexed to foreign
currency. The pace o f development o f the kuna debt market will largely determine the risk structure of
Croatian debt. Figure 7 shows the currency composition o f total public debt, while Table 3 shows the
currency composition o f central government external debt. The surprisingly high weight o f JPY,
approximately 20 percent, has apparently resulted from two factors: (i)
the absence o f a clearly articulated
and formally stated debt management strategy, and (ii)
an absence o f a well defined benchmark for the
currency composition o f external debt. However, until the kuna debt market i s developed over the
medium term, the country should carefully weight the reduction in currency risk over a less diverse
investor base.

15.
As EU accession approaches, and with it the formal adoption of EUR as the currency in
Croatia, the government may want also to revisit the currency weightings in its external debt. In
analyzing the trade-offs between the expected costs and risks for borrowing strateges, sound practice i s to
take into account the main asset cash flows o f the central government, and to select liabilities with
matching characteristics in order to smooth the budgetary impact o f shocks in debt servicing costs.
Table 3: Currency Composition o f Central Government ExternalDebt (as of November 2003)

% o f Total
Debt
% Fixed
EUR
57%
92%
USD
21%
1%
JPY
20%
100%
CHF
2%
100%
Total
100%
74%
Source: Ministry of Finance

% Floating
8%
99%
0%
0%
26%

16.
The government is exposed to reJinancing risks. Croatia’s central government debt redemption
profile shows a high exposure to rollover risk. While there i s n o clear indication as t o the Croatian
government’s target redemption percentage per annum, years 2005,2009 and 201 1 will witness more than
10 percent redemption, mostly due to maturing foreign currency bonds. The Ministry o f Finance would
need to increase the share o f local currency debt issuance in longer maturities and to try t o avoid further
burdening o f peak repayment years when raising additional debt.
17.
There is a signifcant asymmetry at currency level of exposure to interest rate risk. The
Croatian government’s domestic debt i s currently raised at fixed nominal rates. Its external debt
outstanding i s roughly 75 percent fixed and 25 percent floating. While there are n o formally stated
benchmarks in terms o f fixed versus floating debt, this i s broadly in line with the practice o f most debt
managers, which usually have 70-80 percent o f fixed rate debt. The Croatian government’s local
currency debt i s currently raised at fixed nominal rates. However, a currency-specific analysis reveals
that there i s a sharp variance in the percentage composition o f fixed versus floating debt among different
currencies: while debt in EUR and JPY i s almost entirely contracted at fixed rates, U S D borrowings are
floating. This asymmetry at currency level i s worth highlighting. The likely reason for this i s preference
o f the lenders and the characteristics o f the available lending products. Although the levels and shapes o f
the Term Structures of Interest Rates o f these three major currencies are broadly correlated to the global
economy momentum, and are mostly linked to economic cycle/policy decisions specific to that
country/monetary union, i t i s important t o have a currency-specific benchmark o f fixed-floating debt
composition.

Annex A 3
Page 9 o f 11
Legal and Institutional Framework for Central Government Debt Management

18.
Recent legislative changes have considerably improved the legal framework for Debt
Management. The 2003 Budget A c t gives clear authority for the Ministry o f Finance, acting through its
Debt Management Section, to borrow on behalf o f the central government. It introduces a reporting
requirement on debt, guarantees and loans in the Official Gazette twice a year, as well as a requirement
for the govemment t o determine yearly a three-year debt management strategy. It clarifies purposes for
borrowing and describes debt management activities. I t draws a ceiling for the overall state debt,
including called guarantees, at 60 percent o f GDP. The annual Budget Execution L a w sets the annual
stock o f new guarantees and the allowed end-year debt stock. In addition, the government adopted a
Decree on Criteria for Issuing State Guarantees that defined a process and criteria for guarantee issuance,
including an assessment o f the beneficiary's capacity to service the liability.

19.
There is a lack of adequate capacity in the debt management area, parlicularly in the area of
risk analysis. The Debt Management Section o f the Treasury Department, with only eight staff, i s
responsible for management o f central govemment debt and the guarantees. Because o f the lack o f
resources, the Debt Management Section has focused i t s activities o n raising the necessary funds, without
the support o f a r i s k management framework. A middle office should be established to support the
strategy through an analysis o f the costs' and risks o f the debt, while maintaining diversified investors'
base.
20.
The present set-up and situation pose a number of risks that need to be addressed Croatia
participates in the joint World Bank/IMF Program on Sovereign Debt Management and Domestic Debt
Management. Since the start o f the Program in early 2004, some improvements have already been made:
the old debt recording system has been upgraded, which has created a much more stable system
environment; a new head o f the back office has been recruited; and an internal project organization for
implementing reforms going forward has been established. However, much remains to be done. There i s
n o formalized and transparent debt management strategy, n o middle office function and n o clear roles for
the back office staff, n o debt sustainability analysis being carried out, an incomplete guarantee regstry,
and communication with the central bank needs to be improved. There i s a considerable "key person
risk", as the assistant minister heading the debt management office seems to be indispensable as the
principal, if not sole, possessor o f institutional memory in the debt office. Lack o f proper debt recording
systems exacerbates the problem. Due to the lack o f competitiveness o f the government's compensation
structure v i s A vis the private sector, retention o f caliber staff in the debt office i s a major issue.

21.
There is no clearly and formally articulated strategy for managing debt. Due to the capacity
shortage, borrowing strategy i s thus focused on raising the necessary funds, without the support o f a risk
management framework or adequate cash forecasting ability. However, the current activities for meeting
the govemment's funding needs have been moderately reasonable in managing the r i s k o f the debt, given
the constraints o f the kuna debt market. Currency risk remains high, however, as nearly 85 percent o f
total general government debt i s either denominated in foreign currency or indexed to foreign currency.
Until the kuna yield curve i s extended, it would be very r i s k y for the authorities to try to rapidly reduce
currency risk, as they would be replacing foreign currency long maturity debt with short-term kunadenominated debt. Although i t would reduce currency risk, i t would greatly increase a rollover risk which
i s potentially much more serious at this point. With pension reform now underway, longer maturities for
ha-denominated debt are possible. A formalized procedure for approving the strategy and reporting it
to the Parliament would improve investors' confidence and make the debt management process more
transparent.
22.
Cash management appears to be rudimentary and needs to be improved substantially. There
would also be efficiency gains to the govemment through reducing idle balances and cost o f carry.

Annex A3
Page 10 o f 11
Uncertainty in the net cash flow requirements due to inadequate cash forecasting ability might be creating
excess liquidity in the system.
23.
The available debt data seems to be fragmented and incomplete. Government guarantees are
not recorded systematically, while local government guarantees to their respective utility companies are
not recorded at all. Some improvement in debt and guarantees recording has occurred within the past
Stand-By Agreement with the IMF, when the Ministry o f Finance discovered a significant double
counting o f guaranteed debt (at some 8 percent o f GDP) in public debt data received from the Croatian
National Bank.
Domestic Debt Market

24.
The Croatian government securities market witnessed substantial development since 2000. As
a result, it now fares reasonably well vis Ci vis the regional leading group. W h i l e enhancement o f the
public debt management i s a responsibility o f the MoF, further development o f the public debt market
will require efforts by various parties. In addition, such efforts will need to be coordinated to ensure their
effectiveness. A proper mechanism for coordination i s needed. In particular, strong leadership by the
MoF and the CNB will be indispensable to ensure effective coordination. The domestic investor base
only recently started developing and diversifying, and the primary market needs to be better organized.
The issue calendar i s not yet established except for the T-bills. The secondary market i s also fragmented
due to a few factors, including a need to control affiliated party transactions in the small and
conglomerated financial sector, the restriction on foreign investment in the domestic bonds to control the
money supply, and the dual currency denomination.
25.
The demand and investor base need to be developed further. While the launch o f the second
pillar pension funds i s giving impetus to the development o f the domestic investor base, the domestic
demand i s still limited. Further, a high degree o f currency substitution leads to strong investor preference
for Euro-linked govemment securities. W h i l e banks remain to be an important group o f investors, they
are raising funds for domestic bond investment from overseas sources. More targeted issuance and
promotional campaign may be needed. Retail investors might be especially attracted to short-dated
government securities, should infrastructure for easy access and safe custody be established.
26.
The domestic debt market needs to be broadened with supply of new maturities. The volume o f
domestic bonds outstanding i s a small portion o f the total public debt. While T-bills are issued weekly in
three maturities (3, 6 and 12 months), there are only seven truly marketable T-bonds issued by the
government and i t s agencies, which have maturities o f 3,5,7 and 10 years. Mid-term maturities (i.e., 2 to
4 years) are scarce where HRK (instead o f Euro-denominated) T-bonds could be issued. In particular,
with the recent appreciation o f EUR and HRK, Croatia’s USD-denominated extemal debt can be
refinanced in the domestic market with significant capital gains. Domestic absorption capacity by
institutional investors would be sizable enough to support increased domestic borrowing in coming years.
27.
Theprimary market needs to be better organized and made more competitive. W h i l e T-bills are
auctioned weekly, T-bonds are issued with no fixed calendar, and those have been underwritten by
several leading banks based on requests for proposals. The participation in the T-bill auctions i s open to
anyone, including retail investors without eligibility to ensure prompt settlement o f winning bids. In
response to the emergence o f newly bred institutional investors, the primary market system would warrant
a substantial reconfiguration. Particularly, transparency in the primary market needs to be significantly
improved by regular auctions, elaboration and early publication o f the MoF’s annual issuance calendars.
Starting with T-bill auctions, the issuance system could be gradually automated. With better organization
and enhanced competition in the primary market, the yield i s expected to go down substantially.

Annex A 3
Page 11 o f 11

28.
Fragmentation in the secondary market needs to be carefully considered in organizing the
primary and the secondary market. The small, concentrated and conglomerated financial sector calls for
control of affiliated party transactions. The dual currency denomination in HRK and EUR also fragments
the market and yield curve. Most domestic T-bonds are currently denominated in EUR while T-bills are
in HRK. More HRK-denominated T-bonds may be introduced soon. The restriction on foreign
investment in the domestic bonds to control the money supply distorts yields on Croatian Eurobonds and
EUR-denominated domestic bonds. All these factors need to be considered carefully in organizing the
primary and the secondary markets.
29.
The rep0 market exists but needs to be further developed, while the swap market needs to be
investigated. A standardized master agreement covering both banks and non-bank financial institutions
does not exist, limiting the market t o a small number o f banks. It also leaves legal uncertainty in the
transactions. Depth and efficiency o f the currency and interest rate swap market need t o be investigated.
Transparency of the secondary market needs to be improved. Currently, only post-trade
30.
transaction information (i.e., price and volume) i s reported to Zagreb Stock Exchange. While this i s a
regulatory requirement, not every trade i s reported as there i s n o supervision conducted on compliance
with t h s rule. Further, t o provide more representative market price information, the Zagreb Stock
Exchange would calculate the average yield for each issue by collecting price quotation and trading data
from different sources: trading reports from buyers to the Zagreb Stock Exchange, clearinghouse
information, and average quotes from the market makers. Meanwhile, government oversight in the
secondary government securities market i s hardly tangible in Croatia. The Croatian Securities
Commission, the principal market watchdog, i s advised to pay more attention to the government
securities market.
3 1.
The settlement system should be enhanced to achieve simultaneous delivery versus payment.
The Central Depository Agency does not yet participate in the real time gross settlement system operated
by CNB and cannot provide simultaneous delivery versus payment settlement for large institutional bond
trades. On the other hand, CNB does not have any ownership stake in the Central Depository Agency.
The government could divest out o f the Central Depository Agency. Instead, CNB as an important user
o f the Central Depository Agency could be invited to be a minority stakeholder.

.

Annex A4
Page 1 o f 2

Croatia Country Assistance Strategy Consultations
June July 2004

-

Zagreb, Osijek, Knin, Split, Cakovec

A series o f five meetings was held with representatives fi-om local authorities, the business sector, and
civil society organizations to collect feedback on Croatia’s development priorities and challenges.
Meetings were held in the cities o f Zagreb, Osijek, Knin, Split, and Cakovec.
The following issues were identified as key challenges by participants:

Education- All participants highlighted education reform as the most important reform for Croatia.
The current education system at all levels i s inadequate and in need o f reform. I t was also felt that the
education system i s not as responsive to the market needs as it should be, malang the Croatian labor
force less competitive. Further, participants said that there i s a general lack o f understanding by
young people o f what i t means to be a market economy. Civic education was also discussed with
conclusion that Croatians are not adequately educated or prepared to take on an active role as citizens.
There i s a lack o f formal and informal education in “democratic culture.” Such an initiative would
also help the government carry out less popular reforms, as the public would be aware that they have
to undergo a period o f hardship for the greater good o f all in the future. Participants also felt that the
Croatian society i s closed to new ideas.
Public Administration and Judiciary - Participants expressed an acute lack o f confidence in the
judiciary system and complained about a non-functioningpublic administration (unclear regulations,
lack of education o f civil servants, inefficient implementation of laws). They felt the biggest
constraint to improvement was political resistance to reform. As a practical issue, backwardness o f
the administrative part o f the systems was pointed out (lack o f sufficient IT usage resulting in slow
administration of requests). Concerns were also voiced about control o f public pxpenditures (at the
central government and sub-national levels), suggesting the need for greater transparency and
accountability.
Labor Market - A number o f participants referred to the need to analyze and tackle the gray
economy, indicating that many o f the registered unemployed are active in the gray economy. Youth
organizations expressed their concern about the marginalization o f young people (15-30 years o f age)
in society, due to limited employment opportunities (new employees always need to have x number
o f years experience in a certain field), causing a high dependency syndrome and often leading to
depression and apathy.
Equitable Regional Development - Participants felt that promotion and support for equitable
regional development i s one o f the most important tasks for the government t o take on, as they felt the
economic disparities between the most developed regions and the .4reas of Special State Concern
were alarming. Further, they suggested that future planning and investment should be thought
through carefully and not carried out for the wrong reasons. In addition, migration from rural to
urban areas was identified as a major problem. Housing s t i l l appears as a prominent issue in some
Areas o f Special State Concern, so much so that housing shortages were flagged as one o f the main
problems in the Knin area. Decentralization was discussed in some detail. The biggest concern was
with the process o f decentralization itself, what i t means and entails, and whether many
municipalities, particularly those in Areas o f Special State Concern, will be able to sustain and
implement the process o f decentralization in terms o f financial and other resources. Participants felt
that there i s no clear national decentralization strategy, nor a plan for the structure o f the different

Annex A4
Page 2 o f 2
administrative bodies in a decentralized system. There i s lack o f partnership between regions and
municipalities, and demographic policies are not effective.
0

0

0

0

Social Welfare - A major concem was the status and situation o f single mothers and their children.
In addition, too little was being done by the government in terms o f provision o f necessary
infrastructure for victims of abuse (lack o f shelters, safe houses etc.). A similar situation pertains to
the provision o f assistance to the elderly and disabled. In addition, the participants felt that children,
being without social voice, were always the easiest state target for budget cuts and social services.
They saw an important role for the Bank to put pressure on the relevant institutions for greater
accountability as to how, where and on what state funds for social services are being spent.
Suggestions were made to introduce a scheme whereby recipients o f social benefits who are able to
work eam part of their benefits through community service. There seems to be strong support for
greaterprovision of services by NGOs.
Investment Climate - The need to complete the privatization process and to restructure or liquidate
loss-making, state-owned companies was highlighted. There was a strong view that such reform
should be implemented in parallel with adequate social measures. The issue o f ‘dead capital’ was
also discussed, referring specifically to the buildings and facilities belongmg to the Croatian Railways
and Ministry o f Defense which, i t was felt, should be converted to altemative use. Resolving
property and cadastre issues was also seen as a crucial problem, o n a national as well as regional and
municipal level, as unresolved property relations have negative effects o n investment. Some stressed
the need for adequate infrastructure (especially in war affected areas) and better provision o f support
to small businesses (lack o f agencies providing advisory services to small businesses such as
education, advice on investment, setting up companies, etc.). The need for a national development
strategy was stressed, as well as for reducing administrative barriers such as high S M E tax rates and
other required contributions. Limited access to credit, due t o collateral required by commercial banks
and government sponsored credit lines, was highlighted as another problem for SMEs, especially
start-ups.
Agriculture - Fragmentation of plots producing low-value agricultural products (e.g., growing c o m
instead o f flowers and paprika), the lack of privatization o f arable land and agro-kombinats, limited
access to credit, and lack of adequate market infrastructure for small agribusiness were highlighted
as the important challenges in the agncultural sector. There i s a need for training support to
farmers, with respect to both production and access t o EU pre-accession funds. In addition, mines
are still a major problem in some agricultural parts o f Croatia, notably Eastern Slavonia and Baranja.
Mindset -Discussion o f social welfare issues raised points about citizens’ dependency on the state
always to provide a safety net, leaving people incapable or less inclined to solve problems o n their
o w n or through other sources. The discussants felt that this i s more a problem o f culture and
mentality.

Annex A5
Page 1 o f 2

WBI Activities in Croatia

FY05 - FYO8
I n support of the Bank Group’s assistance strategy for Croatia, W B I programs would
contribute to capacity enhancement in the areas of public sector and governance, private
sector development, and social sustainability.
Public sector and governance: WBI would offer two regional programs, one on
Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations and Local Financial Management for E C A countries and the
other (subject to donor funding) on Legal and Judicial Reform Training for the Judiciary in
Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia. The objective o f the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Program
would be to expand the capacity o f central and subnational governments and key stakeholders for
undertaking intergovernmental fiscal and urban management reforms and to provide support
towards sub-national fiscal and political institutional development. It would focus on various
issues in fiscal decentralization reforms, intergovernmental fiscal design, and local financial
management. The planned Legal and Judicial Reform Training, aimed at civil society and
executive authorities as well as the judiciary, would aim to build capacity for a more efficient,
cost-effective accessible, and transparent system o f justice.
Private sector development: Croatia delegates would be invited t o a Cross-Regonal
E C A GDLN Policy Dialogue on Investment Climate Issues. I t i s part o f the policy dialogue
series for cross-regonal dissemination o f lessons and best practices in key dimensions o f
investment climate. EU candidate countries would learn from representatives o f EU8 countries
that would share their experience.
Social sustainability and growth: WBI support focuses on regonal follow-up activities
to the Roma conference, including policy dialogue, capacity building and regional training. The
main activities planned for FY05 include country-level activities related to the Decade o f Roma
Inclusion - including hosting a Young Roma Leaders reunion to discuss Roma participation in
the Decade and Education Fund, and supporting the launch o f the Decade in early 2005. Virtual
learning environments (VLE) would be supported to promote regional networking for ongoing
dialogues and online information exchanges, with special emphasis on education and gender
issues. WBI training programs on health sector reform would also support the social
sustainability and growth objectives o f the CAS. The ECA Regional Flagship Course on Health
Sector Reform would draw extensively from health sector reform experience o f E C A countries as
well as leaming experiences from the EU and other OECD countries. An advanced WBI flagship
course on poverty, equity and health for E C A region would also be offered t o high-level public
health officials and managers from the ECA region.
Partnerships: WBI activities are developed in collaboration with local and intemational
counterparts and donors, and coordinated with the Country Offices and relevant task teams in
ECA. The public sector and governance activities are supported by an Italian Trust Fund, and the
ECA Regional Flagship course on health sector reform i s being offered in partnership with
Semmelweis University in Budapest, Hungary. The Investment Climate program would be
developed in partnership with ECA GDLN. The Roma conference follow-up activities are done
in partnership with the Open Society Institute. Provided funding i s secured, the Legal and
Judicial Reform training for Croatia judiciary would be developed in collaboration with
International Development Law Organization, Rome.

Annex A5
Page 2 o f 2

WBI in Croatia

Ongoing and tentative future regional activities

A: Public sector, governance

Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations and Local Financial Management Course for E C A (Budapest,
participants from all ECA countries)
Legal and Judicial Reform training for Bulgaria, Romania, Croatia (pending funding, proposal to

B: Private sector development
E C A Cross-Regional GDLN Policy Dialogue on Investment Climate Issues (EU candidates and
EU8 countries)

C: Social sustainability and growth
Regional Flagship Course on Health Sector Reform for ECA
Advanced Flagship Course on Poverty, Equity, and Health for E C A
Roma Leadership Capacity Building (Serbia and Montenegro, Macedonia, Croatia, Bulgaria,
Romania, Hungary, Czech Republic, Slovalua)

Annex A6
Page 1 o f 5

IFC STRATEGY IN CROATIA
1.

IFC Activities to Date

As of September 2004, I F C cumulative business volume reached US$193 million, with an
additional US$48 million syndicated from partner banks, in nine individual projects, among
which:
0

0
0

0
0

0

Loan and equity investment in a paper mill plant aimed at rebuilding, modernizing and
helping the company to extend in the region;
Loan and quasi equity investment in a leading pharmaceutical enterprise;
Loan and equity investment to modernize a ship repairing facility;
Loan financing in a bank as a pre-privatization facility;
Loan financing to a foreign regional bank, to support i t s housing finance and S M E onlending;
Equity investment in a venture capital fund;
Loan financing to a discount store chain, operating deep discount food stores and
hypermarkets throughout Europe, to help the company expand into Croatia focusing on
second tier cities and relatively remote areas.

As of September 2004, the committed portfolio was US$132 million for i t s own account, 30
percent invested in the financial markets and 70 percent in general manufacturing, and US$26
million in syndicated loans. During the last four years, I F C has committed about US$30 million
annually. There i s an increased optimism about Croatia’s structural reform program and growth
prospects as the EU accession process i s gaining momentum. IFC has developed good country
knowledge and will capitalize on i t s experience to further support and facilitate private sector
development through i t s proactive and innovative role implementing new models and products.

2.

Impact o f IFC’s Investment

IFC has been successful in supporting several commercially productive enterprises in Croatia with
strong foreign exchange earnings and employment opportunities, as well as in developing the
financial sector. IFC has also been helping strategically important Croatian companies t o grow
into regional industry leaders. Some o f IFC’s successful projects are:
Bjelovarska Banka, a small regional bank, which was later merged into Erste &
Steiermarkwhe Bank. I F C financing helped the bank become one o f the few intermediaries
actively providing term finance to the SMEs and to companies operating in less developed
regions outside Zagreb;
Belisce, Croatia’s leading producer o f packagmg paper and corrugated boxes. IFC helped the
company to enhance i t s international competitiveness and increase its export, comply with
international environmental standards, and acquire 100 percent o f the shares in a cardboard
and packaging material company in neighboring Slovenia, creating the largest cardboard and
packaging materials maker in South Eastern Europe. T h i s was the first cross-border takeover
deal since the two countries gained independence in 1991, and the first one in the
papedpackaging industry in Southern Europe.
Pliva, the largest pharmaceutical company in Central and Eastern Europe. I F C has supported
the growth and strategic development o f the research and development infrastructure o f the
company. T h i s project had a broader positive impact on Croatian society through providing

Annex A6
Page 2 o f 5

0

3.

employment opportunities to the local scientists in their home country, and thus helping to
curb the high level o f “brain drain.”
Croatia Capital Partnership LP (CCP), a 10-year private-equity. IFC’s investment in CCP
increased the Fund’s profile, helped i t reach a critical mass size, and assisted i t s portfolio
companies t o have access to financing.

IFC Strategy

IFC has achieved very good results, especially when a good local partner i s selected. However,
slow privatization, competition with domestic banks and other IFIs, l o w lending margindprices
for debt financing, corruption, and corporate governance issues have been limiting factors for
IFC’s program in Croatia. T w o factors are expected to trigger a higher involvement o f IFC in
Croatia during the next three to four years: (i)
the government i s trying to push the envelope and
privatize more segments o f the economy, only about 60 percent o f w h c h i s currently in the hands
o f the private sector; and (ii)
the European Commission has recommended that the Council open
accession negotiations with Croatia, which i s expected to accelerate the pace of structural reforms
in Croatia during the medium term. In Croatia, IFC will follow the same broad strategc objective
as in Bulgaria and Romania to facilitate the integration into the EU, certainly considering the
differences and specifics o f each country.
3.1

Country Competitiveness

Croatia faces two challenges: the preparation for EU accession, and the shift from a domestic
demand-driven economy to a more balanced and, if possible, export-driven economy. These two
challenges are related and have to do with the ability o f the economy to compete o n international
markets. Croatian companies are less competitive than enterprises o f neighboring counties that
entered the EU o n M a y 2004, and much less competitive than enterprises in other EU counties.
With high wages and an awkward production structure, Croatia faces greater challenges. To help
Croatia meet these challenges and take advantage o f the opportunities that prospective EU
membership presents, i t i s important that IFC supports Croatian companies to become more
competitive in the regional market.

3.2

Corporate Sector

The privatization process in Croatia has been slow, i s s t i l l incomplete, and its impact has been
disappointing. The privatization strategy chosen in the 1990s, giving an overwhelming preference
to manager and employee buy-outs has not been conducive t o enterprise restructuring and has
discouraged foreign investment. Enterprises with high state ownership are mainly in shipbuilding,
tourism, agnculture (ugro-kombinats), metal-processing sectors, as w e l l as in utilities and
infrastructure. Many o f them are loss-making and heavily indebted and could not survive without
government direct subsidies.
The dominance of large enterprises in a non-competitive
environment has discouraged the emergence o f small and medium enterprises. State-owned
enterprises continue to claim and receive preferential treatment while generating large losses,
preventing the development o f a level-playing field for private investment, new firm entry, and
sustainable j o b creation. Recently, some parts o f the tourism sector, including hotels, have been
privatized, mostly on a fragmented basis. T h i s year the government i s accelerating the
privatization o f some large companies in the tourism, metal-processing sector and ugro-kombinats,
to be followed by privatization o f more complex enterprises.

Annex A6
Page 3 o f 5
IFC’s strategic objective i s to facilitate sustainable private sector development through
privatization and post-privatization support t o competitive and export-oriented companies,
strengthening corporate governance and adoption o f principles o f corporate behavior based o n best
principles and rules o f EU countries, development o f R&D capacity, and improvement o f access to
finance for SMEs. IFC will support privatization and post-privatization restructuring in key
sectors o f the country with a priority to manufacturing industries, tourism, agribusinesdfood
processing, utilities, and infrastructure.
Support for improving corporate governance,
environmental standards, and best practices are areas where I F C will continue to have an
important role to play in Croatia. IFC will combine financial support with technical assistance to
help domestic companies become more competitive. One o f IFC’s main priorities will be to
support strong local companies, such as food processing companies, to invest in neighboring
countries. Also, IFC will facilitate FDI in Croatia through debt and equity investment with
strategic partners, particularly when a green-field project i s involved.

3.3

Financial Sector

The banking sector has undergone a period o f restructuring and consolidation. The privatization
process i s well advanced with major banks sold to foreign banks that own 91 percent o f the
banlung sector. Bank privatizations and improved banking supervision helped to restore
confidence in the sector. As a result, the market i s seeing increased competition for products and
services, profitability i s improved, and deposits have grown, indicating increased confidence in the
market. Croatia’s banlung sector i s now large by East European standards with an asset/GDP ratio
among the highest in the region. Bank credit to private sector as a percentage o f GDP i s on a par
with some o f the new EU members. Also, asset per employee in Croatia i s significantly higher
compared to other countries in the region such as Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and
Montenegro, and FYR Macedonia.
However, other parts o f the financial system are less well developed: there i s a small insurance
sector, and securities markets are underdeveloped with only 66 companies traded on the Zagreb
stock exchange (at end-2002, the top three companies - Zagrebska Banka, PBZ, and Pliva represented over 60 percent o f the market capitalization). The introduction of pension system
reforms in 2002 brings the need for capital market development and with focus on domestic
corporate debt securities and equities. Croatia’s financial sector i s expected t o play a central role
in the process o f enterprise restructuring and investment.
Croatia has an investment grade rating with a positive outlook supported by progress on economic
stabilization, strengthening financial sector and external liquidity, prospects o f further structural
reforms, and future EU membership. Should I F C have a role in financial market development, it
has to be competitive, creative, and introduce new products. Consequently, I F C strategy i s t o
increase i t s activities primarily in the non-bank financial institutions with focus on housing
finance, insurance, securities markets and local bond market development, leasing as an
alternative source o f S M E funding, and venture capital funds. Through securitization and credit
enhancement, IFC will help establish linkages between the domestic mortgage market and
intemational investors. I F C will work both to help create enabling environments and to build
solid non-bank financial institutions to provide those services. The financial sector in Croatia i s
advanced enough to develop creditworthy institutions such as credit bureaus, which do exist in
some other countries in transition at the same level o f development as in Croatia.
In the banking sector, I F C will focus on structured finance transactions improving capacity o f
specific financial institutions and strengthening their SME finance capacity to profitably serve this
market segment. The growth o f SMEs in Croatia has been restricted by the limited availability o f

Annex A6
Page 4 o f 5
long-term funds and high-risk perception by the banking industry. Therefore, IFC will: (i)
support strengthening financial institutions oriented towards S M E lending activities; (ii)
assist in
developing n e w financial institutions and new products with domestic banks such as debt
financing for export increase or innovation, guaranty products, and specialized products needed to
assist privatization and support post-privatization o f enterprises; and (iii)
continue to provide
credit lines to local banks for on-lending to SMEs. IFC will work with domestic banks to support
Croatian companies that are ambitious to expand in other countries in the region. I F C i s exploring
possible opportunities for supporting the development o f energy efficiency finance in Croatia.
The country's highly competitive bankmg sector, including well developed mortgage lending
activities, as w e l l as the importance o f some highly energy intensive industries within the country's
economy, suggest a favorable environment for promoting energy efficiency finance. In addition,
IFC will continue the dialogue with the government and will consider helping it t o finish the
privatization o f two remaining state banks, the Postal bank (HPB) and Croatia banka, through
appropriate financing schemes.

3.4

Infrastructure

The government has limited resources to fund infrastructure projects and its fiscal space might
further shrink. Market oriented energy, transport, and communication would be crucial t o enhance
competitiveness and to foster integration with the European economy while opening vast
opportunities for private sector development and FDI. Promotion o f private sector participation in
infrastructure remains a challenge during the next CAS period. In close coordination with the
Bank, IFC will continue its efforts to promote private sector investments in infrastructure,
including the power, water supply, telecom, and transport (ports and airports) sectors.
Although commercial banks are already lending to the larger municipalities with low interest rates
and longer-term maturities, the World Bank Group will look for ways to support infrastructure
development without displacing them, for instance by helping local governments accessing the
debt market and by facilitating the issuance o f municipal bonds. The Municipal Fund, a joint IFC
- IBRD initiative mandated to provide municipal financing, can be instrumental in promoting
these investments in sectors such as water, wastewater, solid waste, transportation, etc. without
requiring a guarantee from the central government.

IFC, through its Balkans Infrastructure Development Facility (BIDFacility) will target Croatia as a
priority market in Southem Europe for investment in the municipal finance area. Solid waste
management and water treatment projects in tourist areas are a priority for the country. IFC will
work closely with the Croatian government on developing new infrastructure projects, structured
on pure commercial financing bases, with the objective to attract private sector financing through
PPP (Box 1).
Box 1. Balkan Infrastructure Development Facility

A poor and unreliable infrastructurecontinues to discourage pri\ ate investors and hinder economic growth in the Balkan
region. In turn, slower economic growth reduces the availability of government funds to improve infrastructure. To
break this cycle, IFC i s establishing the Balkans Infrastructure Development Facility in cooperation with USAID and
European donors. The facility uill help public sector entities IR the Southern Europe region (including Croatia) attract
private sector investments in infrastructure, focusing on the energy, transportation. and water and sanitation sectors. The
facility reflects the World Bank Group strategy to broaden engagement in these sectors to ensure efficient, affordable,
and sustainable delivery of infrastructureservices. The facility will help identify, develop, structure, and reach financial
closure on infrastructureprojects, so that committed public sector entities can engage more effectively with the private
sector and attract investments critical to the region's economic development. IFC w i l l launch the Facility in FY05.

Annex A 6
Page 5 o f 5

The efficient provision o f energy services i s important for promoting growth and enhancing
Croatia’s ability to compete effectively within the EU. Croatia has sought to achieve: (i)
attracting significant investment resources for the modernization o f the energy infrastructure; and
(ii)
creating a market based energy sector, with policies and regulatory framework compatible with
those in the European Union. A series o f energy laws were enacted in 2001 to launch such
reforms. While their implementation in the o i l and gas sector has been generally satisfactory,
progress in the power sector has been slower. The main power utility (HEP), a state-owned public
enterprise that carries out the activities o f generation, transmission and distribution o f electricity as
well as operation o f the national power, controls 95 percent o f the power market in Croatia.
According to the Athens Memorandum o f Understanding, South-East Europe countries, including
Croatia, have agreed to create by 2005 an open power market in the region. T h i s will call for the
restructuring o f HEP (a high-case trigger for this joint World BanMIFC CAS) by the unbundling
o f generation, transmission, and distribution, followed by establishment o f independent operators
and market liberalization. There may be scope for IFC engagement in the power sector once HEP
restructuring i s advanced.
IFC i s developing public-private partnership opportunity in Constanza-Pancevo-Omisalj-Trieste
o i l pipeline (CPOT). I t i s a cross-border oil transportation pipeline that i s expected to offer an
environmentally safe alternative route to bring high quality crude o i l from Central Asia and Russia
to Southern Europe, crossing Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, Croatia, and Slovenia, and
eventually to Austrian and German oil-pipeline networks. USTDA has financed a feasibility study
with a grant to the Croatian government on behalf o f Serbia and Montenegro and Romania. IFC i s
supporting the second phase o f the t e c h c a l assistance assignment following the requests o f the
three governments and the approval o f the feasibility study. It focuses on the predevelopment
strategy and coordination o f the early institutional efforts to prepare the legal framework and to
promote the project with potential investors and users.

3.5

Cross Border Integration-Regional Links

Croatia’s economy i s relatively large by regional standards, accounting for roughly half o f the
GDP o f the western Balkans. However, with GDP o f about US$30 billion, Croatia i s still a small
market. The private sector may play an important role in the economic development and crossborder integration o f Croatia in the region. During 1993-2001, Croatian enterprises invested
around US$l50 million or 27 percent o f total direct investments abroad in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, accounting for around 30 percent o f total FDI in this country. IFC strategy i s to
support dynamic companies in Croatia that seek to extend across borders. Implementing this
strategy, IFC has invested in a paper manufacturing facility and in a leading pharmaceutical
company. W h i l e the paper company has acquired a company in neighboring Slovenia, creating
the largest cardboard and packaging materials maker in southeastern Europe, the pharmaceutical
company i s loolung for opportunities to expand i t s operation in neighboring countries. Also,
IFC’s strategy i s to support regional infrastructure projects such as o i l pipeline, roads etc.

3.6

Health Sector

Improving the quality and access o f health care for public patients i s an important element o f the
government’s reform agenda in Croatia. Together with the government, IFC will assess
opportunities for providing advisory assistance in structuring and implementing public-private
partnerships to improve health care for public patients. T h i s could involve contracting by the
national health insurer and/or the Ministry o f Health with private providers to deliver specific
health care services (e.g., diagnostic imaging, radiotherapy, dialysis), to manage existing hospitals,
or to replace, modemize, or convert (e.g., from acute care to long-term care) health care facilities.

Annex B2
Page 1 o f 1

-

CAS Annex 8 2 Croatia
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Date 11/23/04

Indicator *
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a/
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a/, c/
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a/,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a/, dl
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a/, e/
Disbursement Ratio (%) "
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2005

2002

2003

2004

11
3.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
16.9

11
2.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
22.8

13
3.3
38.5
37.1
38.5
37.1
41.5

38.5
37.1
38.5
37.1
5.2

Yes
918
61

Yes
819
74

Yes
828
80

n/a
1004
71

13
3.5

-

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
13
11
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
722.6
576.5
15.4
9.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
11.1
14.9
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementationprogress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
This was at 1.Ipercent as of May 2004 and increased to 37 percent mainly due to the downgrading
of a large railway project; without the railway project this would be 17 percent. Policy reforms
affecting the performance of the railway project are included in the PAL and also form triggers
for the base and high cases.
f. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicatorsare for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3a
Page 1 o f 1

-

-

CAS Annex 33a IBRD/GEF Program Summary Croatia (BASE CASE)

-

FY 2005 FY 2008

Proposed IBRDlGEF Basecase Lending Program a'
Strategic Rewards
(HIM4

Implementation
Risks (HIMA)

44.0
40.0
150.0
85.0
319.0
TBD

H
H
H
H

M
H
H
M

H

L

30.0
30.0
150.0
210.0
TBD

H
H
H

H
L
H

H

L

Trade and Transport Integration
PAL 111 dl
Health Sector Development
Subtotal IBRD FY07
Sustainable Land Management (GEF)

50.0
150.0
75.0
275.0
TBD

H
H
H

L
M
H

H

L

Municipal Services
Environmental Management
Regional Economic Rehabilitation
Growth Policy Support
Subtotal IBRD FY08

50.0
60.0
50.0
100.0
260.0

H
H
H
H

M
M
M
M

Fiscalyear

Project ID

2005

Social and Economic Recovery
Science and Technology c/
PALIU
Education Sector Development
Subtotal IBRD FY05 el
Zagreb Municipal Nutrient Reduction (GEF)

2006

2007

2008

USS(M)

'

Social Protection
Agriculture Acquis Cohesion
PAL II
Subtotal IBRD FY06
Agricultural Pollution Control (GEF)

"

-

TOTAL IBRD FY 2005 2008

1,064.0

a/ Subject to mid-term review in 2006, to be reflected in CAS Progress Report.
b/ Other than the amounts of the PALSand Growth Policy Support loan and the overall FYO5-08 base case ceiling
of US$1.064 billion, the four-year lending program is subject to modification as projects are further developed
during the CAS period.
d In advanced stage of preparation due to carryover from prior years, resulting in higher than average commitments
in FY05.
d/ Development Policy Loan.
e/ FY05 commitments higher than average due to carry-over from prior years and the need to accelerate Education
operation in view of its high development policy priority.
f/ Includes follow-up to Rijeka Gateway Project.

Annex B3b
Page 1 of 1

-

-

CAS Annex B3b IBRDlGEF Program Summary Croatia (HIGH CASE)

-

PI 2005 FY 2008

Proposed IBRDlGEF High-Case Lending Program
Strategic Rewards
(H/M/L)

Implementation
Risks (HIMA)

44.0
40.0
150.0
110.0
344.0
TBD

H
H
H
H

M
H
H
M

H

L

Social Protection c/
Agriculture Acquis Cohesion
PAL II
Health Sector Development
Subtotal IBRD FY06
Agricultural Pollution Control (GEF)

30.0
30.0
200.0
100.0
360.0
TBD

H
H
H
H

H
L
H
H

H

L

Transport Sector Development e/
PAL 111
Regional Economic Rehabilitation
Environmental Management
Subtotal IBRD FY07
Sustainable Land Management (GEF)

100.0
200.0
50.0
60.0
410.0
TBD

H
H
H
H

H
M
M
M

H

L

Municipal Services
Growth Policy Support
Energy Sector Development
Coastal Cities Pollution Control APL II
Subtotal IBRD FY08

50.0
200.0
100.0
50.0
400.0

H
H
H
H

M
M
M
L

Fiscalyear

Project ID

2005

Social and Economic Recovery c/
Science and Technology
PAL I
Education Sector Development
Subtotal IBRD FY05
Zagreb Municipal Nutrient Reduction (GEF)

2006

US$(M) h/

'

2007

2008

'

'
-

TOTAL IBRD FY 2005 2008

1,514.0

Subject to mid-term review in 2006, to be reflected in CAS Progress Report.
Other than the amounts of the PALSand Growth Policy Support loan and the overall FYO5-08 high case
ceiling of US$1.514 billion, the four-year lending program is subject to modification as projects are further
developed during the CAS period.
In advanced stage of preparation.
Development Policy Loan.
includes Trade and Transport IntegrationIRijeka Gateway follow-up.

Annex B3c
Page 1 of I

-

-

CAS Annex B3c IBRDlGEF Program Summary Croatia (LOW CASE)

-

FY 2005 FY 2008

Proposed IBRD/GEF Low-Case Lending Program

''
Strategic Rewards
(H/M/L)

implementation Risks
(H/M/L)

44.0
40.0
84.0
TBD

H
H

M
L

H

L

Science and Technology cl
Agriculture Acquis Cohesion
Subtotal IBRD FY06
Agricultural Pollution Control (GEF)

40.0
30.0
70.0
TBD

H
H

H

H

L

Trade and Transport Integration d /
Environmental Management
Subtotal IBRD FY07
Sustainable Land Management (GEF)

50.0
30.0
80.0
TBD

H

L

H

L

Municipal Services
Regional Development
Subtotal IBRD FY08

50.0
30.0
80.0

H

M
M

Fiscalyear

Project ID

2005

Social and Economic Recovery c/
Education Sector Development
Subtotal IBRD FY05
Zagreb Municipal Nutrient Reduction (GEF)

2006

2007

2008

US$(M)

-

TOTAL IBRD FY 2005 2008

H

H

314.0

a/ Subject to mid-term review in 2006, to be reflected in CAS Progress Report.
bl Other than the amounts of the overall F'fO5-08 low case ceiling of US$314 million, the four-year lending
program is subject to modification as projects are further developed during the CAS period.
d In advanced stage of preparation.
d/ Includes follow-up to Rijeka Gateway project.

L

L

Annex B3d
Page 1 o f 1

CAS Annex B3d (IFC & MIGA) for Croatia

-

Croatia IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2002-2005
IFC approvals (LJS$m)

56.56

0.00

54.42

Sector (%)
Finance and Insurance
Industrial and Consumer Products
Pulp and Paper
Wholesale and Retail

Total

82

11

18
100

0

89
100

0

Investment instrument( %)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

94
6

100
0
0

0
100

0

100

32.26

166.97

146.13

0

-

Annex B4
Page 1 o f 1

CAS Annex B4 Summary of IBRD Nonlending Services = Croatia
Product
Recent completions u'
EUICEM
Health Financing
Municipal Capacity & Infrastructure Finance
Post-FSAP TA
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Underway d/
Reform and EU Accession Policy Notesl
Workshops e/
Fiduciary Country Systems Development
for EU Integration TNIFA"
Planned pl
Non-Bank Financial Institutions Integration TA
Regional Living Standards and Development
Public Finance Review
Fiduciary Country Systems Development
for EU Integration TNIFA'
Reform and EU Accession Policy Notesl
Workshops e/
Environmental Management Strategy
Country Economic Memorandum
Investment Climate Assessment
Fiduciary Country Systems Development
for EU Integration TNIFA
Reform and EU Accession Policy Notesl
Workshops
Reform and EU Accession Policy Notesl
Workshops
Other TBD

-

FY 2005 FY 2008

Completion FY

Cost (US$OOO)

03
03
03
03
04
04

613
41
47
39
79
108

GIDIB
GIDIB
G
GIB
GIDIB
GIDIB

KGIPS
KGlPS
KGIPS
KGIPS
KGlPS
KGlPS

05

200

GIDIBIPD

KGIPDIPS

05

100

GIDIB

KGIPS

05
06
06

35
250
250

GIB
GIDIBIPD
GlDlB

KGIPS
KGIPDIPS
KGlPS

06

100

GIDIB

KGIPS

06
06
07
07
07

200
145
250
120
60

GIDIBIPD
GlDlB
GIDIBIPD
GIDIWPD
GIDIB

KGIPDIPS
KGIPS
KGIPDIPS
KGIPDIPS
KGIPS

07

200

GIDIBIPD

KGIPDIPS

08
08

200

GIDIBIPD

KGIPDIPS

a/ Government (G), Donor (D), Bank (B), Public Dissemination (PD).

Audience

a/

Objective

bl Knowledge Generation (KG), Public Debate (PD), Problem-Solving (PS).
d The IMF recently completed ROSCs in banking supervision, payments system, and securities regulation.
dl Costs shown for these tasks are estimates.
e/ To assess impact of policy option implemented elsewhere (e.g., EU8, other MICs, and OECD countries) in policy
areas such as Public Administration Reform, Health, Railways, Public-Private Partnership for Municipal Services,
Judicial Reform, Cost of Doing Business, Education, Decentralization, Sources of Growth, Pensions, and
Youth Employment.
fl Institutional Fiduciary Assessments (IFAS) to focus in particular on the social sector and environment
ministries and agencies.
gl AAA needed in high case - Energy Sector Strategy for EU Integration and Infrastructure Sector Strategy for EU
Integration - will be launched only after assessing probability of high case.

b/

Annex B5
Page 1 o f 1
Annex 8 5

Croatia Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATiON
Totai popula~on.mayear (miliims)
GranUl rate (% mnud werage for peri
Urban population (% of popuiatlm)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionlincomegroup

Europe &
Central

Uppermlddle-

1970-75

4980.85

1995-2002

Asia

Income

45

47
05

4.5

472 9

05

-0.2

0.0

329.4
1.2

451

52 3

58.6

1.5

63.6
1.6

75.4

18

4.540
135

2,160

5,110

0
0

119

7.3

4.3

3.7

4.2
18.8

4.3

44

2.4

POVERTY
(% Of population)
National headcount index

Urban headcount Index
Rural headcwnt index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Cmsumer price index (1995-:loo)
Fwdpnceindex(1995=100)
INCOMEICONSUMPTIONDiSTRlBUTlON
Share of inccme or consumptm
Gini index

29.0

owes st quinble (% of i n m M consump
Highest quinbie (% of i n m e OT consum1

8.3
39 6

SOCIAL INDICATORS
PubUc expendlture
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Soda seamty and w a r e (% d GDP;
Net primary school enrollment rate
(x ofage smwl
Total

Male
Female

88

93

89

93
94

88

Access to an improved water swrca
(% ofpopulation)

Total
Urban
Rural

91
96

83

77

93

94

92

90

ImmunizaUonrate
(% ofcmdren ages 12-23 months)
Measles

95
95

DPT
Chiid malnutrition (% under 5 years)

1

Life expectancy at birth
fuearsl
Total
Male
Female
MortallIy
infant (per 1,OW live births)
Under5(perI,OWiivebirths)
Adult (15.59)
Maie (per 1.000 population)
Female (per 1,MO population)

70

71

74

69

73

67

67

70

E4

70

73

75

78

73

77

34

20

7

31

42

23

8

37

19
22

233
106

150
110

317
137

197
103

Annex B6
Page 1 o f 1

IO
31
I9

IO0
9
30

I00

60

61

100
8
SO

8
29
63

I00
8
28
61

100
8
28
54

ID0
8
2%
65

82
24
3
21

ai

15

16
28

24

6
25

72
28
4
25

n

4

78
28
4
24

47
$7

47
53

49
55

21
21

22
22

9

9
30
61

M

62

M

28

I

130
29
61

100
8
28
61

I00
8
21
65

I00
7

n

IO0
9
30
61

130
8
29
62

IO0
8
30
62

100
8
30
12

n

n

15

n

80

ai

26
81
3
23

SI
25
3
23

49

8

M

47
3

49
55

50

5s

52
56

46
53

41

48

55

55

24
25

23
22

22
24

25
16

25
7

20
21

19
21

19
21

21

33.966

35.1'

31.699

31.343

31.500

31.801

28
4
24

50
55

50
55

22
23

23
25

3
6

a

28
4
25

3
26

29

65

29
4
26

4
26

26
4
22

4
23

41
49

47
52

48

n

45
55

I5

15
I8

IS
0

19
22

19.863

22812

2451

12716

32812

31466

34.4 I6

3yS75

33.110

44
23.6

52
22 5

4
I2

31
35

40
36

45
96

45

40

45
14

5.0
12

5
S

30
-1 9

2a
35

25
22

25
I 6

4.
3
4

58
44
39

44
25
36

48
11
18

45

24
35

26
22

49
25
36

53
2.4

5
2

33
31
I 3

32
44
19

27
33
21

25
42

14.90
5.28
11.18
14.2c
-2.8
1.35
-2.05

15,538
6,630
11.316
14.288

16,093

14669
1,319

15,538
6.638
17,316
14.288

14159

1.203
-1.382

1.203
-1.062

11.17
1,600
1a m
I5SL
.l,687
1.223
-1.244

18.1
8.3
19.5
16.0
-1.3
1.2
8

14.438
14.719
5.801
5,738
11.098
16916
1 ~ 8 8 i4,cot
4477
-2.379
1.13
1.395
-1.678
-2,305

mm

I5,05I

17.269
7.685
la787
15.295

6.066
11.474
14,251
-2,261
1,103

-ws

15.m
4360
11,787
14.495
-2,051
1.203
.1,398

1.n
l.OC
1.95

1.431

2,228

23

836
415
-323

828
500
681
.I25
-30

830
500
236
-75
-193

-7 8
-6 3

-16
.54

.7 2
4 9

.6 5
-4 4

.8 7
-2 2

11
05

46

49

-4 8
45 4

4!
44t
Ul
07
50
15

38
Ul
UI

-I 5
42 5
42 5
01
36
2. I

16

20
-2 3
4 0

&lis

4,395
9.791
1.693
.1.613
632
1.39i

1,420
532
488
.69U

69
64
83

31
-0 I
31

51
48

8.663
4.567
9.599

9.634
4,759
10.808
4860
-1.174
966
726

lqnl

IAM
60 I

591
-230
505
1.308
-671

17?1
-936
883
461

1.085

mu

5.w

11061
14652
-2.434
1,076
1.920

-1.m

1.195
-1.955

6Sm
14098
14.601
.ZOO5
1.137
-1.604

lam

.im

.Mi

784
-265

-780

1.195
280
996
-624
-323

-IO 9
-8 4

7
7

-5 4
-6 0

-6 I
4 9

-5 4
41

4.2
I4 0

51
20 2

25
33

56
06

50
36

-6.4

4 4
U9
12 9
20

44
42

45
410
42 9

4m

.m

350
.I,lA
-582

-8 4
-10

4I
.2 5

49

4.7

-4 1
.I1 I

39
I O

48 3
48 2
01
a8
35

-a I

-5 9
46 1
414
-0 1
51
46

39 1
-I1
-6 6
46 6

416
29 I
19
47 2

IMP
16
81
42
38

ID71
82

2%
62
41

14

-569

.I213

45 1
46 3

-1 1
5 l
19

.1,35

m5

-5 0
.3 7

50
16

SO
16

56
06

60
50

83
3.6

-3 7
42 8
41 7
I 1
48
2.2

29
42 0

-2.0
41 0
39 2
I S
3 1
I d

4 0
442
42 7
16
5.6
22

-3 2
42 9
41 3

-17
42 0
402
19
46
17

ma

58 3
77
85
66 4

613
83
1 0
65 8

dl9
18

V8 9

98 9

PE 9
69
65
30
23

66
I1
I4
65

66 2
60
60
55 6

66 I

1m 3

100 6

9a

9%9

98 B

40

1
3

25
31

-1.537

-5 9
-4 6

646
96
29 3
62 7

65
70

1.131

-1.939
1.137

-5 4
49

63 8
45 7
22 9
52 9

6
9

-i.m
1,195
-1.955

7.037

Ian98
llwH

i a

4 4
-;
1

I 1
56
22

71
a7
22
29

1.165
200
186
-3l6
-193

43

-9D

8.

84
6.1
49

.IS18

45

1.835
280
429
-624
463

69
28

76

78
55 i

69
10
2s
21

1.018
200
881
458
-340

69

41 I

I O
38
I 8

80
90
66 0

98 9
11
10
14
20

15
10
22
a4

m5

7M
.265

65
70
25
33

16

4a
22

90

66 3

n

-321
458
-YO

2
3
4

4

11

41
31

1.431
l,OOS
534
-585
430

445
09

51
25

l.000

nu

56

I9

11

01

41
21

68 1
1.5
105
670

61
I
11
6

61 6
52
EO

68 8
66
1 0
68 4

m;

P8 9

91

98 9
65
E2
28
3i

98 9

98 9
71

11
61
2.5
21

671

69
85
2 1
24

1 1
70

6a I

85
27

20

30

11

71 3
66
70
693

98 9

15
82
30
24

Annex B7
Page 1 o f 1

-

Croatia Key Exposure Indicators
A""al

1999

2Mx)

11055

'ad debt -ee

ussm)"

(TDS)

kbIand debt scnice indieams
%)
TWKG~
TDOIGDP
TDWGS

CmcssrionaVTW

luttlm pamcn14'oDP

BRD exposure indicauxs (%)
IBRD DVpublir DS

Rcrared crcditor DWpublicDS W)'

Prclimioary
Sunained p o w ~ brccndo
2003
I2w4
2005
20%
2007

2001

2002

11317

15421

1

f

I

23570

Accdnated pmrh volario

2 W

2005

2006

26348

25762

25623

25129

26348

25862

2007

23823

I

2 W

Slow gpmlh rcmario
2005
2006
2007

23529

25988

2548&

25305

25493

1530

711

2467

3732

3165

3176

2383

2387

3165

2'76

1983

1887

3255

2712

3015

2873

1946

2339

2814

2%7

3314

3762

3465

3843

3486

3762

3415

3143

3386

3162

3765

3%3

3886

122 9
50.1
24.0
29
2.3

1276
640
27 0
29
26

117.5
57.0
29.2
2.7
28

145 9
61.6
28.1

1581
818
222

1696
805
24.2

164.1
785
21.5

1537
76.6
23 1

145.5
73 0
20.2

1696
80.1
242

1640
78.1
21 1

1394
701
21.9

1294
669
18.6

180.0
82.0
261

1732
81 3
25.6

166.4

1620

22

24

25

22

23

25

25

2.1

20

22

26

23

25

2.1

.

..

.

.

8.3

6.0

4.6

39

5.5

41

46

52

6.1

4.2

48

5.2

54

4.0

461

185

14.8

18 3

8.1

5.2
78

5.9

24.9

8.1

63

12

78

83

66

75

78

7.3

6.3

1.2

05

05

0.4

05

06

0.7

07

0.6

06

07

07

06

0.6

469

611

1294

1501

812

1048

1369

1688

418

3%
0

0

0

0

762

812

0

0

I

IN0

0

lo
0

I

0

0

07

812

0

07

869

0

h

Annex B8b
Page 1 o f 1

CAS Annex B8b (IFC) for Croatia

Croatia

Statement o f IFC's
As o f September 2004
(In U S Dollars Millions)

Held and Disbursed Portfolio

I

Held

FY Approval Company
1973/81/98/02Belisce
2002
Croatia Banka
Croatia Capital
1999
1999/02
E&S Bank
2001
Pliva
2000
Viktor Lenac
2004
Schuarz Group
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed

Loan Equity Quasi Partic

19.84
3.63
0
33
0
6
48.41

6.01
0
4.9
0
0
0
0

110.9

10.91

0
0
0
0
10
0.5
0

19.84
3.63
0
33
0
6
0

6.01
0
4.52
0
0
0
0

10.5 25.58

62.47

10.53

Approvals Pending Commitment
2002
2002
12004

Croatia Banka
ESBank Zagreb I1
Viktor Lenac Exp

!Total P e n d i m Commitment:

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
8.07
3.59
0
0
8.97
0
0
5.79

22.83

3.59

Loan Equity Quasi Partic

17.4
0
0
0
0
8.18
0

0

71

0
0
0
0
10
0
0

17.4
0
0
0
0
8.18
0

10 25.58

00
0
0

+

N

.o

c

Y

0

.

0

0

r

.

.

e

0

a2

e

.

C

0
*

.H

0
0

!5

3
M
.3
*

G

$
.9

aw

W

.

.

.

. .

. . . .

0

U
VJ

.

I
rn

Y

....
. . s.
.

I

. .

s

U

. a

a

a

$ a

a

. e

a

.

e

a

a

-0

a

.

0

0

.

. .
3 U .
i
3

0

.

.
. .

L
Eo
0

ova

Pv)

s-8

B . . . .

.

d

0

....
. .

0

.

0

0

0

