Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
the World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 29412-KZ

THE REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN

August 10,2004

Central Asia Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
of their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank

authorization.

The date of the last Country Assistance Strategy was February 8,2001

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(As of July 15,2004)

Currency Unit = Tenge
US$1= 135.37 Tenge

FISCAL YEAR

(January 1 to December 31)

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ABP
ADB
CAS
CEB
CEM
CIS
CPI
CPS
CY
EBRD
ECA
ESW
FDI
GDP
GEF
GOK
HBS
IDF
IFC
IBRD

Annual Business Plan
Asian Development Bank
Country Assistance Strategy
Eastern Europe and Baltics
Country Economic Memorandum
Commonwealth o f Independent
States
Consumer Price Index
Country Partnership Strategy
Calendar Year
European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development.
Europe and Central Asia
Economic and Sector Work
Foreign Direct Investment
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Government o f Kazakhstan
Household Budget Survey
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development

Vice President
Country Director
Country Manager
Team Leader(s)

IPSED
IsDB
JEW
MEBP

MIGA
MOF
MTFF
NFRK

NGOs
OSCE
PEIR
PEP
R&D
SEE
SOE
TCA
VAT
WBG
WTO

IBRD
Shigeo Katsu
Dennis de Tray
Loup Brefort
Pedro Rodriguez/Anthony Cholst

Indicative Plan o f Social and
Economic Development
Islamic Development Bank
Joint Economic Research Program
Ministry o f Economy and Budget
Planning
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Ministry o f Finance
Medium-Term Fiscal Framework
National Fund o f the Republic o f
Kazakhstan
Non-governmental Organizations
Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe
Public Expenditure and
Institutional Review
Private Enterprise Partnership/IFC
Research and Development
Southern Europe
State-owned Enterprise
Technical Cooperation Agreement
Value Added Tax
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization

IFC

Asaad Jabre

Khosrow Zamani
Gorton de Mond

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY .............................................................................

i

I.

THE COUNTRY CONTEXT.........................................................................................

1

I1. THEGOVERNMENT’S
DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM......................................................

4
4
6

I11.
LESSONS
FROM PASTWORLDBANKEXPERIENCE
...............................................
The Last CAS...............................................................................................................

6
6
7

THECOUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY.............................................................

8
8
9
10
11
12
12

Meeting These Objectives: The Four Pillars ..............................................................
Assessment ..................................................................................................................

Lessons Learned ..........................................................................................................

I V.

Overall Approach ....................................
...................................................................
Areas ofEngagement ..................................................................................................
Guidelines for Bank Involvement ..............................................................................
Partner Institutions ...................................................................................................
Central Asia Regional Strategy ................................................................................
Consultation Process ................................................................................................
~

V.

Risks ...........................................................................................................................
erenitworthiness .......................................................................................................

RISKS
AND CREDITWORTHINESS ............................................................................

13
13
14

CONCLUDING REMARKS
....................................................................................

15

V I.

Annexes

Annex 1: Kazakhstan Country Partnership Strategy .
Bank Engagement .......................
Annex 2: Selected Indicators o f Government’s Program Effectiveness ...........................
Annex 3: Millennium Development Goals in Kazakhstan ...............................................
Annex 4: Consultations with C i v i l Society.......................................................................

16
21
22
24

CPS Annex Tables
CPS Annex Table 1: Key Economic & Program Indicators .Change from Last CAS .... 28
CPS Annex Table 2: Kazakhstan at a Glance ................................................................... 29
CPS Annex Table 3: Selected Indicators o f Portfolio Performance .................................
31
CPS Annex Table 4: Kazakhstan Social Indicators .......................................................... 32
CPS Annex Table 5: Kazakhstan .Key Economic Indicators.......................................... 33
CPS Annex Table 6: Kazakhstan .K e y Exposure Indicators........................................... 36
38
CPS Annex Table 7: Status o f Bank Group Operations in Kazakhstan ...........................
CPS Annex Table 8: (IFC) for Kazakhstan ...................................................................... 38

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance o f t h e i r official duties I t s contents may n o t be otherwise disclosed
without W o r l d B a n k authorization .

.

_-

Text Tables, Figures, and Boxes
Table 1: Kazakhstan Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2004 ........................................
Table 2: Kazakhstan: Poverty Rates in 2002 ......................................................................

2
3

..

Figure 1:Progress in Transition. ..................................................................
2
Figure 2:Kazakhstan's Public Debt, Gross Reserves, and Assets in the National Fund.. .14
B o x 1: A Project Relationship - The Syr-Darya Project.. ....................................
7

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The W o r l d Bank Group greatly appreciates the collaboration and contributions o f the
Kazakhstan government in the preparation o f this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS),
particularly during the brainstorming session held last February in Geneva, Switzerland.
The contributions o f those consulted during t h i s process, which included academicians,
policy practitioners, and experts from the United States, Ireland, Poland, and the
Netherlands are acknowledged and appreciated. In Kazakhstan, the W o r l d Bank Group
consulted with representatives o f academic institutions, business associations, nongovernment organizations, the private sector and development partners.
Other contributors to the preparation o f this CPS include MessrsMmes: Ainoura
Alzhanova, Benoit Blarel, L i l i a Burunciuc, Gorton D e Mond, Is& Froumin, Irina
Galimova, Natalya Gosteva, Maurizio Guadagni, Elena Karaban, Johnathan Kamwala,
Henry Kerali, Motoo Konishi, Piotr Krzyzanowski, Valerian Khagay, Aitolkyn
Kourmanova, James Christopher Lovelace, A k i k o Maeda, Jessica Mott, Helga Muller,
Samuel Otoo, Aslan Sarinzhipov, Ilyas Sarsenov, Sarosh Sattar, M a d i Umbetaliyev, Tunc
Tahsin Uyanik, Nancy L. Vandycke, Katelijn Van den Berg, and Alfred J. Watkins who,
together with the Country Director, Country Manager, and CPS TTLs, comprise the core
team.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) has been developed in close
collaboration with the Government o f Kazakhstan to ensure that it responds to the
country’s emerging development objectives and to i t s rapidly changing economic and
social conditions. Financing will not be the primary relationship driver for this CPS.
Rather, the Bank will use i t s international knowledge and experience to help Kazakhstan
build a modern, rapidly growing and diverse economy that improves the welfare o f all i t s
citizens and especially the poor. This CPS builds o n and extends the flexible approaches
recently developed elsewhere in the Bank for other Middle-Income Countries.
1.

..

The strategy set out in the CPS takes as i t s starting point the country’s large and
growing energy income. Utilizing these funds effectively will challenge the country’s
macroeconomic management as w e l l as its implementation capacity. The CPS sets out a
program that will assist the Government in meeting these challenges in an environment
where the need for external financing is minimal.
11.

iii. The next phase o f the relationship between the Government and the Bank will
build o n the Joint Economic Research Program (JEW), an innovative approach to nonlending services under implementation for the past two years. The J E W i s cofinanced by

the Government and i t s content is agreed to annually in parallel with the Government’s
regular planning and budget cycle. This has ensured that the analytic and advisory
services provided are relevant to the country’s needs, enhance country ownership, and
give greater visibility to the Bank throughout the government.

The Government’s Program: Kazakhstan has set the following m a i n goals:
iv.
achieving international standards for public services and enterprises over the next decade
and a half, and increasing the competitiveness o f i t s tradable non-oil sectors. The
Government plans to accomplish these goals through four pillars: (I)managing the oil
windfall and improving public institutions and policies, (2) developing an appropriate
role for the government to foster competitiveness and facilitate business, (3) investing in
human capital and infrastructure, and (4) safeguarding the environment.
v.
The Partnership:The CPS i s grounded in the Bank’s recognition that it needs to
adapt its business model to Kazakhstan’s development agenda, and the Government’s
recognition that the Bank brings much more than financial resources to the table. The
CPS takes as i t s starting point the four pillars o f the Government’s strategy, outlines in
broad terms the Bank’s analytical and operational areas o f interest for the next year and
suggests areas o f possible future interventions. Details o f the Bank Group program in
Kazakhstan will be set out each year in an Annual Business Plan (ABP). The ABP will be
developed in parallel with the Government’s annual planning and budget processes to
ensure that the Bank is fully in step with Kazakhstan’s development agenda.
vi,.
World Bank Group Analytic Work: Based o n the positive experience o f the
past two years, Kazakhstan has requested that the JEW be extended for another three
years. For 2005, consultations carried out by the Ministry o f Economy and Budget
Planning with government agencies l e d to a request for studies o n poverty,
competitiveness, WTO accession, public expenditures and institutions, health, education,
transport, and environmental programs, as w e l l as work o n regional water-energy
arrangements. To supplement this program, The World Bank Institute (WBI) has been

Pane i i

Kazakhstan Country Partnership Stratem

providing support through workshops o n local government and competitiveness. The
International Finance Corporation (IFC)will continue to provide technical assistance o n
the development o f leasing and mortgage markets.

World Bank Group Operations: The Government recognizes that IBRD’s
involvement in project preparation and supervision can transfer knowledge and skills in
ways that a research program alone cannot accomplish. Accordingly, the F Y 0 5 ABP
includes four projects in agriculture, water management and environment that are
expected t o b e approved in the coming 18 months. Kazakhstan will also benefit from the
Central Asia regional program in HIV/AIDS. Areas o f fbture project development will be
discussed in the context o f the 2006 ABP.

vii.

...

viii.
Given the country’s resource position, substantial Government cofinancing will
be the rule for most projects. In keeping with the need for quick response, projects would
be designed for delivery within twelve months whenever possible. T o this end,
Kazakhstan has committed to simplify internal processes. As the Government’s fiduciary
systems are not yet consistent with international standards, the Bank’s procurement and
financial guidelines will continue to apply.

IFC will complement this program through ongoing support to the financial sector
xix.
for institution building and, when possible, with investments to promote the development
o f micro and small business enterprises, and larger investments in manufacturing,
construction materials, infrastructure, and the service sector. Technical assistance and
financing to support local suppliers o f goods and services to the rapidly growing o i l and
gas sector will be also considered.
x.
Guidelines for Engagement and Risk Management:The flexible nature o f the
CPS creates a need for clear guidelines as to when and where the Bank should be
engaged in Kazakhstan. Based o n Kazakhstan’s financial circumstances and its
defensible development agenda, the first basis for any engagement must be demand by
Kazakhstan. However, o n i t s side the Bank must ensure that i t s work in Kazakhstan
serves the institution’s broader goals and meets institutional standards. For this purpose,
management will regularly monitor both reforms and the environment into which Bank
resources are placed. The CPS includes a set o f indicators that will be used to assess
progress in k e y policy areas. The Bank will also regularly assess the extent t o which its
policy recommendations inform Government policy and whether Bank-financed projects
are being effectively implemented.

The CPS framework i s designed to remain in force until such time as i t is no
xi.
longer relevant. “Relevance” will be assessed against three criteria: the demand for the
Bank’s services; the Bank’s value-added to the development process; and, Kazakhstan’s
overall policy environment. Were the program to fall short in one or more o f these areas,
a new strategy would be prepared and presented t o the Board. To demonstrate the
fiamework’s continued relevance, Management will provide the Board with a brief
progress report every 2-3 years.
xii.

Board Members m a y wish to discuss the following aspects:
0

0

Does the CPS - including the JEW and the ABP - appropriately respond to
Kazakhstan’s needs, balancing flexibility with accountability?

A r e the suggested guidelines for engagement adequate?

Page 1

Kazakhstan Country Partnership Strategy

Republic of Kazakhstan
Country Partnership Strategy
1.
The last Country Strategy for Kazakhstan was presented to the Board o n February
8,2001. Prepared in the aftermath o f the regional financial crisis, the strategy rapidly
became outdated as o i l output and prices rose, growth took off, fiscal performance
improved, and foreign borrowing dramatically declined. A s a result, o f the twelve
envisaged operations, only three were processed. This Partnership Strategy is designed to
avoid the problems o f the last CAS by ensuring that the Bank’s program i s aligned with
the Government’s development agenda and also with its decision making process.
I.

THECOUNTRYCONTEXT

2.
Kazakhstan has made significant progress since the break-up of the Soviet
Union in i t s nation building efforts. I t has developed an active legislature, albeit with
limited political diversity, and an emerging judiciary system. At the same time, its
political institutions are still developing. Power rests mainly in the executive, and towards
the end o f the 1990s some c i v i l and political liberties were curtailed. These
developments, and a widespread perception o f corruption, have tarnished the country’s
strong economic reform record. Nevertheless, dialogue t o improve voice and
participation is ongoing, and the Government has indicated its intention to continue the
process o f democratization, decentralization, and the development o f c i v i l society
institutions. The upcoming Parliamentary elections in October will be a test o f this
1
process.

The Country’s recent economic performance has been impressive and i t s
3.
reform record i s among the best in the CIS. Growth has been buoyant at about 11
percent o n average since 2000, with income per capita expected to be above $2000 this
year, 65 percent higher than in 2000. Growth has been driven mainly-but not
exclusively-by o i l production and o i l prices. M a n y industries, including electricity,
food, construction, and banking, have rebounded strongly thanks to structural reforms,
economic stability and demand generated by o i l revenues. The country’s public and
private savings levels have increased steadily since 1998, providing the base for a
sovereign investment grade rating by two international rating agencies. Commercial bank
deposits have grown steadily, signaling public confidence in the financial sector and the
supervision authorities. Public debt i s low, and the bulk o f private debt is tied to FDI in
the o i l sector. FDI flows since 1999 have been significant (amounting t o 9 percent o f
GDP o n average), mostly to the o i l and other extractive sectors (Table 1).

4.
Kazakhstan has also achieved a great deal in terms of structural policy
reform in privatization, the financial sector, pensions, public resource management,
and the energy sector. The country’s economic activity over the past few years has been
driven almost exclusively by the private sector, with nearly three-quarters o f all
investment carried out by private companies. In 2001 the authorities established the
OSCE felt that the January and October 1999 elections fell short o f commitments. Since then, OSCE has
initiated a series of round tables to offer assistance in improving the electoral legislation in Kazakhstan, a
process that i s s t i l l under way. OSCE i s also actively contributing to the process o f improving media
legislation in Kazakhstan. (See: www,osce.org/almaty.)

Kazakhstan Countw Partnership Stratem

Pane 2

National Fund o f the Republic o f Kazakhstan, which has now accumulated nearly $4
billion in oil revenue savings. The fund has facilitated monetary and fiscal policy, and
represents an important step towards revenue transparency.2 The fund i s independently
audited and managed, and no expenditures out o f it have taken place to date.

(see Figure 1). Most o f the countries
that rank ahead o f Kazakhstan are to

1

3,50.

CEB

2

6.
Prospects f o r t h e f u t u r e a r e bright, but they depend on h o w w e l l t h e
Government manages o i l revenues. O i l production i s expected to double from 1 to 2
million barrels per day by the end o f this decade, and to continue to increase through

Kazakhstan participated in the June 2003 conference which issued the statement o f principles for the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, but has not yet developed a specific plan to follow up o n this.

2020.3 As history has shown, managing these flows presents the Government with a
number o f challenges. While real exchange rate appreciation will be unavoidable over the
medium term, appreciation would be accelerated if public and private spending out o f o i l
revenues creates excessive demand pressures, undermining the competitiveness o f nono i l tradable sectors. Exchange rate volatility driven by fluctuations in o i l prices and
public investments would be a further blow to development o f tradable sectors. In
addition to managing these macroeconomic pressures, the Government must balance
pressing development needs against limited implementation and absorptive capacities.

7.
Moreover, the time has come to spread the benefits of growth and oil
revenues throughout the population. A recent living standards survey indicates that for
a $4.30 purchasing power parity (PPP) poverty line, the 2002 poverty headcount was
about 35 percent (15.4 percent for a basic needs consumption basket), although many
people are at income levels just above these poverty lines. Pension and social protection
reforms, combined with continued growth in non-oil sectors and a fall in unemployment,
have reduced income poverty over the last few years, although at a slower pace than
might have been expected o n the basis o f international experience. However, non-income
dimensions o f poverty -- for example, overcrowded living conditions and educational
attainment -- affect an additional 28 percent o f the population.
Table 2: Kazakhstan: Poverty Rates in 2002
Poverty line

Basic needs

Poverty rate (YO)
Kazakhstan

15.4

$l.O75PPP/dayIcap.

0.2

$2.15PPPlday/cap.

3.5

$4.30PPPldaylcap.
35.1
Source: 2004 Poverty Assessments for Kazakhstan, W o r l d Bank.

Social indicators such as infant and maternal mortality are generally below
8.
those in other ECA countries, and vary greatly by oblast and income. H a l f o f the
young adults (25-29 year olds) have a secondary degree o r less, and 11 percent have
incomplete primary schooling. The quality o f social services and infrastructure (piped
water, sewerage, and primary medical services) i s w e l l below the country’s o w n
aspirations, especially in rural areas. Even in urban areas, the poorest households are
much less likely to be connected to central services and, when connected, to have less
reliable service than the better off. The country’s HIV/AIDS prevalence rate (less than
0.2 percent) is l o w in international terms but i s increasing. Kazakhstan also bears a TB
burden, with 50,000 cases o f active TB registered in 2001.
9.
Regional disparities within Kazakhstan in social outcomes are of great
concern and are not easily addressed. The challenge is one o f supplying services to a
relatively small population o f 15 m i l l i o n people dispersed over a territory roughly the size
o f India. The authorities must also deal with a legacy o f environmental liabilities,
Many factors can affect the amount of revenues accruing to the govemment, including projected profiles o f o i l output,
extraction and transportation costs, world prices, discount rates, and retums on altemative investments. Kazakhstan’s
output profile is determined mainly by three fields: Kashagan (operated by ENI), Tengiz (operated by ChevronTexaco), and Karachaganak (operated by British Gas and ENI).

Page
4

Kazakhstan County Partnership Stratem

including water contamination, radioactive materials, and desertification, many o f which
are located in the poorest areas o f the country.

10.
Kazakhstan’s prospects for meeting the Millennium Development Goals are
not encouraging. According to work done by the UNDP, overall poverty i s likely to
halve by 2015, but the targets for child mortality, maternal health, H I V / A I D S and access
to improved water sources are not likely to be reached by 2015, in part because o f
regional disparities and the challenge o f supplying services over such a vast territory (see
Annex 3).
11.

THEGOVERNMENT’S
DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM

Over the past several years the Government of Kazakhstan has created a
11.
vision for i t s future built around two key goals: to become a full member o f the global
economy through the adoption o f international standards for its productive, financial and
public sectors and to diversify the economy away from o i l and minerals.

12.
The elements of a program to achieve these goals were outlined and
reinforced in the President’s Address to the Nation in M a r c h 2004 and can be traced
back to earlier indicative plans.4 While early statements equated competitiveness and
diversification with “industrialization,” more recently the roles o f competition,
investment climate, institutions, human capital, basic infrastructure, and environment
have received increased emphasis.
Meeting These Objectives: The Four Pillars
T o reach these objectives, a four-pronged policy agenda i s being designed and
13.
implemented:

Pillar 1:Reducing losses in competitiveness

through prudent management of the o i l
windfall and increasedpublic sector efficiency.

The Government’s Medium-Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF), the three-year
14.
rolling plan approved with each annual budget, has focused o n the optimal size o f the
NFRK, the level of public spending and non-oil deficit, and ways to increase government
spending efficiency. One aspect o f this agenda i s the Government’s commitment to
increase transparency in o i l revenue management. The first step in this process was taken
in 2001 with the establishment o f the NFRK, whose parameters are currently being
reviewed. A s highlighted in the President’s address to the nation, there i s a strong
commitment to improve the professionalism o f government officials (building o n reforms
supported by the IBRD earlier), reduce corruption opportunities, and improve service
delivery.

See the address o f the President to the Kazak Nation: To a CompetitiveKazakhstan, a Competitive
Economy, and a CompetitiveNation, Astana, March 19, 2004; the Prime Minister’s main formal statement
last year (the Indicative Plan o f Social and Economic Development for 2004-2006); and earlier 10- and 20year indicative programs.

Kazakhstan Country Partnership Stratem

Paae 5

Pillar 2: Promoting competitiveness by strengthening the government's

identifi and reduce barriers to businesses and private investors.

capacity to

15.
T o ensure sustainable economic diversification, the Government i s committed to
maintaining its liberal trade stance and to measuring the success o f its non-oil companies
against their presence in world markets and their competitiveness relative t o imports.
WTO accession and greater regional cooperation, particularly in areas such as
infrastructure, customs and trade facilitation, are seen as vehicles to help Kazakhstan
firms link into global value chains.

A 2003-2015 Industrial Innovation Program, approved last summer, has been
16.
reinforced by a Small and Medium Enterprise Development Program. These programs
encourage investments in non-oil sectors by reducing licensing and inspections, fostering
greater linkages between the o i l and non-oil sectors, and providing assistance to meet
international standards and increase R&D. State institutions have been created to support
these objectives, including Innovation and Investment Funds, Marketing and Research
and Technology Transfer Centers, and the Kazakhstan Development Bank. In addition,
Rural Development and Food Security Programs focus o n enhancing rural productivity in
agricultural and non-agricultural activities, and o n helping farmers to introduce improved
food standards.

Pillar 3: Building thefoundation for future
capital and basic infrastructure.

competitiveness by investing in human

17.
Recently, consensus has been reached in the Government that t o achieve its longterm vision capital and labor productivity must be enhanced. The agenda i s ambitious. I t
aims first to maximize the transit potential in Kazakhstan and lower the cost o f moving
goods and services through the reform o f railways, road management, customs
administration, telecommunications and electricity markets. The agenda also includes the
modernization o f the health, water and sanitation, and education systems. A
comprehensive reform program for education has been prepared, and a similar program
for health i s expected in the near future.

Pillar 4: Ensuring future
mitigated

growth w i l l not harm the environment and past liabilities are

18.
Kazakhstan inherited significant environmental liabilities related to past military,
industrial and mining activities, land degradation and desertification, and water scarcity.
The National Environmental Action Plan for Sustainable Development prepared in 1999
sets out some remedial investments that are n o w being undertaken by the Government.
The authorities are reassessing and updating the environmental agenda t o prevent
additional environmental damage resulting f r o m the economic exploitation o f the
country's vast natural resources, continue to ameliorate past environmental damage, and
putting in place systems t o monitor the environmental impact o f f i t u r e investment and
growth (e.g. recasting national accounts). This will include introducing international
practices in establishing cost-effective and sustainable environmental remediation

strategies in k e y sectors and regions in Kazakhstan, addressing both technical as well as
institutional aspects.

Assessment
The Government has established an agenda for transitioning to a modern
19.
economy that deserves the support of the internationalcommunity. There i s a risk,
however, that the country’s o i l wealth will reduce incentives for reform and undermine
the sense o f urgency and political commitment needed to carry out this difficult agenda.
This risk i s underscored by an ongoing debate over the role o f the Government in a new
Kazakhstan between those who support free-market approaches and those who favor
various forms o f state intervention supported by growing budget resources.
T o mitigate these dangers and to increase the likelihood o f achieving its goals, the
20.
Government i s focusing on:
0

0

Institutional Implementation Capacity. The quality o f human resources at the
highest levels o f government, the central bank, and public enterprises is good.
However, capacity below these upper echelons, and in the line ministries and
local governments, essential ‘transmission belts’ for government policy, i s
generally recognized as weak. Moreover, competition from a thriving private
sector is draining the best skills away from the public sector.
Public Credibility. The Government’s ability t o implement policies has been
undermined by a perception o f widespread public sector corruption. This is
evidenced by the recent World Bank Client Survey and Bank ESW,’ which
identified corruption as among the most serious challenges facing the country.
Concerns are growing over the capacity to spend for good results, particularly in
areas where the policy framework is unclear and institutional capacity weak.

2 1.
An important element o f this agenda i s the devolution o f responsibilities to local
governments in a way that increases checks and balances and accountability. Also
important i s the strengthening o f public procurement, financial management, and public
investment preparation, management and evaluation. Further reforms are needed as well
in c i v i l service administration and in the legal framework and judiciary.

111.

LESSONS
FROM PAST WORLD BANKEXPERIENCE

The Last CAS
The last country strategy (FYO1-03) sought to extend gains made under
22.
previous strategies, but circumstances changed quickly after 2001. Rapid growth,
significant foreign investment, new o i l finds, rising o i l prices, and the resulting increases
in domestic savings and fiscal resources led the Government to reduce foreign borrowing.
The Bank’s traditional three-year CAS with its predetermined program o f Bank lending
could not keep pace with the speed o f change in Kazakhstan. As a result, only 3 o f the 12
’See World Bank Government and Service Delivery Survey, 2001 (Report No. 23257-KZ).

Page 7

Kazakhstan Countw Partnership Stratem

planned projects were implemented. Inaddition, three critical projects under
implementation - in health, judicial reform, and pensions - were closed early by the
Government due to weak ownership in the line ministries involved.
As a result, the Bank’s project portfolio fell from 13 projects at the beginning
23.
of the last CAS to 8 projects now, 5 of which are expected to close within the next 12
months (see CPS Annex Table 7). The Bank’s analytic work was also prepared with little
Government engagement, meaning that important studies on governance, growth and
mining had limited impact. Inan era in which the client’s own resources gave it a choice,
the Bank needed a new model o f engagement.
Lessons Learned
This CPS incorporates lessons from a wide range of reviews of the Bank’s
24.
Kazakhstan program, including Country Portfolio Performance Reviews (CPPRs), an
OED Country Assistance Evaluation, a Client Survey, and, most recently, a QAG review
of AAA.6The main findings o f these reviews are summarized below:
0

0

0

The Client Survey found that the Bank’s greatest value to Kazakhstan i s as a
knowledge provider and facilitator o f reform. But the recent QAG review o f ESW
indicated that long reports and lengthy
preparation periods did not work well. The
Box 1: A Project Relationship - The SyrDarya Project
technical quality o f recent reports was rated as
The investments in the Syr-Darya and
Satisfactory, but Impact as only Marginally
Northern Aral Sea project are complex, and
Satisfactory. The QAG review confirms that
World Bank involvement has clearly
unless the Bank can deliver first-quality
strengthened Kazakhstan’s ability to tap into
analytic work quickly, i t will be unable to
international best practices on construction
techniques.
engage the Government.
The CPPRs showed that project design and
implementationhave been significantly
delayed by the complex environment in
which government decisions are made. A
key constraint in moving forward o n the
CPPR agenda has been weak government
ownership o f Bank-financed projects, a
condition this partnership strategy should help
alleviate.

Discussions with the Government at the
highest levels, most recently at a two-day
brainstorming workshop in February 2004,
indicate that there remains a strong demand
for Bank support. W h i l e this demand relates
mainly to the Bank’s ability to provide advice,

However, the value-added
o f Bank
involvement lies not just with the financing,
design, and construction o f facilities. Rather,
the involvement o f the Bank Task Team and
international experts with the Government on
a regular and sustained basis over several
years has provided real time hydrology
analysis, strategic advice and international
perspectives o n a wide range o f age-old
problems: for example, on how to optimize
the operations o f dams or how to better
regulate the timing and storage o f water
flows to reduce flooding.
In addition, the non-financial contribution of
the World Bank has proven significant in
terms
of
implementation
capacity,
particularly in issues such as project
management, procurement, and evaluation.

See the 2001 CAS Evaluation Report (No. 21 862) and the 2002 Borrower’s Point o f View commissioned b y OED. A
recent QAG Country AAA assessment found that non-lending activities undertaken from 2000 to mid-2003 were
overall Marginally Satisfactory.

Pare 8

Kazakhstan Countrv Partnership Stratem

the Government also recognizes that, when buy-in has been strong, Bank projects
have provided knowledge transfer that goes well beyond what i s possible through
analytic work alone (see B o x 1).

IV.

THECOUNTRYPARTNERSHIPSTRATEGY

Overall Approach
Building on these lessons and in line with recommendationsfrom the Bank’s
25.
Middle Income Country Task Force, this CPS sets out a new approach for the
Bank’s engagement in Kazakhstan. This strategic framework accepts the Government’s
development agenda, focuses o n a flexible business model that is synchronized with the
Government’s o w n budget and decision making processes, outlines the broad areas in
which the Government has asked the Bank to provide support, and indicates the
instruments through which that support will be provided. An Annual.Business Plan will
be prepared each year with the Government detailing the Bank’s analytic and lending
operations for that year and identifying areas o f prospective engagement for future years.
A key driver of the approach will be the Joint Economic Research Program
26.
(JERP), an innovative mechanism for planning and financing AAA work. Begun two
years ago, the J E W i s an effort o n the part o f the Bank and the Government to strengthen
the impact o f Bank analytical work. Under the JERP, the Government and the Bank agree
to a program of AAA work to be co-financed by the Government and the Bank. Over the
first three years of the program, the Government’s financing share is programmed to rise
from 30 percent to 50 percent.

This formal co-financing arrangement, unique in the ECA Region and possibly in
27.
the Bank, brings benefits that go w e l l beyond funding. The JERP ensures that Bank
analytic work is aligned each year with Government priorities. Since the Government
approves and co-finances each piece o f analytical work, client ownership i s not an issue.
The JERP has also been effective in increasing the visibility o f the Bank beyond
individual line ministries and in ensuring that the Bank delivers quality products in a
timely manner. In an endorsement o f its value, the Government has requested that the
JERP be extended for three years beyond FY05 and possibly increased in size.
28.
While the J E W i s a key driver of the CPS, the Government recognizes
increasingly that the Bank’s involvement in project preparation and supervision can
transfer knowledge and skills in ways that the J E W alone cannot accomplish.
Accordingly, the Government and the Bank have agreed to include 4 projects in the FY05
business plan (see Annex 1). Future lending will depend o n developing a consensus
among the economic authorities, the line ministries and Parliament with respect to the
value-added o f implementing investments in partnership with the Bank.

29.

In line with the Government’s demands, projects in Kazakhstan will need t o be
designed for quick delivery, with preparation held to 12 months and implementation
timetables to three years whenever possible. For its part, Kazakhstan has made a
commitment to simplify intemal processes to speed up project approval and
implementation. Given the Government’s healthy fiscal and foreign reserve positions, w e

Page 9

Kazakhstan Country Partnershiu Strategy

anticipate significant Government co-financing for most projects. A s Kazakhstan’s
fiduciary systems are not yet consistent with intemational standards, the Bank’s
procurement and financial guidelines will continue to apply. Capacity building o n these
k e y areas o f public resource management will be provided through the J E W ’ S first pillar
and, if appropriate, through grants and lending.

The strategy’s success will need to be measured not in terms o f loans but in
30.
terms of the value-added that Bank interventionsbring to Kazakhstan’s
development agenda. A s the program i s demand driven, the Bank’s effectiveness will, in
the first instance, be measured by whether or not the Government remains interested in
continued involvement in the JERP and lending.
Areas o f Engagement
The authorities have requested that the World Bank remain engaged in each o f the
3 1.
four pillars o f the Government’s development strategy outlined in Section 11. I t has
signaled that i t expects the Bank to provide global knowledge and intemational
experience, t o give policy advice o n k e y strategic issues, to organize consensus building
activities and debates, and to provide implementation support and capacity building.
Details o f the FY05 program are in Annex 1, which also lists areas o f possible
engagement beyond FY05. Instruments and areas o f focus are outlined below.
Pillar 1 - Preventing loss o f competitiveness through appropriate macro and fiscal
management.
Instruments: M a i n l y analytic work, some lending possible, WBI involvement.
Areas of fucus: Management of the o i l windfalls (including transparency in o i l
revenues), and the Government’s MTFF, local and central governments capacity to
absorb public spending, and addressing various levels o f corruption.
FY05 ABP: Programmatic CEM, Programmatic PElR (JERP), Second Agricultural
post-privatization project, and Agricultural competitiveness project (lending).
Pillar 2 - Enhancing competitiveness and private business by building a supportive
role for the state.
Instruments: Analytic work, possibly some IBRD lending, main focus o f I F C
activities.
Areas of fucus: WTO accession and bilateral trade agreements, technology transfer
and commercialization o f research and development, S M E development and linkages,
and agricultural support policies (including quality and safety standards).
FY05 ABP: WTO Accession TA (JERP).
Pillar 3 - Building a foundation for competitiveness through strengthening human
resources and infrastructure.
Instruments: Analytic work and lending, some potential IFC involvement.
Areas of focus: Health (including HIV/ALDS), education, basic services (water, heat,
power), transport (including roads, and railway modernization).
FY05 ABP: Education sector strategy, Health sector strategy, Transport sector
strategy, Poverty Assessment Follow-up (JERP); Irrigation and drainage (lending)

Page I O
0

Kazakhstan County Partnership Stratem

Pillar 4 - Ensuring sustainable w o w t h through a focus o n the environment.

Instruments: Analytic work and lending.
Areas offocus: Consequences o f growth o n the environment, regional environmental

issues.

FY05 ABP: Environmental Strategy (JEW), Forestry and dry-land management.
These activities are expected to have a significant impact on the development
of Kazakhstan. Given the broad scope o f issues covered under the four pillars and the
fact that activities beyond FY05 cannot be detailed, a list o f very specific expected
outcomes i s not feasible. Rather, in a broad way, the impact o f the CPS o n the
development o f Kazakhstan will be measured in terms o f the priorities the authorities set
for their development agenda and the pace with which they increase government
implementation capacity. Within each o f the four pillars, the impact will be measured by
the degree to which the Bank promotes dialogue and debate around specific policy issues
(e.g. WTO accession, intergovernmental finance, education and health systems,
infrastructure maintenance, environmental management, etc.), addresses questions raised
by the Government in real time, provides advice based o n the most relevant international
experience and Bank’s understanding o f Kazakhstan’s circumstances, and provides handso n institutional support that i s embodied in our projects. The potential contribution o f the
WBG t o each specific pillar is outlined further in Annex 1.

32.

33.
Delivering this strategy will require the full participation of the W o r l d Bank
Group. In particular, WBI will help deliver the knowledge transfer agenda in support o f
the J E W . The International Finance Corporation (IFC) will contribute to the
Government’s second and third pillars, especially in support o f the growth o f financial
instruments for leasing and mortgages, technical assistance in corporate governance, and
the development o f micro and small business enterprises. I F C will also consider a project
to provide technical assistance and financing to local SMEs serving the rapidly growing
o i l and gas sector. The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), whose
outstanding portfolio in Kazakhstan consists o f three guarantee contracts (a US$8.3 net
exposure), will look for possible new operations in non-oil sectors.

Guidelines for Bank Involvement
34.
The flexible nature of the CPS creates a need for clear guidelines as to when
and where - and for how long - the Bank should be engaged in Kazakhstan. Based
o n Kazakhstan’s financial circumstances and its defensible development agenda, the first
basis for any engagement must be demand by Kazakhstan. However, o n its side, the Bank
must ensure that its work in Kazakhstan serves the institution’s broader goals and meets
institutional standards. For this purpose, management will regularly monitor both reforms
and the environment into which Bank resources are placed.
35.
The Bank will ensure that the environment into which Bank resources are
placed meets reasonable standards o f policy direction and governance. This will
require regular monitoring o f Kazakhstan’s overall reform efforts, particularly in areas
such as macroeconomic and fiscal management, and the various aspects that could
contribute to greater competitiveness, transparency, and governance. Outcomes (for

Page 11

Kazakhstan C o u n t q Partnership Strategv

example, in diversification, competitiveness, and poverty reduction) will also need to be
monitored. Annex 2 includes a set o f indicators, several generated by institutions other
than the W o r l d Bank, which will be used to assess progress in these areas. The number o f
these indicators has been intentionally kept small but their assessments will be checked
against other evidence to ensure robustness. CPS Annex Table 4 provides a benchmark
for social indicators.
36.
I n addition to monitoring performance indicators, the Bank will regularly
review the Government's follow-up to the recommendations made through analytic
work and in project preparation. The FY05 J E W i s expected to yield examples o f
h o w the Bank and the Government can monitor and benchmark Kazakhstan's progress
against other middle-income economies and EU countries, especially in areas such as
social services delivery and the environment. The implementation o f Bank projects will
also be closely monitored.

37.

The CPS framework i s designed to remain in force until such time as it i s n o
longer relevant. "Relevance" will be assessed against three criteria: the demand for the
Bank's services; the Bank's value-added t o the development process (as evidenced
through contributions set out in Para 32 and Annex 1); and, Kazakhstan's overall policy
environment (as evidenced by indicators noted in Para 35 and detailed in Annex 2). Were
the program to fall short in one or more o f these areas, a new strategy would be prepared
and presented t o the Board. T o demonstrate the framework's continued relevance,
Management will provide the Board with a brief progress report every 2-3 years.

Partner Institutions
38.
The W o r l d Bank i s working closely with other partner institutions, both
multilateral and bilateral. Many o f these institutions are struggling with the same
engagement issues that this CPS i s designed to address.

The IMF has no program in Kazakhstan given the country's strong
macroeconomic position. W e expect continued collaboration o n selected issues
including oil-revenue management and the financial sector.
The EBRD expects to remain engaged in the financial sector, oil, and
infrastructure, including supporting reform and privatization in k e y state-owned
enterprises through non-sovereign guarantee financing.
The Bank has collaborated with, and will continue to collaborate with ADB,
particularly in poverty monitoring, and in the health, education, and transport
sectors.
The Bank is also working with the UNDP, whose expertise o n the ground,
particularly in the areas o f poverty, environment, health and education, i s highly
relevant as i s evidenced by its recent assessment o f progress towards the
Millennium Development Goals (see Annex 3).
The EU has been working with the Bank o n such issues as WTO accession and
agriculture, and this relationship i s expected to continue.
DFID, USAID, CIDA, and the Netherlands have all begun t o phase out their
development assistance to Kazakhstan, except for that provided through regional

Pane 12

Kazakhstan Countw Partnership Stratem

programs. The United States still maintains a significant presence in support o f
k e y institutions (the Chamber o f Accounts, the Central Bank, and Parliament),
and the private sector (SMEs, standards). DFID i s engaged in efforts t o strengthen
revenue transparency in the extractive industries and will be supporting the
Bank’s regional program through the secondment o f a senior staff member to the
A l m a t y regional office.

Central Asia Regional Strategy

39.
Kazakhstan plays an important and positive role in many regional
cooperation bodies and fora. I t has taken a number o f concrete steps towards regional
cooperation, for example, applying the same railway tariffs to Kazakhstan and Kyrgyz
Republic enterprises, facilitating road transport o n the Bishkek-Almaty corridor,
compensating the Kyrgyz Republic for water service costs o n the transboundary Chui
River, supporting the creation o f a regional Water-Energy Consortium for the Syr-Darya
River.
40.
In support o f the regional agenda, the Bank has developed a Central Asia
Regional Framework that was circulated to the Board in March 2004.7 This Framework
discusses the constraints to and opportunities for greater regional cooperation and sets out
an agenda for the Bank’s work o n regional issues over the next three to four years. The
Government o f Kazakhstan’s request for the Bank to take a leadership role in regional
water and energy issues demonstrates the reinforcing roles o f the Bank’s regional agenda
and the Kazakhstan CPS.
Consultation Process

The consultation process with the Government began with a high-level
41.
meeting on Kazakhstan’s Development Agenda in Geneva in February 2004. The
meeting brought together key Kazakhstan counterparts and a group o f ex-practitioners

and academicians with experience relevant to Kazakhstan. The focus was o n
Kazakhstan’s challenges, but was also o n the role that the Bank could play in meeting
these challenges. This meeting was an essential step in building a partnership o f trust and
a shared vision of goals to be pursued.

42.
Outside of the Government, more than 70 representatives of NGOs, research
institutes, think tanks, and private sector companies from Almaty, Astana,
Shimkent, Taraz, Kzyl Orda, Atyrau, Karaganda, Ust-Kamenogorsk, and Kostanai
participated in discussions o f the Bank’s emerging strategy. These discussions were
supplemented by a web-based consultation process which yielded 400 responses. These
consultations indicated broad support for the proposed activities, and, in particular, for
those focused o n the environment, human development, and rural poverty. However, the
Bank’s record o n communication and NGO involvement were singled out as areas in
need o f improvement. In this regard, participants stressed the importance o f greater

’The World Bank Group in Central Asia
0130

- Regional Framework Paper, February

20,2004. SECM2004-

Pane 13

Kazakhstan County Partnership Strategy

involvement o f NGOs in all aspects o f our work. They also stressed the importance o f
creating simple ways o f monitoring the government’s performance in Bank-supported
activities and, more generally, the need to facilitate the flow o f information o n Bank and
government activities in Kazakhstan (see Annex 4).

v.

R I S K S AND CREDITWORTHINESS

Risks

43.

--

The strategy outlined in this document faces two broad sets of risks the
first associated with Kazakhstan’s dependence on oil revenues and the second
associated with the nature of the CPS. Risks associated with o i l dependency fall into
two groups: those having to do with macroeconomic management and those having to do
with behaviors and incentives. Risks associated with the strategy stem from the fact that it
represents a new business approach for the Bank in Kazakhstan.

With regard to macroeconomic risks, Kazakhstan i s better positioned than in
44.
the past to weather external shocks. Although the o i l industry i s at an early stage,

revenues are expected to continue to grow substantially for the next two decades, driven
mainly by increased production, which is set to double by 2012. Notwithstanding the
inherent volatility in world o i l prices, i t would take a substantial decline in w o r l d energy
prices from current and projected levels to fall below Kazakhstan’s marginal cost o f
production (about US$10 - 12 per barrel) and put serious pressure o n Kazakhstan’s
external and fiscal balances.* This assessment assumes that the record o f prudent
macroeconomic management, including management o f the National Fund and public
expenditures, continues into the future. Exchange rate appreciation will be difficult to
avoid giving the magnitude o f o i l revenues, posing a continuing challenge for the
authorities in their quest to achieve broad-based growth.

45.
Kazakhstan is also vulnerable to other external shocks beyond those associated
with the o i l sector. These include non-oil commodity shocks, climatic shocks affecting
the agricultural sector, and the risk o f major earthquakes to which the region as a whole i s

prone.

46.
The second major risk associated with Kazakhstan’s oil wealth i s the
temptation that wealth brings to substitute money for needed policy reform.
Experience in other resource rich countries demonstrates that too often their governments
try to circumvent difficult policy changes by direct, government-driven actions - for
example, subsidizing import-substitution industries rather than creating a competitive
business environment. History has demonstrated that these alternatives to good policies
are never sustainable and, as well, lead to destructive rent seeking and corruption. A k e y
to mitigating these risks is the Bank’s continued engagement in Kazakhstan, particularly
in helping to foster greater transparency and government effectiveness, and in improving
the business environment.
The pace of o i l revenue growth hinges crucially also on the o i l sector investment climate, the extent to
which technical challenges are overcome, and addressing transportation barriers as oil production increases.

The CPS represents a new approach for the Bank in Kazakhstan and as
such, it will challenge the institution to modify and adapt existing business
processes. Delivering o n the strategy’s main driver, the JEW, will require continued
adaptation o f standard AAA processes and products. This will mean continuing to
strengthen ties with the best international experts in and outside the Bank. It will mean

47.

delivering products that meet the Government’s needs and can be readily absorbed by the
Government. Based on the JEW’Spilot phase, there is good evidence that these risks can
be managed. For lending; the annual identification o f projects supported by Government
will be the best protection for ensuring ownership and moving these loans quickly
through the Government’s system. To deliver loans in step with Government needs will
require preparation times that can only come with simpler, more focused projects.

A final risk i s the reputation risk that the Bank may face in Kazakhstan. This
48.
program is predicated on the assumption that Kazakhstan continues to make progress in
areas critical to sustainable growth and poverty reduction - macro and fiscal
management, the business environment, governance, corruption, transparency. A
deterioration in government policies or performance in these areas would bring into
question the effectiveness o f Bank activities in Kazakhstan. To manage this risk, the
Bank will regularly monitor performance indicators in these areas and, in the event o f a
systemic deterioration o f the indicators, a CPS update with a revised program would be
prepared and discussed with the Board.
Creditworthiness

49.
Kazakhstan i s creditworthy for IBRD lending, and i s rated investment grade
by two out o f the three major commercial rating agencies. In terms o f public debt, the
country i s a net creditor to the rest o f the world (see Figure 2). Although the country’s
total external debt i s relatively high
Figure 2: Kazakhstan’s Public Debt, Gross Reserves, and
(77 percent o f GDP), h a l f o f that
Assets in the National Fund
_______
debt, and the bulk o f private debt,
i s accounted for by inter-company
30
~

“.i.r-

credits related to FDI in large o i l
field investments. International
% 2
0
7
of
debt held by the 12 national public
GD
enterprises, which include
telecommunications, railways, and
electricity transmission, as well as
the state o i l and gas company, is
1°i
0
moderate and i s mainly from
multilateral sources. Since the end
1999 2000
2001
2002
o f 2002, the Government has
observed a policy o f no explicit
Source: CPS Table Annex 5 and 6.
sovereign guarantees to state-owned
enterprises.
~

50.

-

NFRK &
Gross
ReseN es

-NFRK
assets

2003

20041

-External
Public
Debt

I n contrast to public debt, private sector external borrowing, while s t i l l
relatively low, i s on the rise. At 12 percent o f GDP, commercial banks’ external debt is
l o w but is growing rapidly. Although the capital adequacy ratio o f the banking system
seems comfortable, and new stricter loan classification and loan loss provision were

I
~

Pane I 5

Kazakhstan County Partnership Strategy

introduced in 2003, rapid credit growth and some banks’ unbalanced wholesale funding
warrants continued due diligence by both the monetary and banking supervision
authorities. To date, large private enterprises (for example, in copper, steel, grain, and
electricity generation) have financed investment through equity, retained eamings and
local borrowing and are, therefore, not significantly exposed t o extemal debt.
International borrowing by banks and enterprises will be monitored as part o f the annual
Debt Reporting System exercise.

The CPS does not propose a detailed lending program beyond FY05, but for
5 1.
purposes o f the Bank’s internal risk exposure analysis, a notional Bank lending
program in the range o f $100-150 million annually i s projected. At this level, total
extemal government debt i s expected to remain below 10 percent o f GDP over the
medium term and debt service to the World Bank i s expected to represent less than 1
percent o f export earnings. If there i s a demand for higher levels o f funding, the loan
package would include a creditworthiness review confirming that funding levels remain
within prudent levels.

VI.

CONCLUDINGREMARKS

52.
This CPS is designed to ensure strong Government ownership o f the Bank’s
program, to allow the Government and the Bank to adjust that program to changing
Government priorities and country circumstances, and thereby to maximize the Bank’s
contribution to Kazakhstan’s development. As w o u l d be the case for any new
relationship, the strategy will challenge both the Bank and the Government, but if it is
successful, it will create a real partnership in service to the people o f Kazakhstan.
James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:
Shengman Zhang
Washington, D.C.
August 10,2004

Peter L. Woicke

Paze I 6

Kazakhstan Country Partnership Stratew

Annex 1:Kazakhstan Country Partnership Strategy - Bank Engagement
Ongoing Activities
(FY04)

nstrument

FY05 Business Plan 1/

Pillar 1. Managing the Oil-Windfall!

I

Program Areas in Future
Expected Direct Contribution to Development in
Years
Kazakhstan
id Improving Public Sector Institutions
Management o f oil-windfalls
-oca1 governments
3ustoms

. CEM (continued)

. Programmatic CEM (Management of
oil windfalls and competitiveness)

ERP

I

'

1. Second agricultural post-

IBRD: none

. IFC: (1) SME facility (with EBRD);

.:

.............

~

.............

Ise.'v'"g.o".Sompanies .........

....................

"

.IBRD: WTO Accession TA

. WTO Accession

ERP

privatization support
(APPAP-2) -- FY05
Agricultural competitiveness
project
FY05
. IFC: Possible fund for SME

--

(2) Ispat-Kmet
SME Facility; (3)
Small Equity Fund (with ISDB)

.........

(continued)
IFC: (1)TA on mortgage; (2)
TA on leasing

Agriculture Competitiveness
(Fisheries and Livestock)

'

I

I

Pillar 3. Investing i n Hur

Control; (3) Road Transporf; (4)

........"............ .......
"

.......

"

Education sector study
Health sector strategy
Territorial development
(incl. Transport Sector Strategy
Programmatic Poverty
assessment(continued)

. Health Issues

'Pension Policy
' Programmatic Poverty Assessment

Pillar 4. Safegua

. IFC: none

............
Environment: Monitoring and
strategic assessment
. Regional watedenergy
consortium
'

I

le Government to Promote Competitiveness
4gricultural policies and
nstitutions
X&D, innovation, and
. Promote dialogue on productive vehicles to support
:ecbnology
economic diversification and promote R&D
:ommercialization
' Directly support the introduction o f innovative pilots to
support non-oil sectors, especially for the agricultural
3MEs development
relecommunications
sector
.Improve food standards and, with this, the potential of
Linkages for oil and non-oil
iectors (IFC and EBRD)
higher exports of agricultural products
. Facilitate WTO accession process
Financial sector deepening
easing, morgage, insurance,
:nsions)
1 Capital and Infrastructure

Imgation & Drainage 2 -- FYOl

. IFC: none

ERP

rransparency and corruption

I

'

ending

institutions, including local governments, procurement,

Programmatic PEIR

Pillar 2. Building an Appropriate Role o

t

' Promote dialogue on (1) efficient use o f oil revenues; (2)
optimal public spending paths; (3) prioritization ofpublic

See next page for a briefdescription.

Poverty assessments
Territorial development
Health system development
Education reform
Water supply
Railway reform
Road management
Irrigation and drainage 2

' Assist GOK in laying out strategic directions and
improvements to improve health and education systems
' Increase the level of understandingabout poverty
vulnerabilities, particularly across regions
' Assist GOK in defining best strategy to maximize the
Country's transit potential
' Assist with the creation o f mechanisms that can be used
for a steady improvement o f drinking water

ing the Environment
' Greater understanding o f the environmental impact of
future growth, and introduction o f key measurement
Forestry, dryland management
systems
Environment policy, and
Support remedialactions in selected areas (e.g., d q
institutions
lands/forestry) or regions (e.& Ust-Kamenogorsk)
Remediation
. Increase the value and sustainability o f environmental
resources such as forests, bodies o f water and rangelands

I

IERP -Joint Economic Research Program
CEM - Country Economic Memorandum (focused on competitiveness and management of oil sectors)
PEIR - Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
GEF -Global Environment Facility
ISDB - Islamic DevelopmentBank

.

Page
17

Kazakhstan Countiy Partnership StrateD

Brief Description o f Activities
1.

The FY05 Joint Economic and Research Program

Programmatic Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR): This will be a modular
(multi essay-style) work in areas to be selected from: (1) local governments capacity, and
intergovernmental fiscal relations; (2) hands-on advice and short assessment for procurement and
financial management; (3) second generation civil service reforms (e.g., non-wage
compensation); (4) targeted assessments o f efficiency o f some types o f spending or sub-spending;
(5) short and strategic analysis of government spending policies and priorities @e., by function
and by economic items); and (6) review o f the institutions o f public investment. Since the issues
are vast, a key objective of the PEIR will be to promote (and inform) domestic debate around
these issues.
Programmatic Country Economic Memorandum (CEM):The C E M began in FY04 and has
focused on: (1) overall preconditions to improve the competitiveness o f non-oil sectors; (2)
optimal management o f o i l windfalls; and (3) win-win ways to promote greater linkages between
o i l and non-oil sectors. The C E M has aimed at promoting domestic debate about issues o f
diversification and competitiveness, and at providing answers to specific queries from the
Government based on best international experience. To achieve these goals, i t has followed a
multi-output approach including organizing seminars (with WBI support) and training sessions,
preparing short-policy notes and in-depthpolicy reports, and providing comments to government
programs.
Technical Assistance on WTO Accession: This work began in FY04 and has focused on three
areas: (1) assessment o f the overall strategy; (2) telecommunications sector offer; and (3)
transport sector offer. The approach followed has been similar to that o f the Country Economic
Memorandum.
Health Sector Reform: will build o n a narrow activity that started in FY04, and aims at providing
direct support to the formulation o f the health reform program in areas such as: (1) an initial
evaluation o f the productivity and cost-effectiveness o f the existing health care system by main
functions (preventive and primary care, public health, hospitals, pharmaceuticals) and selected
programs (e.g., HIV/AIDS control, management o f chronic diseases); and (2) an outline o f the
applicability o f the principles o f the pooling o f resources and the oblast-level Single Payer
System for Kazakhstan, and the key institutional steps to be taken at the Republican and Oblast
levels for this implementation.
Education Sector Reform: will aim at assisting the Ministry o f Education to elaborate key
implementation issues o f their Education Strategy: (1) financing mechanisms for the school sector
(e.g., capitation principle and equality considerations); (2) elements for costing key educational
inputs (teachers, textbooks); and (3) an outline o f institutional mechanisms to support equal
access to education, particularly in rural areas.
Territorial Development Program: will produce (on the basis o f twinning local and foreign
expertise) background Reports for the Territorial Development Program that would outline ways
to maximize the transit potential o f Kazakhstan (for transport and energy corridors) and to ensure
appropriate multimode linkages between the various producing centers in the north, south, east
and west parts o f the country. The work will start with a Transport Sector Note focusing o n road,
rail, and air.

Page I 8

Kazakhstan County Partnership Strategy

Poverty Assessment: This i s a follow up o f a larger piece prepared in FY04 (and distributed to the
Board jointly with the CPS), focusing on: (1) a closer look at the relationship between growth,
income-inequality and poverty; (2) continued capacity building efforts on poverty monitoring;
and (3) follow-up assessments as may be appropriate (e.g., labor market issues).
Water and Energy Issues: will aim to assess the impact on Kazakhstan o f the various options for
improving regional cooperation in the Syr-Darya Basin. This activity will also provide support to
the creation o f a Water-Energy consortium.
Environmental Control and Strategic Assessment: will cover mainly “industrial” pollution, but
will possibly extend to “green” landwater degradation issues. The ”industrial” or ”brown” part
could cover: (1) assistance in the reevaluation o f GDP and GDP growth figures to take into
account environmental liabilities created by industrial growth; (2) policy measures and incentives
to address new contamination; and (3) an assessment o f key industries or hotspots and a
suggested set o f remedial and preventive measures.

2. Projects Agreed for FY05 and FY06
i.
Agricultural Post-Privatization Assistance Program 2 (APPAP-2) (FY05). This i s the
second phase o f a three-phase, 10-year Adaptable Program Lending program. The objectives are
to: (1) maintain the policy framework for the development o f private rural enterprises and the
strengthening o f the market economy; (2) improve the f l o w o f information, advice and training to
newly emerging rural enterprises; (3) support the development o f rural financial markets and
improve the access o f rural enterprises to commercial financial services; and (4) introduce further
legal and institutional reforms to improve the rural financial system and strengthen bankruptcy
procedures.
ii.
Agriculture Competitiveness (FY05). The project’s objective i s to increase the
competitiveness o f the agricultural sector in Kazakhstan by: (1) facilitating access to markets by
improving the quality and safety o f agricultural products, facilitating access to information, and
improving market efficiency; and (2) increasing the quality, quantity, and relevance o f public and
private investments in applied agricultural research and knowledge transfer. The Project will
consist o f four components: (1) Quality and Safety Management o f Agricultural Products; (2)
agricultural marketing; (3) applied agricultural research and extension, and (4) institutional
development.

iii.

Forest Protection and Reforestation Project (FYO6). The project objective i s to develop
cost effective and sustainable environmental rehabilitation and management o f forestlands and
associated rangelands, with a focus on the Irtysh pine forest, the dry Aral seabed, and saxaul
rangelands. The objective i s both local and global in nature. The project would include: (a)
rehabilitation and effective management o f 650,000 ha o f damaged Irtyshpine forest in the
northeast (Pavlodar and East-Kazakhstan Oblasts), including replanting o f some 48,000 ha; and
(b) planting o f 59,000 ha o f dry Aral seabed and rehabilitation o f 6,000 ha o f saxaul rangelands
(Kyzyl-Orda Oblast); and (c) capacity building o f the Forest and Hunting Committee and
associated organizations (e.g., mapping, planning, monitoring, policy analysis, human resource
development, and financial management). The project i s intended to reduce or prevent land
degradation from wind erosion, wind-blown pollution, and loss o f tree cover. Benefits will
include improved air quality and associated health enhancement, increased recreational and
amenity values, as well as the wood and fodder products themselves. The project will not only
address land degradation, but also establish revised arrangements for flexible, performance based
budgeting and contracting.

Pane 19

Kazakhstan Country Partnershiu Strategy

iv.
Irrigation and Drainage Improvements 2 (FY06). The project’s main objectives
would be to: (1) promote sustainable irrigated agricultural production and increase employment
and incomes by improving irrigation and drainage systems, water management, and operations
and maintenance with the enhanced participation o f users through water users’ associations; (2)
introduce improved agricultural practices and farmers’ information services; and (3) strengthen
irrigation, drainage, agriculture and environmental services. The project would cover the
rehabilitation o f irrigation and drainage systems over an area o f about 150,000 ha. The preference
would be given to covering more areas in the southern Oblasts where the cultivation o f h g h value
crops such as cotton i s possible, the investment would benefit a large population and the
rehabilitation costs are relatively lower At this stage i t i s estimated that about 100,000 to 130,000
ha would be in South Kazakhstan, covering the rehabilitation o f the Kzylkum Massif, remaining
un-rehabilitated areas in the Maktaral district, and Kzylorda Oblasts. The rehabilitation o f
Kzylkum Massif, considered a high priority investment by the Government, would be included as
the f i r s t large investment under the project. The rehabilitation o f both traditional surface irrigation
and drainage systems, as well as modem irrigation systems such as sprinklers would be included
in the project. The estimated cost o f the project i s more than US$300 million.

3. Selected Sample of Projects under Discussion9
Ust-KamenogorstEnvironment Remediation Project (FY06). The development
objectives o f the Project are: (i)
improve the quality o f water supply for population and industry
in Ust-Kamenogorsk area; (ii)
safeguard the Irtysh River Basin from toxic metal waste pollution;
(iii)
involve large industrial enterprises in the resolution o f the priority environmental problems in
this region; and (iv) strengthen the capacity o f environmental authorities to manage pollution
issues.

V.

Municipal Water Supply Project. This project suggests creation o f a special “Fund” for
water and wastewater sector development. Given the magnitude o f the problems o f providing safe
and good quality water supply in urban areas in Kazakhstan, a project-by-project (i.e. vodokanalby-vodokanal) approach may not address deficiencies in service provision in a rapid manner.
Creation f a “Fund” would be a good solution for Kazakhstan to implement a sector-wide longt e r m rehabilitation and development approach.

vi.

Custom Modernization: Carrying out a systematic reform and modernization o f the
vii.
customs administration o f Kazakhstan, with a view to: (a) promote internationally acceptable
practices for processing o f international trade flows by Customs, so as to further integrate
Kazakhstan into the world trading community, improve the investment climate, and secure the
benefits from foreign and domestic investments in the economy; and (b) increase taxpayer
compliance with the Customs Code and ensure uniformity in i t s application, to support macroeconomic stability and increase transparency, timely transfer o f collected revenues to the Federal
budget, and equity and predictability in customs operations.
Economic Diversification and Technology Commercialization: the objective o f the
vii.
project are to (1) Promote small and medium scale enterprises through supply chains around the
o i l sector and other means; (2) Develop the national capacity in metrology, standards, testing and
quality to ensure facilitate Kazakh f i r m s exporting o f manufactured goods to (OECD) countries
and the revamping o f metrology services; and (3) Promote the commercialization o f Research and

Decision expected in the next 6 to 12 months to proceed or not with their inclusion in an amended FY05
business plan or in the FY06 business plan. Follow up projects (e.g., agriculture and electricity) would also
be considered, as would projects following up on J E W funded activities (Health, Education).

Page 20

Kazakhstan Countw Partnership Strategy

Development, which i s needed to convert scientific research into wealth and increase the number
o f “bankable deals.”

viii.

Modernization of Government Institutions: The project will build on past and ongoing
efforts to modernize the state apparatus by supporting: (1) elimination o f unnecessary
bureaucratic procedures (e.g., licensing, inspections), and the development o f monitoring systems
to assess red tape and corruption; (2) improve a selected set o f government services (including
through the design and implementation o f appropriate e-government pilots, and the facilitation o f
international accreditation for institutions servicing households or SMEs); and (3) programs to
strengthen local government’s capacity to undertake greater responsibilities in key service
delivery.
Railways Program Implementation Support: The project would support the Government
xix.
to achieve: (1) the remaining elements o f the restructuring plan for KTZ, particularly divestiture
o f the remaining social and non-core railway assets, and the creation o f competitive railway
supply markets, local railway services, and passenger services, and (2) improvements in the
condition o f the railway infrastructure and rolling stock, and thereby improve the efficiency and
quality o f service offered by KTZ and its subsidiaries.
Road Management Modernization: Supporting the Committee for Roads and
xx.
Infrastructure Development within the Ministry o f Transport and Communications to: (i)
improve
i t s capacity and modernize i t s system o f road management; (ii)
prepare a prioritized road
rehabilitation program, (iii)
rehabilitate selected main roads that form parts o f major transit
corridors for regional trade; and (i)
develop local capacity for road construction and maintenance.
The main outcomes would be improvement in the capacity and efficiency o f road management,
improvement o f the road network condition through rehabilitation and better maintenance, and
increase in local capacity for execution o f road works.

Kazakhstan Countv Partnership Stratem

Pane 21

Annex 2: Selected Indicators of the Government's Program Effectiveness
Indicator
1. Economic Management
Non-oil exports ($ growth)
Government savings rate a
Investment Rating:
Moody's
S&P
Fitch
2. Poverty
Headcount ($4.3 PPPIday)
($2.14 PPPIday)
Basic needs WB meth.
3. Competitiveness
EBRD Transition index

Kazakhstan

Regional
Benchmark

World
Benchmark

6.2% avg 2001-03
5% o f GDP in 2002

9.5% (Russia)
4% (Avg. Rus & Aze.)

n.a.
4.1%

Baa3 (2004)
BBB- (2004)
BB+

Baa3 (Russia)
BB+ (Russia)
BB+ (Russia)

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

35.0% in 2002
3.5% in 2002

33.0% (Russia)
6.3% (Russia)
19.6% (Russia)

n.a.

2.9 (2003)

2.5 (CIS), 2.8 (SEE),
3.6 (CEB)

2.4 (ECA)

7.0%
57.2%
4.0%

8.2%(CIS)
43.9%(CIS)
2.2% (CIS)

11.8 (ECA)
47.5 (ECA)
1.4 (ECA)

2.4
21.6
24.2
10.8

2.4 (CIS)
21.7 (CIS)
25.4 (CIS)
16.8 (CIS)

3.8 (L-MICs)
41.5 (MICs)
40.5 (MICs)
39.9 (MICs)

;
Business environment ':
o Regulation '
o Perception '
o Competition '
4. Governance
Corruption perception
Government Efficiency e
Regulatory Quality e
Control o f Corruption e

SEE: Southem Europe; CEB: Central and Eastem Europe and Baltics.
From World Bank, FY04 Unified Survey. See CPS Annex Table 5 (B6-4) for key parameters o f fiscal policy in an oil
rich economy, such as the non-oil fiscal deficit (as a share o f non-oil GDP), and the real growth o f public spending.
Source: EBRD Transition Reports. The index ranges from 1 (worse) to 4 + (best), and reflects the assessments made
by EBRD's Office o f the Chief Economist based on a large set o f numerical and qualitative indicators.
Source: BEEPS I 1 (EBRD and World Bank). T h e indicators are calculated based on the results o f the Business
Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS) 11. BEEPS is a survey o f managers and owners o f firms
across the countries o f Eastem Europe, the former Soviet Union, and Turkey designed to generate comparative
measurements o f the quality o f govemance, the investment climate and the competitive environment, which can then be
related to different characteristics o f the firm and to firm performance. T h e indicator on business regulation shows the
average percentage o f those business respondents, who strongly agree that information on the laws and regulations
affecting their firms is easy to obtain, and that interpretations o f the laws and regulations affecting their f i r m s are
consistent and predictable. The indicator on perceptions o f business environment shows the average percentage o f those
business respondents, who do not consider, to any extent, the following factors as an obstacle to their firms' operation
and growth: access to financing, cost o f financing, telecommunications, electricity, transportation, tax administration,
customs and trade regulation, skills and education o f workers. The competition and concentration indicator shows the
percentage o f those respondents, who face n o competitors in the domestic market.
These indicators w i l l not be available annually and, thus, may be omitted some years.
Source: Transparency International (10 - highly clean and 0 highly corrupt)
e Govemance Research Country Indicator Snapshot 2002: World Bank Govemance Indicators: 1996-2002 (Percentile
Rank 0-100). These indicators will not be available annually and, thus, may be omitted some years.
Average savings rates for a sample o f resource abundant countries (Venezuela, Mexico, Azerbaijan, Russia, Iran,
Malaysia, Indonesia, Nig, and Botswana.
a

-

Pane 24

Kazakhstan CountT Partnership Stratep

Annex 4: Consultationswith Civil Society
The Bank h e l d three workshops t o obtain feedback o n the Bank's proposed program in
Kazakhstan, in Almaty and Astana during the first week o f June 2004, with about 70
participants in total from NGOs, think tanks and private sector representatives.
Participants were broadly supportive o f the four pillars within which the Bank and the
Government proposed to operate, and encouraged the Bank to deepen its activities in
Kazakhstan. At the same time, they stressed that the Bank should take environmental
concerns into account in all pillars, that social concerns should be given as much
attention as commercial ones, and that increasing the f l o w o f information and working
more closely with NGOs and business representatives, should be made a top priority.
Some o f the particular issues discussed are as follows:

'

Involve C i v i l Society and Business Groups. Participants stressed the need to build a tripartite partnership in development (government, c i v i l society, and the private sector), and
to involve the public more in decision-making. They particularly encouraged the Bank to
involve c i v i l society, business groups and project beneficiaries in all parts o f the project
cycle - design, implementation, and monitoring/evaluation - as well as in its economic
and sector work. The Bank and Participants agreed that the CPS consultations provided a
good foundation to build o n through more regular interaction. Participants also
suggested that the Bank increase the level o f its direct support t o NGOs through a larger
Small Grants Program.
Monitor Results Closely. Participants felt that although the Government has increased
hnding in many areas, the impact o f this i s not clear, and in some cases indicators
continue to worsen. Therefore, the Bank should be more involved in monitoring country
progress in different sectors, so that programs can be held accountable for delivering
results. Participants particularly encouraged the Bank to continue its efforts to strengthen
monitoring in the areas o f poverty and corruption. The Bank should also ensure that its
o w n interventions are w e l l monitored, with the participation o f N G O s and stakeholders.
This can be done by documenting performance target indicators for Bank-supported
activities, so that progress and deliverables can be measured against expected results.
Provide Greater Access t o Information. Participants noted that public access to
government and other information was quite low, and the quality o f information that was
available was quite poor. Without improvements in these areas, i t would be difficult to
determine h o w efficiently public hnds are used. They therefore encouraged the Bank to
make improving public access to information and legal rights a central part o f all o f i t s
activities. Business representatives also noted the need to provide businesses with more
information on innovation, research, marketing or production possibilities (for example,
through a cofinanced grant scheme) and to generate better information o n the
employment potential o f different industries. The Bank should also disclose as much
information as possible o n i t s o w n activities and should actively seek feedback from the
public. The Bank noted that information o n most o f its activities is publicly available,
but that it would consider additional outreach vehicles.

Pane 25

Kazakhstan Country Partnership Stratem

Build Human Capacity. Participants felt that Kazakhstan needed a more highly trained
work force if it was to be a truly competitive country. The Bank should therefore make
training and technology transfer a high priority for all o f its activities. In many cases this
would mean increasing the use o f local experts, although the value o f international
experts in transferring knowledge was also recognized. Participants also noted that, in
education and health, f i n d s would be better spent o n training and developing better
delivery systems than on building facilities. They also encouraged the Bank to continue
to work in the area o f social protection.
Focus o n Rural Development and the Environment. Participants supported the Bank’s
focus o n agriculture and the rural areas, where poverty i s the greatest, and o n the
environment. In particular, they encouraged the Bank to increase micro-lending, to
improve services such as education, health, and water supply in the rural areas, and to
look into h o w to rehabilitate o r grow new light industries related t o agriculture products,
leather and wool. T o facilitate this, participants suggested that the Bank help support
rural roads and the development o f mini-power plants to support industries o f f the main
power grid. Some participants also suggested that the Bank work with N G O s and the
private sector to support the development plans o f small towns. As regards the
environment, participants asked the Bank to help ensure that o i l income growth did not
come at the expense o f the environment, and to help the Government use n e w
technologies in areas such as gas flaring and o i l spills. In this regard, improved
environmental monitoring was needed. Some participants voiced support for the Bank’s
efforts at improving rangelands and protecting forests. One participant suggested that the
Bank could consider assisting in the management o f radioactive tailings.
Strengthen Public Governance and the Private Sector. Participants agreed with the Bank’s
focus o n establishing an appropriate role for the public sector, and noted four areas in
particular for the Bank to focus on. First, they supported the Bank’s efforts to help the
Government manage o i l and non-oil extractive revenues in a more transparent manner,
and to use excess revenues for social and environmental purposes in a sustainable
manner. Second, they encouraged the Bank to help improve inter-governmental finance
to enable local governments to have the means t o finance urgent services. Third, they
suggested that the Bank work with the Government o n drafting legislation that is probusiness and innovation (particularly in the areas o f taxes, licensing, public procurement
and customs). They noted that the banking sector needs to provide more loans, insurance
and leasing to small enterprises. The Bank and the Government also need t o help
businesses meet international standards in advance o f WTO accession. Fourth, the Bank
should help deepen public sector reform to improve training for and reduce corruption o n
the part o f public servants.
These discussions were supplemented by a web-based consultation process, which
received 399 hits. Most respondents supported the overall focus o f the CPS o n
diversification. Many NGOs and academicians identified the second highest priority as
access to and quality o f education. The third priority identified, particularly important for
local government officials, was access to and quality o f infrastructure.

Pane 26

Kazakhstan Countv Partnership Strategy

E-Survey o f stakeholders"

Q1: WHAT ARE THE MOST URGENT DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES I N KAZAKHSTAN ?
Most Urgent Development Challenges in Kazakhstan
Percent of Respondents (total and by affiliation)
100%

...............

........... ..... ..... ...................................................................................................

......... .... ....................................................................

"

..

. .. . .

"

'i

90%
80%
70%
60%

50%
40%

30%
20%
10%
0%

All (399
responses)

NGO's (79
responses)

Research
Institutes (22
responses)

I3Diversification o f economy
Quality and access to education

0 Social assistance

Academic
Istitutes (58
responses)

Central
Government
(4 responses)

International
Local
Parliament (8 Private sector
donors (33
Government
responses) (70 responses)
responses) (81 responses)

Other (41
responses)

HAgricultural competitiveness and rural development
0 Improvement in the quality o f infiastructure
Environment and natural resource management

Note: the choices included:
1. Diversification o f economy (development o f non-oil economy, small and medium enterprises
development, investment climate improvement, innovative industrial development, etc.)
2. Trade policy developmentiWT0 accession
3. Financial sector development (banking sector, insurance market, mortgage market
development, etc.)
4. Governance
5. Civil service r e f o d T r a i n i n g o f government officials
6. DecentralizatiodSupport to local governments
7. Agricultural competitiveness and rural development
8. Environment and natural resource management (forestry, drylands, fisheries, water resources,
etc.)
9. Urban & Rural Water supply & Sanitation
10. Improvement in the quality o f infrastructure (roads, railway, electricity, telecommunications,
gas distribution, etc.)
11. Quality o f educationiaccess to education
12. Quality o f health services /availability o f health services
13. Social assistance (pension, health insurance, social contributions, poverty monitoring, targeted
social assistance, etc.)
14. Other (please, specify)

lo
Includes 399 responses from non-government organizations, academic and research institutes, private
sector, local governments, central government, and international organizations.

Pane 27

Kazakhstan Countw Partnershiv Straten

CAS ANNEX TABLES

v1

L

0

c,

m
0

a

.
I

fi

H

E
m

kl
E

a

I s
I s
I I

Page 29

Kazakhstan Countw Partnershiu Stratem
-

CPS Annex Table 2: Kazakhstan at a Glance
Europe 8
Central
Kazakhstan
Asia
2002
2003

POVERTY and SOCIAL

Population, mid-vear (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method. US$ billions)

14.9
1.780
26.5

476
2.160
1,030

2.41 1
1,390
3,352

-0.5
0.5

0.1
0.4

1.o
1.2

Averaae annual growth. 1997-03
Population (%)
Labor force f%)

Lowermiddleincome
2002

Most recent estimate flatest veal available. 1997 3)
~

Poverty (% of population below nationalpovertv line)
Urban population I%of total Population)
Life expectancv at birth (wan)
Infant mortalitv (per 1.000 live births) **
Child malnutrition f% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source 1% of population)
llliteracv (% of population age 75+J
Gross primaw enrollment I%of school-age population)
Male
Female

24
57
66
81
4
53
1
93

91
3
102
103
101

49
69
30
11
81
13
111
111
110

63
69
25

Development diamond'

-

Life expectancy

-

GNI
per
capita

~

I/'

Gross
pnmary

enmIIment

Access to improved water source
Kazakhstan
~

Lower-middle-incomegroup

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1983

1993

2002

2003

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenffGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savinaslGDP
Gross national savingsfGDP

23.4
20.0
37.9
11.2
12.1

24.6
27.3
47.2
28.2
27.3

29.7
26.6
50.4
32.8
26.6

Current account balancdGDP
interest PavmentdGDP
Total debffGDP ***
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debffGDP
Present value of debffexwrts

-4.6
0.0
2.2
0.2

-3.5
0.9
73.9
34.3

-0.2
0.9
76.8
33.9

2002

2003

2003-07

2.8
3.9
4.8

9.8
9.8
22.6

9.2
8.8
5.9

6.8
4.0

1983

1993

2002

2003

..
..

17.5
40.0

..

42.5

8.6
38.6
15.6
52.8

7.8
38.3
15.5
53.9

..

74.9
13.9
46.7

61.1
10.7
46.3

56.4
10.8
44.2

1983-93 1993-03

2o02

-2 6
54
60
31

32
118
76
90

14

-1 0
07
1.6
0.9

12 2
-4 3
11.3
4.3

74
58
6.0
-6.3

(average annual arowth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of aocds and services

1983-93 1993-03

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Aaricuiture
lndustrv
Manufacturina
Services
Private consumption
General aovernment consumption
Imports of aoods and services
(average annual clmwthf
Aqnculture
Industw
Manufactunna
Services
Private consumption
General aovernment COnSUmPtlOn
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

..
..
..

..

..

..

..

Economic ratios'
Trade

Domestic
savings

-

' I

_ _ Investment

i
_

Indebtedness
Kazakhstan
Lower-middle-incomeamun

Growth of investment and GDP (%)

GDI

+GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)

ZOL

Exports

*Imports

Note: 2003 data are preliminaryestimates.

'The diamonds show four kev indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-qroup averaqe. If data are missina. the diamond will

be incomplete.
*' Infant mortality is from the independent 2001 household survey. The oftical coefficient of infant mortalitv is 17 (per 1.000 live birth) in 2002.
*** Total debt indudes intra-companv loans.

I
I

Page 30

Kazakhstan County Partnership Strategy

(continued)
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic Drices
I%chanoeJ
Consumer Dnces
Implicit GDP deflator

1983

Government finance ****
f% of GDP, rncludes current wants1
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surDlus/deficit
TRADE

IUS$ millions)
Total exDorts (fob)
Fuel and oil products
Ferrous metals
Manufactures
Total imDorts (an
Food
Fuel and enemv
Capital aoods

1983

1993

2002

2003

2.165.0
1,243.5

6.6
5.8

6.8
7.9

19.8
-0.7
4.0

22.4
5.2
1.3

25.2
7.9
2.1

1993

2002

2003

3.586

10.027
5.641
1.139
1.299
7.726
280
760
2,806

13.233
7.912
1.538
1.441
9.144
360
916
3,565

5.127

Emort Dnce index 11995=100J
lmwrt Dnce index f1995=1001
Terms of trade (1995=1001
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

IUS$ milhons)
Ex~ortsof aoods and services
ImDorts of aoods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

1993

2002

2003

4.396
5.555
-1.159

11.611
11,463
148

15.006
13.169
1.837

45
129

-1.127
114

-1,741
-165

Current amount balance

-1.075

-866

-69

Financina items (net)
Changes in net reserves

1.441
-366

1.401
-535

1.602
-1.534

711
1.3

3.141
153.3

4.962
149.6

1993

2002

2003

518
0
0

18.201
1.232
0

22.859
1.226
0

11
0
0

4.096
120
0

5.180
134

Memo:
Reserves including gold /US$ millions1 ***'*
Conversion rate (DEC. localNSSf
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ milliond
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

1983

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreian direct investment
Portfolio eauitv

11
170
171
474
0

20
1,809
2.583

World Bank Droaram
Commitments
Disbursements
PrinciDal reDavments
Net flows
Interest Davments
Net transfers

218
0
0
0
0
0

0
92
63
29
57
-28

Development Economics

98

W

99

01

GDP deflator

02

03

+CPI

I Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
114.000
112.000

i

I

97

98

99

W

BExports

i

1983

I

Inflation (YO)

01

03

02

mlmports

Current account balance to GDP (%)
4-

-6
-7

-

I

Composition of 2003 debt (US$ mill.)
1226
01
/

\
1

\

'u'

I
40
71
76
-6

17900

A - IBRD
B IDA

-

C-IMF

D Other multilateral
~

E . Bilateral
F - Private
G Short-ten
~

4/14/04

***+ Government finance data includes revenue of the National Fund of the Republic of Kazakhstan (NFRK). an extra-budaetarv oil fund.
***** Central Bank's reserves do not include the NFRK assets (US$3.663 million in 2003).

Pane
31

Kazakhstan County Partnership Strategy

CPS Annex Table 3: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance
As Of Date 04/06/2004

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementationa
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,
Disbursement Ratio (YO)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2001

2002

2003

2004

13
3.5
23.1
12.3
23.1
12.3
13.4

9
3.9
22.2
18.7
22.2
18.7
20.8

9
3.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
27.9

8
4.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
17.0

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
16
12
1,I
57.6
578.6
18.8
25.0
2.6
5.1

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Kazakhstan Countrv Partnership Stratem

Pane 32

CPS Annex Table 4: Kazakhstan Social Indicators
Same regionlincome group

2003

Kazakhstan

Europe &
Central
Asia

Lowermiddleincome

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

14.9
0.4
56.9
1.9

472.9
0.0
63.6
1.6

2,408.5
0.9
49.4
2.1

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

24.2
15.6
34.7
2,160

1,400

4.3
4.3

2.7
4.0

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (19 9 5 4 00)
INCOMWCONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index I /
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 2/
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

1,780
262
238
31.2
7.0
39.6

2.0
3.3
5.4

90
90
89

91
92
92

53

91
96
83

81
95
70

95
95
4

93
92

78
84
9

66
61
71

69
64
73

69
67
72

81
99

31
37

32
40

366
201
210
99

317
137

212
131

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series
between 1997 and 1998 due to change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to
children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one year of age.
Sources: Poverty Monitoring Indicators in Kazakhstan. UNDP/Kazakhstan Statistical Agency, 2003;
2004 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank.
1/ WB staff calculation based on HBS is 36 in 2002 (see Dimensions of Poverty in Kazakhstan).
Z WB staff estimate.

Pane 33

Kazakhstan Countw Partnership Stratem

CAS Annex Table 5: Kazakhstan - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts(as % o f GDP)
Gross domstic p r o d d
Oil and gasb
Industry'
senices
Non-oil-and-gas
Agricdhre
Indushy'

1999

Actual
2000
2001

prelim
2003

2002

25
52

67
11
56
24
4
20
15
5
3
14

67
12
55
25
5
20
14
5
3
15

71
12
60
24
4
20
14
7
3
15

47
41
22
5
5
2
46
31

50
5
5
3
44
31

49
44
24
5
5
3
43
32

28
23
27

33
8
25
27

22
3
19
1491
1350
0.9
24.4

25
4
21
1659
1520
1.o
24.9

13.5
23.2
11.9
9.6
19.2
7.8

9.8
12.9
9.3
9.1
-4.3
12.2

100
15
14
2
85
9
25
51

100
16
14

Consumptiond
G o v e m n t administration
Rest o f the economy
Gross domestic fixed i n v e s m t
G o v e m t administration
Rest o f the economy
Oil and gasb
Non-oil-and-gas
Change in stocks
Non-oil-and-gase(as % o f n o n 4 l GDP)

80
12
68
16
2
15
9
6
2
IO

73
12
61
17
1
16
13
3
1
11

74
13
61
24
1
22
16
6
3
12

72
12
60
24
3
21
16
6
3
14

Exports (GNFS)'
Merchandise FOB
Oil and gas
Ferrous metals
Manufactures
Agnculture

42
35
14
5
8
3
40
33

57
51
24
6
7
4
48
37

46
40
20
5
6
2
47
34

20
-2
23
18

27
1
25
18

26
5
21
27

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product (US$ billion)
Oil and gas
Non-oil-and-gas
GDP per capita (US$, at average exchange rate)
GNI per capita (US,Atlas method)
Oil production(million barrels per day)
Oil price (US$ per barrel)

17
2
15
1130
1290
0.6
18.1

18
3
16
1229
1270
08
28.2

Real annual growth rates (%)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Oil and gas
Non-oil-and-gas
Total Consumption
G o v e m t administration
Rest of the economy

2.7
18.6
1.5
1.4
7.6
0.5

9.8
26.5
8.0
3.1
15.0
1.2

Gross domestic saving
G o v e m n t administration
Rest of the economy
Gross national savings'

2010

100
9
7
2
91

100
14
13
1
86
9
26
50

(GNW

100
16
14

Projected*
2006
2008
100
10
8
2
90
7
28
55

100
15
14
1
85
9
27
49

Merchandise FOB

2005
100
11
IO
2
89
7
27
54

100
10
9
1
90
10
26
54

seniCeS

2004

(B6-1)

5

2012

29
56

100
10
8
2
90
6
28
56

100
12
IO
2
88
6
27
55

74
11
62
24
4
20
13
7
3
15

73
12
61
22
3
19
12
7
2
15

74
11
62
19
3
16
8
7
2
14

72
11
60
18
3
15
8
7
2
14

42
37
17
4
4
3
40
31

41
37
16
5
5
3
41
32

40
36
15
6
5
3
37
34

41
37
17
6
6
4
36
34

46
41
21
6
6
4
38
35

33
9
24
27

29
5
23
27

26
6
21
26

27
5
22
25

26
6
21
21

28
6
23
20

30
4
25
1996
1780
1.1
28.9

37
5
31
2448
2090
1.2
32.3

40
4
36
2637
2450
1.3
23.0

43
4
39
2848
2780
1.5
20.0

49
4
45
3221
3 120
1.7
18.5

56
5
50
3587
3470
1.9
19.5

63
7
56
4054
3890
2.5
20.3

9.2
10.5
9.0

8.1
15.0
6.9
8.6
12.1
7.8

5.8
4.2
6.0
11.3
4.4
12.8

6.3
11.1
5.8
9.6
3.1
10.9

4.4
9.4
3.9
0.5
4.4
4.2

3.7
6.7
3.4
2.5
3.3
2.3

4.1
9.6
3.4
2.7
3.8
2.5

2
84
8
24
52

44
25

7.1
5.8
7.4

2
84

7

7

~~~

Source: Ministry of Finance, National Bank ofthe Republic of Kazakhstan,Agency on Statistics and World Bank staff estimates.
Projections for the 2004-12 periodare made by the World Bank and m y be slightly different 60m the Government's Mediurn-Tenn Fiscal F m w r k
(e.g., 2004 growth rate is slightly lower than the one currently used by the Government). The definitions usedby the G o v e m t and the World Bank
also differ (e.g.. since the WE3 consolidatesthe State Budget with the National Fmd and adjust i t e m to comply with internationalstandards).
a GDP at factor cost (Gross Value Added).
b. Oil and gas exbadon and exbadon-related services, processingand
an estimate for oil-relatedconstruction, transportation, and oil field services (geological exploration).
c. Includes construction.
d Includes statistical discrepancy.
e. Includes g o v e m t adminisiration and change in stocks.
f. "GNFS denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
g. Includes net unrequitedtransfersexcludingofficial capital grants.

*

CONTINUED(B6-2)

Indicator

Balance of Payments (US%millions)
*&
(WS)
MerchandiseFOB
Oil and gas

m*(-)

h4erchanclise FOB
Trade balance
Resource balance
In”
balance
Net current transfers
C m t t“
balance
Net private foreign direct investnmt

Long-termloans (net?
othercapital(net,incl.~&omissiorS)
Changeinreserves
Memr&
items
Resource balance (%of GDP)
Annual growth ram (“A)

( m s ) (real growth)

Non-oil e

m (dollar value grad)

Non-extmdve exprts (dollarvdue p W h

ma(WWrealg r o 4

Tems oftrade (2000=100)
Nomoi1tans of trade (2000=100)
Labor market indicatols
Labor force (million people)
Participationrate (labor force as %of
population at the age 15+)
Unerrqloqment rate (%of labor force)

Actual
2000
2001

1999

prelim
2003

2002

2004

2005

Projected*
2006
2008

2010

2012

6916
5989
2392
6740
5648
340
176
-569
157
-236

10420
9288
4387
8852
6848
2440
1568
-1254
249
563

10228
8928
4464
10433
7607
1320
-204
-1237
238
-1203

11611
10027
5363
11463
7726
2301
148
-1127
114
-866 ’

15006
13233
7501
13169
9144
4088
1837
-1741
-165
-69

18391
16261
9072
16115
11809
4452
2276
-1312
-177
787

16848
14895
6920
16038
12430
2465
809
-1176
-259
-625

17691
15774
7069
17806
13922
1853
-115
-1038
-340
-1493

19585
17518
7459
18337
16692
826
1248
-968
-297
-16

22958
20569
9254
20155
18932
1637
2802
-1015
-343
1445

29059
25732
13027
23734
21873
3859
5325
-1450
-414
3460

1468
216

1278
-58

2861
463

2163
763

2188
2128

2779
1054

2847
752

3040
-27

3197
-1227

2920
-2456

3082
-3693

-1194
-254

-1198
-585

-1736
-385

-1526
-535

-2713
-1534

-3214
-1406

-1751
-1222

-1055
-464

-1593
-361

-1351
-557

-2164
-685

1.0

8.6

-0.9

0.6

6.2

6.2

2.0

-0.3

2.5

5.0

8.4

3.0
-14.0

28.7
36.3

-1.8
-8.9

22.6
4.5

5.9
22.9

11.2

-7.9

5.6

5.9

10.8

9.2

2.4
0.6
80.0
94.3

59.6
26.1
100.0
100.0

-2.0
0.3
94.0
97.0

13.8
4.3
95.7
97.9

32.7
-6.3
100.4
101.0

11.2
107.5
109.1

0.0
93.1
106.3

11.6
87.1
102.9

4.8
85.1
103.0

2.4
86.1
102.8

9.4
86.8
102.6

7

7

7

7

8

66
13

66
13

70
10

70
9

69
9

* See Table B6-1
h. Include interampany loans related to FDI inoil sector.
i. Exclude “Is,
fuel and oil products, base metals and base metals products other than f

m &.

’

Page 35

Kazakhstan Countw Partnership Strategy

CONTINUED(B6-3)

1999

Actual
2000
2001

2002

Prelim
2003

2004

2005

17.9
1.0
1.0
0.0
16.9
16.9
0.0
0.0
23.1
20.3
1.9
0.3
0.9
-5.2
-5.2
-6.1
-6.8
-2.5
2.4

21.9
4.6
4.6
0.0
17.3
17.3
0.1
0.0
22.8
20.3
1.8
0.5
0.7
-1.0
-1.0
-5.6
-6.5
1.4
1.2

24.9
6.8
4.4
2.3
18.1
17.6
0.3
0.5
23.0
19.5
2.8
1.0
0.6
1.9
-0.9
-4.9
-5.6
5.1
0.3

22.7
5.1
3.8
1.3
17.5
17.2
0.3
0.3
21.4
17.2
3.6
0.3
0.5
1.3
-0.3
-3.9
-4.5
5.2
-1.4

25.4
6.8
4.0
2.8
18.6
18.3
0.3
0.3
23.3
17.2
5.6
1.2
0.5
2.1
-1.0
-4.7
-5.5
7.9
0.2

27.2
8.9
5.5
3.4
18.3
18.1
0.3
0.2
25.4
17.9
6.9
0.9
0.6
1.8
-1.8
-7.1
-8.3
8.9
-1.1

23.7
4.7
3.5
1.2
19.1
18.8
0.2
0.3
22.8
18.0
4.5

23.1
3.8
3.3
0.4
19.3
19.0
0.2
0.3
22.1
17.3
4.5

0.3
0.9
-0.5
-3.8
-4.2
5.5
0.2

0.0
0.0
31.6
24.8
6.8

0.0
0.0
25.5
21.8
3.6

5.7
1.3
20.4
17.6
2.8

7.9
0.7
17.7
14.3
3.3

11.9
1.5
15.5
11.7
3.8

14.3
1.6
14.8
8.8
6.0

13.6
84.4
3.2

15.3
45.0
4.3

17.7
45.1
5.6

20.3
32.8
7.1

21.8
26.8
8.3

Prices and foreign exchange rates
8.3
Consmr price index (YOchange)
13.3
GDP deflator (YOchange)
~ e aexchange
l
rate (LCU/US$, ~~97=100)' 141.7
0.0
Real effective exchange rad (YR97=100)'

13.2
17.4
154.0
0.0

8.4
10.2
150.8
0.0

5.8
5.8
151.2
0.0

6.4
7.9
141.8
0.0

Indicator
finance (as % of GDP at market pricesj
Total revenue
Oil revenue
Revenue kept by the State Wget
R e m e accdated inthe NFRK
Non-oil revenw
Revenue kept by the State Budget
of which Capital revenue
m u e accumulatedinthe NFRK
Total e&ture
and net lending
Current expaditures
Cap~tale t u r e , of which
o f which Capital transfers
Net l d g
overall balance
State budget balance
Norroil balance
bbn-oilbalance (as % o f n o n d GDP)
Current savings (Current account balance)
Foreignfinancing

PUMC

Assets o f the National Fund of RK (NFRK)
hkrm NFRK accdation (US$ billion)

Govemtl~ntand govt-guar;inteed debt
E k t d
DorrestC

Monetary indicators
M?/GDP
Growth o f h9 (Yo)
Assets inpensionh d s (%of GDP)

* See Table B6-1
j. Consolidatedgeneral g o v e m n t ( i n c l w NFRK accutmlation).
k An increase inthe index denotes depreciation
1. S@le average of real exchange rates o f LCU(tenge) to USD, EUR and RUR

Projected*
2006 2008

2010

2012

22.1
3.0
2.8
0.1
19.1
18.8
0.2
0.3
21.3
16.8
4.3

22.1
3.2
2.8
0.3
18.9
18.7
0.2
0.3
20.8
16.3
4.3

21.8
3.2
2.8
0.4
18.6
18.3
0.2
0.3
20.2
15.8
4.3

0.3
1.0
0.3
-2.8
-3.1
5.6
-0.1

0.2
0.8
0.3
-2.2
-2.4
5.1

0.2
1.3
0.7
-1.9
-2.0
5.6

0.1
1.6
0.9
-1.6
-1.8
5.8

15.2
0.8
14.2
8.3
5.9

15.3
0.6
12.8
7.6
5.2

14.2
0.2
10.8

13.6
0.3
8.3

13.3
0.4
5.6

26.1
36.6
9.9

28.8
22.5
11.3

31.5
21.4
12.3

37.6
19.3
13.2

44.2
17.4
13.0

48.6
14.1
12.4

6.0
7.2
126.2

5.0
3.3
125.7

5.0
4.5
125.2

5.0
5.0
124.2

5.0
5.0
123.2

5.0
5.0
122.2

..

._
..

Pane 36

Kazakhstan C o u n t y Partnership Stratem

Continued (B6-4)

Sensitivity to Oil Price

1999

Actual
2000
2001

2002

Prelim.
2003

2004

2005

Projected*
2006
2008

2010

2012

Oil price (US$ per barrel)
Overall fiscal balance (%of GDP)
Non-oil fiscal balance (as YOofnon-oil GDP)
Public spending (% of GDP)
Real growth o f public spending (%)
Government and govt-guaranteeddebt (%of GDP)
Stock o f assets in the NFRK (% of GDP)
Real exchange rate (LCU/uS$, YR97=100)
Real GDP growth (%)
Oil and gas
Non-oil-and-gas

18.1
-5.2
-6.8
23.1
4.8
31.6
0.0
141.7
2.7
18.6
1.5

28.2
-1.0
-6.5
22.8
12.7
25.5
0.0
154.0
9.8
26.5
8.0

24.4
1.9
-5.6
23.0
16.1
20.4
5.7
150.8
13.5
23.2
11.9

24.9
1.3
-4.5
21.4
2.2
17.7
7.9
151.2
9.8
12.9
9.3

28.9
2.1
-5.5
23.3
20.8
15.5
11.9
141.8
9.2
10.5
9.0

32.3
1.8
-8.3
25.4
17.5
14.8
14.3
126.9
8.1
15.0
6.9

23.0
0.9
-4.2
22.8
-4.8
14.2
15.2
126.4
5.8
4.2
6.0

20.0
1.0
-3.1
22.1
2.9
12.8
15.3
125.9
6.3
11.1
5.8

18.5
0.8
-2.4
21.3
2.9
10.8
14.2
124.9
4.4
9.4
3.9

19.5
1.3
-2.0
20.8
2.4
8.3
13.6
123.9
3.7
6.7
3.4

20.3
1.6
-1.8
20.2
2.9
5.6
13.3
122.9
4.1
9.6
3.4

Memorandum item:
GDP per capita (US$)

1130

1229

1491

1659

1996

2448

2637

2848

3221

3587

4054

18.1
-5.2
-6.8
23.1
-4.8
31.6
0.0
141.7
2.7
18.6
1.5

28.2
-1.0
-6.5
22.8
12.7
25.5
0.0
154.0
9.8
26.5
8.0

24.4
1.9
-5.6
23.0
16.1
20.4
5.7
150.8
13.5
23.2
11.9

24.9
1.3
-4.5
21.4
2.2
17.7
7.9
151.2
9.8
12.9
9.3

28.9
2.1
-5.5
23.3
20.8
15.5
11.9
141.8
9.2
10.5
9.0

32.3
1.8
-8.3
25.4
17.5
14.8
14.3
126.9
8.1
15.0
6.9

30.0
2.2
-6.6
24.1
0.2
13.9
16.2
126.1
5.5
-2.9
7.0

30.0
3.0
-6.3
23.8
5.6
12.1
17.8
125.3
7.0
8.2
6.8

30.0
3.4
-5.3
22.8
3.1
8.0
19.7
123.7
4.3
0.6
4.9

30.0
3.3
4.7
22.2
3.4
5.0
21.6
122.1
4.9
8.1
4.4

30.0
2.8
-4.4
21.6
3.7
4.0
23.8
120.5
4.6
5.8
4.4

1130

1229

1491

1659

1996

2448

2638

2873

3307

3765

4381

18.1
-5.2
-6.8
23.1
-4.8
31.6
0.0
141.7
2.7
18.6
1.5

28.2
-1.0
-6.5
22.8
12.7
25.5
0.0
154.0
9.8
26.5
8.0

24.4
1.9
-5.6
23.0
16.1
20.4
5.7
150.8
13.5
23.2
11.9

24.9
1.3
4.5
21.4
2.2
17.7
7.9
151.2
9.8
12.9
9.3

28.9
2.1
-5.5
23.3
20.8
15.5
11.9
141.8
9.2
10.5
9.0

32.3
1.8
-8.3
25.4
17.5
14.8
14.3
126.9
8.1
15.0
6.9

15.0
-1.5
-2.8
22.3
-14.9
16.9
15.5
126.7
-3.4
-51.2
5.0

15.0
-0.8
-2.6
22.0
3.8
16.9
15.6
126.5
5.1
8.7
4.8

15.0
-0.5
-2.3
21.4
1.9
17.1
14.9
126.1
2.8
1.1
2.9

15.0
-0.4
-2.1
21.1
2.1
17.4
14.4
125.7
2.9
8.7
2.4

15.0
-0.4
-2.0
20.7
2.2
17.3
13.7
125.3
2.8
6.3
2.4

1130

1229

1491

1659

1996

2448

2404

2559

2823

3073

3397

Indicator
Baseline scenario"

Higher oil price scenariom
Oil price (US$ per barrel)
Overall fiscal balance (% of GDP)
Non-oil fiscal balance (as % o f non-oil GDP)
Public spending (YOo f GDP)
Real growth o f public spending (%)

Governmentand govt-guaranteeddebt (%of GDP)
Stock o f assets in the NFRK (% o f GDP)
Real exchangerate (LCUiUS$, YR97=100)
Real GDP growth (%)
Oil and gas
Non-oil-and-gas
Memorandum item:

GDP per capita (US$)
Lower oil price scenario"
Oil price (US$ per barrel)
Overall fiscal balance (% of GDP)

Non-oil fiscal balance (as % o f non-oil GDP)
Public spending (% o f GDP)
Real growth o f public spending(%)
Government and govt-guaranteed debt (%of GDP)
Stock o f assets in the NFRK (% o f GDP)
Real exchange rate @CU/US$, YR97=100)
Real GDP growth (?h)
Oil and gas
Non-oil-and-gas
Memorandum item:

GDP per capita (US$)

* See Table B6- 1
m The three different paths of oil prices are chosen arbitrarily to illustrate the possible impact o f these changes on the economy.
n. An increase in the index denotes depreciation.

Kazakhstan Countrv Partnershiu Strategv

Page 37

CPS Annex Table 6: Kazakhstan -- Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

Actual
2000
2001

1999

Prelim.
2003

2002

Projected
2005
2006

2004

12081
3619
436
8025
6163

12684
3929
0
8755
693 1

15157
3800
0
1I358
8879

18201
348 1
0
14720
10709
1352
2659
327

22859
3623
0
19236
12029
3465
3742
493

26394
3219
0
23176
13419

30697
3293
0
27404
14842

34756
3269
0
3 1487
16364

Net disbursements (US$m)a

-103

84

1071

448

2386

1522

1667

1646

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a

1890

3278

3834

4096

5180

5973

6832

1643

171.7
71.6
26.9
3.2

119.4
69.3
30.9
3.2

143.9
68.4
36.4
2.6

152.3
73.9
34.3

149.4
76.8
33.9

156.2
72.5
35.3

181.9
76.5
40.5

199.8
78.0
43.9

8.8
35.6
1.O
1116
0

9.4
62.6
0.8
1143
0

21.6
29.7
1.o
1203
0

18.9
28.6
1.O
1232
0

26.4
39.7
0.9
1226

28.8
43.5
0.9
1204
0

28.7
43.6
0.9
1142

0

25.4
38.2
0.9
1211
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

129.80
87.30
42.50

133.77
89.88
43.89

140.78
89.38
51.40

145.66
86.36
59.30

266.18
165.16
101.02

265.90
163.16
102.74

IFC (US$m)- disbursement balance
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

64.00
42.20
21.80

92.49
70.68
21.81

101.49
74.68
26.81

115.42
86.11
29.31

202.69
133.11
69.58

235.46
164.1 1
71.35

IFC (US$m)- outstanding balance
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

62.22
40.43
21.79

89.18
65.98
23.20

84.32
63.61
20.71

92.63
61.53
31.10

157.07
90.84
66.23

175.52
110.85
64.67

24

11

Total debt outstanding and disbursed (TDO) (US$m)"
Government and govt-guaranteed private debt
IMF credit
Private non-guaranteed debt
Intra-companyliabilities (FDI related)
Commercial banks
Other, o f which
State-owned enterprises (12 National Companies)

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO~XGS~
TDO/GDP
TDSKGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DSipublic DS (%)'
IBRD DSKGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d

Of which present value o f guarantees (US$m)

0

Share of IBRD portfolio ("A)

IDA TDO (US$mld
IFC (US$m)-net commitment balance
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity i c

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm)

A

1 .

a. Includes govemment and govemment-guaranteeddebt, private non-guaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital. Does not include domestic debt.
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferredcreditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateraldevelopment banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for InternationalSettlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasiequity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

x

v)

t

6

U
4

'c

0

m

b

.
m
m

m

b

.-c

