Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 28141-ME

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTIONAND DEVELOPMENT
AND

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
WITH
THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES

March 18,2004

Colombia and M e x i c o Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

MEXICO-FISCAL YEAR
January I-December 31
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of December 3 I,2003)
Currency Unit = Peso
11.23 Pesos = US$l
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AIDS
BANOBRAS
BANRURAL
BANSEFI
CAA
CAE
CAS
CFAA
CFE
CMU
COMPRANET
CONACYT
CONADEPI
CONAFE
CONASUPO
CONEWT
CPAR
CPPR
CPS
DDO
ENRP
ESSD
ESW
FARAC
FOAEM
FORTEM
FOSEG
FPSI
FSL
GDP
GEF
GNP
HD
HlV
IADB
IBRD
ICA
ICB
IDF
IFAI
IFC
IMF
IMSS
INDESOL
INEGI
IPAB
ISSSTE

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Banco Nacional de Obras y Servicios Pdblicos,
S.N.C.
Banco Nacional de Credito Rural, S.N.C.
Banco del Ahorro Nacional y Servicios Financieros
Country A A A Assessment
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Comision Federal de Electricidad
Country Management Unit
Sistema Electronico de Contrataciones
Gubemamentales
Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia
Consejo Nacional para el Desarrollo de 10s Pueblos
Indigenas
Consejo Nacional de Foment0 Educativo
Compaiiia Nacional de Subsistencias Populares
Consejo Nacional para la Vida y e l Trabajo
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Country Partnership Strategy
Deferred Drawdown Options
Environment and Natural Resources Program
Environment & Social Sustainable Development
Economic Sector Work
Fideicomiso de Apoyo al Rescate de Autopistas
Fondo de Apoyo a Estados y Municipios
Programa para Fortalecer Estados y Municipios
Fondo Nacional de Seguridad P~blica
Financial, Private Sector and Infrastructure
Fixed Spread Loan
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Gross National Product
Human Development
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Inter-American Development Bank
Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Investment Climate Assessment
Intemational Competitive Bidding
Institutional Development Fund
Instituto Federal de Acceso a la Informacion
Intemational Finance Corporation
Intemational Monetary Fund
Instituto Mexican0 para la Seguridad Social
Instituto Nacional de Solidaridad
Instituto Nacional de Estadistica, Geografia e
Informatica
Instituto de Proteccion al Ahorro Bancario
Instituto de Seguridad y Servicios Sociales de 10s
Trabajadores del Estado

Vice President
Chief Economist:
Country Director:
Task Managers:

JICA
LAC
LIL
MDA
MDBs
NAFIN
NAFTA
NCB
NCSC
NGO
OECD
OED
PCF
PEC
PEMEX
PER
PIDIREGAS
PREM
PROCAMPO
PROCEDES
PROGRESA
PROFEPA
PRONAFIDE
PSBR
R&D
SAGARPA
SAL
SCT
SEDESOL
SEMARNAT
SENER
SEP
SFP
SHCP
SMEs
SNG
SOFOLES
SRA
SSA
SSDS
SWAP
TA
TAL
TFP
UN
UNAM
USAID
VAT
WBG
WBI
WPA
WTO

Japan Intemational Cooperation Agency
Latin America and Caribbean Region
Leaming and Innovation Loan
Master Derivative Agreement
Multilateral Development Banks
Nacional Financiera, S.N.C.
North American Free Trade Agreement
National Competitive Bidding
National Commission of State Courts
Nongovemmental organization
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development
Operations Evaluation Department
Prototype Carbon Fund
Programa de Escuelas de Calidad
Petroleos Mexicanos
Public Expenditure Review
Proyectos de Impact0 Diferido en el Registro del Gasto
Poverty Reduction & Economic Management
Programa de Apoyos Directos a l Campo
Programa de Calidad, Equidad y Desarrollo en Salud
Programa de Educacion, Salud y Alimentacion
Procuraduria Federal para la Proteccion del Ambiente
Programa Nacional de Financiamiento del Desarrollo
Public Sector Borrowing Requirements
Research and Development
Secretaria de Agricultura, Ganaderia, Desarrollo Rural,
Pesca y Alimentacion
Structural Adjustment Loan
Secretaria de Comunicaciones y Transportes
Secretaria de Desarrollo Social
Secretaria de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales
Secretaria de Energfa
Secretaria de Educacion Publica
Secretaria de la Funcion Publica
Secretaria de Hacienda y Credito Publico
Small and Medium Enterprises
Subnational Govemment
Sociedades Financieras de Objeto Limitado
Secretaria de la Reforma Agraria
Secretaria de Salud
Southem Status Development Strategy
Sector Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
Technical Assistance Loan
Total Factors Productivity
United Nations
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de MCxico
U S Agency for Intemacional Development
Value Added Tax
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
Work Program Agreement
World Trade Organization

IBRD
David de Ferranti
VP, Investment Operations:
Guillermo Perry
Director, LAC:
Manager:
Isabel Guerrero
Task Manager:
Miguel L6pez / Connie Luff
Team Production Support: Gabriela Vidals

IFC

Assaad Jabre
Bernard Pasquier
Toshiya Masuoka
Eduardo Wallentin

MEXICO

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS

..........................................................................................................
I. INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................
I 1.
COUNTRY CONTEXT....................................................................................................

4

................................................................................

8

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

.................................................................
.................................................................................................

POLITICAL. SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENTS
POVERTY: PROFILE AND TRENDS

.

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

.

THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

I11

1
4

4
7

REDUCE
POVERTY
AND INEQUALITY
........................................................................................... 9
INCREASE
COMPETITIVENESS.....................................................................................................
13
....................................................................................................... 17
STRENGTHEN INSTITUTIONS
PROMOTE
ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY
........................................................................... 20

IV

...............

INPUTS
To DESIGN
THE STRATEGY ............................................................................................
Country Partnership Strategy Evaluation and AAA Review .................................................

Program Implementation......................................................................................................
Messages Received from Civil Society and the Global Poll .................................................
Development Partners’ Activities .........................................................................................
Mexico’s Debt Management Strategy ...................................................................................

PROPOSED
STRATEGY AND INSTRUMENTS
.................................................................................

Transition to a New Relationship .........................................................................................
World Bank Group’s Comparative Advantage and Focus ...................................................
Lending Scenarios and IBRD’s Exposure .............................................................................
Instruments to Reduce Poverty and Inequality .....................................................................
Instruments to Increase Competitiveness..............................................................................
Instruments to Strengthen Institutions ..................................................................................
Instruments to Promote Environmental Sustainability .........................................................
IBRD ’s Financial Instruments ..............................................................................................

BUDGET
TO IMPLEMENT THIS CPS .............................................................................................
R I S K S OF THE PROPOSED STRATEGY .........................................................................................
CPS MONITORING
.....................................................................................................................

V

.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

.............................................................................................

23
23

23
25
27
29

30
32

32
33
36
37
38
41
43
44

46
47
47

48

TEXTBOXES
Box 1. Highlights o f Government Programs t o Reduce Poverty and Inequality..................12
Box 2 . Highlights o f Government Programs to Increase Competitiveness....................... -16
Box 3 . Highlight s o f Government Programs to Strengthen Institutions ........................... 19
Box 4. Highlights o f Government Programs to Promote Environ. Sustainability .................22
Box 5 . Main Messages Received from Civil Society ................................................. 27
Box 6. Global Poll Results ................................................................................ 2 8

TABLES
Table 1.
Table 2 .
Table 3 .
Table 4 .

Mexico’s M a i n Macroeconomic Indicators.................................................. 5
Mexico and the MillenniumDevelopment Goals ........................................... 8
Partnerships in Mexico’s Development..................................................... 30
Mexico’s WPA Orig. Allocations for FY03-04 and Projections for FY05-08 .......46

FIGURES
Figure 1. Credit to the Non-banking Private Sector ................................................. 14
Figure 2 . Total Net Debt o f the Public Sector ...................................................... 31
Figure 3 . Emerging Markets, Mexico and WB Spreads over U S Treasury 1993-2003 .......45

ANNEXES
A1.
B1.
B 2.
B 3.
B 3.
B 3.
B 4.
B 5.
B 6.
B 7.
B 8.
B 8.
c1.
c 2.

Mexico .
Country Development Objectives and WBG Partnership Strategy
Monitoring Matrix ........................................................................... 49
Mexico at a Glance .........................................................................
53
Selected Indicators* o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management .............55
IBRD Program Summary - Proposed IBRD Lending Program..................... 56
IFC Program FY2001.2004 ................................................................... 57
58
Proposed IBRD/GEF/PCF Program Summary ...............................................
Summary o f Non-lending Services FY05.08 ...........................................
59
Mexico Social Indicators....................................................................................... 60
K e y Economic Indicators.................................................................. 61
Key Exposure Indicators..................................................................
-64
Status o f Bank Group Operations in Mexico Operations Portfolio..................65
Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio ......................................
66
IFC’s Commitments During the Previous CAS Period......................................... 67
Program o f WBI Activities FY05.07 ..................................................... 68

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the collaboration and
contributions o f the Mexican government in the preparation o f this
CPS. The contributions o f those who were consulted during this
process are also greatly appreciated. including representatives o f
academic institutions. business chambers. indigenous groups. unions.
non-government organizations. the private sector. and other
development partners. M a i n contributors to the preparation o f this
CPS were Mark Hagerstrom. John Kellenberg. Steven Webb.
Joaquin Cottani. David Gould. Anna Wellenstein. Tova Solo.
Krishna Challa. Conchita Espino. Philip Karp. and Daniel Morrow
who. together with the C D and TMs. comprised the core team.
Additional contributions were received from Keta Ruiz. Joost
Draaisma. Gladys Lopez and Erica Soler. as well as all o f the
Mexico extended team during brainstorming sessions held in July in
Mexico City and September and October in Washington D C.

MEMORANDUM
OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANKFOR RECONSTRUCTIONAND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE
CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRYPARTNERSHIPSTRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANKGROUP
WITH THE UNITED MEXICAN
STATES
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
Mexico has undertaken impressive reforms since the 1994 crisis, leading to a major
economic and political transformation in the last decade. Today, the country enjoys a more
open economic and political system, i s more integrated into the world economy, belongs to
the OECD, has investment grade in the financial markets and has strong ownership o f i t s
development strategy. Yet, and not detracting from these achievements but rather pointing to
the long-term nature o f development, there i s s t i l l a substantial agenda that the government
seeks to advance within the context o f i t s National Development Plan, including very
importantly poverty reduction, improved competitiveness, environmental management and
institutional change.

..

So how does the Bank support a country with Mexico’s characteristics? This i s not an
easy question given the Bank’s relatively small weight in covering the country’s financial
needs, the non-additionality o f Bank loans for the sector ministries, and the need to customize
Bank assistance to a creditworthy middle-income borrower. In some ways, such a strategy
should not be different than that for other clients where the Bank also supports poverty
alleviation, country ownership and a long-term vision. But for a country like Mexico, the
Bank needs to customize i t s support by adapting to a sophisticated borrower and making sure
the Bank i s particularly competitive in the instruments we offer, given the many options
available for a country with investment grade and a significant IBRD lending program.
11.

iii. In this CPS, it i s proposed in partnership with the government o f Mexico to address
this challenge in three ways: (a) focus work o n selected areas where the Bank can bring value
added expertise and quality support to Mexico while being more selective in initiating the
preparation o f lending operations; (b) use programmatic analytic work and
learninghowledge sharing activities to help answer, debate and reach consensus around the
main unanswered questions in selected areas (such as poverty, water, competitiveness, quality
o f education and decentralization); and (c) be flexible to respond to windows o f opportunities
which may arise during the CPS period (e.g. subnational lending) and ready to provide
financial resources taking advantage o f WBG’s financial products that best suit Mexico’s
needs.
iv.
Mexico i s in the midst o f both a political and an economic transition, both o f which
are intrinsically inter-connected and proving more challenging than originally anticipated.
The political system i s in a process o f renewal and democratization-the election o f President
F o x in July 2000 marked an important shift towards democracy and a multi-party system.
The highly desirable political development involves managing a transition away from a

hierarchical-corporatist system that worked for seven decades and made policy making
relatively straight forward. Today policy making i s much more complex, with the rise of
pluralism at the federal level, the decline o f Presidentialism, and the rising importance o f
local governments for social and economic development.
~

~

v.
The economic transition i s also proving more difficult than would have been expected
a decade ago, when after the Brady-plan reduction o f debt and NAFTA i t looked as if victory
could be declared. Debt management has been extremely successful and the Brady bonds
were paid 16 years ahead o f time in 2003. But the need to keep the budget in control and the
l o w tax effort has meant that infrastructure needs are extremely high and growing. The
legacy o f the 1994/95 crisis remains with Mexico, with poverty levels only now recovering to
early 1990 levels. And after 10 years, the initial economic advantages o f NAFTA are being
offset by increasing global competition, with China displacing Mexico as the second trading
partner o f the U S in late 2003.

H o w are these transitions linked to poverty reduction? Although Mexico has made
vi.
important gains in health and education, l o w and inequitable growth has kept income poverty
high. Improved economic growth i s constrained by l o w levels o f human capital, inadequate
infrastructure and weak institutions (inadequate competition, property rights, private sector
f i r m s s t i l l emerging from a history o f rent-seeking).
Mexico also faces significant
environmental degradation and water scarcity which could threaten growth, social welfare and
poverty alleviation. Solutions to these problems are interconnected and require deep
institutional change within government and state-society interactions. The competitiveness
agenda i s crucial to poverty dynamics via j o b creation. And the institutional agenda i s
fundamental for competitiveness (the judicial system for example), for environmental
management and to improve basic services to the poor.
vii.
Taking into account this rich and complex set o f challenges, the WBG will work in
multisector clusters to adapt to these inter-related issues building o n i t s strong partnership
with government counterparts and working to adopt country processes in procurement,
financial management and safeguards. W e will use the best o f our new lending instruments,
including SWAPS, repeater projects and financial products. These will be complemented by
analytical work and by WBI learning and capacity building programs, which will be closely
integrated with the country program. IFC’s program would continue to support efforts to: (a)
enhance competitiveness o f the private sector; (b) h r t h e r deepen the financial sector; (c)
promote investments in areas newly opened for private sector participation; (d) encourage
sustainable social and environmental development; and (e) promote good corporate
governance. I F C will implement this strategy through: (a) direct financing for larger clients to
whom I F C can provide otherwise unavailable long-term financing and best practice expertise;
(b) financing through intermediaries to reach small enterprises; and (c) targeted financing to
small projects expected to have a high impact and a good probability o f success.
viii.
The SHCP and the Bank have agreed to work in partnership during this CPS period
(FY05-08) to implement a lending program that best addresses Mexico’s development needs
as a creditworthy middle-income country and enhances the Bank’s ability to respond quickly
to changing circumstances. A lending range o f US$O.8 to US$1.7 billion a year i s proposed
in order to promote the country’s key development objectives supported through this CPS.
The proposed lending range i s consistent w i t h careful risk management, in view o f the
government’s sound macroeconomic policies, its prudent debt management strategy, and the

2

projected evolution o f Bank exposure. In the event o f any significant changes in the proposed
program, we would return to the Board with a CPS Progress Report.
ix.
The proposed strategy faces risks such as Congressional paralysis to implement
reforms and the potential occurrence o f external shocks (such as a downturn in o i l prices, a
stalled U S recovery, or contagion from shocks in other markets). There i s also the r i s k that
more selectivity in Bank operations makes the lending program more sensitive to some
operations being dropped. However, the focus o f the CPS heeds the lessons learned during
the last decade and the implementation o f the proposed program has been designed with the
management o f these r i s k s in mind.
x.

Board members may wish to discuss the following aspects o f the CPS:
0

0

The proposed strategy to use programmatic assistance, organize thematic support
groups and incorporate flexibility in the lending program; and
The proposal to move to country systems in procurement, financial management
and safeguards during the CPS period.

3

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Mexico was presented to the Board in
April 2602. I t was organized in line with the development challenges addressed in the
country’s 2001-2006 National Development Plan presented by the then new administration o f
President Fox. In addition to a comprehensive program o f lending and non-lending services,
the program included operations to support government reforms in pensions, finance,
decentralization and infrastructure that have not yet been implemented due to lack o f
legislative support-no single political party has a majority in Congress.
2.
Consistent with Mexico’s status as a major middle-income country and OECD
member, as well as to realign the Bank’s support to the government’s priorities for the
remainder o f President Fox’s term, the government and the Bank have agreed to implement in
partnership a new CPS to cover fiscal years 2005 through 2008, going into the beginning o f
the next presidential term. This CPS proposes a selective program o f IBRD and I F C
operations and a strategic program o f analytical and learning services to be provided by the
WBG, all built upon four strategic pillars to support Mexico’s efforts to: (a) reduce poverty
and inequality; (b) increase competitiveness; (c) strengthen institutions; and (d) promote
environmental sustainability.
11.

COUNTRY CONTEXT
POLITICAL,

SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENTS

3.
Mexico i s in the midst o f two major transitions: a political-institutional one, and an
economic one.
The political system i s going through a process o f renewal and
democratization. The election o f President Fox in July 2000 marked an important shift
towards increased political pluralism and a more effective separation o f powers, providing
more checks and balances to the power vested in the President. Public decision-making i s
broadly shared among different political parties. Mexico’s recent democratic transition has
been a peacefbl and smooth process receiving widespread recognition at home and abroad.

4.

On the other hand, the rise o f pluralism at the federal level and the increasing interest
in the social and economic development agendas at subnational levels have hampered the
administration’s ambitious reform agenda. Because no party holds a majority in either house
o f Congress, the executive has had very limited success securing legislative approval o n i t s
reform proposals. The mid-term elections o f July 2003 confirmed the division o f electoral
preferences as n o single political party obtained a majority. All three major political parties
now stand a reasonable chance to win the next presidential election. While there s t i l l may be
a window o f opportunity to build consensus to pass some reforms, recent efforts o n much
needed fiscal reforms in December 2003 were not successful.

5.
The government’s agenda, outlined in i t s medium-term National Program to Finance
Development (PRONAFIDE) 2002-2006, includes major structural reforms in areas such as:
fiscal management to reassign responsibilities among the federal and state governments,
increase tax collection and reduce reliance o n o i l revenue; energy sector reform to allow for
private sector participation in meeting future demand; labor market regulation to reduce
rigidities that hinder employment and productivity; public sector workers’ pension reform to

4

assure financial sustainability; development bank modernization to improve effectiveness,
enhance corporate governance and increase operational efficiency; telecommunications
regulation to foster a competitive environment, increase coverage, improve quality and reduce
costs; and judicial modernization to strengthen the lower courts and make their operations
more transparent.

6.
The full implementation o f the government’s reform agenda i s expected to increase
potential output growth by about two percentage points due to higher public and private
investment as well as improvements in productivity growth. Given the current state o f the
economy, potential output growth i s estimated to be slightly below 4 percent, which, without
major reforms, i s unlikely to be sufficient to make noticeable progress in the reduction o f
widespread poverty. Moreover, the protracted stagnation o f economic activity over the past
three years has raised concerns about Mexico’s competitiveness and further highlighted the
need o f implementing a comprehensive reform agenda.
7.
Average annual real GDP growth in Mexico over the 2001-2003 period has been a
lackluster 0.6 percent. The slowdown o f the U.S. economy in 2001 and i t s hesitant recovery
reduced demand for Mexican non-oil exports. In addition, the reduction o f market share o f
Mexican non-oil exports to the United States from 11.4 percent in 2001 to 10.7 percent in
2003 suggests that Mexico may be losing out to competitive pressures from abroad. Exports
o f manufactured goods, which had quadrupled over the previous decade, have stagnated at
about US$ 141 billion annually over the past three years and are about 3 percent lower than
their historic high in 2000. Finally, a sharp contraction o f private investment, attributable to
global economic uncertainties and lack o f domestic structural reforms, generated a
deceleration o f domestic demand and contributed to the weak output growth performance.

8.
Notwithstanding disappointing growth, Mexico has been able to maintain financial
and price stability and access to capital markets during the global economic downturn and
emerging market turbulence o f the past few years. Unlike many past episodes o f economic
weakness, the recession was the first in Mexico’s recent history not associated with a balance
While there are still concerns about the loss o f
o f payments or financial crisis.
competitiveness, Mexico should be able to benefit from a sustained recovery in the U.S. and
attain higher rates o f economic growth over the CPS implementation period (see Table 1)
even in the face o f limited progress o n the country’s structural reform agenda. Industrial
production and trade figures for the last quarter o f 2003 already show a strong response to the
upturn in U.S. economic activity.

Source: Bank staffprojections based on Banco de Mixico, INEGI and SHCP

9.
Economic policy remains focused o n price stability as a precondition to economic
growth while, at the same time, pursuing structural reform to boost private investment and
increase the country’s medium-term competitiveness and growth. Monetary policy i s aimed

5

at achieving a medium-term inflation target o f 3 percent with a margin o f plus/minus 1
percent. The gradual decline in inflation over the past few years and a 2003 year-end inflation
within the medium-termtarget range has contributed to the credibility o f the monetary policy
framework and the authorities’ commitment to the medium-term goals. This, in turn, has
allowed the easing o f monetary policy, leading to substantially lower domestic market interest
rates, and the development o f the longer-term fixed-rate debt market (the government recently
issued a 20-year fixed rate peso denominated bond). Historically l o w interest rates are also
improving the availability o f credit to the private sector.

10.
The government has maintained tight fiscal policies, largely meeting its annually
established fiscal targets and setting objectives for further, medium-term fiscal consolidation.
Fiscal deficit targets have gradually been reduced, moving toward a balanced budget by the
end o f the government’s term. Automatic budget adjustment rules requiring expenditure cuts
in case o f lower-than-expected revenue and allocating higher-than-budgeted revenue have
been adopted and applied through the annual budget laws. A broader Public Sector
Borrowing Requirements (PSBR) deficit measure has also been adopted and i s published o n a
quarterly basis, strengthening the case for further medium-term fiscal consolidation.
Mounting public expenditure pressures in areas o f social sector spending, public
infrastructure, public sector pension reform, and declining o i l revenue will require a renewed
effort at tax reform.

11.
Mexico’s external accounts do not pose a risk to macroeconomic stability. The
country’s external deficit (i.e. the balance o f payments’ current account) has been reduced
over the past two years to about 2 percent o f GDP as a result o f strong o i l export revenue,
rapidly increasing workers’ remittances, lower interest payments o n external debt and
subdued net import demand.
Strengthening o f the external accounts and sound
macroeconomic management allowed the country to broaden access to international capital
markets and meet its external financing requirements.
12.
Mexico adopted a floating exchange rate regime following the balance o f payments
crisis o f 1994-95, with interventions in the exchange market normally limited to rule-based
mechanisms. The flexible exchange rate provides a useful buffer against external shocks,
such as a sudden fall in o i l prices, a significant drop in capital inflows or increased
international competition. Over the past two years the peso has depreciated substantially with
respect to the U S dollar due to several factors including relatively slow growth and limited
progress o n economic reforms. While depreciation may initially compensate for part o f the
deterioration o f external competitiveness, in the longer t e r m the depreciation will not be able
to substitute for economic reforms or public investment in infrastructure and education, which
are needed to enhance competitiveness and reduce poverty.

The internal economic transition i s proving much more challenging than would have
13.
been expected a decade ago. After the resolution o f the debt crisis (with the issuance o f the
Brady Bonds) and the implementation o f NAFTA, Mexico was believed to be in route for a
long and sustained period o f economic development. However, the mid-ninety’s crisis and
the recent slowdown o f economic activity highlight the fact that there are s t i l l unresolved
structural development challenges. The legacy o f the 1994-95 crisis remains with Mexico as
poverty levels only j u s t recovered to early 1990’s levels and the advantages brought by
NAFTA could be undermined if Mexico does not tackle the competitiveness agenda.

6

POVERTY: PROFILE AND TRENDS

14.
Poverty in Mexico remains widespread. The 2000 official poverty numbers indicate
that about 53 percent o f i t s population was suffering from income-poverty (defined as having
a l e v 4 o f per capita consumption below what i s needed to meet basic food and non-food
needs), and close to 24 percent was extremely poor (below what i s required to meet basic food
needs for adequate nutrition).' In 2000, 12.6 percent o f the urban population and 42.4 percent
o f the rural population was extremely poor.* Preliminary government estimates for 2002
indicate a small decline in the broad conception o f poverty to about 52 percent and a
significant fall in extreme poverty to 20 percent. 11 percent o f the urban population and 35
percent o f the rural population was extremely poor. In terms o f aggregate numbers, most o f
the poor live in urban areas, yet poverty in rural areas i s more severe.

15.
There has been a slow long-run progress in the reduction o f income poverty, overlaid
with a dramatic impact o f the 1994-95 economic crisis. However, achievements have been
imbalanced with important gains in health and education and lack o f progress in income
poverty. Subsequent to the crisis, there i s a divergent relationship between poverty dynamics
and national income growth in different periods. From 1996-2000, the economy grew at 5.5
percent per annum, but poverty fell slowly. In 2000, although mean income per capita had
increased 11 percent in real terms compared to 1994, poverty had not recovered to pre-crisis
levels, and unskilled wages had decreased by 22 percent in real terms. The share o f the
population in extreme poverty in 2000 was s t i l l above the pre-crisis level o f 1994 by four
percentage points in rural areas, and by three percentage points in urban areas. By contrast, in
the 2000-2002 period, despite a fall in per capita income o f over 2 percent, poverty declined,
with the 4 percent decline in extreme poverty o f particular note. Preliminary analysis by the
government finds that this was due to an equalizing pattern o f income growth-heavily
influenced by transfers, remittances, and growth in l o w skilled wages-in this period, with
significant growth for the bottom deciles and a substantial decline for the top decile.
16.
Despite this decline in poverty, achieving the MDGs will remain a challenge in
Mexico. Assuming n o change in income distribution and with an average yearly growth rate
o f 3.5 percent GDP per capita, Mexico i s unlikely to meet the goal o f reducing extreme
poverty by h a l f by the year 2015 (see Table 2). To do so, it i s estimated that Mexico needs a
sustained growth rate o f at least 5 percent, which has not happened since the 1970's. Mexico
i s also unlikely to reduce under-five mortality by two-thirds and maternal mortality by three
quarters. However, it i s likely to achieve universal primary education, the elimination o f
gender disparity in all levels o f education, and the reversal o f the spread o f HIV/AIDS.
Moreover, in the recent past, income growth o f the extreme poor, especially in rural areas, has
been lower than the average so specific efforts will be needed to reach the most disadvantaged
groups o f the society in order to enable them to catch up with the rest o f the population.

' SEDESOL works with three poverty lines: food-based poverty, based on estimated food requirements to provide adequate
nutrition assuming consumption pattems of the poor; plus two higher lines that respectively add requirements for education
and health, and for clothes, housing and transport. The first (extreme poverty) and third (poverty) lines are quoted here.
CortCs, Fernando, Daniel Hernandez, Enrique Hemhdez, Miguel Szekely, and Hadid Vera, 2002.
7

Table 2. Mexico and the Millennium Development Goals
Goals

I

Current Position of Mexico*

Projected position b y 2015

1. Reduce the proportion ofl
peopre living h extreme
poverty and those who
suffer from hunger by half
between 1990 and 2015.

In 1992, the official Mexican food based I Assuming an average annual economic
growth rate of 3.5 %, the proportion o f
poverty was 22.5% and in 2002, i t was
people below the official food based
20.0%.
poverty line would be reduced to 13.0%.
An increase of the annual average economi
growth rate to at least 5.0% would be
needed to attain reduction of extreme
poverty by half.

2. Enroll all children, boys
and girls, in primary school
by 2015.
3. Eliminate gender
disparity in basic
education, preferably by
2005, and to all levels of
education no later than
2015.
4. Reduce by two thirds the
under-five mortality rate
between 1990 and 2015.

In 1995, 94.1% of children 6-12 were
enrolled in primary school; in 2002,
95.4%.
In 1990, there was a 5% gender gap in
basic school and 25% in higher
education; in 2000 i t was 2 4 % for a l l
levels of schooling.

Net primary school enrollment i s projected
to increase to 96.8 %, practically full
coverage.
There are no strong concerns regarding
gender disparity in (basic) education in
Mexico, more important for Mexico i s the
gap for indigenous groups.

In 1990,44.7 per 1,000 under-five
mortality rate, and 27.4 per 1,000 infant
mortality rate; in 2000 i t was 25.2 and
17.9 respectively.

Under-five and infant mortality are
projected to continue their reduction to 18.5
and 12.5 per 1,000 respectively, a reduction
by an important 55-60 % though slightly

the maternal mortality ratio
between 1990 and 2015.

57 per 100,000 live births for 1990 and
2002 respectively. Correcting for
underreporting the number of matemal
mortality would increase to 85 and 79 for
1990 and 2002 respectively.
In 1990,51.9per 100,000 was the
malaria morbidity rate; in 2001, i t was
4.9. Deaths due to tuberculosis were 4.1
per 100,000 in 1990, and 2 in 2000. The
HIV prevalence for female ages 15-24 i s
0.05-0.08% and in males it i s 0.17-0.26%

practically stagnated over the past decade
which makes i t unlikely for the rate to be
reduced by three quarters by 2015.

6. Have halted and begun
to reverse the spread of
HIV/AIDS and the
incidence o f malaria and
other major diseases by
2015.

I

Already a major reduction in the death rate
due to malaria and tuberculosis has been
attained over the past decade. HIV AIDS
prevalence is yet at a very low level.

Goal
Achievemen

I

Unlikely

Likely

Likely

Unlikely

Unlikely

Likely

(1999).

* Source: Word Bank staff Calculations based on: Fuentes, R.. and Montes, A. “Country Case Study Towards the Millennium Developme

Goals at the Sub-National Level: Mexico”, Ministry of Social Dev 2003

111.

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

17.
Mexico’s 2001-2006 National Development Plan defines a “Vision o f Mexico in
2025” stating that i t “will be a fully democratic nation w i t h a high quality o f l i f e that will have
reduced its extreme social imbalances and will offer its citizens opportunities for integral
human development and a living coexistence based o n the full respect o f the r u l e o f l a w and
o f human rights. I t will be a dynamic nation, with leadership in the world, with a stable and
competitive growth and with an all-inclusive development process in harmony with the
environment. I t will be a nation proudly sustained in i t s roots, multi-ethnic and multicultural,
w i t h a profound sentiment o f national unityyy3.
The government has stressed the importance o f
fighting poverty and inequality. In President Fox’s Presidential Address to the Nation
delivered o n September 1, 2003, he stated that social development and the fight against
poverty and inequality are the highest priority to his administration and summarized the
government’s programs oriented to promote effective social policies.
3

National Development Plan 2001-2006, page 37; and also pages 73,97, and 127 for further details in the areas
o f human and social development, growth with quality and order and respect.

8

18.

The National Development Plan defines the following basic objectives:
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e

Strengthen social capital and social cohesion
Improve levels o f education and well being
Increase equity and equality o f opportunities
Manage the economy in a responsible manner
Increase and expand country competitiveness
Promote balanced regional development that includes all segments o f the
population
Promote education for the development o f personal capacities as well as o f
individual and collective initiatives
Establish a new framework o f democratic governance
Increase citizen confidence in its institutions, reduce the level o f corruption, and
give absolute transparency to public sector management and performance.
Promote a new federalism with the transfer o f functions and responsibilities to
State and municipal governments
Guarantee an expeditious and efficient judicial system
Promote development in harmony with nature and the environment

19.
Furthermore, the 2002-2006 PRONAFIDE outlines the actions needed to finance the
National Development Plan objectives. This CPS proposes to support the government’s
efforts to finance i t s development objectives detailed above addressing them in four pillarsreduce poverty and inequality, increase competitiveness, strengthen institutions and promote
environmental sustainability (see Annex 1 for more details)-under which this section o f the
document groups the analysis o f the main development challenges that Mexico faces today.
These four pillars are strongly interconnected. The competitiveness agenda i s crucial to
poverty dynamics via j o b creation. The institutional agenda i s fundamental to improve basic
services-especially
for the poor, make institutions more competitive, and strengthen
environmental management.
REDUCE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY

20.
As already introduced in the profile and trends section, poverty in Mexico remains
widespread and suffers from four persistent characteristics: (a) although reduced, absolute
poverty (below SEDESOL’s asset poverty line) numbers remain unacceptably high (some 5 1
million Mexicans are s t i l l poor); (b) there i s sharp inequality in the distribution o f income,
which has been resilient to policy interventions; (c) the incidence o f extreme poverty in rural
areas i s abnormally acute (in 2000, 42 percent o f the rural population lived in extreme
poverty); and (d) there s t i l l i s wide development gap between the South and the rest o f
Mexico (southerners are far poorer, less educated, less likely to have running water, and more
likely to die younger). At the same time, urban poverty remains a challenge, which requires
new approaches beyond the rural focus o f most previous interventions. These characteristics
gather additional urgency when seen in the light o f the available employment opportunities
for the poor-while unemployment has remained low, some 1.5 m i l l i o n new jobs are needed
each year just to accommodate new entrants into the labor force. At the peak o f i t s recent
growth performance, the Mexican economy managed to create only about 600,000 formal
jobs. Thus, dealing with the increasing informal sector must be at the center o f any poverty
reduction initiative.
9

21.
The remaining challenges in reducing poverty and inequality, point to an enhanced
development agenda-one that combines the effect o f a solid macroeconomic framework and
sustained growth with policy interventions by sector and region in order to bring the benefits
o f growth to all Mexicans. This encompasses reform challenges affecting income growth,
social protection, education, health, specific needs o f indigenous peoples, women, and the
rural and urban poor, basic infrastructure, and housing.
22.
Income Dynamics. Reducing income poverty depends primarily o n the expansion o f
labor incomes-in formal sector jobs, in the informal sector, and in the rural agricultural and
non-farm sector. This i s powerfully influenced by economic growth, and i s intimately linked
with policies for competitiveness (see next section). Policy can also influence the pattem o f
growth, in ways that encourage income growth in poorer segments o f the society, and so
lower income inequalities. Action in a number o f intersecting areas is needed. Formal j o b
creation will require measures that improve the investment environment o f medium and large
firms, including policies that reduce disincentives for formal j o b creation whilst protecting
There i s a complementary agenda o f improving the investment
basic labor rights.
environment for micro and small enterprises, including micro entrepreneurs, through
measures that improve property rights, provide quality infrastructure and financial services to
small firms, regulatory reform to reduce costs o f doing business and technical assistance. The
government has recently introduced i t s I M P U L S O strategy to make a systematic effort to
address the income growth agenda for the moderate urban poor. The major challenge in rural
poor areas i s to shape rural development policy, including territorial strategies, around the
needs and productive potential o f peasant farmers, including in particular indigenous groups,
and provide the infrastructure and other economic services that will support the rural nonfarm sectors. Migration to cities and abroad will continue to be a major route out o f poverty
for some areas; continued efforts to develop a more efficient formal system to reduce the cost
o f remittances and make them more transparent, as w e l l as measures to facilitate rural
financial services, would harness the development potential in worker remittances. Finally,
special attention needs to be given to the overall spatial distribution o f development, for
example through reducing costs o f intemal transportation within Mexico.
23.
Social Protection. The social security system covers only 1 in every 5 o f the urban
elderly population, and only 2 percent o f the total poor. In social insurance, the pension
system has benefited the formal, middle-class workers, and left out the informal, the poor, and
the unemployed. Mexico has begun to fill parts o f this gap through OPORTUNIDADES
(formerly PROGRESA), a direct income transfer arrangement for the poor conditional o n the
use o f selected education, health, and nutritional services. Yet, important gaps in the social
protection system remain, particularly among the rural poor without access to health and
education services and the urban poor to which programs such as OPORTUNIDADES have
only recently been extended.
24.
Education. The poor have benefited from centralized outreach programs designed to
provide service to marginal rural areas. Increased spending in education has allowed for near
universal access to primary education and secondary enrollment i s high and continues to
increase. Public spending in higher education, however, continues to be highly regressive and
access by the poor remains a challenge. Moreover, while coverage has increased in basic
education, the out-of-school adult population without secondary education remains a
challenge, requiring greater emphasis on non-formal education in order to respond to the

10

demands o f a modernizing economy. Such demands are also placing a premium o n the
quality in education, where the system in general lags. A systemic effort would require going
beyond the centralized approach and involves decentralized governments, who are responsible
for basic education services, and collaboration with communities and teachers.
25.
Health. Mexico has used centralized institutions and vertical programs to control
infectious diseases and increase prevention and education among the poor through the
provision o f services in marginal rural areas. This has helped bring about important advances
with lower infant mortality, higher vaccination rates, and higher l i f e expectancy. These and
other factors have begun to change the country’s epidemiological profile, and n o w chronic
diseases and injuries are becoming the main causes o f death and disability. In addition, the
challenge n o w i s to continue efforts in creating an equitable healthcare delivery system with
improved quality and the alleviation o f the financial burden o f catastrophic illness that
exacerbate poverty. While the population engaged in the formal labor market benefits from
health insurance more than h a l f o f the labor force i s in the informal sector and remains largely
uninsured (more than 80 percent in the South).
26.
Excluded Groups. The challenge o f human capital formation i s particularly difficult
for three, overlapping social groups-women,
indigenous populations, and the rural poor.
Longstanding demands-regional, rural, indigenous-have been heightened by the political
opening, the poor growth performance and international integration. Socially ascribed gender
roles have placed women at a clear disadvantage in terms o f health (especially reproductive
health), labor, and personal safety. Similarly, about 1 in 10 Mexicans defines himself or
herself as indigenous and may hold a different set o f economic values, whereby assets
(especially land) are non-tradable sources o f group identity, community benefit i s held in
higher regard than individual profit maximization, traditional social governance bodies are
trusted over those dictated by the country’s laws, social organization i s based o n prestige and
civic duty, and the language o f preference (and frequently the only language) i s not Spanish.
These overlapping groups, themselves, are concentrated in the southern States, which underperform the rest o f the nation, specifically in the areas o f education, health and the provision
o f basic services. In 2000, access to piped water was 20 percent below the national average,
enrollment o f school age population was 10 percent less, and deaths per 1,000 births averaged
5.4 more than nationally. In order to “catch up” with the nation, these States must address
challenges related to l o w income per capita, smallhemote localities, and large proportions o f
rural and indigenous populations, in addition to the inefficient use o f existing resources and
the need for additional resources to move forward at a faster pace.

Basic Infrastructure. Large numbers o f people are without access to basic
27.
infrastructure services, undermining efforts at human capital development: 13.2 million
without piped water, 23.7 million without sanitary drainage, and 5.4 m i l l i o n without
electricity. Transport, particularly in rural areas, i s lacking and hampers the poor’s ability to
access markets and services-road coverage i s high in Mexico, but public transport (whether
privately or publicly provided) i s sorely lacking. In addition, the quality o f service i s poor,
particularly among l o w income populations; for example, only about h a l f the households
living in poor urban neighborhood get water every day, 24 hours a day. This incomplete
coverage and poor quality o f infrastructure services continues despite the substantial inflow o f
public resources. Electricity subsidies, for example, account for nearly 3 percent o f public
expenditure, but do little for the poor since they are badly targeted.

11

I

28.
Housing. Mexico has a large housing deficit, currently estimated at 4 m i l l i o n units,
which i s worsening due to the rapidly growing demand (700,000 new households are formed
each year) and limitations o n funding availability. Currently, over 40 percent o f Mexicans
live in informal housing characterized by temporary construction materials, lack o f services,
insecurity o f tenure and, in many cases, situated in areas at risk for natural disasters (68
percent o f people affected by natural disasters are poor). Despite progress in financial sector
reforms including recent substantial enhancement o f secured lending regulations, the housing
market s t i l l faces problems o f dysfunctional land markets, which also hinder efficient
agricultural production in rural areas. Finally, only 20 percent o f urban Mexicans and even
fewer rural ones have access to financial services, limiting their ability to save, invest and
manage risks. At year-end 2002, the total mortgage debt represented 3.1 percent o f GDP,
compared to 12, 15, and 68 percent for Colombia, Chile and the U.S., respectively. In urban
areas effective programs have yet to be tested and will require a greater role by municipalities
and overall reforms in factors markets. The market i s very segmented with banks providing
financing only to the higher income brackets and SOFOLES focusing mostly o n the l o w to
middle income housing segment. Past experience in rural areas suggests that this will not be
an easy task.
Increased spending alone will not bring sustained changes without
improvements in housing and land markets, in access to financial services, and in local
government capacity and accountability.
Box 1. Highlights of Government Programs to Reduce Poverty and Inequality

Through SEDESOL, the current administration i s seeking to coordinate and develop as needed, programs tc
address social risks through a life-cycle approach (CONTIGO) and an inter-ministerial body has been created foi
this effort. Moreover, the effectiveness and impact o f social programs has become an increasing priority anc
annual evaluations are n o w mandated by law. In concert, the Health Secretariat (SSA) through the new Genera
Health L a w i s expanding i t s pilot program o f Seguro Popular, which seeks to provide health insurance for the
uninsured poor. The L a w provides the framework needed for reforms in health services, together with privatr
(IMSS) and public (ISSSTE) providers and insurers, in pursuit of a more equitable system with quality and
financial protection. In education, the Education Secretariat (SEP) i s continuing i t s efforts to increase access ta
education by the rural poor through the C O N A F E program, where important achievements have been seen on
the quality side as well, and has inaugurated new programs targeting the rural poor.
Sustainable poverty reduction, however, needs to go beyond interventions to support human capital
development to encompass “economic empowerment” o f the poor. The continuing high levels o f poverty and
persistent inequity which has largely been immune to the effects o f growth will require more emphasis on
interventions in the economic aspects o f poverty. The framework for this approach i s being developed unde1
CONTIGO. While the job-creation strategy l i e s mainly in the environment for private investment, CONTIGO i s
pursuing an asset-based strategy focusing o n land regularization and patterns o f infrastructure provision,
complemented by actions to reduce regulatory burdens o n small enterprises. Helping the poor to build physical
and financial assets would provide a means to better cope with economic shocks and improve their l o t over time.
In addition to its OPORTLJNIDADES program that focuses o n the extreme poor, the government has recently
introduced i t s I M P U L S O strategy to address the income growth agenda for the moderate urban poor. Also, to
facilitate access to financial services by micro- and small-enterprises, as w e l l as the self employed, the
government also established BANSEFI.
The current administration established a n e w mortgage financing institution Sociedad Hipotecaria Federal,
enhanced secured lending regulations, has made housing a priority and expects to bring construction o f new
u n i t s up from i t s current level o f 400,000 per year to 750,000 new units by the end o f the presidential term. The
sector i s undergoing structural changes as the government i s shifting i t s role from financing construction to
providing guarantees to SOFOLES so that these can raise themselves financing in the markets and effectively tap
the capital markets for both construction and long-term mortgage financing.

12

INCREASE
COMPETITIVENESS
29.
Mexico enjoyed the benefits o f the global economy, particularly NAFTA, through the
last h a l f o f the 1990s. From 2000 to 2002, however, Mexico’s exports have slipped and the
‘maquila sector’ has shrunk more than 15 percent losing jobs and f i r m s to other regions, in
part due to the economic slowdown in the U.S. but more worrisome due to the increased
competition from other countries. In 2003, China surpassed Mexico as the United States’
second largest trading partner after Canada. While China’s exports to the U.S. increased
about 55 percent in the last three years, preliminary numbers indicate that Mexican exports to
the U.S. in 2003 were below the 2000 level. This has come not only as a result o f China’s
lower labor costs but also, among other reasons, fi-om policies that created an environment
that has enabled massive private sector investment and growth. Such policies were directed at
improving education quality and labor skills, providing more access to financing, improving
infrastructure and reducing logistics costs, raising investment in R&D, and moving into
higher value-added manufacturing activities, including high-tech.
30.
Mexico’s survival and growth o f both i t s large export-oriented firms and its small- and
medium-sized f i r m s poised to enter global markets will depend o n their capacity to compete
o n a world level. Traditionally growth in Mexico has been driven by labor market growth and
(to a lesser extent) capital accumulation. During the last decade, Total Factor Productivity
(TFP) contribution has been minimal (0.12 percent from 1991 to 2000). Increasing private
sector labor productivity, in the face o f rising external pressures, will require reduced costs o f
financing accompanied by greater access to financial services, infrastructure, logistics
services, efficiently regulated public-utility services, and skilled labor; less cumbersome
government regulations and procedures; greater dynamism at sub-national levels; enhanced
corporate governance in both public and private sectors; improved products and services; and
better integrated supply chains (an area with considerable growth, income, and employment
opportunities for the development o f small and medium size enterprises).
3 1.
Trade. Trade facilitation within the NAFTA had early positive results although the
advantage o f preferential access to the U.S. market i s rapidly being eroded by international
competition. This will be further worsened with the expiration o f preferential treatment in
agriculture under NAFTA and the decrease in U.S. tariffs with respect to other countries that
compete with Mexico. Also, Mexico has had limited success in providing incentives for
European and Asian f i r m s to re-invest. Incentives for maquilas to establish strategic alliances
outside o f NAFTA are weak, partly explained by labor rigidities (see below). Finally, illegal
trade and corruption through triangularization o f imports from Asia to Mexico and uneven
application o f quality norms reduce the benefits o f NAFTA.
32.
Financial Sector. A broad-based and efficient financial system i s key to Mexico’s
competitiveness. Government’s success in establishing macro-economic stability and sector
reforms-including
putting in place an adequately capitalized banking system with solid
regulatory, supervisory and loan recovery frameworks-helped the country move beyond the
1995 crisis and set the stage for the recovery o f the domestic credit market. However, further
recovery o f the demand will only happen if higher rates of economic growth are attained and
additional reforms aimed at broadening access to finance are implemented. While top tier
companies with sound finances can raise domestic funding at very attractive rates, access to
financing s t i l l remains very limited-credit to the private sector amounts to about 25 percent
o f GDP, less than h a l f o f the share in Chile and one seventh o f the one in China. Moreover,
13

the demand for external capital by the non-banking private sector has continued to decrease
(see Figure 1 below). And, although issuance o f domestic paper by the private sector has
increased considerably during the last two years, selected top tier companies account for more
than two-thirds o f the market. For particular groups o f middlekmall companies and
individuals access to financing i s even more limited (about 75 percent o f adults in
metropolitan areas and about 85 percent o f individual entrepreneurs are unbanked), with
consequences for the payment systems and limiting investment choices and r i s k management
activities. Broader availability o f funds for continued investment i s crucial to Mexico’s
competitiveness.
Figure 1. Credit to the Non-banking Private Sector
External N e t Debt Flows to
the Non-Banking Private Sector

Domestic Credit to the Private Sector as % o f G D P

7.5
6.0

a 4’5

2
Y)

3.0
1.5

1996

1997

1998

1999

Zoo0

2001

Banking 0 Non-Banking

2002

2003*

0.0

* Jan-Nov

15%

1997

1998

1999

Zoo0

2001

2001

2003*

* Jan-Sep

Infrastructure and Logistics. Reliable and affordable public utility services and
infrastructure within a framework o f fiscal restraint also form an important challenge for
Mexico. The collapse o f investment in infrastructure from levels between 2 and 2.5 percent
o f GDP in most o f the 1980’s and first h a l f o f the 1990’s to levels between 0.8 and 1.3 percent
of GDP in the second half o f the 1990’s points to the major challenges remaining after
privatization and public sector reform, as w e l l as to the importance o f tax reform to regain
higher investment levels. In the case o f the energy sector, improving the business climate
calls for further unbundling o f activities, strengthening regulatory frameworks, increasing
private investment, and enhancing corporate governance. Hydrocarbons i s the largest sector
in the economy and Petrbleos Mexicanos (PEMEX) has a major challenge ahead to up
production and improve its efficiency and accountability. Under a business-as-usual
scenario, Mexico will need to import 25 percent o f its natural gas needs in the next decade.
Although electricity services are today reasonably reliable, some 40 percent o f the Comisibn
Federal de Electricidad (CFE)’s installed capacity i s over 35 years old and i s due for
replacement, and concerns about the reliability o f electricity supply are impacting today’s
foreign investment decisions in the industrial sectors. At the same time, the Kyoto Protocol
could open the way for Mexico to develop a large market in carbon trading. Limited
independent regulation has hampered efficiency gains from private participation in affected
sectors-notably r a i l and telecom. The latter, in particular, has yet to show the hllbenefits o f
privatization. Lastly, Mexico’s logistic costs at about 18 percent o f GDP are high compared
to other OECD countries. This erodes the location competitive advantage that Mexico has
vis-h-vis the U.S. Increases in efficiency and reduction in costs o f the various components o f
the logistics chain (ports, customs, transport services, border passage, multi-modal services,
and safety-security costs add 5 to 7 percent to the value o f goods in Mexico, in comparison
to a more common figure o f around 1 percent) are a priority.

33.

14

Labor. Integration into the global economy i s also creating demands in labor force
34.
training. Mexico has been successful in reaching near universal primary and secondary
enrollment and attention i s now focused o n education quality and non-formal education. At
the tertiary education level, access and coverage lags noticeable in comparison to i t s OECD
partners. The poor match between supply and demand for skills points to the need to improve
the quality o f education, strengthen l i n k s between the education system and industry, and to
increase coverage o f tertiary education, especially among the poor. Labor and laborassociated costs (social security, pensions, housing, etc.) in Mexico are rigid and high
compared to other peer countries. Strict firing regulations and an emphasis o n j o b stability in
the labor laws limit hiring modalities and force companies to absorb wages as fixed costs,
reducing the firm’s ability to retool in reaction to a changing external environment. These
issues, combined with weak labor-dispute settlement mechanisms form a big incentive to hire
workers informally. From 2001 to 2002, the informal labor force increased from 24 to 25.6
m i l l i o n workers while the formal labor force decreased from 15.3 to 15.1 million.
Judicial and Bureaucratic Procedures. Another challenge to competitiveness i s
35.
further streamlining and making more transparent judicial and bureaucratic procedures. I t
takes over 50 business days to register a business in Mexico compared with 2 days in Canada.
I t takes 325 days on average to resolve a business dispute in Mexico. Lack o f contractual
security has prompted entrepreneurs to resort to private agreements to resolve contract
breaches, or forego contracting with unknown clients altogether. Market exit and entry costs
are high as are the administrative burden for expanding productive chains to small enterprises
and the transaction costs surrounding tax payments. The rate at which States issue and
change norms compounds the uncertainty, as does the lack o f coordination among
government levels.
36.
Quality and Innovation. While Mexico has benefited from knowledge sharing w i t h
parent companies in the U.S., this has not translated into robust levels o f domestic innovation
and technology development. Technology transfer to Mexico has been very dynamic (behind
only Singapore, Ireland and Luxemburg and significantly better than comparator countries
such as Poland, Hungary and Malaysia). Domestic research and development has lagged,
however, as evidenced by a record o f patents and published research which falls far from
comparable countries such as Chile and Venezuela.
Moreover, the l o w level o f
transformation o f R&D into commercial applications points to inefficient use o f scarce
resources and poor collaboration between researchers and the private sector, magnified by the
difficulties associated with business start-ups, obtaining credit or venture capital.

Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). Further integration o f SMEs, including
37.
micro businesses and entrepreneurs, provides opportunities for improvements in growth,
income distribution and competitiveness. SMEs may represent as much as three quarters o f
total employment. Supply chain integration continues to be a challenge for SMEs, which lack
the knowledge and production techniques to improve quality for certification and to establish
l i n k s with larger f i r m s and export markets.
Agriculture. Agricultural growth, in spite o f trade and land reform and elimination o f
38.
price interventions, has been stagnant. The sector now faces the expiration o f preferential
treatment under NAFTA. Advancing and integrating agro-industry requires improved product
quality, certification and distribution processes, as w e l l as access to larger tracks of land.
Progress on these fionts-combined with actions outlined above in terms o f access to finance,

15

labor reform and reducing regulatory costs-will
internal markets and reach export markets.

help the agricultural sector develop i t s

Box 2. Highlights of Government Programs to Increase Competitiveness
The government’s competitiveness policy targets j o b recovery and retention, increasing export businesses
and stimulating the private sector in high value-added sectors. Implicit in this approach i s the recognition that
Mexico’s perceived competitive advantages-such as cheaper labor relative to, and geographical proximity to
the U.S-will eventually become irrelevant. Competitiveness must n o w come through reducing unnecessarily
high production costs, increasing productivity through technological upgrading, and establishing diversified
strategic sector associations. Reflecting the importance o f this endeavor, a Presidential Competitiveness Council
has been formed and twelve sectors have been identified for which integrated sector strategies will be
developed-five
o f which have been completed. These strategies include a broad set o f reforms to reduce
production costs through better product supplies and aligning their norms with those o f importing countries.
Since the mid-l990s, Mexico has embarked on substantial financial sector reforms aimed at bolstering
capitalization and soundness o f banks through an overhaul o f the supervisory system, resolution o f troubled
banks, and phasing out o f the universal deposit guarantee. M o r e recently, the government implemented
enhanced legislation to regulate savings and credit institutions, to strengthen secured lending, and took steps to
improve credit information systems. Reforms were implemented to improve its development banks’ efficiency
and reduce their associated fiscal costs-most
notably through the liquidation o f BANRURAL and the
establishment o f Financiera Rural and Sociedad Hipotecaria Federal.
Labor reform has been a subject o f much attention by the government and the public in general. After a
year o f negotiations, employers and employees have jointly placed a reform bill before Congress. This i s
complemented by increased efforts in science, technology and innovation through the creation and
implementation o f a coherent policy to increase collaboration with private firms. Accordingly, the C O N A C Y T
general director has been raised to a quasi-cabinet member, an independent line o f budget provided, and finding
increased and refocused to stimulate private R&D investment. The government has also placed considerable
emphasis on improving skills in the out o f school population through the creation o f the Consejo Nacional para
la Vida y Trabajo (CONEVyT) as a ministerial level agency.
The government has promoted the streamlining of business opening procedures and i s preparing a fast
track business entrCe system that would benefit 55 percent o f the economic activities registered in INEGI.
Similar regulatory improvements are also considered at the State and municipal levels. Efforts in judicial
system and procedures have focused o n criminal justice institutions and the judiciary in general. The presidents
o f the National Commission o f State Courts (NCSC), in collaboration with the Federal Government, SHCP and
BANOBRAS, have initiated a program to assist State judicial branches to improve their institutional structure,
efficiency, efficacy and transparency.
The government i s attempting to implement reforms in infrastructure and service sectors, focusing on
sector restructuring, competition and regulation to increase performance and investment. The government
presented to Congress without success an electric sector reform aimed at facilitating greater private participation
in generation and unbundling transmission and distribution. The government has begun granting concessions for
natural gas development and extraction and efforts are also underway to launch a system o f road concessions and
sustainable highway finance arrangements. In telecommunications, SCT i s focusing o n strengthening the
eegulatory framework within existing legislation, and working along with e-Mexico to close the digital divide.
The government has targeted actions to address SMEs. The government has targeted in particular those
inked to export markets with increasing access to financing, capacity building, and information services,
:omplemented by efforts on supply chain integration through funding for productive projects with regional
mpact. In the first h a l f o f 2002 alone, government funding help to set up 158 integrating businesses that j o i n
wer 2,899 SMEs.
In terms o f the rural sector, SAGARPA has developed a coherent framework for agricultural
levelopment policy and i s working to bring other secretaries into the framework for a more coordinated effort to
:hange in rural areas. Improved integration in factor markets has received support in terms o f access to finance
is outlined above, as w e l l as through S R A completion o f the land regularization program in the social sector.

16

STRENGTHEN INSTITUTIONS

39.
Over the past 15 years, multiparty political competition at all 3 levels o f government
has activated a democratic federal system, replacing the single party system that had been in
place €or decades. Making the new system fully operational, however, requires further
institutional reforms. The present administration, like the previous, seeks to leave an
institutional legacy o f transparency, accountability, and federalism that will hinder prospects
o f future political monopolies. The external opening o f the economy makes institutional
strengthening more urgent, because good institutional software seems to be the most
important contributor to sustained competitiveness and per-capita income growth. Also, the
economic opening makes institutional reform less vulnerable to reversal, as the benefits o f
international linkages increase the numbers o f people favoring the better institutions that
make Mexico more competitive. While the theme o f institutional strengthening could touch
o n most o f Mexico’s development challenges, the discussion here focuses o n what could
realistically be undertaken and o n what i s not covered elsewhere in the CPS.
40.
Civil Society and Inclusion. Democracy in Mexico, traditionally operated through
corporatist channels into a single party, n o w rightly takes place through multi-party
competition. Today, people have the option to be heard through civil organizations
independent o f parties, corporatist organizations (unions, chambers o f commerce, etc.) and the
government. I t i s particularly important for vulnerable groups, like indigenous peoples,
women and youth, to also have established institutional channels for expressing c i v i l society
views. Mexico’s public administration will benefit by having more efficient flows o f
information in both directions between decision-making levels and those in contact with
stakeholders, by building internal cohesion around clear objectives and shared strategies for
change, and by creating mechanisms for open exchanges o f ideas among officials at various
levels and in different agencies concerned with the same issues.

41.
Transparency and Anticorruption. The government has advanced many reforms to
improve transparency and reduce corruption, especially in the customs and procurement areas.
However, progress regarding government procurement i s uneven. In most agencies
procurement practice s t i l l emphasizes following complex procedures rather than getting the
best value for money for the public sector. One o f the actions to improve transparency was to
open to c i v i l society the monitoring o f government procurement processes for very large
contracts. Another important action was the creation o f the Federal Institute to Access
Information (IFAI) and the enactment o f the new law that makes disclosure o f certain
information mandatory. A major improvement in procurement processes was introduced with
the electronic procurement portal (COMPRANET) that allows for electronic management o f
bidding processes-the next generation o f COMPRANET will also include shoppingalthough the system i s not yet used at the State level. Likewise, financial management i s
strong in some areas, but weak in others, again leaving too many opportunities for corruption.
More and more government agencies have been making information public, but the quality
and coverage are uneven and until recently people had little chance to dig deeper with any
inquiry. Local services networks, one stop service centers, service quality, simplified
procedures, computer-based systems, automated controls and proper audit trails need further
development in order to provide higher quality o f services as well as accurate and timely
information to Mexico’s citizens.

17

Government Personnel-Civil Service and Pensions. A new L a w was recently
42.
passed to implement civil service in government. The c i v i l service should, while not
promising life-tenure, certify professional capability and achievements and define reasonable
career paths for public employees. I t should also provide j o b security for talented
professionals that want to pursue fruitful public sector careers without the need, as in the past,
to affiliate to a particular political party. Also, rapid growth o f public employment in the past
resulted in the use o f a pay-as-you-go pension system for public workers, w i t h generously
defined benefits for some sectors. With retirements accelerating and public employment
stalled, the system i s now going into deficit. More public employees are interested in
employment opportunities in the private sector, but they do not want to lose accumulated
pension benefits. A few years ago a reform o f the pension system for the private sector,
giving employees individual portable accounts, took care o f most o f these problems for the
formal private sector, and the government i s considering a similar reform for public pensions.
This strategy could also help address the problem o f subnational governments’ employee
pension systems,

43.
Fiscal Policy Institutions. Mexican fiscal policy has improved greatly in keeping
sustainable fiscal balances, even in the face o f recession. There is, however, s t i l l room to
improve the efficiency o f taxes (including contributions to social security, housing, etc.) to
raise revenue, as well as o f spending to better allocate resources to nation-wide priorities.
Congressional mandates and past concessions to special interests have put so many rigidities
in the budget that adjustments to revenue shortfalls or changing priorities tend to affect the
most flexible part o f public spending, investment; and VAT and income tax bases remain too
narrow, with too many exemptions.
Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations. The 1990s witnessed major expansions in the
44.
transfers and spending responsibilities for the subnational governments, but federalism needs
hrther reform to complete the transformations underway to achieve the outcomes desired.
Although a lot o f money now flows through State coffers (mostly to pay teachers and health
workers), not all levels o f government have ownership o f the decentralization process, as
unclear roles, strong links between unions and their federal sector ministries, and lack o f
political will by State governments lead to ineffective management o f key public services.
States also lack substantive tax bases, and the development bank B A N O B R A S has to
strengthen its function in order to get the SNGs access to international financing at
competitive rates.

45.
Strengthening Capacity o f SNG. Along with the SNGs’ problems o f inadequate
authority over their finances and spending, most o f them lack management capacity to do
more (there are a few exceptions, among the economically stronger States and municipalities).
Areas o f weaknesses include strategy design and investment planning for economic
development, results-based and efficient expenditure management to improve services
provided to the poorest population, procurement and financial management, tax
administration, crime and violence prevention, and justice administration.
Justice System. Mexico’s judicial system i s not meeting i t s objectives to secure
46.
property rights, facilitate stability in commercial and financial interchanges (contracts,
bankruptcy, etc.), foster a respect for cultural diversity, and provide security against crime and
violence. Marginalized groups like women and the indigenous suffer particularly from
judicial inefficiency. These shortcomings have both social and economic costs, in lost foreign

18

and domestic investment that would have fostered economic growth. Despite some reforms,
the thirty-two State judicial systems, which handle majority o f the country’s caseload, face
several institutional obstacles: (a) an inefficient, inaccessible and inequitable administration o f
justice; _(b) problems o f impunity, lack o f independence and corruption among judges,
resulting in a negative public perception of the judicial system; (c) poor communication and
coordination among criminal justice institutions; and (d) a general lack o f public knowledge
about the judicial system and citizens’ rights.
Box 3. Highlights of Government Programs to Strengthen Institutions
Transparency and anticorruption. In line with the government’s strong commitment to greater
transparency, the L a w o f Public Access to Information o f 2003 l e d to the creation o f a special office for thai
purpose; it has already opened computer kiosks in many public agencies, so people can download the
information they want. The C O M P R A N E T e-procurement program continues to expand i t s coverage. As this
develops into a comprehensive electronic project, it will accelerate the whole government’s efficiency and
effectiveness.
Government personnel. The government has developed an innovative and financially sound proposal for
reform o f ISSSTE (which would also help the overall fiscal situation and contribute t o more system reforms
underway in social protection and health). D e facto a professional c i v i l service has started to emerge with the
retention o f many senior staff in the historic political transition to a new party o f government in 2000-01. The
government i s implementing i t s new c i v i l service law, starting with the personnel accreditation process for midmanagement positions in the Federal Government and with an intensive pilot in SHCP.
Fiscal policy Institutions. Mexico has been implementing stronger fiscal management procedures, codified
in the 2002-2006 PRONAFIDE. SHCP i s re-engineering itself as a model for the rest o f the Federal
government, which includes streamlining i t s internal process as w e l l as reforming the budgeting and tax
administration processes with which the ministry interacts w i t h the rest o f government and the wider economy.
The contemplated budgetary reforms include medium-term financial planning, performance budgeting, treasury
reform, and more strategic public investment selection.
Intergovernmental relations. The government i s considering reforms to the Fiscal Pact and will h o l d the
Convencibn Nacional Hacendaria in February-July 2004 to push the dialogue among a l l levels o f government
further, possibly including wider fiscal reform. Spending management, particularly education, health, transport
and environment are also critical for making the new federalism actually work. The new mechanisms for SNGs
to borrow from the market seem to be working for the more creditworthy ones.
Strengthening capacity of SNGs. The government has on-going programs to strengthen SNG’s capacity,
especially through FORTEM for municipalities, for whom federal contributions have greatly increased since
1998. Preventing crime and violence became a responsibility for municipalities in 2000, according to a new
article o f the national Constitution. Mexico C i t y and one or two other large cities have hired private-sector firms
to assist in developing crime-abatement strategies.
Justice System. The National Development Plan (2001-2006) assigns a high priority to the justice sector.
The Federal Government has initiated e l Fondo Nacional de Seguridad Publica (FOSEG), a program of
assistance to Federal and State Public Ministries and other criminal justice institutions. State governments and
judiciaries recognize the need to improve the hnctioning of judicial institutions and strengthen the rule o f law.
The NCSC, in collaboration with the Federal Government, SHCP and BANOBRAS, has initiated a program to
assist State judicial branches in improving their: (a) institutional structure, organizational culture and knowledge
sharing; (b) efficiency and efficacy in service delivery; (c) transparency in case processing and public
information; and (d) accessibility.

19

PROMOTE
ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY
Mexico today faces tremendous pressure o n its natural environment. Available
47.
information o n Mexico’s environmental status suggests that severe degradation has taken
place in a number o f sectors-to the point where failure to reverse some o f the most
damaging environmental trends could not only act as a brake o n continued growth but in some
cases contribute directly to reduced social welfare and increased poverty. During the 1990s,
environmental deterioration was estimated at around 10 percent o f GDP. Approximately 90
percent was due to environmental degradation (mostly pollution) from economic activities; 10
Given the magnitude o f Mexico’s
percent represented natural resource depletion.
environmental challenges and the relatively short time that has passed since i t began to
formulate a comprehensive response, there remains a considerable unfinished agenda to
improve the environment over the next decade.

Environmental Governance. Since the mid-l990s, decentralization has become a
48.
key policy priority. The General L a w o n Ecological Balance and Environmental Protectionthe overarching Federal environmental law-and
other environmentally related Federal
legislation are complemented by State environmental laws. The shift towards greater
decentralization requires the implementation o f short and long term approaches in all sectors
including those involved in environmental management. However, cross-sectoral integration
o f environmental considerations into economic decisionmaking has not been sufficiently deep
and the evolution o f environmental policy implementation has not been accompanied by
adequate capacity building at State and municipal levels.
Complex decisionmaking
frameworks do little to promote sustainable water resources management in water-stressed
northern and central States. Similarly, critical reforms to extend water pricing from
municipalities and industrial users to the agricultural sector were rejected by Congress in
2001. Insufficient environmental competencies at the State and local level, combined with
limited authority to raise revenues from taxes or other charges, impedes decentralization o f
environmental management per federal and State laws.
49.
Environment and Livelihoods. Mexico has a wealth o f natural resources which, if
utilized in a sustainable manner, could serve as a driver o f growth in rural areas. With 1.3
percent o f the world’s land area, Mexico hosts about 12 percent o f known terrestrial
biodiversity and i s one o f the world’s 12 megadiverse countries. Mexico’s forests account for
over 100,000 permanent jobs and are home to 10 percent o f the national population. The
country i s unique in that 70 percent or more o f i t s forest area i s within the boundaries o f
ejidos and indigenous communities. Land tenure reforms in the 1990s gave many Mexican
farmers titles to property, thereby providing incentives to increase productivity in agricultural
and forestry activities and to consolidate small plots into viable farms. Innovative
mechanisms to permit banking and trading o f water, as w e l l as to increase operational and
maintenance costs in irrigation districts, promote more efficient water use among users.

50.
That said, Mexico’s natural resources have not been managed in a sustainable manner.
Water resource management i s perhaps Mexico’s most urgent environmental problem today,
and one that impacts heavily on the economy. The country i s slightly less than 2 m i l l i o n km2
in size and the population has quadrupled from 25 m i l l i o n in 1950, to 100 million today.
Population growth has occurred nationwide, but has been greater in the semi-arid and arid
north, northwest, and central regions, which are precisely the regions with greater economic
activity and where the major water shortage problems occur. H a l f the volume o f abstracted
20

groundwater i s pumped from overexploited aquifers. In 1975, 32 o f a total o f 653 aquifers
were considered overdrawn; there were 80 by 1985 and 100 by 2002, accounting for over 50
percent o f the country’s groundwater supply. Priority issues to be addressed include: (a) overexploitation o f surface and ground watg; (b) minimizinguse o f scarce water resource for l o w
value crops; (c) lack o f a strategic consensus between k e y stakeholders; (d) inadequate water
r i g h t s administration (mainly due to over-allocation o f water rights); and (e) high subsidies for
pumping groundwater and inappropriate pricing o f water.
In terms o f forest resources, Mexico suffers from one o f the world’s highest
51.
deforestation rates, around 1.2 percent per year. Based o n preliminary information from the
2002 National Periodical Forest Inventory, approximately 770,000 hectares o f arboreal forest
per year were lost between 1993 and 2000. Of this total, 66 percent takes place in tropical
forests, including areas o f high biodiversity value. The loss in natural resources places a
significant toll o n Mexico’s biological wealth: 2,582 species and subspecies o f birds,
amphibians, reptiles and mammals are at risk, o f which 41 are probably already extinct in the
wild, 1,215 are endangered or threatened with extinction, and 1,326 are subject to special
protection. The main immediate causes o f deforestation and forest degradation are forest
fires, illegal logging, extensive livestock production and clearing for agricultural purposes.
Unsustainable agricultural practices have led to high rates o f soil erosion and desertification,
which affect approximately 60 percent o f arable lands. Traditional and subsistence farming
has contributed to environmental degradation, encroaching o n forests and fragile land to boost
agricultural production. Fishing i s the cause o f over-exploitation and diminishing populations
o f many marine species o f commercial value, and thus o f the exhaustion o f fishing grounds
and damage to marine ecological networks.

Environment and Health. Mexico has a relatively high incidence o f illnesses that
52.
can be correlated with environmental variables, especially among vulnerable groups
(e.g., children, pregnant women, elderly). Such environmental variables include access to
safe water supply and basic sanitation, as well as exposure to air pollutants, hazardous
substances, and indoor air pollution in rural areas where wood-burning stoves are used. In
short, while in recent years Mexico has made significant progress in reducing the health
impacts o f pollution, efforts to diminish the impacts o f unsustainable development processes
need to be consolidated and extended.
Municipal waste management i s at an early stage. Municipal waste generation
53.
increased from 28 million tons to 31.5 million tons between 1993 and 2001, mainly reflecting
rapid population growth, high rates o f internal migration and urbanization. Proper disposal
capacity i s so inadequate that over h a l f o f municipal waste i s sent to uncontrolled and illegal
landfills. Illegal dumping o f solid waste often results in improper operation o f sewerage and
drainage systems, becoming a disease vector and creating public health risks. Local
governments do not have the capacity for proper waste management.
54.
In terms o f air quality, pollution levels have significantly declined overall in urban
areas during the last ten years, including in Mexico City. However, relatively high emissions
from industry, energy production and transport remain a challenge. Principal ambient air
quality problems in urban areas include ozone and suspended particles, principally from fossil
h e 1 combustion from industry and transport. As a result, while extremely high pollution
episodes have become rare, the number o f days in which atmospheric environmental
standards are exceeded has remained unchanged. While Mexico has assumed responsibilities
21

earthquakes.
Box 4. Highlights of Government Programs to Promote EnvironmentalSustainability

Environmental framework. The 200 1-2006 Environment and Natural Resources Program (ENRP]
provides a framework for the country’s environmental policy. The underlying pillars o f the ENRP include: (a)
integrated ecosystem management: focus on ecological rather than political boundaries in the management oi
water, land, air quality, forests and biodiversity; (b) policy integration: sustainable development as the shared
responsibility o f Federal ministries and institutions that represent distinct sectors o f the economy; (c)
decentralized environmental management: shift the emphasis f r o m prevention and control to stopping and
reversing degradation o f ecosystems. This policy implies: (a) restructuring and decentralization o f the federal
environment sector, calling for shared and coordinated environmental action across federal, State and municipal
levels; (b) inducing good behavior on the part o f environmental users through clear, efficient and innovative
regulation and the formulation o f incentives to promote efficient environmental performance; (c) provision and
valuation o f environmental services: improve management o f natural ecosystems and ensure that those who
benefit pay for these services; (d) enforcement o f environmental legislation: strengthen inspection and
compliance; and (e) public participation and transparency.
Addressing water scarcity. The government has set goals for its programs supporting sustainable resource
management. With respect t o the National Water Program, milestones include: (a) the development o f a
consensus on solutions to the water problem; (b) increase incentives for water conservation and increase
resources for investments and management through increase and rationalization o f water fee collection; (c)
improve water use and quality via better water rights and discharge administration, enforcement and through
efficient water markets; (d) promote conservation o f water resources by redirecting subsidies and other financial
resources on a pilot basis; and (e) take an integrated approach to wastewater treatment that takes into account
economic, social and environmental implications.
Promoting environmental health. Concerning environmental health, quantitative targets established under
the 2001-06 Environmental Health Action Program include: 30 percent reduction o f respiratory illnesses due to
exposure to atmospheric pollution and 60 percent reduction o f those due to children’s exposure to indoor
pollution; 15 percent reduction o f average population exposure to atmospheric pollutants; 70 percent reduction
o f incidence o f high child b l o o d lead levels; and a guarantee o f access to safe drinking water for 70 percent of
the population. The 2002 version o f the annual Federal L a w o n Water Taxes represented an important step
towards securing investment finance. I t earmarked the revenue f r o m abstraction and pollution taxes for
investment in water infrastructure, and made access to these fkds conditional on utilities agreeing to pay water
taxes in the hture. A related initiative i s the Program for the Modernization o f Water Utilities, whose purpose i s
to improve the operation o f these utilities in cities o f over 50,000 inhabitants and to attract private capital for
financing new infrastructure. Waste management goals and targets are included in the Program to H a l t and
Reverse Air, Water and Soil Pollution. National targets primarily focus on hazardous waste management.

22

IV.

THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
INPUTS TO DESIGN
THE STRATEGY

56.
The bof this CPS takes into consideration it vwiety o f inputs received from both
internal and external sources. On the one hand, brainstorming sessions with local staff in the
Mexico office and with WBG staff in headquarters were conducted at different stages o f
preparation, before holding the formal Regional Brainstorming meeting in December 2003.
Other internal sources taken into consideration were OED’s evaluations, the implementation
o f the current program, and the valuable country knowledge existing within the Bank’s
extended team working o n Mexico. On the other hand, the government, c i v i l society, and
other development partners provided key inputs to the strategy. In addition to working in
partnership with the SHCP (the Bank’s main counterpart) this strategy was also discussed
with other government institutions, including the Office o f the Presidency and sectoral
Secretariats.

Country Partnership Strategy Evaluation and AAA Review
57.
Mexico has been an important Bank client for decades. Especially over the past three
administrations, beginning with the election o f President Salinas in 1989 and through the
administrations o f Presidents Zedillo and Fox, the Bank had a substantial and wide-ranging
program o f lending operations, analytical work, and policy dialogue. In 2001, OED issued a
Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) that assessed the program from 1989 through 2000.
Although the climate for the Bank’s program in Mexico has changed in some important
respects, many o f the lessons from that C A E remain valid today. In addition, the recently
completed Country AAA Assessment (CAA) that covered analytical work during the FYO103 period also provides important lessons to consider when we look forward.

An important lesson o f experience i s that although Mexico i s one o f the largest LBRD
58.
borrowers, the Bank i s only a marginal actor in Mexico. Bank lending provides a very small
share o f public revenues and the government has ready access to alternative private financing.
The Bank’s advice and analytical work i s one among many sources o f expert advice and
analysis available to the government. This has two important implications. First, Mexico has
exercised high degrees o f ownership in i t s relationship with the Bank. I t involves the Bank
only in areas where it finds that the Bank can provide valuable assistance and where i t does
not perceive excessive Bank conditionality. Second, in order to provide value-added in
Mexico, the Bank has needed to do exceptionally good work, combining world-class
international experience and analytical skills with deep knowledge o f the country and i t s
institutions.
59.
When the Bank has been able to adequately mobilize and manage i t s human capital, it
has contributed significantly to policy debate and formulation in Mexico and, through i t s
lending operations, has aided effective implementation o f government investments and reform
programs. In the last 15 years, the Bank has provided valuable assistance in defining and
implementing investment programs and policy reforms in education, health, agriculture,
transport, environment, trade, pension, and other areas. However, the Bank has not always
been able to provide value-added, sometimes because the government has not accepted the
Bank’s engagement. The recent AAA assessment found that although the level o f dialogue

23

related to Bank’s analytical work was rated satisfactory, overall dissemination and strategic
relevance were found marginally satisfactory.

60.
The difficulties o f bringing non-financial value-added to Mexico certainly affected the
Bank’s efforts to develop a lending program. The SHCP appropriately sets ceilings o n the
expenditure programs o f line ministries without regard to financing sources. Therefore, from
the perspective o f a line ministry, a Bank loan does not add to i t s overall resource envelope.
Because o f this “non-additionality”, the line ministries have often been hesitant to ask for
Bank loans or accepted the technical assistance provided during loan preparation and then
used non-Bank resources for project implementation. They are concerned about the “hassle
factors”-Bank
procurement rules, audits, and safeguard requirements. On the other hand,
some ministries, where the Bank’s work i s better known, welcomed and benefited from the
Bank’s involvement through lending operations.
61.
According to the OED CAE, line ministries found that the Bank could have valueadded by: providing first-class policy analysis; giving an objective, outsider’s perspective;
sharing lessons o f international experience; using the Bank’s convening power to bring about
more productive dialogues among Mexican stakeholders; inducing greater coordination
among units o f the government; insisting o n technical norms for resource allocations that
might otherwise be subject to excessive political manipulation; and injecting a greater
measure o f discipline in project execution. However, if a line ministry has not had a
sustained, productive relationship with the WBG within i t s institutional memory, i t may not
perceive that these potential contributions are worth the “hassle factors”. This suggests that,
in defining its portfolio o f activities in this CPS, the WBG should focus o n areas where i t
already maintains productive relationships (or it can quickly start them) or where the WBG
can employ the best expertise (either i t s o w n or external) to help policy-makers deal w i t h
difficult questions. Moreover, the C A A panel specifically recommended that the AAA
program should be organized around a few organizinghnifying principles such as: (a)
competitiveness; (b) poverty reduction; (c) infrastructure, including water and sewerage
services; and (d) modernization o f institutions. The panel also stated, “In Mexico, accept that
AAA work and lending are more separated than i s normally the case. AAA i s more clearly an
end in i t s e l f in a middle income country such as Mexico than in most countries.”

62.
Historically there has also been a political aspect to the Bank’s reception in Mexico.
The Bank’s name evoked suspicion or even hostility from some elements o f Mexican society.
For this reason, even Mexican leaders who consider the Bank’s analytical work and
publications a valuable source o f ideas (Global Poll results in B o x 6) s t i l l worried that the
Bank’s association with certain sensitive reforms would be politically harmful. Even in areas
that were less politically sensitive, the govemment was sometimes reluctant to accept the
Bank’s public embrace. This may, in part, explain why overall dissemination o f analytical
work was found marginally satisfactory by the CAA. As policy debate and political
competition in Mexico have become more open and democratic, these concerns are
diminishing (Messages to the Bank from C i v i l Society in B o x 5). Nevertheless, the Bank
must s t i l l be aware that public endorsement o f certain programs and reforms might damage
their political viability-especially as the next, highly contested election approaches.

24

Program Implementation

63.
IBRD’s efforts to assist Mexico during the FY03-05 CAS were organized under five
strategic objectives: (a) consolidating the macroeconomic framework; (b) accelerating growth
through competitiveness; (c) human capital development; (d) balancing growth and poverty
reduction with environmental protection; and (e) building an efficient, transparent, and
accountable government. The program included a rich program o f analytical work and
offered a three-year US$5 billion lending envelope; however, annual new commitments were
only US$1.2 billion in FY03 and are expected to be below US$l.O billion in FYO4equivalent to an annual US$l .O-1.2 billion envelope-mainly
because major pension,
highway financing, and development banks reforms did not materialize as expected. As o f
February 29, 2004, the Bank’s exposure in Mexico was US$10.5 billion, representing 9.2
percent-second l a r g e s t - o f the Bank’s total portfolio. During the first six-months o f FY04,
the disbursement ratio o f the Mexico portfolio reached 13 percent-in line with the average
disbursement ratios presented in the previous four fiscal years. The portfolio under
implementation comprises 17 lending operations (see Annex BS) for US$3.6 billion in
commitments o f which US$2.3 billion are s t i l l available for disbursement (5 loans are
managed by ESSD, 7 by FPSI, 3 by HD and 2 by PREM). T w o operations represent actual
risk for an undisbursed amount o f US$724 million. The Bank also manages 7 full-size
GEF/PCF operations with only one at risk. This i s the largest GEF portfolio in the Bank.
64.
In order to monitor portfolio implementation, the Colombia and Mexico C M U
established an Implementation Team comprised o f Resource Management, Procurement,
Operations and Financial Management staff during FY03. The team’s main goal i s to
generate a broad view o f portfolio management and supervision among all operation support
units and within the department’s management team. One o f the first tasks implemented by
the new team was a Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR)-the first one done in
Mexico since M a y 1997-with the active participation o f our government counterparts, as
well as financial agents and executing institutions. The main issues identified during the
exercise were the generalized delays in effectiveness, the lack o f budget prioritization at the
sector level, the absence o f efficient financial intermediation to implement loans at the
decentralized level, the excessive number and not properly planned Bank missions visiting
Mexico, and the need to decentralize Bank staff (including legal and safeguards) to the
country office in order to improve project supervision. While there has been progress o n
many o f the agreed improvement actions, some o f the main issues-such
as budget
prioritization, financial intermediation, and decentralization o f Bank staff-ontinue
to affect
portfolio implementation. The next CPPR i s planned for M a y 2004 and, in addition to
lending operations, we are planning to include a review o f non-lending activities. This should
help the country team systematically address the weaknesses identified in the February, 2004
Country AAA Assessment.
65.
Financial management in the Bank’s Mexico portfolio i s generally sound, supported
by the involvement o f numerous established government institutions, including national
development banks, the government’s internal audit office (SFP), and executing entities.
Project funds pass through government budget processes, and Bank financing i s usually
provided as a reimbursement o f expenditures. This arrangement has worked well, except that
in some projects in which funds flow to multiple entities or levels, it has been slowed by
insufficient inter-institutional management arrangements and/or cumbersome reporting

25

requirements imposed by each institution or level involved. The Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (CFAA), completed in 2003, confirmed the general strength in the
federal public sector’s financial management, but pointed out certain key weaknesses such as
fragmented information systems and the relative inexperience o f external oversight functions.
Overall, experience o n projects and the findings o f diagnostic work carried out suggest
substantial opportunities to place even greater reliance o n government institutions (e.g. those
related to funds flow, reporting, and audit) in the financial management o f Bank programs,
while at the same time supporting capacity building efforts where weaknesses exist. This
approach will need to be customized to the particular institutions involved, especially for
Bank-financed programs in which funds may be managed by subnational level institutions,
where financial management capacity levels may vary considerably.

66.
One area that has a major impact o n the results o f public expenditure i s government
procurement and contracting. The Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR) issued
in 2002 highlights the strengths and weaknesses o f the Mexico legal and administrative public
procurement framework and makes specific suggestions to improve it. In terms o f Bankassisted projects, the CPAR found that agencies responsible for project implementation carry
out procurement in accordance with Bank policies and procedures, using i t s standard bidding
documents. Procurement performance in Bank projects was therefore concluded to be
satisfactory and free o f major problems-2 procurement audits and 10 agency procurement
capacity assessments carried out in the past two years found n o major problems either. The
most used procurement method i s NCB, and in the majority o f the I C B procedures only
Mexican f i r m s submit bids. The CPAR also defined a Plan o f Action to strengthen
procurement at the federal level. The SFP and the Bank have met every 3 months to follow
up o n agreed actions-about
80 percent have been completed. The SFP has made a
significant effort to organize, standardize and even deregulate public administrative and
procurement law-the wide variety o f rules and regulations affecting the current procurement
regime results in dispersed, fragmented and, at times, contradicting normative bodies. For
instance, more work i s required at the State level to improve contracting procedures and
discard those which do not follow generally accepted principles. Modifications to the two
procurement laws (one for goods and one for works approved in 2000) to make the system
more efficient and transparent are already before Congress. Taking into account the progress
so far, the SFP and the Bank have agreed to prepare a Second Plan o f Action with the
intention to move to country systems in the area o f procurement at the federal level during
this CPS period.

67.
IFC’s strategy during the past CAS period centered o n (a) fostering financial sector
development; (b) enhancing international competitiveness o f the private sector; (c) promoting
investments in areas newly opened for private sector participation; and (d) promoting
sustainable development and good corporate governance. In this period, I F C has committed
U S 5 8 5 million, including US$207 m i l l i o n in syndication, to projects in general
manufacturing and services, infrastructure, financial, information and technology, municipal
finance, mining and agribusiness sectors. IFC’s investments during this period have had a
development impact in various fronts, for example: (a) help preserve/create jobs in viable
companies by providing long-term funding not otherwise available to these companies hence
avoiding scaling down operations; (b) through i t s sustainability initiative, transfer knowledge
in and assist in implementing global best practices o f environmental management and
corporate governance to its customers; and (c) support investments geared toward providing
26

basic needs such as water and housing for lower income people; (d) and promote local SMEs
through SME linkage programs. I F C continued to expand to new areas especially with its
first municipal finance operation. Through this innovative operation, I F C i s providing a pesodenominated partial guarantee to a private Mexican trust, which will issue bonds in the local
markets. The proceeds will be used for a wastewater treatment plant to be built by the
Municipality o f Tlalnepantla. I F C also provided financing to a leading Mexican producer and
distributor o f paper-based consumer products in Mexico, Nicaragua and Costa Rica. With
debt coming to maturity, market contraction has presented the company with a major liquidity
problem. IFC’s support i s helping the company overcome this problem as w e l l as improve i t s
corporate governance practices. Annex C 1 includes a detailed description o f IFC’s activities
in Mexico during the previous CAS period.

68.
As o f December 31, 2003, Mexico represented the sixth largest exposure in terms o f
outstanding balance for IFC’s own account, representing 4.9 percent o f IFC’s total disbursed
portfolio. IFC’s portfolio in Mexico consisted o f investments in 52 companies in a broad
range o f sectors, for a total exposure o f US$614 million for IFC’s o w n account and US$383
m i l l i o n for participants. In light o f the 2001 economic slowdown and declining capital flows,
the previous CAS highlighted the importance o f quality at entry o f new projects to preserve a
healthy portfolio. Through i t s selectivity, I F C has identified and participated in good
investment opportunities that have helped maintained the high quality and performance o f the
portfolio. This has been done while continuing IFC’s focus o n frontier sectors. As a result, as
o f mid-FY04, only 1.7 percent o f IFC’s loan portfolio was in non-accrual status.
Messages Received from Civil Society and the Global Poll

69.
As part o f the CPS preparation, the Bank organized three full-day seminars with
diverse members o f c i v i l society, including participants from academic institutions, business
chambers, indigenous groups, unions, non-governmental organizations and the private sector.
The events took place in Oaxaca, Mexico City and Guadalajara. The main message heard
from c i v i l society (see B o x below) was that the Bank should remain very actively engaged in
Mexico. The dialogue helped the Bank to better understand the development challenges
facing Mexico and define the role we should play to provide more valuable assistance.
Box 5. M a i n Messages Received from Civil Society

27

70.
The Global Poll, carried out for the Bank by Princeton Survey Research Associates, i s
one o f the largest and most comprehensive surveys ever conducted o n international
development issues with opinion leaders4. The results in Mexico are consistent with the main
messages received during CPS consultations. Opinion leaders were asked about the WB’s
role in international development, and i t s performance in k e y areas. In Mexico, opinion
leaders believe the Bank should concentrate efforts o n reducing poverty, promoting growth
and the economy, and ensuring environmental sustainability. Poverty reduction i s the top
priority in all categories, while growth and the economy appear as the second priority for the
country and Bank objectives. Mexico i s the only L A C country to rank environmentally
sustainable development as the second area where the WB should spend more resources and
as one o f the top three WB objectives. Mexican opinion leaders also regard poverty and
inequality as significant problems and recognize the importance o f being competitive in open
markets. In addition, they consider the Bank’s analytical work and publications a valuable
source o f ideas.

3. Corruption (17%)
I 3. Environment (15%)
I 3. Building climate for investment (12%)
Opinion Leaders’ Views on Social and Economic Issues
0 Pessimistic about current economic situation and social problems.
A majority (57 percent) thinks the
biggest problems facing Mexico are social in nature (poverty being the m a i n issue). Economic problems are
second in importance (25 percent).
In favor of globalization, privatization, and greater openness. Globalization i s seen as good by 80 percent
(highest response among L A C countries), while 72 percent think privatization o f inefficient State-owned

enterprises will have a positive effect on Mexico. Open markets and trade, the establishment o f foreign
businesses and companies, foreign products, ideas and culture are considered good by 75 percent or more.
Gap between rich and poor widening. A majority (85 percent thinks the gap between r i c h and poor people
i s widening in Mexico, compared w i t h 3 percent who perceive it has decreased. All respondents believe the
gap between r i c h and poor countries i s widening as well.
Opinion Leader’s Views on Bank’s Studies and Dissemination
0 Greater effectiveness and exposure.
85 percent o f Mexicans (best response in L A C ) believe Bank
communications have become more effective. A majority (60 percent) feel they are exposed to more
information about the Bank than in the past and 58 percent are exposed to information about the Bank at least

-

0

Usage o f B a n k information i s high. In Mexico, publication usage i s the highest among L A C countries
polled: 82 percent has used a Bank publication in the last two years. Mexicans are also the heaviest users of
Bank sources o f information: 66 percent get their information about the Bank f r o m Bank web sites,
publications, reports, and face-to-face meetings, while 27 percent get their information f r o m newspapers. The
external web site in the U.S. i s used four times as much as the locally accessed web site, but 42 percent use
Bank web sites infrequently (once or a few times per month).
Publications are helpful. Those who use publications find them easy to use (97 percent), up-to-date (85
percent) and helpful (89 percent think the Bank‘s Public Information Center i s a valuable source o f
information). Users think Bank publications effectively contribute to the country’s economic debate (85
percent) and acknowledge they have an important influence on their thinking about development issues (84

High level oficers from government, media, civil society, academia, private sector and labor unions.

28

Development Partners’ Activities

71.
One o f the WBG’s main development partners in Mexico i s the Inter-American
Development Bank (IADB), which i s planning to deliver a US$O.8-1 .O billion, 4-5 operations
a year program to support the country in three main areas: (a) Competitiveness, through the
reform o f the rural credit system, an effort which builds upon a tradition o f collaboration
between the IADB and Bank in support o f the reform o f the private and public financial
systems and would continue with similar operations in the future; (b) Social Development and
Poverty Reduction, through operations such as Oportunidades, Habitat, community education
at the primary level, labor training, water and sanitation, and improvement o f the delivery o f
health services and reform o f the pension system, an operation which would also be carried
out together with the Bank; and (c) Institutional Strengthening, mainly through support for
improved governance at the State and Municipal levels through BANOBRAS. Although
IADB has limited resources for analytical work, at the policy level, we maintain continuous
communication o n economic and social developments in the country.

At the moment, Mexico does not have a financial support program or loans
72.
outstanding with the IMF and in view o f the country’s healthy finances, it i s not expected to
request Fund support over the CPS period. Therefore, the IMF recently closed i t s office in
Mexico. The Mexican government does, however, maintain an active policy dialogue with
the IMF through the Fund’s bilateral and global surveillance activities, including annual
Article I V consultations. IMF and Bank staff maintain regular contact o n macro policy. In
addition, the Fund provides technical assistance in areas such as the assessment o f financial,
fiscal and economic data quality and dissemination practices in observance o f internationally
recognized standards and codes.

73.
While there are not many other donors working in Mexico given the country’s income
level, there are a few other development partners active in Mexico. The Bank maintains a
continuous dialogue with the OECD o n economic analytical work, as well as with the local
United Nations system, which has twenty agencies in Mexico supporting government efforts
related to each agency’s specialization with stronger concentration in HIVIAIDS, gender,
human rights, and the MDGs. In addition, the Bank has recently initiated contacts with (a) the
U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) that has a US$30 m i l l i o n a year grant
program to support democracy and govemance, prevention and control o f infectious diseases
(TB and HIV/AIDS), management o f natural resources, broadening access to finance for
micro-enterprises and higher education partnerships; (b) the Japan International Cooperation
Agency (JICA) that has a US$30 m i l l i o n a year technical cooperation program in disaster
prevention, technical training, industrial and regional development, health and environmental
protection; and (c) some other bilateral partners which have trade promotion activities in
Mexico. The matrix below shows the areas where Mexico’s development partners are active.

29

Development
Challenges
Partner

Reduce Poverty
& Inequality

Promote
Environmental
Sustainability

Strengthen Institutions

Increased
Competitiveness

I

I

I

OECD
Other Bilateral

I

I

I

I

I

I

High Focus

Significant Focus

I

I

I

I

Some Focus

Mexico’s Debt Management Strategy
74.
The government’s debt management strategy over the CPS period i s expected to
remain in line with i t s current approach of: reducing the foreign-currency debt as a proportion
o f the total; reducing the costs o f foreign debt; and extending the maturity profile o f all debt.
This i s being achieved by financing the fiscal deficit in the domestic market, while using
foreign-currency borrowings for refinancing purposes only. Development o f the domestic
market and lengthening o f the yield curve has allowed for coverage o f the government’s
financing needs and extension o f the average life o f domestic debt. On the external front, the
strategy i s to improve the maturity profile, reduce costs by retiring collateralized debt,
diversify the investor base, and reduce vulnerability to the uncertainty o f the international
capital markets.
75.
The level o f public debt, in the traditional definition, as a percentage o f GDP
decreased substantially since the mid-1990s. However, including extra-budgetary liabilities
stemming from the banking crisis (IPAB), toll-roads bail-out (FARAC) and private sector
financed investments in the energy sector (PIDIREGAS), the historical balance o f the PBSR
continued in a range o f 40-45 percent o f GDP over the past few years, as shown in the
following graph.

30

Figure 2. Total Net Debt of the Public Sector
Stocks outstanding at end o f period as Percentage o f GDP
50

35

76.
The sources o f financing have also changed since the mid-1990s crisis, with a
significant expansion o f market debt in both MXN and foreign currencies and a reduction in
bilateral, multilateral and restructured debt. Debt outstanding from the IADB and IBRD has
been reduced by US$1.1 billion since 1995 and currently represents US$17.5 billion or 11
percent o f Mexico's external debt. Mexico does not have any outstanding obligation with the
IMF. This has generated and, if the current trend i s continued, will continue to generate
MDBs lending space-"headroom"
within exposure guidelines. MDB lending presents some
advantages over private sources: stability in spreads, access in time o f international market
constraints, and technical advice usually provided with financing.
77.
The government's successful debt management strategy implemented since the mid1990s has resulted in a marked improvement in some risk indicators. In particular, foreigncurrency debt (including debt linked to foreign currencies) has fallen from 75.3 percent o f
total net debt at the end o f 1995 to 38.8 percent at present (including PIDREGAS debt).
Over the same period, the average maturity o f gross domestic federal debt has increased from
0.8 years to 2.5 years (excluding off-balance sheet liabilities, such as IPAB and FARAC, for
which figures were not readily available). The average maturity o f foreign-currency debt i s
estimated to have fallen since the mid-l990s, with the prepayment o f very long-dated
collateralized debt. Federal gross debt (excluding off-balance sheet debt) maturing within the
next 12 months has not changed considerably over the period and currently represents 13.5
percent o f the total.

31

PROPOSED STRATEGY AND INSTRUMENTS

78.
This CPS will focus in supporting the government’s efforts to reduce poverty and
inequality, increase competitiveness, strengthen institutions, and promote environmental
sustainability in Mexico. This section presents first a discussion o f the WBG’s thinking o n
how its relationship with Mexico i s evolving and why it should remain active in the country; a
description o f the WBG’s comparative advantage and strategic focus; and the Bank’s lending
cases. The next four parts describe the WBG’s lending and non-lending instruments proposed
to deliver the strategy organized under the four CPS pillars. The last part o f this section
presents the Bank’s financial instruments proposed to support Mexico’s debt management
efforts.
79.
Mexico-as evidenced by its per capita income o f about US$5,900 (GNI per capita
under Atlas method)-is in an advanced stage o f i t s development and the WBG’s strategy
needs to take this into consideration. This CPS proposes a greater focus on the role that the
WBG can play as a knowledge institution, while continuing to deliver a program o f lending
operations consistent with Mexico’s development needs. In the next four years, the WBG can
make more o f a difference in those areas where i t already maintains productive relationships
w i t h government counterparts, where challenges are multisectoral in nature and where there
remain difficult unresolved matters. I t can also be the honest broker among government
institutions and c i v i l society in their efforts to deal with development issues. Taking into
consideration these advantages, we will seek a sustained programmatic analytical engagement
in selected areas where the WBG can have the greatest impact, such as poverty,
competitiveness, education quality, decentralization o f public finances, and sustainable water
management. Our analytical and learning assistance in these areas would be supported by
lending, including programmatic SWAPS,at the request o f the government. In addition, given
the importance o f supporting State governments for the development o f Mexico, the
authorities and the Bank will continue discussing potential opportunities to increase lending
and non-lending assistance to the States. These discussions could lead to a request for
additional lending.
Transition to a New Relationship

80.
Mexico has access to international financial markets, to the U S market through
NAFTA, and i s a member o f OECD and the World Trade Organization (WTO). It i s an IBRD
country with investment grade, which has a significant lending program with the Bank. Its
recent democratic transition has received widespread recognition and has launched greater
public demand for transparency, accountability, and decentralization. With these enviable
assets, what i s the comparative advantage o f the World Bank in Mexico and at what point
should the country seek graduation?
8 1.
The WBG’s role i s determined by the significant poverty challenge in Mexico and the
value that the government places on our contribution. According to official poverty figures,
over 50 percent o f Mexico’s population i s s t i l l poor. This i s in large part because Mexico
suffers from great income inequality (the richest tenth earns over 40 percent o f total income,
while the poorest tenth earns only 1.1 percent), deep regional and ethnical disparities (such as
nortldsouth, indigenoushon-indigenous), and differences in access to quality healthcare,
education and public utilities. Moreover, achieving some o f the MDGs by the year 2015 will
be a challenge for Mexico. With no further changes in income distribution and current

32

estimates o f an average yearly growth rate o f 3.5 percent o f GDP, Mexico i s unlikely to meet
the goals o f reducing extreme poverty by halfY5under-five mortality by two-thirds, and
maternal mortality by three quarters. I t i s estimated that Mexico needs a sustained growth
rate o f 5 percent, which has not happened since the 1 9 7 0 ’ ~in~ order to achieve the extreme
poverty MDG (see Table 2).
82.
In response to the expressed desire o f the Mexican government, which we also heard
loud and clear in our consultations with civil-society, the WBG expects to stay engaged in
Mexico to continue supporting the country’s efforts to tackle its development challenges and
achieve the MDGs. The engagement proposed in this CPS seeks to respond to the specific
requirements o f Mexico.

World Bank Group’s Comparative Advantage and Focus
83.
Learning from the implementation o f the previous CAS, and adapting to the
challenges posed by a middle-income country such as Mexico, this CPS will attempt to have a
greater development impact through sustained involvement in selected areas, through the use
o f all the available Bank instruments. This adaptation starts by recognizing that the most
important value-added o f the Bank i s not in transferring resources but in helping Mexico
achieve better development effectiveness through targeted analytical work and improved
project and policy design.

84.
Our clients have stated that the main value-added the Bank has in Mexico i s through
analytic work in those areas where: (a) there are difficult questions; (b) inter-sector work i s
required; and (c) we are perceived as a neutral player. I t i s through enhanced programmatic
analytical work that we can raise important development issues, promote debate by different
stakeholders and bring to Mexico the experience o f other countries which have faced similar
constraints. Our value-added has been less clear to the Mexican government in some o f our
lending operations, given the constraints posed by the government’s non-additionality and the
Bank’s conditionality. Moreover, our record in the last 8 years shows that many lending
operations in the previous CAS never materialized. Since FYO1, we have delivered an
average o f 4 lending operations per year despite having 10-12 operations under preparation
and offering 11-12 new lending operations per year in the previous CAS.
85.
Therefore, in this CPS we propose that our emphasis would shift, together with our
budget resources, towards an enhanced program o f analytic work. However, while the Bank’s
potential value-added comes from i t s knowledge and analytical contributions, it i s important
to keep in mind that i t s effectiveness (convening power, policy influence, etc.) i s s t i l l closely
tied to lending. Thus, this strategy proposes a more strategic way o f bundling Bank analytical
instruments to provide analytical support in k e y areas o f opportunity, while at the same time
strengthening the Bank’s lending support in core areas where i t has already established
productive relationships (for example, poverty reduction, education, health, water resources
management, irrigation, and forestry) and in other areas where we intend to make a significant
contribution to critically important government programs (for example, justice, property
rights, access to financial services, and environmental management). Within a constant
budget scenario, this would imply less overall resources devoted to overall project
preparation, and a lower number o f operations in the pipeline, but not necessarily fewer
The official numbers show a n improvement in income distribution between 2000-2002, but it i s s t i l l unclear
whether the trend will be sustained.

33

operations delivered or less budget per operation. W e propose to provide financial resources
through 4 to 6 operations a year, including a m i x o f policy-based operations, SWAPS and
investment loans.
The proportion o f quick disbursing loans will depend o n the
implementation o f reforms as w e l l as o n maintaining the Bank’s exposure limits.
86.
On the knowledge front we would give priority to areas where answers are not readily
available and where the Bank can employ the best expertise to help policy-makers find
answers to difficult questions. W e have selected a few strategic areas for programmatic AAA
work, which would help the Bank: stay engaged in a core issue area over the full CPS period;
build longer-term relationships with key national counterparts within and outside the
government; enhance i t s staff knowledge o f Mexico’s situation and institutions so as to
improve their potential value-added; use the full range o f Bank products (formal reports,
informal papers, conferences, workshops, dissemination activities, IDFs, learning programs,
and fee-for-services-an area where w e have recently had positive experiences working with
government institutions); and create the foundations in terms o f knowledge and institutional
relationship for lending operations in which the Bank can have non-financial value-added.
The areas where we currently see these opportunities within each o f the themes o f this CPS
are: poverty, competitiveness, water, and education quality. Decentralization could be the
fifth area given the new opportunities posed by the recently launched Convencidn Nacional
Hacendaria, a national convention being convened to discuss federal, State and municipal
policy and interrelations.
87.
The programmatic approach will require that we work in thematic clusters, under the
leadership o f our locally based Sector Leaders, to provide for multi-sectoral, multi-operational
and extra-institutional expertise in longer-term partnerships with the government and other
partners (including IADB, USAID, JICA and others) to tackle Mexico’s main development
challenges. Working in thematic clusters with such characteristics should promote consensus
building, strengthen policy recommendations, and improve project and sectoral strategy
design, delivery, and monitoring. This approach requires a human resource strategy that
allows us to convene the best expertise we can muster as a knowledge institution. I t also
means that we will need staff who work together effectively as a team and have a shared
understanding o f the struggles faced by the poor and vulnerable. In order to launch this effort,
the C M U sponsored a retreat for 86 staff during which we spent a day in indigenous villages
close to Oaxaca City, Mexico. Divided into 11 groups, we learned about the development
issues poor communities encounter, especially in light o f the MDGs; we heard the voices o f
the poor and gained a better understanding o f the uniqueness o f each community (shared
language and culture, patrimonyhnique products to market, access to roads and markets,
government, partner and Bank programs that exist). The following day each group presented
i t s findings in poster sessions (similar to the Development Marketplace). We shared with
each other the impact o f our experience, as well as how the lessons we had learned could
shape our work and help us better implement this CPS.
88.
To attain a more effective dialogue with, and expose the Bank’s knowledge resources
to key audiences-both in government and c i v i l society-in a systematic manner, an effective
outreach and dissemination strategy has also been outlined. In addition to working in the
areas identified in the Global P o l l and in consultations with c i v i l society, this strategy entails
(a) enhancing the Bank’s participation in conferences and public debates; (b) upgrading,
expanding and promoting the Public Information Center; (c) further developing the Mexico

34

external website; (d) expanding outreach to include a greater number o f key media people,
academics, NGOs, politicians business people, etc; and (e) ensuring better dissemination and
visibility o f Bank publications, specially in Spanish. The C M U will further strengthen i t s
Outreach Team, including the Public Information Center, to implement this strategy.

89.
Improving the Bank’s competitiveness in Mexico also requires moving to country
processes in procurement, financial management and safeguards-consistent with the recent
Bank’s efforts to enhance i t s support to middle-income countries. Under this approach, the
Bank would rely on federal and applicable subnational systems and institutions for financial
management and procurement under Bank-financed projects-national
procurement
procedures and standard bidding documents would apply to procurement processes where
appropriate. On safeguards much has been done in Mexico to level i t s norms and regulations
to international standards. Thus, the Bank’s intention i s also to move towards relying o n and
using country systems for environmental and social safeguards in this CPS period. In this
direction, a review o f the Mexican environmental and social standards legal and regulatory
will be conducted to assess relevant gaps between Bank safeguard policies and those
embodied in Mexican law, institutions and practices. Consequently, upon submission to the
Board o f any new operation under the country fiduciary and safeguards systems approach, the
corresponding project documentation will (i)
clearly identify relevant differences between
request the Board to approve the relevant
Mexican and Bank policies and procedures, and (ii)
operation to be carried out in accordance with the identified Mexican policies and procedures.
In support o f these efforts, relevant due diligence analytical work i s focusing o n specific steps
to move towards increased reliance o n country systems and will be undertaken in close
collaboration with key counterpart institutions in a fashion that emphasizes not only their
diagnostic objectives, but also the capacity enhancement aspect. Attention will be given to
strengthening country processes at both the federal and subnational level.
90.
In Mexico, as in other middle-income countries, demand for I F C services fluctuates
with the extent o f i t s comparative advantage vis-&vis other sources o f financing and knowhow available for the private sector. IFC’s advantages in Mexico l i e primarily in specific
transactions, catalyzing financing where IFC’s presence adds value. IFC’s strength i s derived
from its practical knowledge o f the financial and corporate sectors, dialogue with international
and local private investors, hands-on experiences in local constraints to private investment,
and accumulated international knowledge and expertise. Also, given the current difficulties to
proceed with needed reforms, i t can be expected that both lenders and investors will exercise
more caution and will be more selective in the future. In this, I F C will engage where feasible
in new opportunities where i t can play a catalytically role in mobilizing funds that otherwise
wouldn’t materialize, hence assisting companies improve their competitiveness. Mexican top
f i r m s in good financial standing have enjoyed access to external financing for some time and
with the country attaining investment-grade credit rating in early 2002, this access has further
improved for large firms. However, external financing to all the private sector has not
materialized as originally envisaged. Second tier companies, as w e l l as larger corporations
that have suffered from economic slow-down, find it difficult to refinance their external debt,
thereby limiting their capacity to invest and to remain competitive. This refinancing risk was
identified in the previous CAS. I F C has a role in supporting the corporate sector by providing
long-term financing accompanied by expertise in environmental and social issues and knowhow geared to improve competitiveness.

35

Lending Scenarios and IBRD’s Exposure
91.
The SHCP and the Bank have agreed to work in partnership during this CPS period
(FY05-08) to implement a lending program that best addresses Mexico’s development needs
as a creditworthy middle-income country and enhances the Bank’s ability to respond quickly
to changing circumstances. A lending range o f US$0.8 to US$1.7 billion a year i s proposed
in order to promote the country’s key development objectives supported through this CPS.
The proposed lending range i s consistent with careful risk management, in view o f the
government’s sound macroeconomic policies, i t s prudent debt management strategy to
contain the overall public debt as a percent o f GDP and reduce the currency exposure (see par.
74 above), and the projected evolution o f Bank exposure.

Within the above range, IBRD’s most likely lending scenario would be about US$1.2
92.
billion a year which assumes continued sound macroeconomic and social policies and
portfolio implementation, as well as a stable external environment, and reflects the
government’s strategy to take advantage o f the current favorable market situation to further
reduce i t s external debt exposure. Taking into consideration the average annual amortizations
o f US1.4-1.5 billion in the coming years (assuming no prepayment o f IBRD loans during
that time), Mexico’s current exposure with IBRD o f U S 1 0 . 5 billion (as o f February 29,
2004)-9.2
percent and second largest share o f I B R D ’ s portfolio-would fall to US$9.2
billion or 7.8 percent o f I B R D ’ s portfolio during the period o f the CPS. Under this scenario,
Mexico would continue to meet all Bank exposure guidelines and would gain “headroom”
within them, so that the lending program could move to the upper limit o f the borrowing
range and would s t i l l remain within the IBRD exposure guidelines, including the single
borrower ceiling o f US$13.5 billion.
93.
The Bank’s program would move to the higher end o f the lending range to assist the
government in i t s efforts to:
undertake policy measures to address the impact o f unexpected economic shocks or
contagion effects emanating from international capital markets;
0

0

implement accelerated or broader reform programs as outlined in the government’s
development agenda in areas such as fiscal management, energy, labor, pensions,
development banks, telecommunications and justice (see paragraph 5); and/or

finance new or enhanced investment programs, including increased lending at the
subnational level and/or new lending opportunities, which may arise as a result o f the
programmatic analytical work proposed in the CPS.

the
94.
The Bank’s program would move to the lower limit o f the lending range if (i)
the
government chooses to further reduce its new borrowings and exposure to the Bank; (ii)
government does not maintain sound macroeconomic and social policies, which may be
evidenced by a deterioration in the PSBR or a fall in the ratio o f social expenditures to federal
portfolio performance deteriorates significantly.
government programmable spending; or (iii)
Under the highly unlikely scenario o f major departure from sound macroeconomic policies,
the Bank would respond by reducing lending volumes even below the lower-end o f the
proposed borrowing range. Furthermore, in the event o f any significant changes in the
proposed strategy, we would prepare a CPS Progress Report for discussion by the Board.

36

Instruments to Reduce Poverty and Inequality

The programmatic approach to AAA has already started in the poverty work. In
95.
response to a request from President Fox, the Bank has started assisting SEDESOL and the
Social Cabinet in i t s effort to systematically address poverty issues through analytical work
and facilitating dialogue with international experts. Under this programmatic approach, the
ongoing Poverty Programmatic AAA (which includes analytic work and capacity building
activities for the duration o f this CPS, FY05-08) will provide an overall diagnostic o f the
government’s poverty framework (CONTIGO), in-depth work o n mralhrban and income
poverty, as well as social protection in a first phase. In i t s following phases, it will focus o n
institutional issues, especially in the context o f service provision and decentralization, and o n
an overall synthesis particularly concerned with supporting the transition to the next sexenio.
To enhance i t s relevance, we have agreed with SEDESOL o n a program o f joint
dissemination and debate o f the poverty work that will include discussions among the
Executive and Congress, as well as engagement with the States. At the same time, a
programmatic review o f public expenditure i s analyzing in greater depth the incidence o f
public spending-including social investment-both at the federal and the State level (see
institutions section ahead). The executive branch wants to use the PER as an instrument in
their budget discussions with Congress. Both programmatic A A A s could provide the basis
for a policy-based operation for poverty alleviation (Contigo SAL in FY06) that may involve,
for example, a rationalization o f government programs based o n their impact o n poverty
alleviation and potential support for the IMPULSO strategy. This approach would be
complemented with the ongoing work o n Monitoring and Evaluation (IDF) with SEDESOL
and with WBI’s learning programs in social evaluation, results-based management, achieving
MDG targets and quality and equity in learning, among others.

96.
While our programmatic approach will require multi-sector teams from both the Bank
and the government and will provide the overall framework for our support, we will also
undertake sector-specific analyses when more specific dialogue requires i t and sector lending
when sector institutions need to implement policy or institutional change o n the ground. In
the poverty pillar, such sector-specific lending would focus o n targeted programs seeking to
include the poor in social services both o n the supply and demand sides, through existing
projects in health (PROCEDES) and education (Basic Education Development IIIIFY04).
PXOCEDES, already approved, would be restructured to support the government’s Seguro
Popular program, and retrofitted as a SWAP. Analytic work o n service coverage and quality
Health Service Delivery (FY05-08), as well as public expenditure efficiency (IMSS Study in
FY07), would provide the basis for a Health System Support lending operation in FY07. In
developing new investments in the health area, I F C will also seek opportunities to work with
potential clients that, among their activities, seek to expand service coverage to underserved,
lower income areas, as in the case o f an on-going investment in Mexico City. Review o f
determinants o f the Quality of Education (FY05-08) would be addressed through
programmatic analytical work in collaboration with the government, with a particular focus
o n the poor and indigenous populations. Among the more promising interventions i s the PEC
(Programa de Escuelas de Calidad) which promotes school-based approaches to quality
enhancement. Bank support for scaling up this pilot will be carried out through an Education
Quality SWAP project in FY06.

37

97.
Efforts at poverty reduction and increasing the equity o f public spending will also
need to include the States, which have responsibility for health, education and infrastructure.
Dissemination o f the Southern States Development Strategy (SSDS) i s spawning requests
from southern States for greater engagement with the Bank. Our initial response, pending the
results o f the Convencibn Nacional Hacendaria, i s to develop an intensive and collaborative
program o f capacity building and knowledge sharing through the WBI, which would focus o n
public finance management and economic and social accountability at the State level.
98.
Finally, we plan to be involved in series o f lending operations supporting the
government’s efforts to strengthen access o f low-income people to assets, notably housing and
land. W e are ready to put a series o f operations together, based o n the ample analytic work
already done, to provide Housing and Urban Programmatic Sector Policy-based and
Technical Assistance Loans (FY04+06+08). These would target reforms and actions in the
areas o f policy, institutional frameworks, housing subsidies, household savings and privately
provided finance for housing, urban land markets, and urban upgrading. IFC’s work in
housing complements w e l l with that o f the Bank, i t has benefited from coordination with the
Bank and i s expected to continue to increasingly do so. IFC’s growing activities in the sector
will encompass investments and technical assistance that, among i t s key priorities, will help
increase private financial institutions capacity to provide market rate mortgages to l o w
income market segments, thus reducing the level o f direct lending o f the government entities
for mortgage. In rural areas, we will support the govemment’s program through the current
Municipal Development in Rural Areas project in addition to studies o f Land Reform in FY05
and Rural Decentralization in FY07 and a loan to provide Access to Land for Young Farmers
in FY06.

99.
To facilitate inclusion, especially o f indigenous groups, the Bank has IDF grants
supporting the c i v i l society training activities o f INDESOL and the indigenous outreach
activities o f CONADEPI. T o promote inclusion with equality for women, the Bank has a
Gender LIL under implementation and could continue supporting the Institute for Women and
i t s agenda with a repeater operation. Building on its experience in other countries in the
region, IFC’s S M E facility will also evaluate opportunities for indigenous business market
access programs in an effort to facilitate inclusion initiatives in Mexico.

100. In summary, we propose under the Poverty and Inequality theme a rich program o f
analytic work to tackle poverty and inequality accompanied by two multisector policy-based
operations, two SWAPSand one investment operation in the FY05-08 period.
Instruments to Increase Competitiveness

101. The competitiveness challenges being experienced by Mexico will likely increase due
to the continued market expansion o f China and other competitors, the expiration o f
preferential treatment in the agricultural sector under NAFTA and the decrease in U S tariffs
with respect to other countries that compete with Mexico. The Bank, through the series o f
Competitiveness and Trade Programmatic AAA (FY05-08), could play a role in helping to
implement policy reforms to improve competitiveness an mitigate expected costs o f
adjustment, in areas such as textiles and agriculture. In order to remain competitive, Mexico
will have to accelerate i t s transition from a l o w value-added product export base economy to a
higher value-added one. This will be key for Mexico to achieve robust economic growth in
the coming years. The private sector has increasingly become aware o f this. The main focus

38

o f IFC’s strategy in Mexico will be to support the country’s efforts to improve i t s
competitiveness by assisting companies that seek to position themselves better vis-a-vis local,
regional or global competitors. This support would be provided through investment and
advisory assistance and could cover a wide spectrum, from SMEs to 2nd and top tier
companies as well as the public sector. On the latter, I F C stands ready to provide
reimbursable advisory services to the authorities in coordination with, and complementing
Bank’s work in this area.
102. Improving competitiveness i s most urgent and challenging. I t involves policy
interventions across sectors as well as sizeable investment (both public and private) in
infrastructure and human capital. However, it i s important to note that these should involve
enhancing market efficiency rather than picking specific sectors to support. The Bank will
start this work through the recently initiated Investment Climate Assessment (FY04) and a
review o f the government’s Competitiveness Strategy. The Southern States Connectivity
(FY05) study will analyze regional market disparities. Analytic work o n Crop and Agro
Competitiveness (FY06) will be carried out to complement the I C A with sector specific
recommendations for agriculture.
103. The results o f this analytical work will help identify the relative priorities to improve
competitiveness. We will assess those changes with short vs. long term benefits. This will
allow us, in partnership with the government and the private sector, to propose an optimal
policy agenda given Mexico’s constraints. A series o f policy-based loans in support o f policy
reforms to improve competitiveness could result out o f this analytic work as w e l l as more
focused investment operations involving TA andor financing investment requirements.
Further analytic work, which could include issues ranging from labor productivity to
infrastructure, technology and innovation, will be carried out under the Competitiveness and
Trade Programmatic AAA (FY05-FY08).
104. The Bank will support efforts to improve access to financial services o n multiple
fronts. W e will continue to assist the government in i t s efforts to strengthen i t s development
banks in order to improve their efficiency, reduce contingent liabilities, and focus their
activities o n developing financial markets. Recently completed analytical work o n Access to
Financial Services in Mexico City would provide the basis for a country wide study in F Y 0 6
and a lending operation in FY07. The Bank has also been asked to support the government’s
work o n Property Rights through an investment operation in FY06 to increase access to
financial services and improve property tax administration. IFC’s current and potential work
in the housing sector would also support the expansion o f the financial and capital markets
through its activities in structured finance and mortgage securitization, among others. These
lending efforts will be complemented by analytical work, including further study o f Capital
Markets (FY07) and the next generation o f Pension Fund reforms (FY07) to be carried out in
coordination between I F C and the Bank.
105. Bank support to infrastructure and services will focus o n the government’s efforts to
expand coverage, improve quality and reduce costs. The Highway Finance Loan (FY05) will
help improve the design and financial engineering o f highway concessions. In order to ensure
that the various infrastructure reforms permeate to sub-national governments, the Bank has
responded to the government’s request for a Decentralized Infrastructure Development Loan
to be approved in FY04, providing financing to States looking to strengthen their
infrastructure strategy and planning and to develop their institutions. The success o f this loan
39

will determine our possibilities for further lending in this area in FY08. Through a recently
approved investment activity, I F C i s supporting interurban and semi-rural transport
modernization and will seek to engage in opportunities with the private sector in the highway
sector under a conducive regulatory framework. Also, based on the positive experience with
the municipal finance project discussed in paragraph 67, I F C will seek new opportunities with
the private sector in the area o f municipal infrastructure. I F C will also look to support new
opportunities in the power sector where efficient and environmentally-friendly generation
technologies are being adopted, as was the case w i t h two FY03 operations. The Investment
Climate Assessment i s expected to identify other areas where inadequate infrastructure limits
Mexico’s productivity. Further studies and analytic work in such areas would be carried out
under the overall heading o f Competitiveness and Trade Programmatic AAA.

106. Regarding the business environment, the first Knowledge and Innovation Project will
lead to a repeater operation with CONACYT 11, as well as to the Life-Long Learning and
Training SWAP program, both in FY05, envisioned to improve non-formal education, work
force skills, innovation systems and ultimately product quality to respond to the demands o f a
modernizing economy. WBI will include Mexico in a regional study o n mobilization o f
highly-skilled emigrants to support trade, investment and innovation. The Bank will support
efforts to improve the quality o f primary and secondary education, as described in greater
depth in the poverty theme above. A more difficult challenge i s in higher education, where
strong resistance has deterred direct efforts to reorient highly regressive public spending.
Ongoing pilots financed by the Bank to enhance access by the poor to both public and private
higher education through granthtudent loan schemes have shown some promise and the
Tertiary Education Financing II project in FY05 will support a scaled up operation. IFC’s
involvement in the sector focuses in supporting expansion o f existing institutions as well as
developing a financing facility for educational institutions.
107. Efforts to more fully integrate SMEs and the rural sector into the global economy
focus on creating a market-friendly environment for their operations (e.g. ,reducing the cost o f
doing business, technology services, access to finance). These efforts will be supported
through the Rural Savings & Credit II in FY04, the Access to Financial Services in FY07, and
the E-Business II in FYO8. I F C expects to rapidly expand i t s S M E facility and initiate
technical assistance work in Mexico this calendar year focusing in one or more o f the
following areas: (a) simplification o f business requirements; (b) access to markets and finance
and other areas o f SME support. Through existing and potential new clients, I F C will seek to
expand the use o f local SMEs either via linkage programs or through other viable means.

108. Moving forward o n the theme o f business environments for productivity and
competitiveness, IFC’s strategy will continue to focus o n the following themes: (a) enhancing
international competitiveness o f the private sector (including projects to promote more
sophisticated technology and higher value-added products); (b) further deepening the
financial sector with introduction and/or penetration o f specialized products and markets, such
as housing, and more evenly distributed access to financing; (c) promoting investments in
areas newly opened for private sector participation, such as infrastructure; and (d) promoting
sustainable environmental and social development and good corporate governance. In
implementing this strategy, I F C expects to place an increasing importance o n the balance
between the quality o f i t s portfolio and developmental reach through the following activities:
(a) direct financing o f larger clients where I F C provides otherwise unavailable long-term

40

financing and best practice expertise (for example, corporate governance and sustainability);
(b) reaching smaller firms through financial intermediaries; and (c) targeted direct
intervention with smaller projects in high impact areas (for example, micro finance), which
have a high probability o f success.

109. In summary, for FY05-FY08 we propose in this theme a program o f analytic work
around competitiveness and trade issues that could lead to policy-based programmatic
operations, complemented by investment operations o n innovation and technology, higher
education and lifelong learning, infrastructure both at the federal and state levels, and access
to financial services and property rights. IFC i s well positioned to provide support o n
sustainability issues, corporate governance, corporate strengthening through restructuring, and
local supplier linkages. WBI will complement I F C support in the area o f corporate
governance through capacity building services focusing o n corporate social responsibility, as
well as i t s importance, to ensure access to international markets and develop national
competitiveness.
Instruments to Strengthen Institutions

110. With the deepening o f democracy and political decentralization, Mexico faces new
institutional challenges for effective development. Cross-cutting to most o f the institution
themes, the Bank started two tasks in FY03-04 that will have important follow-on activities
supporting the government’s efforts to strengthen i t s institutions. SHCP contracted with the
Bank o n a fee-for-service basis to support the modernization o f processes within the
secretariat. The Bank also responded to a request from the Budget Subsecretariat to do a
Public Expenditure Review, the first ever at the national level in Mexico, focusing o n issues o f
flexibility o f spending, distribution o f spending benefits by household income level and by
geographic area, and budget management institutions.
This will be important for
understanding the effects o f public spending today and for identifying where further study i s
most needed o n how to improve i t s efficiency and effectiveness in the future. The follow-on
work will include expenditure studies in critical sectors identified by the PER, such as
infrastructure, education and health. WBI, long active with subnational training programs,
will participate in a multiyear set o f programs to support institutional strengthening in the
Southern States. The final program will be defined in close collaboration with the C M U and
the government.
111. To support transparency and accountability, programmatic analytical work with SHCP
related to Federal Public Expenditures and Strengthening of Public Finances and
Management at all levels o f government are envisaged in the next three to four years.
Through this AAA, Mexico could develop with the Bank a Strengthening Public Finances
SAL, supported by a TAL in FY06. These operations would help simplify government
services, train federal employees to the new budget and financial management systems,
implement the new c i v i l service law, and reduce corruption. The Bank’s support for an
integrated financial management mechanism will help Mexico achieve better macroeconomic
forecasting, budgeting, and fiscal reporting, as w e l l as better tax administration. This activity
could also include support to IFAI-the new office for public information-as has been
recently requested and will be complemented by an Institutional Governance Review in FY06.
In addition, depending o n the outcome o f the Convencibn Nacional Hacendaria in FebruaryJuly 2004, the Bank could support SHCP’s efforts to strengthen subnational finances within
the programmatic analytical work and lending o n Public Finances and Management,
41

mentioned above, as well as with a State Pension Survey in FY07. To the growing demand
for technical advisory services and seminars to congress (members, staff, and Contadurias
Mayores) and local governments, the Bank will respond via WBI. The Institute has been
active at the Federal and Subnational levels in providing distance learning programs for
transparency and accountability for 240 Mexican Federal agencies and more than 200
municipalities, some on a cost recovery basis. The Bank will also conduct another round o f
fiduciary assessments (CPAR and CFAA) in FY07-FY08 focusing in capacity enhancement
and local capacity to complete the move towards national procurement and financial
management systems during the period o f this CPS. It also expects to support Autonomous
National University o f Mexico’s (UNAM)new anticorruption lab, and share knowledge from
international experience o n monitoring and evaluating government programs.
112. There are other opportunities to provide support to strengthen the capacity o f
subnational governments (although developing lending will require a continued effort to more
attractive lending terms to the States from the Mexican intermediary that borrows from the
Bank). For example, the SFP has requested Bank assistance to identify the steps needed to
allow for the use o f country systems and for the harmonization o f Financial Management and
Procurement Standards (FY05) among the federal, state and municipal levels. The Statelevel Access to Justice TAL in FY04 will deal with a number o f States, and if successful, there
could be a follow-on project to strengthen the State judiciaries (Access to Justice II)in FY07.
The proposed Broadening Access to Justice AAA (FY05) and Streamlining Commercial
Justice AAA (FYO6)would assist the government-the Comisidn Nacional de Tribunales in
particular-to deal with issues complementary to the Access to Justice operations which are
important to provide access to justice for the poor and to improve performance o f commercial
courts. WBI’s Judicial Reform Learning Program will also include Mexico starting in 2004.
Potential for linking learning to lending through this distance learning training will be
explored. IFC could help SNGs to mobilize funds (such as the recent guarantee for the
Tlalnepant l a water authority) .
113. For the professionalization o f the c i v i l service, the government i s wisely taking a
gradual approach, starting with a focus o n the accreditation and development o f midmanagement positions within the Federal Government. The Bank will initially provide
support under capacity building initiatives, supported in part by WBI curricula and
accreditation programs, and if requested by the government, could also support the integrity
and capacity building efforts o f SFP within the Strengthening Public Finances lending and
non-lending programmatic activities. For the reform o f ISSSTE, the Bank i s ready to provide
support when the reform gets political approval, based o n extensive analytic work over the
past few years.

114. Finally, to continue with i t s efforts to disseminate knowledge and share international
experiences, the Bank plans to update its 2000-01 Policy Notes in FY07. I t could once again
become a useful advisory instrument during the next government transition.
115. In summary, under the Institutionality theme w e propose a rich program o f analytic
work complemented by small investment operations in justice as w e l l as a large policy-based
operation and a TAL to strengthen public finances. Depending on the outcome o f the
Convencidn Nacional Hacendaria in February-July 2004, there could also be large windows
o f opportunity for Bank operations in this area.

42

Instruments to Promote Environmental Sustainability

116. Mexico’s increased attention to environment during the 1990s led to marked progress
in some areas, most notably biodiversity and air pollution. To deepen these achievements, the
government has expressed interest in the Bank’s support to integrate the principles o f
sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss o f
environmental resources. The Environmental SAL II operation in FY05 will promote the
mainstreaming o f environmental concerns and improved local environmental management
processes. Starting in FY05, the overall program o f Bank’s support under this theme will be
underpinned by a Water Programmatic AAA, which will include studies o n the economic
value o f water, governance, public expenditure, environmental health and water quality
management during the period o f this CPS.
117. Another important objective o f the work o f this theme i s to move to country based
safeguards. A review o f Mexican Environmental and Social Standards (FY05) will be
conducted to assess the gaps between Bank safeguard policies and those embodied in
Mexican law and practices. This will allow u s to trace a path and strengthen local capacity to
move to Mexican safeguards within this CPS period. In FY07, the Environmental
Management project will strengthen the federal agency for environmental management
(PROFEPA) to enforce environmental legislation on industrial activities and natural resource
management. PROFEPA officials will also participate in a pilot WBI learning program on
environmental compliance measures and indicators. A Disaster Management study (FY06)
will focus on risk reduction and r i s k transfer mechanisms. These tasks will be complemented
and supported by WBI learning programs o n indicators for environmental compliance and
strategic environmental assessment. Building-up o n i t s experience to date, I F C will continue
promoting its sustainability agenda w i t h existing and potential clients and working with them
to increasingly adopt environmentally-friendly practices. Furthermore, I F C will stress the
importance, from a business perspective, o f adopting sustainable practices, and the social
benefits o f being a good corporate citizen.
118. Mexico’s efforts to address the nation’s water scarcity problem, high rates o f
deforestation, and promote sustainable natural resources management to alleviate rural
poverty include programs relating to water resource management and sustainable forest
management. The IBRD/GEF-financed Water Resources Management II loan in FY05 will
help improve conditions for sustainable integrated water resource management contribute to
increased efficiency o f water use and fair water rights allocations, and consolidate water
management institutions and stakeholders participation in decision-making. The Water Rights
loan in FY07 will seek to promote aquifer stabilization in water-stressed areas through retiring
water concessions where demand for water exceeds sustainable supply via surface and
groundwater sources. The Water Policy Development SAL proposed in FY07 will support the
government’s efforts to increase quality o f services and financial and environmental
sustainability through support for further legal, regulatory and institutional reforms. The
Water and Sanitation Modernization and the Irrigation and Drainage Modernization 11 loans
in FY08 will seek to implement these reforms in the delivery o f services. This work will
build upon programmatic Bank analytical work and by a WBI-led program o f dialogues and
learning programs leading up to the World Water Forum, to be held in Mexico in 2006. The
Community Forestry III project in FY08 will assist indigenous communities and ejidos that
own forests in priority areas to improve the management and conservation o f their forest

43

resources and to generate alternative sources o f income in a sustainable manner. The
IBRD/GEF-financed Environmental Services (FY06) project will support the development o f
economic incentives to promote conservation and sustainable forest management in priority
watersheds. The GEF-financed Sustainable Land Management project (FY07) will support
efforts to slow land degradation-including soil erosion and desertification-which affects
nearly two-thirds o f Mexican soils. The GEF-financed Gulf of California (FY08) project will
promote improved fisheries and coastal zone management.

119. To improve the environment, WBG activities will support on-going programs to
address air pollution, solid waste management, promote clean energy technologies and reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, and enforce national and State-level environmental management.
The Bank, through the PCF and related carbon finance vehicles, has taken a leading role in
the early implementation o f the Kyoto Protocol and can be an important partner in efforts to
develop Mexico’s very large carbon trading market potential by new project development,
capacity building and replication o f best practices. Climate change finance efforts in the
Bank’s Mexico portfolio are centered o n the PCF-financed: (a) ComexhidroLNELEC Hydro
Umbrella (FY04) project which replaces fossil-fired electricity generation with a package o f
mini-hydro developments associated with existing irrigation schemes; (b) Landfill Methane
Umbrella (FY05) project that will capture landfill gas for power generation and thereby
improve the sustainability o f waste management practices at multiple urban sites; (c) PEMEX
Refinery Cogeneration (FY07) project that will use carbon finance to promote the use o f
refinery wastes for high-efficiency production o f steam and power while the PCF-financed
Bagasse Cogeneration (FY08) project will support a similar scheme with Mexican sugar
factories; (d) Mexico Transport Corridors (FY07) project that will address the potential for
carbon emissions reductions in the globally important transport sector, as well as; (e) the
Netherlands Carbon Development Fund-financed Wind Umbrella (FY06) project that will
support the displacement o f fossil energy through grid-connected windfarms; ( f ) the GEFfinanced Large-scale Renewable Energy Development (FY05) project that will support the
development o f grid-connected renewable energy resources as well as facilitate a financial
mechanism offering competitively-based tariff support for wind, hydro, biomass, and other
renewable technologies; and (g) the IBRD/GEF-financed Rural Electrzjkation (FY06) project
that will promote the expansion o f electricity services to poor households in dispersed or
remote areas, where connection to the electricity grid i s not financially or logistically feasible.
Building upon previous capacity building efforts in support o f the PCF program, WBI will
work with the Secretaria de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales (SEMARNAT) and the
Secretaria de Energia (SENER) officials to examine opportunities for Mexico to participate
in the emerging international carbon market.
120. In summary for FY05-FY07, under the theme o f environmental sustainability, we
propose a substancial program o f analytical work. This AAA will be accompanied by two
policy-based and six investment loans to support environmental and water sustainability
issues (the possible use o f SWAPSwill be explored). This program will be complemented by
GEF and carbon financed vehicles.
IBRD’s Financial Instruments

121. The cooperation with the government would focus o n the potential use o f existing
IBRD financial products to manage i t s financial risks per the government’s debt strategy. In
particular, the use o f IBRD financial products to transform the net IBRD obligation into
44

Mexican Pesos could assist the States and local government to access IBRD funding and
technical assistance through on-lending programs o f the Mexican development banks. IBRD
would also work with the government to identify potential new products that could assist the
government in i t s funding and risk management strategy.
122. The government o f Mexico has diversified the funding sources o f i t s program, tapping
the financial markets efficiently. A s can be seen from the graphs below, IBRD borrowing has
allowed Mexico to diversify i t s sources o f funding contributing to lowering the cost and r i s k
structure o f i t s overall funding program.
Figure 3. Emerging Markets, Mexico, and WB Spreads over US Treasury 1993-2003

la

-

16
14
0

g

D

12

EMBl Strip Spread (%)
EMBI-MX Strip Spread (%)
EMBIPLUS-MX Strip Spread (%)
WB spread (%)

10

al

s a
i!6
4

2

Year

123.

Mexico was one o f the earlier countries to use the IBRD Fixed Spread Loan (FSL),
taking advantage o f the embedded risk management tools. I t now seems w e l l positioned to be
among the first IBRD client countries to use the hll menu o f IBRD products to manage i t s
financial risks. By signing a Master Derivatives Agreement (MDA) with IBRD, Mexico
could enhance i t s capacity to manage the financial risks in i t s debt portfolio by having access
to a range o f IBRD hedging products, e.g., currency and interest rate swaps, caps and collars,
and commodity swaps. In addition, Mexico could use the Deferred Drawdown Option (DDO)
to manage the liquidity r i s k emanating from unexpected shocks, e.g., contagion effect,
financial shocks, natural disasters, etc.
124. The Bank plans to work with the government to help structure an adequate portfolio o f
IBRD financing from a cost and risk perspective, taking into account the government’s
existing asset and liability management framework, the available alternative sources o f
finance, and the products and services the WB Treasury would be able to offer. Within the
agreed upon lending envelope, IBRD loans, guarantees and hedging products could be applied
at two levels (country and projects) and two dimensions (existing portfolio and new pipeline):

45

0

0

At the Country level, the financial products could be used to support Mexico’s debt
and risk management strategy through: (a) traditional IBRD lending as needed; and (b)
intermediation or guarantee o f long dated derivatives transactions to enable the
government to better manage the financial risks, mainly the interest rate, currency and
refinancing risks. This would be achieved mainly through the use o f existing IBRD
portfolio, and adequate structuring o f new financing within the overall government
strategy. For example, the local currency products could be used to transform part o f
the outstanding debt into local currency, hence reducing the vulnerability o f the
government from currency exposure in their debt portfolio. In particular, NAFIN and
BANOBRAS could benefit from IBRD’s financial products to better manage their
exposure to currency and interest rate risks. Using Bank intermediation in funding
and risk management operations could prove beneficial for the pricing o f loans o f the
mexican development banks. In addition, the Federal government i s considering the
use o f IBRD local currency product to develop an alternative to FOAEM to manage i t s
currency exposure in this fund.
At the Proiect level, the government will be able to use the flexibility in the loan terms
along with the hedging products and the Bank guarantees to reduce cost/risk structure
of, and enhance projects. They could also use the flexibility o f IBRD loan guarantees
and hedging products to structure more adequate financing for new projects. The
flexible characteristics o f the loans would allow financing projects with longer loan
maturities (up to 25 years, longer maturity than the standard i s being demanded by the
States for developmental projects). The IBRD borrowing by the States could
effectively be transformed into Pesos at competitive pricing which would allow the
States to stay engaged with the Bank for future development projects. IBRD financial
products can also help to further tailor the financial terms for the final user in a way
that will reduce their financial risks, e.g., local currency, fixed interest rate, and
custom repayment schedule, while at the same time, help reduce risks for the
government intermediaries.

BUDGETTO IMPLEMENT THIS CPS
125. The budget required to implement the proposed CPS i s in line with the level o f funds
provided for the Mexico program in recent years, as shown in the following table. The
increase in FY05-06 in relation to F Y 0 4 represents a partial shift back o f resources to the
Mexico program within L C C l C ’ s total budget envelope (US$10.3 m i l l i o n for FY05). The
full implementation o f this CPS requires that Mexico’s, together with LCClC’s, WPA
funding be maintained through FY08.

1I

PRODUCT

FY03

FY04

FY05

FY06

FY07

FYO8

LENDING

1,851

1,363

1,410

1,453

1,249

1,300

SUPERVISION

2,747

2,257

1,867

1,969

1,908

2,000

AAA

1,785

1,849

2,663

2,573

2,824

2,700

6,383

5,469

5,940

5,995

5,981

6,000

TOTAL

I

I

46

R I S K S OF THEPROPOSED STRATEGY

126. The proposed strategy faces risks. First, as no single political party has a majority in
Congress, i t may be difficult to implement pending reforms (fiscal, energy, pensions, labor,
telecommunications, water, judicial, ete.). Arty one o f the three major political parties could
win the next presidential election, however, so there may s t i l l exist window o f opportunity to
build consensus to pass reforms with longer-term benefits.
127. Second, the recent incipient signs o f economic recovery in Mexico could be stalled if
the U.S. economic upturn does not continue, i f there i s another emerging market crisis that
spreads to Mexico, if Mexico i s unable to increase i t s competitiveness to respond to Asian
competition in the North American market, or if there i s a significant downturn in o i l prices.
This risk i s lessened by the government’s commitment to implement a program for enhancing
trade competitiveness, and by Mexico’s recent solid macroeconomic and debt-management
record (Le,, fiscal discipline and flexible exchange rate regime) that allowed i t to maintain
access to capital markets during the recent international economic downturn and emerging
market turbulence.
128. Third, structural problems in the State governments could result in a sub-national
government entering into fiscal difficulties that could prevent it from delivering basic services
or in excluded groups demanding improvements that could exceed the capacity o f local
governments to respond. This r i s k i s especially acute in the poorer southern States. I t has
been partly reduced by the establishment o f market-driven mechanisms for restraint o f subnational debt and by the on-going efforts to strengthen the inter-government fiscal system.
129. Fourth, the non-additionality o f Bank financing from the point o f view o f line
ministries presents a challenge to the Bank’s ability to develop the proposed lending program.
This means that the Bank will need to ensure high value-added by working in areas where we
can bring exceptional knowledge and the potential for impact. The strong proposed program
o f analytical work in the CPS should help the Bank to achieve this goal.
130. Fifth, an overt strategy o f emphasizing AAA could backfire, jeopardizing the Bank’s
reputation as a politically neutral advisor and actually reducing i t s fbture effectiveness. The
Bank will have to make a strong effort to improve its AAA work quality and review processes
(including increased participation o f government counterparts and local peer reviewers), while
at the same strengthening its dissemination.
131. Finally, there i s an internal r i s k to the Bank. Under this strategy, if a few operations
are dropped, the Bank’s lending could be significantly reduced. This risk would be mitigated
by the organization o f Bank staff in thematic clusters around Mexico’s main development
challenges, and the continuous long-term engagement that these clusters would entail. This
approach would focus the dialogue o f Bank management and government authorities on
results and the delivery o f Bank activities to support these results.

CPS MONITORING
132. Overall implementation o f this CPS will be monitored o n the basis o f the relative
impact o f WBG’s support to help Mexico make progress in meeting its 2001-2006 National
Development Plan basic objectives. The WBG intends to work in partnership w i t h the
government and other development partners to monitor progress based o n the indicative
country targets included in Annex A l . The Bank’s ongoing work and WBI’s learning
47

programs o n monitoring and evaluation will provide the foundations for the implementation
o f this effort.

V.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

133. The objective o f this WBG partnership strategy i s to support Mexico’s efforts to
reduce poverty and inequality, increase competitiveness, strengthen institutions and promote
environmental sustainability. This strategy i s the result o f extensive analytical work, lessons
o f operational experience, and country consultation.
James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:

Peter L. Woicke

Shengman Zhang

Washington, D.C., March 18, 2004

48

5

8

0
'

8

8

m
c

i

M

CPS Annex B1- Mexico at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2002
Population, mid-year fmillioosJ
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Mexico

Latin
America
& Carib.

Uppermiddleincome

lQQ.9
5,920
597.0

527
3,280
1,727

321
5,040
1,668

1.4
2.4

1.5
2.2

1.2
1.8

75
74
25
8
88
8
113
1I 4
1I 3

76
71
27
9
86
11
130
131
128

75
73
19

9/3/03

I

:

Average annual growth, 1996-02

Population (%)
Labor force (%)

Development diamond'

Life expectancy

GNI
per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1996-02)

Poverty (% ofpopulation below national poverty line)
Urban population (% oftotal population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% ofpopulation)
llliteracy (% ofpopulation age lS+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

I

Access to improved water source

90
7
105
106
105

-Mexico
~

K E Y ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1982

1992

2001

2002

173.7
22.9
15.3
27.9
21.5

363.6
23.3
15.2
18.3
16.6

623.9
20.9
27.4
18.6
17.9

637.2
20.3
27.2
18.3
18.0

-3.4
4.5
49.6
52.3

-6.7
1.6
30.9
33.8

-2.9
1.9
25.4
26.3

-2.2
1.7
24.2
18.8

1982-92

1992-02

2001

2002

2002-06

1.9
-0.1
5.1

3.2
1.6
13.4

-0.3
-1.8
-3.6

0.9
-0.6
1.4

3.8
2.2
5.6

1982

1992

2001

2002

Services

8.1
33.4
21.7
58.4

6.7
28.1
20.2
65.2

4.1
27.1
19.6
68.7

4.0
26.6
18.9
69.4

Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Imports of goods and services

61.6
10.5
10.3

71.8
9.9
20.3

69.6
11.8
29.7

70.0
11.8
29.2

1982-92

1992-02

2001

2o02

0.7
2.5
3.0
2.0

1.7
3.7
4.3
3.1

3.3
-3.5
-3.7
0.7

-0.4
0.0
-0.6
1.4

2.7
2.1
2.5
11.2

2.9
1.5
4.7
11.8

2.7
-1.2
-5.2
-1.5

1.2
-1.3
0.5
1.6

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmentiGDP
Exports of goods and servicesiGDP
Gross domestic savingdGDP
Gross national savings/GDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest paymentsiGDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debtiGDP
Present value of debtiexports
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agiculture
Industry
Manufacturing

(average annual growfh)
Adculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports o f goods and services
Note: 2002 data are preliminary estimates.

I

Upper-middle-income group

Economic ratios'

Trade

T

indebtedness
-Mexico
Upper-middle-income group

Growth of investment and GDP (YO)
30

2o
10

-10

-GDI

1

*GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)
25
2o
l5

0

5

ports

-Imports

* The diamonds show four key indicatorsin the country (inbold) compared with its income-groupaverage. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex B1 - 53

I

Mexico
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1982

1992

2001

2002

58.9
60.9

15.5
14.4

6.4
6.5

4.6

27.4
-6.0
-14.1

23.7
5.0
1.4

21.8
1.9
-0.7

22.6
0.2
-1.2

1982

1992

2001

2002

24,055
16,477
1,233
5,843
17,011
1,517
10,991
4,502

46,196
8,307
2,112
35,420
62,129
7,744
42,830
11,556

158,443
12,799
3,903
141,353
168,396
19,752
126,149
22,496

160,813
14,475
3,998
14 1,95 1
168,949
21,178
126,778
20,992

127
74
171

91
91
100

103
103
101

106
104
102

1982

1992

2001

2002

28,169
22,841
5,328

55,387
73,617
-18,230

171,103
184,614
-13,511

173,374
185,419
-12,045

-12,261
1,043

-9,595
3,386

-13,835
9,338

-12,282
10,268

Current account balance

-5,890

-24,438

-18,008

-14,058

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

2,316
3,574

26,184
-1,745

25,347
-7,339

19,851
-7,375

914
5.64E-2

18,975
3.1

44,814
9.3

50,607
9.7

Domestic prices
(%change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusldeficit
TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Oil
Agriculture
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Consumer goods
Intermediate goods
Capital goods
Export price index (1995=100)
Importprice index (1995=100)
Terms o f trade (1995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions)
Exports o f goods and services
Imports o f goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, localRJS$)
EXTERNAL. DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

5.0

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

1982

1992

2001

2002

86,08 1
2,692
0

112,315
11,966
0

158,291
10,883
0

153,923
10,596
0

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

15,684
328
0

20,75 1
1,874
0

48,729
2,178
0

35,254
2,093
0

76
1,577
6,391
1,655
0

14
615
-53 1
4,393
4,783

-669
3,198
25,334
151

-432
-3,932
13,627
-104

540
408
133
275
195
80

1,313
1,352
981
371
892
-522

860
749
1,314
-565
864
- 1,429

1,322
1,247
1,356
-108
737
-845

Composition o f net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

97

98

-GDP

99

00

deflator

01

*CPI

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
200.000 T

96

97

98

99

Exports

I

I

1

01

00

02

Imports

Current account balance to GDP (%)

-51

Composition of 2002 debt (US$ mill.)

F: 116503

-

A IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral

-

F Private

G - Short-term

913103

Annex B1 - 54

C P S Annex B2 - Mexico
Selected Indicators* o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of February 29,2004

Indicator
Portfotio Assessmen€

2001

2002

2003

2004

Number o f Projects Under Implementation a
Average ImplementationPeriod (years)
Percent o f Problem Projects by Number
Percent o f Problem Projects by Amount as
Percent o f Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent o f Projects at Risk b y Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
SupervisionResources (total BB in US$OOO)
Average Supervision (US$OOO/project) I

28
3.1
10.7
12.6
10.7
12.6
25.7

28
3.1
3.6
8.1
3.6
8.1
14.7

26
3.4
11.5
22.6
11.5
22.6
25.5

24
3.0
12.5
20.8
12.5
20.8
12.5

No
2,144.5
76.6

No
2,006.0
71.6

Yes
2,625.0
101.0

Planned
2,429.0
101.2

Memorandum Item

Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

129
24,8 11.3
27.6
17.7

18
5,100.5
17.6
4.6

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Perfonnance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent o f projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andor implementationprogress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio o f disbursements during the year to the undisbursedbalance o f the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning o f the year: Investment projects only.
f. Current FY figures are estimates.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception o f Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B2 - 55

CPS Annex B3 -Mexico
IBRD Program Summary

Proposed IBRD Lending Program
As o f February 29,2004

F
&
l
year
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Strategic
Rewards

hj*

Implementa
tZRisks

E-Business for Small Enterprises (Approved on 7/3 1/03)
Community Forestry I1(Approved on 12/9/03)
Irrigation & Drainage Modernization (Approved
on 12/9/03)
__
Basic EducationDevelopment APL 111
Housing & Urban Program SAL I+ TAL
Decentralized InfrastructureDevelopment I
Rural Savings & Credit I1
Access to Justice I
Result

58.4
21.3
303.0
200.0
130.0
130.0
50.0
20.0
912.7

M
M
M
M
M
H
M
H

L
L
M
M
M
M

Tertiary EducationFinancing I1
Conacyt I1
Lifelong Leaming & Training SWAP
Highway Finance SAL
Environmental SAL I1
Water Resources Management I1

200.0
200.0
200.0
300.0
200.0
100.0

M
M
M
H
M
M

L
L
M
M
L
L

H
M
M
H
H
M

M
L
L
H
M
L

M
M
M
H
M
M

M
M
L
L
M
L

Result

L
L

1,200.0

Contigo SAL
Education Quality SWAP
Access to Land for Young Farmers
Housing & Urban Program SAL I1
Strengthening Public Finances (SAL + TAL)
Property Rights Program

300.0
300.0
100.0
100.0
300.0
100.0

Result

1,200.0

300.0
300.0
350.0
50.0
100.0
100.0

Health System (Seguro Popular) SWAP
Access to Financial Services
Water Policy Development SAL + TAL
Access to Justice I1
Water Rights
Environmental Management
Result

1,200.0

250.0
200.0
100.0
300.0
300.0
50.0

Decentralized InfrastructureDevelopment I1
Housing & Urban Program SAL 111
E-Business I1
Water & SanitationModernization
Irrigation & Drainage Modernization I1
Community Forestry 111
Result

1,200.0

Overall Result
Of which Quick-disbursing is

1,750.0 31%

FY 2005-2008 Result
Of which Quick-disbursing is

1,650.0

Annex B3 - 56

34%

5,712.7
4,800.0

H
H
M
H
M
M

L

H

L
M
L
L

CPS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) -Mexico
IFC Program, N 2001-2004
as of January 31,2004

2001

~

245.38

~~~~

I F C approvals (US$m)

Sector (YO)

2003

2002
54.00

3

Agriculture & Forestry
Accomodation & Tourism
Chemicals
Collective Inv Vehicle
Finance & Insurance
Health Care
Industrial & Cons Prod
Information
Oil, Gas & Mining
Pulp & Paper
Transportation & Warehousing
Utilities
Wholesale & Retail Trade
Total

4
0
88
1

2004

329.50

83.00

12

19
9
24
11

8
0
36

5

27
54

45
101

56
100

101

100

Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total

90
5
5
0
100

89
5
6
0
100

65
3
27
4
99

98
0
0
2
100

MIGA Guarantees (US$m)

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Investment instrument (YO)

Annex B 3 - 57

CPS Annex B3 - Mexico
Proposed IBRD/GEF/PCF Program Summary
As o f February 29,2004

FY

-Praj

~~

~

US$(M)
IBRD
~

2004
2005
2006

2007

2008

US$(M)
GEF

US$(M)
PCF

7.5

I N E L E C Hydro Umbrella

25.0

Large-scale Renewable Energy Development
Landfill Methane Umbrella

15.0
40.0

Rural Electrification
Environmental Services
Wind Umbrella

5.0
10.0

Mexico Transport Corridors
P E M E X Refinery Cogeneration
Sustainable Land Management

10.0

Bagasse Cogeneration
Gulf o f California

20.0

Overall Result

55.0

Annex B 3 - 58

70.0

20.0

10.0
10.0
10.0
5.0
62.5

CPS Annex B4 -Mexico
Summary of Nonlending Services FYOS-OS
As o f February 29,2004
Product

FY

Cost (us$oOO) Audience

Objective

Poverty Programmatic I1
a) Health Policy & Nutrition
b) Monitoring & Evaluation
c) Core Diagnostic I1
d) Labor Markets
e) Social Protection I1
f) Health Services Delivery I
Quality of EducationProgrammatic I
Land Reform
Competitiveness & Trade Programmatic I
Competitiveness
a) Southern States Connectivity
Public Finances and Management Programmatic I
Institutionality
a) FM+PR Country Systems Review
Sectoral Public Expenditure Review I
Broadening Access to Justice
DisseminatiodOutreach
Env. Sustainability Water Programmatic I
a) Economic Value of Water
Environmental & Social Standards Review

171
88
88
88
88
88
88
171
88
171
88
171
88
88
88
88
171
88
88

G, B, PD
G, B, PD
G, B, PD
G B , PD
G, B, PD
G, B, PD
G, B, PD
G, B, PD
G, B
G, B, PD
G, B
G, B, PD
G, B
G, B, PD
G, B, PD
PD
G, B
G, B
G, B

KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG
KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG, PD
PD
KG
KG
KG, PS

2006

Poverty

Poverty Programmatic 111
a) Poverty & Decentralization
b) Monitoring & EvaluationI1
c) Health Services Delivery I1
Quality of EducationProgrammatic I1
Competitiveness & Trade Programmatic I1
Competitiveness
a) Crops & Agro Competitiveness
b) Access to Financial Services
Institutionality
Public Finances and Management Programmatic I1
a) Institutional Governance Review
b) Country Economic Memorandum
Sectoral Public Expenditure Review I1
StreamliningCommercial Justice
Disseminatiodoutreach
Env. Sustainability Water Programmatic I1
a) Governance + Publ.Exp.Assess.
Economic Instruments for Environmental Mgmt
Disaster Management (Risk + Insurance)

171
88
88
88
171
171
88
88
171
88
88
88
88
88
171
88
88
88

G, B, PD
G, B, PD
G, B, PD
G, B, PD
G, B, PD
G, B, PD
G, B
G, B
G, B, PD
G, B
G, B
G, B, PD
G, B, PD
PD
G, B
G, B, PD
G, B
G, B

KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG
KG, PS
KG, PD
KG
KG
KG, PD
KG, PD
PD
KG
KG, PD
KG
KG

2007-08

Poverty Programmatic I V
a) FY04-06 Summary Report
b) Health Service Delivery 111
Quality of EducationProgrammatic 111
I M S S Study
Rural Decentralization
Competitiveness
Competitiveness & Trade Programmatic 111
a) Capital Markets Development
2nd. Generation Pension Reform
Institutionality
Public Finances and Management Programmatic 111
a) State Pension Survey
b) Country Financial Accountability Assessment
c) Country Procurment Assesment Report
Policy Notes
Country Assistance Strategy
Disseminatiodoutreach
Env. Sustainability Water Programmatic 111
a) Environm Health + Water
b) Water Quality Management

171
88
88
171
88
88
171
88
88
171
88
88
88
238
238
88
171
88
88

G, B, PD

KG, PD

G, B
G, B, PD
G, B
G, B
G, B, PD
G, B
G, B
G, B, PD
G, B
G, B
G, B
G, B
G, B
PD
G, B, PD
G, B, PD
G, B, PD

KG
KG, PD
KG
KG
KG, PD
KG
KG
KG, PD
KG, PS
KG
KG
KG
KG
PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD

2005

Poverty

~

Poverty

(a) G = Government; B = Bank; PD = Public dissemination
(b) KG = Knowledge generation; PD = Public debate; PS = Problem solving

Annex B4 - 59

~~

~

CPS Annex B5 -Mexico
Mexico Social Indicators
Latest single year

~

~~~~~

~~~

~~

~~

~~~

~

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% o f population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionhcome group
Latin
&
America
Carib.

Uppermiddleincome

523.6
1.5
75.8
2.5

503.6
1.3
77.2
2.3

3,580

4,550

2.5
4.4
3.3

3.3
4.4

3.5
4.4

103
103
104

97
98
96

96
97
95

88
95
69

86
94
65

88
94
69

64
40

97
97
8

91
89
9

94
94
9

64
61
67

69
66
72

73
70
76

71
67
74

72
68
75

68
92

47
60

24
29

28
34

23
27

246
188

216
135

180
101
65
86

22 1
124

218
114

~~~~

1970-75

1980-85

1995-261

59.1
3.1
62.8
5.8

75.5
2.2
69.6
3.9

99.4
1.4
74.6
2.5

POVERTY
(% ofpopulation)

National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

45.7
36.3
73.3
1,480
0

2,180
3
4

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% o f income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% ofpopulation)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
L i f e expectancy at birth
(years)

Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

5,530
255
254
51.9
3.4
57.6

3.7
3.6

3.7
2.2

83
83
82

100

17

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than halfthe unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97; ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies between the estimates of school-age population
and reported enrollment data.

2003 World DevelopmentIndicators CD-ROM, World Bank

-

Annex B5 60

CPS Annex B6 - Mexico
Key Economic Indicators
(Calendar Years)

Indicator

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

National accounts
(as YOGDP at current market prices)

100.0
4.7
28.7
66.6

100.0
4.2
28.0
67.8

100.0
4.2
27.3
68.6

100.0
4.0
26.5
69.5

100.0
4.0
26.4
69.6

100.0
3.7
23.6
65.5

100.0
3.7
23.7
65.0

100.0
3.7
23.7
64.7

Total Consumption
Gross Domestic Investment
Government Investment
Private Investment
(includes increase in stocks)

78.1
23.4
3.0
20.4

78.1
23.7
3.6
20.1

81.6
20.9
3.2
17.7

80.3
19.9
3.3
16.7

77.9
19.3
2.3
18.0

81.8
20.3
0.9
19.4

82.3
20.4
1.0
19.4

82.1
21.1
1.o
20.1

Exports (GNFS)b
1mp0rts (GNFS)~

30.8
32.4

31.0
32.9

27.5
29.8

26.7
28.7

28.3
29.7

30.1
32.2

29.9
32.6

30.1
33.3

Gross Domestic Savings
Gross National Savings'

21.9
20.6

21.9
20.5

18.4
17.7

19.7
19.4

22.1
22.3

18.2
22.6

17.7
21.6

17.9
21.6

581,326 62 ,270 648,458

625,535

Gross Domestic Product
Agriculturea
Industrya
Servicesa

Memorandum items

Gross Domestic Product
(US$ m i l l i o n at current prices)
Gross National Product p e r
Capita (US$, Atlas method)

481,094

61 ,702 645,383 681,118

4,440

5,090

5,540

5,910

5,990

5,750

5,980

6,230

3.7
4.6

6.6
7.7

-0.1
0.0

0.7
1.1

1.3
1.8

3.1
2.4

3.8
3.5

4.0
3.9

Real Annual per Capita
Growth Rates (%, calculated from 1993 prices)
GDP at market prices
2.3
Total Consumption
2.9
Private Consumption
2.9

5.0
5.9
6.7

-1.6
0.7
1.2

-0.8
-0.6
-0.3

-0.1
0.1
-0.3

1.7
1.5
1.9

2.4
2.7
2.9

2.6
2.1
2.2

Real Annual Growth Rates
(%, calculated f r o m 1993 prices)
GDP at market prices
Gross Domestic Income

(Continued)

Annex B6 - 61

CPS Annex B6 -Mexico
K e y Economic Indicators (continued)
(Calendar Years)

__

Indicator

1999

Actaaf
2000
2001

2002

F- i n
f

2003

2004

2005

2006

Balance of Payments
(US$ m)
Exports (GNFS)D
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)D
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
(including official current transfers)
Current account balance
(after official capital grants)
Net private foreign direct investment
Portfolio investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, including
errors and omissions)
Net use o f IMF resources
Change in gross reserves
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% o f
GDP at current market prices)
Current account balance
(% o f GDP at current market prices)
Annual growth rates (%)
Merchandise exports
Merchandise imports

148,083 80,167
136,391 66,455
155,465 90,494
141,975 74,458
-7,382 -10,326
6,313
6,994

71,103
58,443
84,614
68,396
-13,511
9,338

173,454
160,763
185,419
168,679
-11,964
10,268

178,014
165,355
188,083
170,958
-10,070
13,727

184,330
170,147
197,522
179,643
-13,191
13,999

192,977
177,872
2 10,623
191,620
-17,646
15,403

205,214
189,128
227,O 54
206,8 16
-2 1,840
16,947

-14,001

-18,167

-18,158

-14,053

-9,150

-14,967

-18,065

-2 1,504

13,166
3,769
12,793
-1,670
14,462
-7,767

16,449
447
-6,996
-526
-6,470
19,717

26,569
151
1,175
-669
1,844
-2,399

14,435
-104
-4,012
246
-4,258
11,108

10,73 1
-123
-790
-372
-418
1,230

13,888
1,146
1,396
-1 82
1,578
0

15,276
1,204
3,233
-3 5
3,268
2

16,040
1,264
6,419
-198
6,6 17
0

-3,682
-4,278

-4,299
-7,150

0
-7,339

0
-7,375

0
-1,898

0
-1,463

0
-1,650

0
-2,220

-1.5

-1.8

-2.2

-1.8

-1.6

-2.2

-2.7

-3.2

-2.9

-3.1

-2.9

-2.2

-1.5

-2.4

-2.8

-2.7

16.1
13.2

22.0
22.9

-4.8
-3.5

1.5
0.3

2.8
1.2

2.9
5.1

4.5
6.7

6.3
7.9

(Continued)

Annex B6 - 62

CPS Annex B6 - Mexico
Key Economic Indicators (continued)
(Calendar Years)

Indicator

1999

Public finance
(as % of GDP at current market prices)a
Current revenues
20.8
19.2
Current expenditures
1.5
Current account surplus (+)
or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
2.7
-1.1
Overall Balance

2000

2001

2002

2003

2005

2006

21.6
20.1
1.5

21.9
20.0
1.9

22.2
20.2
2.0

23.7
21.3
2.3

23.3
20.7
2.6

23.1
20.3
2.7

23.0
20.1
2.9

2.7
-1.1

2.6
-0.7

3.2
-1.2

3.0
-0.7

3.0
-0.3

2.9
-0.2

2.9
0.0

26.1
14.2

20.6
-5.7

22.2
14.1

21.6
4.6

112.1
107.5
104.2
105.8

120.6
110.6
109.0
93.8

117.9
111.3
106.0
85.6

120.7
110.8
108.9
83.3

126.7
113.5
111.7
91.1

126.7
115.9
109.3
94.0

128.4
118.6
108.2
94.9

130.8
121.5
107.7
95.7

Consumer price index

16.6

9.5

6.4

5 .O

4.5

3.7

3.4

3.2

Consumer price index
(% growth rate, end o f period)
GDP deflator
(% growth o f rate)

12.3

9.0

4.4

5.7

4.0

3.0

3 .O

3.O

15.2

12.1

5.9

6.9

6.5

3.O

3.0

3.0

Monetary Indicators
M2/GDP (at current market prices)
Growth o f M2 ("h)
Private sector credit growth/
total credit growth (%)
Price indices (1993=100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index
Real exchange rate (LCU/US$)e

("hgrowth rate, period average)

a. GDP components estimated at factor cost, as a % o f GDP at factor cost.

b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services".
C.

2004

Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital.

d. Consolidated non-financial public sector
e. "LCU" denotes "local currency units". A decrease in LCU/US$ denotes appreciation.

Annex B6 - 63

CPS Annex B7 - Mexico
K e y Exposure Indicators
(Calendar Years)
-

Actual

d

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

166,463

150,313

145,675

141,264

140,39 1

140,778

144,O 13

150,430

9,111

-1 1,295

1,175

-4,012

-790

1,396

3,233

6,4 19

35,310

58,809

48,290

43,535

34,279

33,568

30,720

36,123

108.1
34.6
22.9

80.5
25.9
31.5

80.9
23.4
26.8

77.1
21.8
23.8

73.4
22.4
17.9

71.0
23.0
16.9

69.1
22.3
14.7

67.7
22.1
16.3

10.1
39.0

7.4
29.1

8.8
11.7

10.9
15.0

13.8
20.7

13.1
19.9

13.0
20.9

13.4
22.0

1.4
11,353
326

1.2
11,444
0

1.2
10,883
0

1.1
10,797
0

1.o
10,717
0

0.9
10,555
0

0.9
10,380
0

0.8
9,75 1
0

9.3

9.4

8.9

8.8

9.3

9.2

9.2

8.6

402
57

424
75

Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(uS$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%>
TDOKGS'
TDO/GDP
TDSIXGS~
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor/
public DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGSD
IBRD TDO (US$m)a
Present value
of guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equitye

2004

Projected
2005

Indicator

...
...

...
...

MIGA guarantees (US$m)
a.

b.
c.

d.
e.

Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
"XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank o f
International Settlements.
Includes present value o f guarantees.
Includes equity and quasi-equitytypes of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B7 - 64

2006

...
...

d

B

w

CPS Annex BS (IFC) -Mexico
Statement of IFC's H e l d and Disbursed Portfolio
As of Dec 31,2003
(In U S Dollars Millions)

1988119911199211993/1
1998
2001
199511999
1998
1998
199412001
2000
1997
2001
2003
2002
1999
2001
2000
199712001
1998
200 1
199111996
199612000
200112002
1998
1989
1997
1992119931199511996/1
1998
2000
2000
2000
2004
200012001
2003
1998
2003
199511999
1996/1999/200012001
2003
2004
2003
2000
2001
2002
2002
2000
2000
2000
2001
1997
1992
2003
2002
1998

Total Portfolio:

Auasco
Avvi
BBVA-Bancomer
Baring MexFnd
CIMA Mexico
CIMA Puebla
CTAF'V
Chiauas-Proualma
Comercializadora
Comuartamos
Couamex
Copuel
Corsa
Ecomex
Educacion
Fondo Chiauas
Foria Monterrev
GFNorte
GIBSA
GIRSA
Gruuo BBVA
Grupo Calidra
Gruuo FEMSA
Gruuo Minsa
GNUO Posadas
Gruuo Sanfandila
Hospital ABC
ITR
Innouack
Interoval
InverCau
Lomas de Real
Merida III
Mexmal
Mexulus Puertos
NEMAK
Occidental Mex
Occihol
POLOMEX S.A.
Pan American
Plata
Puertas Finas
Oualita
Rio Bravo
Saltillo S.A.
Servicios
Su Casita
TMA
Toluca Toll Road
Valle Hermoso
ZN Mexico I
l
ZN Mxc Eqty Fund

7.20
6.43
37.65
0.00
0.00
6.75
1.54
0.00
1.53
1.00
50.00
30.00
8.36
5.00
6.50
0.00
8.36
50.00
13.52
41.57
0.00
8.00
0.00
12.60
28.81
5.72
30.00
11.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
50.00
27.56
0.00
0.00
0.00
30.00
0.00
8.00
0.00
9.50
13.00
0.00
47.12
33.16
9.00
0.00
1.86
0.32
50.00
0.00
0.00
651.06

0.00
0.00
0.00
8.40
4.80
0.00
0.00
1.02
0.00
0.66
0.00
0.00
3.00
0.00
0.00
3.53
3.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
32.67
6.00
2.85
0.00
5.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
15.00
0.01
1.07
0.00
0.00
0.00
4.46
0.00
0.00
9.99
0.00
5.88
0.00
0.00
2.50
0.00
0.00
1.90
10.62
0.00
0.00
0.00
10.00
15.30

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.84
0.00
1.09
0.00
25.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.57
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
15.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
20.00
0.00
10.00
0.00
9.04
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.50
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.66
2.82
0.00
20.00
0.00
0.00

147.65

114.03

-

Annex B8 66

28.80
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.88
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
8.36
0.00
45.48
51.43
0.00
5.00
0.00
17.97
0.00
2.21
14.00
3.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
83.46
63.84
0.00
0.00
0.00
40.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
54.1 1
39.12
8.33
0.00
6.47
0.00
83.92
0.00
0.00
557.38

7.20
6.43
37.65
0.00
0.00
3.25
1.54
0.00
1.53
1.00
0.00
30.00
8.36
3.00
4.90
0.00
8.36
0.00
13.52
41.57
0.00
8.00
0.00
12.60
28.81
5.72
10.29
11.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
27.56
0.00
0.00
0.00
30.00
0.00
8.00
0.00
9.50
13.00
0.00
47.12
33.16
9.00
0.00
1.86
0.32
0.00
0.00
0.00
424.25

0.00
0.00
0.00
8.39
4.80
0.00
0.00
0.89
0.00
0.66
0.00
0.00
3.00
0.00
0.00
0.1 1
3.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
32.67
6.00
2.85
0.00
5.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
15.00
0.01
1.06
0.00

0.00
0.00
4.46
0.00
0.00
9.99
0.00
5.88
0.00
0.00
2.50
0.00
0.00
1.90
10.62
0.00
0.00
0.00
4.47
15.30
138.55

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.84
0.00
1.09
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.57
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
15.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
10.00
0.00
9.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.50
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.66
2.82
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
49.02

28.80
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.88
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
8.36
0.00
45.48
5 1.43
0.00
5.00
0.00
17.97
0.00
2.21
7.21
3.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
63.84
0.00
0.00
0.00
40.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
54.11
39.12
8.33
0.00
6.47
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
383.20

b
W
I

G

4

I

m

E

W

4

P

6

8

v,

-

-

6

P
0

E

P

.-E

I

5

s

.-b
*
a

8

9v

E2
s
CI

p'

3

*

0

ir

I-

R
t:
0

p'

5:
3

E

k

*
3
*

0
p'

0

Fr

3

k

0

2

4
X

I n

