Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 47520-BW

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA

FOR THE PERIOD FY09 - FY13

Public Disclosure Authorized

April 23,2009

Southern Africa Country Department 1
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f their
official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

BOTSWANA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
Date o f last Bank Strategy
This i s the first Country Strategy o f the World Bank for Botswana

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Botswana Pula (BWP)
US$1= BWP7.698 (as o f April 4,2009)
B W P l = US$0.1299

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric system
FISCAL YEAR
April 1 - March 3 1

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leaders:
Task Team:

Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili
Ruth Kagia
Anna van der Wouden, Pauline McPherson and Dirk Reinermann
Zeinab Partow and Sandeep Mahajan

The CPS benefited from contributions from the Botswana Country Team, including Bremala Nathan, Sheila
Dutta, Oscar Picazo, Modupe Adebowale, Andrew Asibey, Paula Lytle, Kimberly Versak, Sarwat Hussain,
Jose-Manuel Bassat, Supee Teravaninthorn, Yitzak Kamhi, Varadarajan Atur, Candy Herlihy, Ricardo Tejada,
Demet Kaya, Alex McPhail, Juan Gaviria, Suman Babbar, Herawaty Anderson, Elysee Kiti, Faith Chiwa,
Karsten Feuerriegel, Eugenia Marinova, Lilia Burunciuc and Dennis de Tray. The strategy was prepared under
the overall guidance o f Ruth Kagia. Helpful guidance and advice was provided by Tevfik Yaprak (OPCCE) and
Surendra Aganval (AFTQK).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AAP
AtDB
AGOA
AMLICFT
ART
AU
BADEA
BDP
BIDPA
BIUST
BMC
BPC
BTC
B WP
CBM
CDM
CKGR
COMESA
CPS

cso
CSP
DNA
EAC
EU
ESKOM
ESW
EUR
FBSA
FDI
FSSA
GDP
GEF
GFATM

GNI
GNP
HIES
HIVlAIDS

HDI
IBRD

ICA
ICSID
IDA
IDF
IEG
IFC

Africa Action Plan
African Development Bank
African Growth and Opportunity Act
Anti-Money Laundering and
Combating Financingof Terrorists
Anti-Retroviral Treatment
African Union
Arab Bank for Economic Development
in Africa
Botswana Democratic Party
Botswana Institute for Development
Policy Analysis
Botswana InternationalUniversity o f
Science and Technology
Botswana Meat Commission
Botswana Power Corporation
Botswana Telecommunications
Corporation
Botswana Pula
Coal Bed Methane
Clean Development Mechanism
Central Kalahari Game Reserve
Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa
Country Partnership Strategy
Central Statistics Office
Concentrated Solar Power
DesignatedNational Authority
East African Community
European Union
Electricity Supply Commission
(South Africa)
Economic and Sector Work
Euro
Fee Based Service Agreement
ForeignDirect Investment
Financial System Stability Analysis
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria
Gross National Income
Gross National Product
Household Income and Expenditure
Survey
Human Immunodeficiency
VirudAcquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome
Human Development Index
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
Investment Climate Assessment
InternationalCentre for Settlement o f
Investment Disputes
InternationalDevelopment Association
InstitutionalDevelopment Fund
IndependentEvaluation Group
InternationalFinance Comoration

IFSC
IMF
KfW
JBIC
MAP
MDGs
M&E
MIC
MIGA
MTR
MSME
MW
NACA
NBFI
NDP
NPRS
NPV
ODA
OECD
OPEC
PEFA
PEPFAR
PER
PFM
PLWHA
ROSC
SACU
SADC
SAPP
SSA
STI
TA
TB
TFSCB
UN
UNAIDS
USAID
UNDP
XDR-TB

InternationalFinancial Services Centre
InternationalMonetary Fund
Kreditanstalt fllr Wiederaufbau
Japan Bank for International
Cooperation
Multi-country HIV/AIDS Program
Millennium Development Goals
Monitoring and Evaluation
Middle-income country
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Mid-Term Review
Micro, Small, Medium Enterprises
Mega Watt
National AIDS Coordinating Agency
Non Bank Financial Institutions
National Development Plan
National Poverty Reduction Strategy
N e t Present Value
Official Development Assistance
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Organization o f the Petroleum
Exporting Countries
Public Expenditure and Finance
Accountability
President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS
Relief (of the USA)
Public Expenditure Review
Public Financial Management
People Living With HIV/AIDS
Report on the Observance o f Standards
and Codes
Southern African Customs Union
Southern Africa Development
Community
Southern Africa Power Pool
Sub Saharan Africa
Sexually Transmitted Infections
Technical Assistance
Tuberculosis
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity
Building
United Nations
United Nations Joint Program on
HIV/AIDS
United States Agency for International
Development
United Nations Development Program
Extensively Drug-Resistant
Tuberculosis

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without World Bank authorization.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

.......................................................................................
........................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I INTRODUCTION
I1 COUNTRY CONTEXT

.
.

.

A . Botswana: a country o f contrasts ................................................................................
B. Immediate challenges ..................................................................................................
C . Preparing for the future ...............................................................................................

..............................................................................

I11 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

.

A . Proposed World Bank Group Program .....................................................................
B. Partnerships...............................................................................................................

IV RISKS

..........................................................................................................................................

GRAPHS
Graph 1: New adult HIV infections and AIDS deaths ..........................................................................
ANNEXES
1: Botswana’s Development Vision and Strategic Plans .............................................
2 : HIV/AIDS in Botswana...........................................................................................

Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

3: CPS Results Matrix ..................................................................................................
4: Botswana: Country Financing Parameters ...............................................................
5 : Botswana: World Bank and IMF Work Programs ..................................................

i
1
1

1
5
9
16

18
28
28

33

31
32
34
39
42

STANDARD CPS ANNEXES

Annex A2:
Annex B2:
Annex B3:
Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B8:

Botswana at a glance........................................................................ 44
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management., ............47
IBRD Program Summary ................................................................. 48
IFC & MIGA Program ......................................................................
49
Summary o f Non-lending Services ....................................................
50
Key Economic Indicators ................................................................ 51
Key Exposure Indicators ................................................................. 54
Operations Portfolio (IBRD)............................................................
56
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio (IFC) ............. 57

BOXES:

Box 1: What explains Botswana’s past high growth rates? ....................................................... 2
Box 2: Botswana and selected Millennium Development Goals ............................................... 4
Box 3: Innovative Financing Partnership for Strengthening HIV/AIDS Prevention Efforts ... 2 1
Box 4: Strategic Communications for Development Results .................................................. 29
TABLES

Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators. ..................................................................................... 6
Table 2 : Indicative IBRD Lending Program FY09-11 ...........................................................
27

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Botswana i s one of the world’s great development success stories. One of only very few
countries in the world to have sustained a long period of high growth, it i s also a rare example of a
country that has escaped the ‘natural resource curse’, despite its abundant diamond resources. Political
stability, mature democratic processes, good policies and strong institutions have underpinned
effective economic management for over four decades.
This exemplary success in good governance, macroeconomic and fiscal management has,
however, not yet been matched by broad improvements in human development outcomes. This
apparent contradiction manifests itself today in high poverty and unemployment rates and in
Botswana’s ranking as the fifth most unequal country in the world. Government recognizes that unless
inequality i s reduced and human development indicators rise, future economic growth cannot be
sustained. At no stage has this been more evident than at this time of global economic turmoil.
In order to reduce poverty and inequality, the key challenge for Botswana i s to diversify the
economy away from diamonds. Today, despite major efforts towards diversification, the diamond and
the public sectors s t i l l dominate the economy. There i s a growing recognition in the country at the
highest political level that a greater focus on public sector effectiveness, including more effective
implementationof policies and programs, as well as less dependency by citizens on the state for
development solutions i s required. Botswana i s in need of a more competitive and dynamic private
sector that can generate more employment. To make this a reality, however, skills development must
be more responsive to the needs of the labor market. Botswana also suffers from the second highest
HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate in the world, and the pandemic i s a significant drain on the economy
and on society. Furthermore, infrastructure capacity and quality have not kept pace with growth, and
the electricity, transport and water sectors in particular are now presenting bottlenecks to sustained
growth. With the threat of losing 70 percent o f the current electricity supply by 2013, when South
Africa will stop all electricity exports to Botswana, achieving energy security has become an urgent
national priority.
In addition to these challenges, Botswana i s also strongly affected by the global economic
meltdown since late 2008. The consequences are a sharp decline in GDP growth caused by
plummeting demand in particular for diamonds, triggering a closing of mines and exacerbating already
high unemployment rates, especially among youth, a burgeoning fiscal deficit and rapidly worsening
balance o f payments. I n some sense, this scenario i s a ‘fast forward’ glimpse into the future when
Botswana will run out of diamonds, and it serves as an urgent reminder of the need to diversify the
economy in order to sustain past gains and achieve sustainable development in the future.

Botswana i s conscious of the fact that the past development paradigm, that was so successful
in bringing the country to this point, may no longer be suitable for the future and require some
adjustments while building on past successes. These changes will not come overnight, but Botswana’s
leadership i s poised to use the global economic crisis as an opportunity to more rapidly realize i t s
vision of using a l l of i t s assets - not just diamonds - more effectively, to achieve shared economic
growth and more rapidly reduce poverty and inequality.
The Government i s responding swiftly to the immediate challenges while building for the
future and looking for the “silver lining” beyond the crisis. I t i s getting the economy ready for l i f e
after diamonds by developing a 2lStcentury physical and human capital base, containing the crippling
HIV/AIDS pandemic, increasingthe effectiveness of public sector spending and improving
environmentalmanagement which i s essential for the large and growing tourism industry. To meet the
immediate crisis, the Government -just as this strategy i s being finalized - i s realigning the budget
and reassessing policy priorities, improving public sector efficiency to ensure targeting and
effectiveness and investing with urgency in the electricity sector to ensure domestic energy security.

i

In the medium term, the Government aims for greater competitiveness by providing critical
infrastructureinvestments and skills upgrading for the future, by increasing the effectiveness of social
spending, education and HIV/AIDS programs and by building the foundation for diversification
through private sector growth in non-extractive industries, with regional integrationas one driver.

After a long hiatus in the relationship, the World Bank has been requested to gradually and
selectively scale-up levels of support, always driven by client-demandas with other development
partners. In line with this request, the overall strategic objective of the Bank’s engagement in
Botswana i s to help the Government use all of i t s resources (both non-renewable and renewable) to
sustain growth and defeat poverty and inequality.
The young partnership has grown steadily in the past few years. The Bank was first requested
to assist the Government by increasing the effectiveness o f i t s response to the HIV/AIDS pandemic,
while taking into account the global public good nature of the challenge and the high levels of grant
support the country i s receiving from partners. In response, the first IBRD ‘buy down’ operation in
Africa was prepared to help Botswana fight the pandemic more effectively and was approved by the
Board in July 2008 (US$ 50 million). Additional requests for financial support have focused on
making improvements in the transport sector (US$ 180 million, Board in June 2009), achieving
domestic electricity security (US$450 million, Board in June 2009) and an electricity export project
(US$ 100 million, Board in FY 10/11). For the purpose of IBRD’s internal risk exposure analysis, an
indicative lending envelope of up to US$1 billion i s assumed for the CPS period, with the
understanding that IBRD’s capacity to lend can change over time and that lending plans are indicative.
In addition to these financial investments, which are critical if Botswana i s to tackle poverty
and inequality more effectively and rapidly, the World Bank has also been asked to broaden and
deepen the analytical knowledge base, which was depleted during the long hiatus, in order to provide
policy advice. An ongoing Public Expenditure Review will be one entry point into enhancing our
understanding of why public spending has not been more effective in providing better development
outcomes, especially in social sectors. The HIV/AIDS project and a study on education, skills and the
labor market will complement this work. Government has also requested the Bank to prepare policy
options in areas it deems critical for competitiveness, drawing on the Bank’s internationalexperience.

As the partnership with Botswana as an important middle income client in Africa continues to
mature, the Bank intends to gradually deepen and broaden the policy dialogue in order to help the
country more effectively address the poverty and inequality challenge by availing itself of the full
array of the Bank Group’s analytical and financing support, while remaining selective and demand
driven. Opening a country office in Gaborone would also provide a significant step forward in this
regard.
This CPS comes at a time when the full impact o f the global financial crises on the Botswana
economy i s s t i l l unfolding. During CPS consultations the Bank has discussed a wide range o f options
and we intend to maintain flexibility in how we respond to the evolving needs. Adjustments to the
program will therefore have to be made in the coming months.

ii

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) presents the World Bank’s indicative program for
Botswana for the period FY09 to FY13. This first-ever Bank strategy for Botswana comes in response
to increased interest from the Government o f Botswana for a scaled-up World Bank Group (WBG)
program that has been limited in the 15 years. The strategy has been developed in consultation with
the Government o f Botswana, and i s linked to the national development priorities as set forth in
Botswana’s long term development strategy “Vision 20 16”, and its National Development Plans
(NDPs). The CPS will support the final year o f NDP9 (2003-2008) and the f i r s t four years o f NDP10
(2009-20 16).

I
I
.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. BOTSWANA:
A COUNTRY OF CONTRASTS
2.
Botswana i s a landlocked country o f about 1.9 million inhabitants spread over an area
approximately the size o f France or Kenya. I t s environment i s mostly arid with the Kalahari Desert
covering 70 percent o f the country, and the population i s mainly concentrated in the little arable land
that exists in the eastern parts o f the country. Botswana i s an African success story. I t s remarkable
economic growth record (see B o x 1) and good governance have transformed it from one o f the world’s
poorest countries (GDP per capita o f US$70 at independence in 1966) into the ranks o f middle-income
countries today. Botswana’s growth story i s a testament to how a country on a continent ridden by
poverty and government failure can change i t s course, use natural resources well, and become one o f
the fastest growing economies in the world.

3.
Botswana takes pride in being a mature democracy. Free and fair elections are held regularly
and the constitution provides for fundamental rights and freedoms. The political scene i s remarkably
stable. The Botswana Democratic Party (BDP) has been in power since the first elections were held on
the eve o f independence in 1965. Former Vice-president and the son o f Botswana’s first President
Seretse Khama, Lt. General Seretse Khama Ian Khama, was inaugurated as Botswana’s fourth
President in April 2008; the Presidential transition went smoothly. The next national elections are
scheduled for late 2009.

4.
Botswana regularly ranks at the ,top o f countries in the African continent in terms o f
governance and transparency. According to Transparency International’s Corruption Index, Botswana
i s the least corrupt country in Sub Saharan Africa (SSA) and ranks 36’ internationally. The World
Bank Institute’s Governance Indicators place Botswana ahead o f the global average for upper middleincome countries with particularly high marks for political stability and control o f corruption.
5.
In the regional context, Botswana has always been active in seeking opportunities for regional
integration. This i s particularly important given Botswana’s small population and economy,
landlocked geography, and interdependency with its giant neighbor, South Africa. Botswana was a
founding member o f the Southern African Development Community (SADC) which has i t s
headquarters in the capital city o f Gaborone. It i s also a member o f the African Union (AU) and
Southern African Customs Union (SACU).

1

6.
Botswana i s one of only about a dozen countries in the world that have been able to secure
high economic growth for a prolonged period o f time’. Botswana’s economic growth, which averaged
about 9 percent a year in the four decades following independence, outpaced even the Asian Tiger
economies. While growth was driven by the discovery o f vast mineral resources, mainly diamonds,
this alone does not explain the country’s success. How did Botswana succeed where so many other
countries have failed? How did it avoid the “resource curse” and translated its mineral resources into
economic growth and better lives for many of i t s citizens?As Box 1 describes, the answer i s simple
but profound: strong leadership that adopted good policies and built the institutions needed to
implement those policies.
Box 1 : What explains Botswana’s past high growth rates?

The key to success was that diamonds translated into wealth due to the good policies the
Government adopted and strong institutions that implemented them. Three critical factors
seem to distinguish Botswana from other natural resource-rich countries and to create an
enabling environment for these good policies and institutions3.These include:
Botswana has had a 150 year history o f enlightened leadership that promoted education,
and strove to modernize and maintain independence from colonial rule.
*:* Botswana was closer to a “nation state” than any other African nation. The national
boundaries enclosed people who, if not always ethnically Tswana, had been integrated
into a set o f indigenous states and institutions.
0 Botswana had relatively inclusive pre-colonial institutions which survived the impact o f
colonialism. After independence, the political legacy o f indigenous institutions, such as
the kgotla4proved important in promoting accountability.
*:*

Particularly in the years following independence, Botswana’s leadership, currently led by
President Seretse Khama Ian Khama o f the Botswana Democratic Party (BDP), adopted
successful strategies to shape the hture o f the nation and established a multiracial and
democratic society. Government’s efforts were reinforced by considerable foreign aid which
Botswana was able to attract being the only liberal democracy surrounded by minority-ruled
Southern African states. Barely ten years into independence diamond income had begun to
accrue and the Government’s budget was in surplus. Again, the Government made good
decisions and invested the mineral revenues well in improving social and economic
conditions, including building infrastructure, and developing health and education systems.
Soon, the diamond industry established itself as the main engine o f growth and the state-led
development strategy continued to propel the country’s rapid development.

While growth rates have declined somewhat since the early 1990s, they have remained robust,
7.
averaging more than five percent over the past five years. Prudent investment o f i t s mining revenues
and cautious fiscal management has ensured this strong performance. Despite these achievements,
Botswana’s economy rests on a narrow foundation -- diamond production -- which in recent years has
accounted for over 40 percent o f GDP and in large part sustains economic expansion and social

’

Commission on Growth and Development, “The Growth Report: Strategies for Sustained Growth and Inclusive
Development” (2008).
Most Countries that rely heavily on a single natural resource, such as diamonds in the case of Botswana, have difficulty
managing the associated foreign exchange income and its fluctuations. “Dutch Disease” i s the frequent result, characterized
by the appreciationof the exchange rate, relatively expensive labor costs, and the unsustainable expansion of service sectors.
For most of the past four decades, Botswanahas kept these symptoms in check through the pursuit o f cautious
macroeconomic policies and an emphasis on social expenditures. Instead o f unbalanced development, the country
experienced four decades of economic growth.
See e.g. Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson: “An African Success Story: Botswana”.
A ‘Kgotla’ i s a public meeting, community council or traditional law court of a Botswana village. I t i s usually headed by the
village chief, and community decisions are always arrived at by consensus.

2

spending (a level that i s more akin to a European social democracy with a large welfare state than a
developing economy in Africa). Diamond production i s reaching a plateau, however. Within a decade,
as surface diamonds are projected to run out and mining will go underground, diamond production i s
likely to slow considerably, and current projections are that it will virtually cease by 2030. Unless new
sources o f minerals emerge, revenues will fall.
8.
Botswana i s concerned that growth i s s t i l l too dependent on diamonds and on Government.
Diamonds have in recent years accounted for 60 percent o f exports and about 40 percent o f
Government revenues. Between 1994 and 2005, the weight o f the mining and Government sectors
together grew from 52 to 58 percent o f GDP, while agriculture, manufacturing and construction
experienced a secular decline, from contributing 16 percent to GDP in 1994 to 10 percent in 2005. In
agriculture, the total real value o f output has decreased, in absolute terms, in the past two decades.

The relatively short horizon until the projected decline in diamond production implies that
9.
non-diamond growth must accelerate significantly in the coming years in order to avoid a contraction
o f the economy. Yet the investment rate - especially from the private sector - i s currently too low for
that replacement to occur. Growth in the non-mining private sector has been disappointing, and has
not supported the rate o f j o b creation that the country needs to reduce i t s high unemployment rate,
especially among the youth.
10.
Botswana’s economy does not produce enough o f the right kinds ofjobs. At almost 10
percent a year, j o b creation in the formal economy over the past 40 years has been faster than the rate
o f population and labor force growth, but over this period there has been a significant shift in worker
preferences, especially among Botswana’s youth. Rising education and l o w agricultural incomes have
led recent school leavers to turn their backs on agriculture and seek employment in urban service and
manufacturing. This exodus from traditional employment has led to an unemployment rate among
Botswana’s youth o f 35 percent in contrast to an overall unemployment rate o f nearly 20 percent5.

11.
In the sphere o f monetary and exchange rate policy, while inflation has never reached the very
high levels seen by some developing countries, inflation in Botswana has nonetheless been too high,
as the country has been unable to consistently get inflation down to levels comparable with South
Africa or major international economies. Inflation has therefore had a negative impact on regional and
international competitiveness, the cornerstones o f Botswana’s diversification prospects. Monetary
policy has responded by keeping interest rates high to contain inflation, with the detrimental effect o f
constraining investment at the same time. For its part, exchange rate policy has had to strike a difficult
balance between supporting l o w inflation on the one hand (through a strong exchange rate) and
maintaining international competitiveness by reducing domestic prices in international terms (via a
weak exchange rate). Achieving the most appropriate balance between exchange rate and monetary
policy, inflation and competitiveness remains a key development challenge for Botswana.
12.
Botswana’s impressive track record o f good governance and economic growth supported by
prudent macroeconomic and fiscal management stands in contrast to the country’s still high levels o f
poverty and inequality and generally l o w human development indicators. While Botswana’s economic
progress over the past forty years has significantly raised living standards for about two-thirds o f the
population, a third or more o f i t s people have been left behind. Unemployment has been persistently
high at approximately 20 percent, household incomes are much lower in rural than in urban areas
(HIES 2002/03), and, while rural poverty rates have fallen, they remain significantly higher than in
urban areas. As a consequence, Botswana’s income inequality i s the fifth worst in the world (Gini coefficient o f 60.5 % - UN ranking). The HIV/AIDS pandemic has further exacerbated the situation: the
country now suffers from the second highest HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate in the world, and

’The Government uses an unemployment rate o f 17.5 percent from the 2005/06 Botswana Labor Force Survey
3

education and health outcomes are below those o f countries in the same income group. While
Botswana s t i l l has good prospects o f achieving some o f the MDGs (see B o x 2)6, it i s unlikely to
achieve the MDG goal o f halving poverty by 20 15,

n

Box 2 : Botswana and Selected Millennium Development Goals

13.
While the factors contributing to sustained high growth rates in Botswana are well researched
(see B o x l),
the apparent contradiction between good governance and good economic management on
the one hand and very low human development indicators on the other hand i s less well understood.
Analyzing current data i s an issue, with the latest aggregated household income data going back to
2002/3, and disaggregated data only available from 19937.The Bank’s current body o f analytical work
i s also limited due to the hiatus in the lending relationship. However, the work that has been done over
the past years suggests a combination o f factors contributing to this apparent contradiction, but more
work will need to be undertaken in the coming years.

14.
With regard to factors affecting human development outcomes, the issue i s that despite high
levels o f budget outlays, Botswana i s not yet getting sufficient ‘value for money’. While Botswana’s
slide in the HDI rankings, from number 72 (of 130 countries) in 1990 to 126 (of 179 countries) in
20088 can be largely explained by the decline in life expectancy due to the W / A I D S pandemic, the
country underperforms on a number o f other indicators when compared to countries in its income
range. Botswana’s past economic model, heavily centered on mining, has kept unemployment rates
high, at about 20 percent. The economy’s inability to generate sufficient employment to absorb newly
trained youth as well as those exiting a declining agricultural sector i s a major contributor to continued
high poverty and inequality levels.
15.
In education, Botswana lags comparator upper middle income countries such as Argentina,
Chile, Colombia, and Mauritius in terms o f youth and adult literacy rates, primary completion rates,
6

The Government uses the following statistics from the Botswana Central Statistics Ofice: Poverty headcount ratio (30.6;
2000); infant mortality rates (56; 2001 & 76; 2006); child mortality rate (19; 2001 & 26; 2006); under five mortality rate (34;
2001 & 76; 2006); HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases (25.3; 2004).
The next Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) i s scheduled for 2010 and i s being produced with support
from the Bank’s DevelopmentEconomics (DEC) Department.
The 2008 HDI i s based on 2006 data.

’
*

4

education efficiency as measured by the number o f grade 1 students who reach the last grade o f
primary education, as well as in net enrollment ratios in primary and secondary school (although
Botswana compares favorably with Sub-Saharan African middle income countries such as South
Africa and Namibia). This i s particularly striking given that Botswana outspends i t s comparators by a
wide margin in education: Botswana’s public sector spends over 21 percent o f i t s total budget, and
nearly 10 percent o f GDP, on the education sector, compared to 14 and 4.7 percent for the average
upper middle income country. Spending on secondary education per student in Botswana i s a very
high 40 percent o f per capita income, and 438 percent o f per capita income for tertiary education,
compared to 20 and 24 percent in upper middle income countries, respectively.
16.
In the health sector the situation i s similar: Botswana spends 4.5 percent o f i t s GDP and 18
percent o f the total Government budget on the sector, compared to 3.5 percent and 11.2 on average in
other upper middle income countries. While Botswana compares favorably in access to improved
water sources and child immunization rates, in a number o f areas it performs poorly, including in
access to improved sanitation facilities, the prevalence o f undernourishment, maternal mortality ratios
and life expectancy - although the latter i s a function o f high HIV/AIDS prevalence. Poor social
development outcomes are further exacerbated by a fragmented social protection system.
17.
With regard to the economy as a whole, Botswana, as a landlocked country with a small
domestic economy, has a very narrow economic base and has been dominated by the mineral sector
for the past decades. Private sector growth, while positive, has not been able to keep pace with the
much faster growth o f the mineral sector, and that o f Government. Constraints to competitiveness in
the investment climate, regulatory issues, an apparent mismatch between the skills produced by the
education sector and those required by a modem labor market as well as increasing infrastructure
bottlenecks have hampered diversification, private investment and thereby j o b creation.
18.
Government policies and programs aimed at improving competitiveness and wealth
redistribution - although generally well designed and executed transparently - have not been effective
enough and often lack in implementation. Many in the country today believe that the plethora o f
public programs may indeed have inadvertently led to a ‘dependency culture’ in the economy and in
society. Lastly, in more recent years, the tremendous burden o f the HIV/AIDS epidemic has increased
costs for the fiscus and companies, and continues to pose a major sustainability risk to the economy,
and a great burden on PLWHA, their families, communities and society as a whole. I t appears that, as
a result o f a combination o f these factors, poverty and inequality have not decreased sufficiently in
Botswana. Government fully realizes that unless it can solve this distributional challenge going
forward, growth cannot be sustained over time. Government i s looking to i t s development partners for
assistance in designing policy options and providing financing to address these challenges.

B.

IMMEDIATE CHALLENGES

Botswana’s critical medium-term priority i s to diversify i t s economy in order to create the
19.
employment opportunities needed to lift citizens out o f poverty and reduce inequality. T o do this, the
country must increase competitiveness and reverse trends in human development indicators (especially
in education and health). But, as Botswana tackles these longer term goals, it faces more immediate
and pressing challenges that must be met if the economy i s to sustain i t s past growth record and
prepare for global recovery.
20.
The first immediate challenge i s to protect the economyfr.om the worst of the global economic
crisis. Economic growth i s down, exports and Government revenues have plummeted, and
unemployment i s on the increase. Economic growth for 2008-201 1 i s projected to decline substantially
from the 3.3 percent attained in 2007/08, fiscal deficits will emerge after years o f surpluses, and the

5

current account balance will shrink substantially from the 19 percent surplus seen in 2007. As a small
open economy, Botswana’s reliance on international trade means that what happens to exports and
imports will be the main channel through which external economic developments are transmitted to
the economy in the near term. In turn, the fall in diamond income will lead to a sharp reduction in
Government revenues.

T a b l e 1: Selected Economic Indicators
(Percent o f GDP, unless otherwise noted”)
2ooo2004
6.2

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08e

2008/09p

2009/10p

2010/11 p

0.6

5.3

3.3

-1

-1.8

2.7

CG Balance

0.4

8.4

11.8

8.0

-7.7

-15.7

-8.9

Total Revenues*

38.2

40.3

42.5

41.1

35.6

29.2

29.8

Mineral revenues

20.4

19.9

20.4

17.5

11.6

7.5

7.3

SACU receipts

5.5

7.1

10.3

10.2

10.4

8.5

8.8

Total Expenditures
& N e t Lending

37.9

31.9

30.7

33.1

43.4

45.3

39. I

External Public Debt

6.4

4.1

3.5

2.7

2.9

5.5

6.0

Current Account
Balance (CY)

6.1

14.4

19.3

19.0

3.5

-10.2

-8.4

Imports, fob, %
change (US$, CY)

13.2

1.3

-11.7

16.5

24.8

-12.0

8.5

Exports, c i f YO
change (US$,CY)

7.8

20.5

-0.3

12.6

-9.6

-3 7

15.0

Inflation (CPI period
avg, %, CY)

7.9

8.6

11.6

7.1

12.6

9.8

9.0

GDP growth, %

Source: IMF Staff Reports and World Development Indicators database;
* Fiscal year runs April 1 to March 3 1
CY: Calendar Year

21,
In terms o f economic growth, and in contrast to the 1981-2 crisis, where Botswana’s diamond
exports also f e l l by close to 50 percent, and the impact on GDP and employment was negligible, the
effect on GDP growth o f the current crisis will be large, with the economy projected to shrink through
2010, likely returning to positive growth in 201 1. Unlike the situation in the early 1980s, where
Debswana continued to produce diamonds and grew i t s stockpiles, today the decision has been made
to reduce production significantly. At the sector level, the diamond industry i s suffering severely from
restricted credit availability and reduced demand. By the end o f 2008, the diamond supply pipeline
was not able to absorb any new supplies o f rpugh diamonds from Debswana, the 50-50 joint venture
between the Government o f Botswana and D e Beers, and Botswana’s rough diamond exports
plummeted.This led Debswana to announce that it would shut down operations through April 2009
(Le. no diamond production for at least the first 3 months o f 2009) pending review o f market
conditions. The company also announced the closure o f two mines for the entirety o f 2009. Smaller
companies in diamond exploration have also shut down operations, as have nickel and copper mines.

The mine closures have resulted in the loss o f an estimated 4,500 jobs, about half o f them at
22.
Debswana. More j o b losses are likely in the coming months as companies in the Debswana supply
chain are affected. Declines in production have also impacted Botswana’s fledgling polishing and
cutting industry. The impact o f the crisis on the mining sector, which employs around 13,000 people,
i s just beginning to be felt. The secondary effects o f a decline in the sector will reach deeper into the

6

economy, for instance as many miners normally use their mining income to finance agricultural inputs
and employ staff in the house and for farming.

The prospects for diamonds depend o n economic developments in the major rich-country
23,
markets. The US, Europe and Japan together account for 76 percent o f the diamond market, with the
U S alone representing 45 percent (2006). The Government expects diamond sales revenue to fall by
half. With most analysts now predicting that general economic recovery in the US and other developed
markets will be slow and weak, it i s likely that Botswana’s diamond exports will remain depressed for
some time to come. The early 1980s recession serves as a bleak reminder: it took seven years before
rough diamond sales recovered to pre-crisis levels.
24.
The impact on Botswana has been severe. Since the global economic crisis unfolded in the
fourth quarter o f 2008, in the four months between October 2008 and January 2009, the value o f
Botswana’s diamond exports dropped by 5 1 percent as compared to a year earlier. Diamond prices
have also fallen by close to 10 percent from their peak in August 2008, and hrther declines are
expected, with analysts forecasting a total drop o f 20-30 percent. In addition to diamonds, copper and
nickel export values, which represent about 15 percent o f total exports, have also dropped by over 50
percent since the crisis. Problems with mineral exports will affect not just those sectors but will have
macroeconomic consequences as well.

25.
Declines o f this magnitude are likely to induce a fall in Government revenues o f close to 20
percent. Lower mineral revenues are likely to be compounded by slower growth in other revenue
sources, including SACU revenues, earnings from foreign exchange reserves, and domestic tax
revenues (VAT and income tax). With the large fall in revenues, significant fiscal deficits are forecast
at least through 20 11, averaging 10 percent o f GDP over the coming two years (2009/10 - 2010/11)
according the Government’s latest estimates. Given the large role played by Government expenditures
in the economy, infrastructure needs associated with diversification and poverty reduction efforts, and
the fiscal requirements o f HIV/AIDS treatment and prevention programs, a sharp cut in expenditures
would carry large long-term costs. Currently, the Government expects expenditures to remain fairly
flat in real terms over the next two years, although this will be continually reevaluated in light o f
global developments regardin the projected depth and duration o f the crisis and their impact on
Botswana’s mineral revenues.

!

26.
With diamond exports unlikely to return to pre-crisis levels any time soon, current account
balances will shrink, and are likely to turn to deficits for some years. The current account surplus i s
estimated to have shrunk from 19 percent in 2007 to under 5 percent o f GDP in 2008. The reduction
in exports due to diamonds alone i s likely to be on the order o f 10-15 percent o f GDP, but will be
accompanied by declines in exports o f other major commodities such as copper-nickel. Botswana may
well experience trade deficits close to 10 percent o f GDP in the near future. While imports will be
restrained by the decline in economic activity and the effects o f Pula depreciation against some
currencies’o, it i s likely that trade deficits will need to be partially financed by foreign exchange
reserves. The rate o f drawdown o f foreign exchange reserves will depend on the rate o f Pula
depreciation and on the Government’s policy response (Le. measures to restrain imports). The
impetus on imports will be supported by large infrastructure needs associated with transport and
energy requirements for sustained growth and diversification in the medium and long terms. In the
short term, the immediate impact o f the decline in diamond exports i s that approximately BWPl.5 -2
9

The Government is, at the time of CPS printing, in the process of prioritizing its expenditure program with the objective of
cutting back on unnecessary spending and focusing on items in both the current and capital budgets with clear long term
benefits in terms of sustained growth and diversification. The details of this exercise are not yet available in time for
inclusion in the CPS.
loOn an annual basis the Pula has depreciated by 20 percent against the US Dollar and 16 percent against the Euro, although
it appreciated by 10 percent against the South African Rand.

7

billion has to be drawn from the foreign exchange reserves each month to maintain the level o f
imports. With total reserves at around BWP70 billion, this i s not a problem in the short-term, but will
become a concern as the fall in exports stretches into the medium-term.
27.
Botswana i s in a stronger position than many other mineral producing economies in the
continent, with foreign exchange reserves providing nearly two years’ worth o f import cover, and a
year’s worth o f expenditures saved from previous years’ fiscal surpluses. Another point in Botswana’s
favor i s the very l o w level o f public external debt, estimated at less than 3 percent o f GDP, and a
similarly low domestic public debt, at 2.6 percent o f GDP. These all provide degrees o f freedom and
will serve as a cushion that may enable a gradual, rather than abrupt, adjustment t o adverse
circumstances. Nevertheless, the economy’s high dependence on diamond and mineral revenues and
on Government spending based on these revenues poses a significant danger that reserves can be very
rapidly depleted and debt accumulated, at the expense o f long term sustainability. Trade and fiscal
deficit financing will become an increasing challenge if the fall in exports stretches into the medium
term, as it appears likely to do. T o manage this, Government spending will need to be reduced
substantially, and sharply focused on items with significant contributions to maintaining Botswana’s
long term growth. If the fiscal deficits projected in Table 1 are realized, and financed through the
draw-down o f accumulated reserves, they could consume over 80 percent o f the Government’s
accumulated savings at the Bank o f Botswana (estimated at about BWP 30 billion) by 201 1. As the
fall in diamond and other revenues are likely to extend into the medium term, exclusive reliance on
reserves for financing i s not feasible, and a combination o f expenditure reduction and recourse to
domestic and external debt will be needed.

The prospect o f fiscal deficits after many years o f su luses has led Government to initiate a
28.
process o f prioritization in the budget, which i s s t i l l ongoing? In the public expenditure program o f
the Tenth National Development Plan (NDP 10) Government officials are now looking for those
projects that would have the greatest positive impact on growth and on employment in the short term.
It will be important to identify those expenditures that can provide the most effective fiscal stimulus,
while at the same time protecting investments that will assist with the diversification o f the economy
and reduce poverty. Investments in human capital remain essential for future growth. The long term
costs o f a discontinuation o f AIDS treatment programs for instance would have very high costs in the
long term through exponentially higher future treatment costs, greater loss in productivity and even
higher fiscal outlays. Equally, cuts in education spending would undermine the country’s ability to
generate the human capital needed to make the transition to a more diversified economy.
29.
The second immediate challenge to overcome i s the electricity crisis that has become acute
since South Africa began ‘load shedding”* in early 2008. As have several other Southern African
countries, Botswana has long relied on abundant and inexpensive electricity supplies from South
Africa. In 2007, Botswana imported about 70 percent o f i t s power requirements from ESKOM, South
Africa’s national electric utility, generating only 20 percent o f i t s requirements from a small 25-year
old coal power plant (Morupule A, 4x33 MW). South Africa’s power shortage problems mean that
Botswana i s also experiencing ‘load-shedding’ .

The crisis, which i s anticipated to worsen through the medium term until new generation
30.
capacity i s commissioned starting in 20 12, brought to the fore vulnerabilities o f the Botswana
economy to the volatility o f electricity imports, and made it clear that not addressing the energy
security challenge will impact Botswana’s economic growth and diversification plans, and requires a
‘I The budget prioritization process i s led by the Ministry o f Finance and DevelopmentPlanning together with the
Government Implementation and Coordination Ofice (GICO) in the Presidency.
12
The term ‘load shedding’ refers to a process by which an electric utility cuts power to some customers in response to a
shortage o f available electricity.

8

concerted effort at the national and regional level. Concretely, the South African utility has indicated
that it can no longer provide sufficient power and that it will reduce exports to Botswana through
2012; stopping all exports from 2013 onwards. Given the long lead-times before new generation
capacity can be commissioned and supply can be expanded, shortages o f electricity from 20 13 would
severely hamper efforts to maintain growth and diversify the economy, both o f which would have
significant impacts on unemployment and poverty.
Overall access to electricity i s poor in comparison with other countries in the region, with 3 1
3 1.
percent access levels, let alone in comparison to other upper-middle-income countries (above 85
percent on average). In part this i s a result o f the country’s spatially dispersed population and
economic activity, but it also reflects the limited level o f domestic power generation. The Government
o f Botswana has therefore made the development o f domestic electricity generation a national priority
and i s looking for assistance from its development partners.

c.

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE

32.
Botswana has struggled to achieve significant economic diversification as i t s small domestic
market i s not sufficient to drive the economy. In the end, the only way to increase growth and reduce
unemployment and poverty sustainably i s to build a private sector that can compete and thrive in
regional and global markets. At present, however, the private sector lacks dynamism and i s too
dependent on Government to be able to drive diversification. Attracting FDI beyond the mining sector
has been diflicult, due in part to the high cost o f doing business in Botswana. Transport and utility
costs and relatively high labor costs13all increase the challenge o f competing for international
investment and capital flows.
33.
The current crisis provides, in some ways, a window on a future when diamond revenues will
no longer form the mainstay o f Botswana’s economy. The need to diversify the economy away from
mineral wealth could hardly be more stark. Over the past twenty years, Botswana has begun to reduce
dependence upon diamonds: mineral revenues accounted for well over 55 percent o f total Government
revenues in the late 1990s; today the figure i s under 40 percent. The balance o f payments i s less
dependent on diamond exports than it was in the early 1990s, with non-diamond exports before the
global economic crisis covering nearly 60 percent o f Botswana’s imports. Botswana’s history o f
sound management, good governance, and an emerging focus on enhancing regional competitiveness
should also serve it well as it continues efforts to diversify.
34.
Botswana’s N D P 10 identifies tourism, international financial services, energy, agriculture and
manufacturing as the main potential sectors for diversification to new value chains, as well as regional
power export. Whatever the sectors will eventually be, given Botswana’s small domestic economy,
resource’s-endowment and geographic location, diversification will likely have to be export-led and
skills-intensive, with a focus on non-extractive industries, but also require diversification within the
mineral sector and adding more value in downstream production.
35.
Botswana’s unique environment and abundant wildlife gives it a natural comparative
advantage for nature-based tourism. The sector has future potential, particularly as it i s increasingly
being perceived as an engine for economic growth. Botswana’s tourism industry in 2007 generated
U S $ l .lbillion o f economic activity according to the latest Tourism Satellite Account report produced
by the World Travel & Tourism Council (WTTC). According to estimates, tourism directly
contributed 4 percent o f total employment and 4.3 percent o f total GDP in Botswana in 2007. Adding

l3The minimum wage i s low relative to the cost o f living in Botswana, but high by some international standards, making
Botswana’s labor costs high in some industries.

9

the direct and indirect impacts o f the tourism sector on the economy brings the contribution to 10.6
percent o f total employment, 9.7 percent o f total GDP, and about 16 percent o f non-mining GDP.
T o move this sector closer to i t s potential, the Government in 2007 updated its travel and
36.
tourism policies and i s undertaking a series o f actions (for example through sub-leasing o f community
safari concession areas and selling o f annual wildlife hunting quotas) designed to open up
development opportunities for the rural poor, while maintaining the ecological balance. However,
recent studies and interviews with stakeholders confirm that three over-archiving reasons are
contributing to limiting economic performance and investments: a) the absence o f large international
investments capable o f driving high value markets and building local supply chains; b) high input
costs and poor levels o f service as well as immigration and customs’ constraints; and c) the high
prevalence o f HIV/AIDS among adults, which has had a debilitating effect on the workforce, and
could jeopardize the future development o f the travel and tourism industry.
37.
Internationaljnancial services i s a relatively new area launched with the establishment o f the
International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) in 2003. While it i s too early to tell how successful this
investment will be, by the end o f 2007,37 companies were accredited to IFSC, o f which 19 were fully
operational.
38.
In agriculture and livestockproduction, Botswana i s a major exporter o f high quality beef
products. A livestock study supported by the World Bank and discussed by the Economic Committee
o f Cabinet highlighted a number o f recommendations to increase the productivity o f the sector. Many
o f these recommendations have been implemented, however, the significant upward potential o f
increasing exports into the European Union and other markets have not been fully tapped. The
Ministry o f Agriculture i s now looking into constraints to the supply response o f farmers, and to land
tenure as a possible constraint to increasing outputs.
In an effort to integrate within an existing value chain, the Government i s also investing in the
39.
downstream diamond industry, particularly in diamond sorting, valuing, cutting, polishing and jewelry
manufacturing. The Diamond Trading Company Botswana was launched in early 2008 and was
expected to become the largest sorting facility in the world, sorting and valuing in excess o f 30 million
carats a year and creating employment for 3,000 persons by the end o f 2009. The current impact o f the
global economic crisis and the very steep downturn in Botswana’s diamond sector presents significant
risks to this downstream objective and demonstrates why this can only be one pillar o f a broader
diversification strategy, aimed at increasing overall competitiveness o f the economy.

40.
One o f Botswana’s good export prospects, although not one that will provide much additional
employment, lies in related diversification within the mineral sector to the energy sector. The
Government i s on a quest to mobilize the country’s significant coal reserves, estimated at 30 billion
tons o f high-quality, low-sulfur reserves, to reduce energy dependency from South Africa, and to
become an energy exporter in i t s own right. To that end, in the future, Botswana i s exploring support
for a private sector led initiative to develop a 1,200 M W green field coal-fired power plant
(Mmamabula Independent Power Project IPP) which will be mainly oriented for export to South
Africa. In addition, Botswana aims to export high grade coal to South Africa and other markets, and
explore and exploit coal bed methane (CBM). Botswana plans to move from producing 1 million tons
o f coal per year to more than 10 million tons per year starting 2013/2014. Initial exploration also
points to a large C B M reserve which, in addition to expanding domestic energy resource choice,
would also mitigate climate change concerns as C B M i s about 50 percent less carbon intensive than
coal. To promote the use o f renewable energies, Botswana i s also actively exploring solar options,
which -while not yet commercially viable and insufficient to meet the demand in the short to medium
term -bear much promise for the future due to Botswana’s geographic location and high levels o f
sunshine.

-

10

To turn Botswana’s potential into reality the challenge i s to equip the economy to identify
4 1.
niche markets globally. This will require a more effective public sector, and a healthy and betterskilled workforce. Continued openness to trade and regional integration will also be essential elements
o f the diversification strategy. A more effective public sector will be able to steer the economy in the
right direction to overcome a number o f remaining challenges currently hampering diver~ification’~.

A more effective public sector
42.
Diamond income has enabled the Government to finance high per capita levels o f social and
infrastructure spending and to become the largest employer in the formal sector, providing nearly 40
percent o f all jobs. As the Government recognizes, there are concerns about excessive bureaucracy and
inefficiency, capacity constraints, poor service delivery, slow progress in privatization, and delays in
project and policy implementation.
43.
The Bank has analytical gaps15, with regard to public sector management, but it i s evident that
the structure o f the economy and the significant public control o f mineral resources have translated
into a large share o f Government in the economy, which - combined with l o w outcomes in areas such
as education and health to name two - makes increasing public sector productivity and effectiveness as
a priority, including keeping the size o f the Government under control. This point was also
underscored by the IMF’s 2007 Article I V reportl6. It i s noteworthy that even in the face o f rising
expenditure pressures, the Government has been able to maintain fiscal restraint, holding to the rule o f
limiting public spending to 40 percent o f GDP or less. Nevertheless, social needs are large and
growing, and there are questions regarding the effectiveness and efficiency o f these programs,
especially given the need to clearly prioritize spending within a tight budget constraint imposed by the
current global economic crisis, and to ensure that a high value-for-money i s achieved. Government
recognizes the need to increase efficiency in the provision o f services, while taking care that any
reduction in public service would be done in a way that cushions those who would be retrenched.

The short-to-medium term fiscal challenges facing Government are considerable and growing.
44.
The impact o f HIV/AIDS, the global economic crisis, high dependency on Government contracts,
subsidies and welfare payments, all lead to concerns regarding fiscal sustainability and the need to
prioritize Government spending. This calls for a strengthening o f existing tools and consideration o f
new tools, for improved public financial management, as well as an increased emphasis on efficiency
and effectiveness in delivery o f public service.
A Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Public Financial Management
45.
(PFM) Performance Assessment, sponsored by the EC, was completed in October 2008 and i s being
reviewed by the Government. This assessment noted Botswana’s relatively good track record with
respect to aggregate fiscal discipline. However, the P F M system i s not yet fully capable o f strategic
allocation o f resources. The definite budget calendar that facilitates meaningful bottom-up
participation by line ministries and the achievement o f predictable budget releases and effective
payroll management all point to efficient delivery o f services. However, these positives are negatively
impacted by capacity constraints, including procurement management challenges.
There have been important reforms undertaken recently including the implementation o f the
46.
Government Accounting and Budgeting System (GABS), improvements in the revenue administration,
l4Diversifying Botswana’s Exports - An Overview, July 2005, Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis
(BIDPA) and The World Bank.
l5 The Bank i s currently undertaking a Public Expenditure Review at the request of the Ministry of Finance and
Development Planning which will enhance the dialogue on public sector effectiveness.
l6Botswana: 2007 I V Consultation - Staff Report; Public Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and
Statement by the Executive Director for Botswana: February 2008, IMF Country Report No.08/58.

11

strengthening of external audit and the implementationof the new public procurement legal and
regulatory framework. The commitment to continuing improvements in PFM in Botswana has been
championed at the highest levels including by the Minister of Finance. However, there has been no
public sector reform strategy, with a PFM pillar, formally issued or approved by cabinet. There i s also
a strong push for PFM reform from the Public Service Reform CoordinatingOffice in the Office of the
President.

47.
The planning and budgetingsystem i s likely to face increasing difficulty in meeting the
challenges of flat or declining revenues. A traditional system, based upon annual line item dual
budgets drawing from National Development Plans has served Botswana well. When mineral revenues
burgeoned, Botswana’s planning and budgeting system ensured they were used for productive effect,
both in the recurrent and capital budgets. The planning and budget system also helped Botswana
maintain fiscal and monetary stability, and encouraged the coordination o f policies and programs
across sectors. Nevertheless the system i s facing growing pressures and a key question emerges
regardingthe suitability of the current system to a future where revenues will no longer be as buoyant
as they have been in the past. Budget control i s viewed as having weakened, with too many
supplements. Each year, there i s a large gap between the budget as approved by the National
Assembly and the budget as executed by departments. The Government i s seeking a more explicit
emphasis on performance in budget and human resource management systems, but implementation
has been slow. There i s a desire to see a closer link between finance providedthrough the budget and
outputs.

48.
Beyond the budget and planning system, increased public sector effectiveness must also be
founded on an effective and efficient public service. The public service in Botswana i s large. The
wage bill takes an important share of the central Government’s recurrent budget (over 9.5 percent of
GDP), especially when local Governments and parastatals are included. Despite efforts to control civil
service growth, the number of staff needed to complete projects has necessitated continued increases
in Government employment. At the same time, recruitment of technical and professional grades i s
becoming increasingly difficult, making both size and quality key issues for civil service reforms. The
Government i s implementinga number of initiatives to improve public service performance. It i s
important that these move hand-in-handwith the desired improvements to the budget and planning
process. Building on the strong governance track record o f the country, improvements to public
service delivery could also take explicit account o f client feedback, possibly using tools such as client
charters, customer satisfaction surveys, etc.

49.
With regard to state-owned enterprises Botswana has 11 commercial public enterprises. Most
o f these enjoy varying degrees of profitability, with the exception of Botswana Railways which i s
running losses. Air Botswana and the Botswana Agricultural Marketing Board have also suffered
from poor finances in the past, although their performance improved in 2008. The Government
intends to privatize a number o f these enterprises, including the National Development Bank, where
the development o f a privatization strategy i s ongoing. The Botswana Telecommunications Company
i s expected to be privatizedduring 2009/10, with the IFC serving as transactions adviser. Air
Botswana i s being recapitalized and a management contractor has been appointed. Botswana
Railways’ large infrastructureand maintenance expenditures, unmatched by revenue growth, have
resulted in losses on the order o f US$10 million in 2007/08. Consequently, the Government has
decided to restructure and recapitalize the entity, along with increasingfreight tariffs to cost recovery
levels.
Improving the investment climate

50.
To create jobs in the private sector, Botswana must address impediments to investment. The
2007 Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) found that while Botswana has a relatively attractive

12

investment climate benefiting from macroeconomic stability, low corruption, and relatively good
infrastructure, f i r m s in Botswana are not as competitive as those in many other middle-income
comparator countries and their productivity i s lower. But trends in this area are positive. The findings
o f the Doing Business 2009 Report ranks Botswana 38 out o f 18 1 countries and 3rd in the SADC
region. In addition, Botswana was ranked among the Top 10 reformers in 2009 in starting a business,
protecting investors and trading across borders. While Botswana performs relatively well on paying
taxes, closing a business and registeringproperty, remaining areas for improvement include ease o f
dealing with construction permits and enforcing contracts. In addition, the shortage o f industryrelevant skills i s o f particular concern to manufacturing f i r m s if Botswana i s to compete in the global
markets.

Creating a skilled workforce

5 1.
Efforts to develop the private sector and international competitiveness are also hampered by
skills and productivity issues. Concerns are often voiced in Botswana about a lack o f entrepreneurial
skills or inclination, l o w productivity, a lack o f technical and managerial skills and inappropriate
education for vocational purposes. For reasons that are not yet filly understood, educational outcomes
have also declined since the 1990s. While education expenditure i s high at 8 percent o f GDP,
Government i s concerned about the quality o f education provided. There have been significant
educational achievements, including the provision o f nearly universal and free education (adult
literacy rate stood at 8 1. 2 percent in 2005), but overall outcomes have not created the skills and
trained workforce Botswana needs. Relatively l o w transition rates from junior to secondary schools
(66 percent) and the shortage o f technical and vocational skills have produced a labor force with
qualifications that have not kept pace with the demands o f the private sector. For instance, in the area
o f 8’ grade science achievement, Botswana’s score has dropped worldwide between 2003 and 2007
from a score o f 365 to 355, compared to a scale average o f 500 (similar results in mathematics
achievements)’ 7.
Overcoming the HIV/AIDS pandemic18

52.
Botswana’s first HIV infection was diagnosed in 1985. Today, the country faces the second
most severe W / A I D S epidemic in the world (after Swaziland) and from a regional perspective, i s in
the midst o f the Southern Africa sub-region with the highest prevalence rates in the world’g. Key
factors fueling the epidemic include the high incidence o f multiple concurrent sexual partners and
intergenerational sexual relationships, unprotected sex, and the vulnerability o f women. Recent
estimates identify 283,000 adults living with HIV/AIDS in 2008 (NACA, 2008), implying a national
adult (15-49 years) prevalence rate o f nearly 25 percent 20. Rising mortality rates have paralleled the
maturing epidemic. AIDS-attributed mortality in Botswana increased from 4 percent to 27 percent o f
all reported deaths between 1992 and 2003. Total H I V / A I D S spending has steadily increased and now
accounts for 2-3 percent o f GDP. If the National Strategic Framework were fully funded it would
represent 5 percent o f GDP21. The impact on growth i s equally severe: in 2006 it wasestimated that
average GDP growth would be reduced by the pandemic 1.5 to 2 percentage points per year over the

l7According to TIMSS 2007, Trends in International Mathematical and Science Study, InternationalAssociation for the
Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA).
18
For more details on the pandemic in Botswanaplease refer to Annex 2.
l 9 End 2007 HIV prevalence rates’estimates for Lesotho (23.2 percent), South Africa (18.1 percent) and Namibia (15.3
ercent) ; Source UNAIDS 2008, Report on the Global Epidemic.
Current status of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Botswana (Draft, March 2008). NACA.
The financing and delivery of HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment and social support services in Botswana: an economic
analysis, World Bank (2009).

13

period 2001 - 2021, resulting in an economy 25-35 percent smaller than it would have been without
the impact o f HIV/AIDS22.

The national HIV/AIDS program, coordinated by the National AIDS Coordinating Agency
53.
(NACA), i s 80 percent Government-financed. The program i s seen as a model o f effective treatment.
Botswana was the first African country to provide no-cost, antiretroviral (ARV) therapy, capitalizing
on both i t s strong health system and strong Government commitment to quickly expand access to
these critical services. Today, an estimated 90 percent o f individuals with advanced HIV infection are
receiving antiretroviral therapy. The cost o f this disease-specific Government allocation has increased
from US$69.8 million in 2000-2001, to US$130 million in 2005.
54.
If the past has been difficult, the future looks even more challenging. While the treatment
program has been successful, the sexual behaviors driving new infections are broadly unchanged23,
keeping prevalence rates - and hence the need for treatment and social support - high. Second-line
ARV drugs that have to be provided to the increasing numbers o f HIV positive patients who are
becoming resistant to first-line medication cost 13 times more than first-line drugs24.An economic
analysis (pre global economic crisis) o f Botswana's financing and delivery o f H I V / A I D S prevention,
treatment and social support prepared by the World Bank found that despite high levels o f own and
foreign resources allocated to the fight against HIV/AIDS, Botswana faces an increasing funding
deficit o f up to US$300 million by 2009. Rising numbers o f social program beneficiaries, and growing
social and increasing HIV/AIDS-related expenditures are all coming at a time when short-to-mediumterm growth, and, consequently, the fiscal envelope, has become much more constrained. The impact
o f the global financial crisis increases the risks for the sustainability o f the provision o f free treatment,
which - if reduced would lead to even higher costs in the future through an even greater need for
second-line drugs and social assistance. This also reinforces the need to improve allocative efficiency
within HIV/AIDS spending, with a much greater focus on prevention efforts.

-

Addressing risks in the financial sector and improving services

Botswana's financial system i s generally well diversified and regulated, but faces potential
55.
risks in the area o f Non-Bank Financial Institutions (NBFI), mortgage and unsecured household credit.
Banks are generally well capitalized and liquid, but access to finance -while better than in other SSA
countries - i s l o w in rural areas and several Government-owned initiatives aimed at expanding access
to finance need a reassessment so as to improve their efficiency25.Commercial banks are gradually
shifting emphasis from serving large corporations and are beginning to recognize the potential o f the
MSME sector.
Addressing constraints in manufacturing and agriculture

56.
Expansion o f the manufacturing sector has also been hampered by high labor cost, low
productivity, a small domestic market and high utility and transport costs. Agriculture continues to be
a key priority for the Government but despite numerous policies and strategies to revive the sector,
there has been no significant growth. The livestock sector contributes about two-thirds o f total
agricultural value-added as climatic constraints prevent intensive arable farming in most o f the
Economic Impact o f HIV/AIDS in Botswana, NACA/UNDP 2006.
A recent 'Afrobarometer' survey i s worrisome in this regard. For the first time since 1999 AIDS did not feature in the top
five most pressingproblems facing Botswana. Only 11% o f respondents considered AIDS among the top five, compared to
27% as recently as 2005. Source: Afrobarometer briefings, February 2009.
24 Experience from places where ARV has long been widely available shows that after a few years, the "first-line" of ARV no
longer works for an increasing number of patients due to drug resistance, and these patients must then switch to "second-line"
drugs.
25 Botswana - Financial System Stability Assessment, IMF and World Bank (2007).
22
23

14

country. A World Bank study on livestock sector viability found that the sector can be viable, but not
without significant reforms and diversification. The report, discussed by the economic committee o f
cabinet in 2007, made recommendations for market liberalization, improving land tenure security and
incentives, strengthening o f production support systems and restructuring o f the Botswana Meat
Commission (BMC). Some o f the recommendations have since been implemented.

The agricultural sector has been contracting on average by 1.6 percent a year for many years.
57.
The total real value o f agricultural output in 2005/06 was lower, in absolute terms, than it was in
1974/75. Over this period the sector’s contribution to GDP has fallen from 33 percent to 1.9 percent.
Poor agriculture performance i s a main reason for the weak rural economy, which i s pushing up
poverty, and increasing inequality and out-migration to urban areas.
Removing infrastructure bottlenecks

To re-establish a real sense o f energy security, the Government and the Botswana Power
58.
Corporation (BPC) are pursuing a number o f initiatives. First, a Demand Side Management effort i s
underway to encourage energy conservation and increase efficiency through a campaign that i s
expected to yield savings o f about 50 MW by 2012. Second, the Government plans to tap the
country’s vast coal reserves through public and private-led initiatives to develop coal to power
projects. The Morupule B project (publicly funded) will expand the generation capacity o f Morupule
from 132 MW to 732 MW to meet the growing domestic demand at a total investment cost o f about
US$ 1.6 billion, including associated transmission enhancements and other support infrastructure. The
main pro-poor development benefits o f Morupule B will be to (i)
prevent a major economic
create a limited amount o f
contraction after 2013 when Eskom will stop exports to Botswana, (ii)
direct and indirect employment, and (iii)
make possible the rural electrification program to bring
power to rural areas, where the bulk o f poverty i s located.
Furthermore, in the future, the Government i s exploring support for a private sector led
59.
initiative to develop a 1,200 M W green field coal-fired power plant (Mmamabula Independent Power
Project - IPP) which will be mainly oriented for export, potentially contributing to regional energy
security by supplying power into the Southern Africa Power Pool. The proposed Mmamabula IPP
would be developed using supercritical boiler technology (one o f the f i r s t o f i t s kind in the region),
that i s the most efficient for a plant o f i t s size (600 MW unit size), an important factor to reduce
potential Green House Gas (GHG) emissions. While Mmamabula would provide some limited direct
and indirect employment, its main pro-poor development benefits would depend on the effective use
o f export revenue through public expenditure.
60.
In addition to the need to address electricity security as a short term risk, and linked to the
need for regional integration and a necessary condition for increased competitiveness, i s the provision
o f efficient and cost effective transport. Because o f its geographic location at the center o f the
Southern Africa region, Botswana i s well positioned to connect to a larger regional market and could
become a land-bridge connecting South Africa and Namibia to Zambia, Angola and Eastern Africa.
Botswana has done well in its transport sector expanding i t s paved road coverage from just 12
kilometers at independence to more than 6,000 kilometers today, but much more i s needed. The sector
faces several challenges including gradual deterioration o f existing road networks, the lack o f a
sustainable network approach, poor network management and insufficient funds for the long-term
sustainability o f existing investments.
6 1.
Furthermore, in infrastructure, water in the long run will be the scarcest commodity in
Botswana. Currently over a hundred villages and settlements suffer from serious water shortages and
the economy has outgrown the current water sector framework. The sector would benefit from greater
clarity in the division o f labor and accountability, a more efficient tariff regime and better targeted

15

subsidies. At present, the sector i s not financially viable and Government i s embarking on a major
reform effort for the coming 3-5 years with a view to eliminating subsidies for recurrent costs and
creating a financially viable sector with clear accountability, increasing the quality o f service for all,
with subsidies targeted to the poor and to smaller villages.
Putting regional integrationto work for Botswana

A joint study by the World Bank and the Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis
62.
(BIDPA) on export diversification26also highlighted the need for greater regional integration as a
major cross-cutting theme for Botswana’s economic diversification. Given i t s small size, Botswana
cannot “go it alone”. South Africa i s the primary destination for Botswana’s non-diamond exports.
Trade links are important and Botswana can benefit from South Africa’s more developed private
sector, market know-how, expertise and investment. The harmonization o f regulations and standards
required to move towards a single market could also act as a major spur to increased investment and
trade within the SACU region and beyond.
Botswana’s Vision and National Development Plans

Botswana has managed its development agenda through a series o f National Development
63.
Programs (NDPs) built around Vision 2016, a long term development strategy based on the country’s
five national principles: democracy, development, self-reliance, unity and “botho,” a Setswana word
for respect, manners. Under the theme ‘ilcceleratin Vision 2016 through NDPlO”, the most recent
NDP, has 10 key results areas and 16 national goal$. The strategic thrusts o f N D P 10 will be to
accelerate diversification and competitiveness through knowledge and productive human resources,
sustainable growth and environment, enhanced well-being and social protection, security, transparency
and governance. NDP10 differs from previous development plans in that it i s the first results-oriented
plan t o be supported by a strengthened monitoring and evaluation system. It also spans a seven year
horizon to coincide with the timeframe o f “Vision 20 16” and to bracket the end o f the Millennium
Development Goal period in 2015. At the time o f finalizing this CPS, a Government task force i s
reviewing the policy priorities o f NDP10 in light o f the global economic crisis.
64.
Government, led by the Presidency, has also recently increased i t s focus on implementation o f
and less dependency on Government programs, which - combined with the greater emphasis on
prioritization and results also triggered by the global economic crisis - indicates a gradual shift in the
development paradigm towards the need for greater competitiveness. Government leadership i s
already actively looking for the ‘silver lining’ beyond the current global economic crisis, in order to
position the country in a way that it can reap maximum benefits.

III.

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

Over the course o f i t s partnership with Botswana, the World Bank Group (WBG) has financed
65.
a total o f 28 operations since the first operation was approved in 196428.Activities focused on
education, transport, water, and rural development. As Botswana’s economy grew, the country turned
increasingly t o i t s own resources for development financing, and stopped using foreign aid2’. W i t h
lending phasing out, the Bank’s engagement in Botswana shrank, and its focus shifted to limited
analytical and advisory work mainly in the form o f fiduciary and comparative analytic services such as
an InvestmentClimate Assessment (FY07), a Financial System Stability Assessment (FY07), a Report
Prospects for Export Diversification (2006). BIDPA and the World Bank.
See Annex 1 for details on Botswana’s National DevelopmentProgram.
28 Botswana has been a member o f IDA and IBRD since 1968, ICSID since 1970, IFC since 1979 and MIGA since 1990.
29 Botswana contributed to IDA 11.
26
27

16

on the Observance o f Standards and Codes on Accounting and Auditing (FY07), and an Anti-money
Laundering and Combating Financing o f Terrorists (AMLKFT) procurement assessment (FY07). At
the Government’s request, the WBG’s knowledge program also included an Export Diversification
Study (FY05), prepared jointly with a local think tank, a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (FY06),
and a Livestock Sector Development Strategy (FY06). This last study was largely funded by the
Government. IFC has had limited engagement in Botswana to date, while MIGA has not had any
exposure in Botswana.
In the past 15 years Botswana has had little demand for Bank Group services, in part due to i t s
66.
strong fiscal position and a demonstrated ability to deal effectively with the development challenges
the country faced, but also because Botswana has in the past considered IBRD loan terms too
expensive, arguing for more concessional financing given the high incidence o f poverty and
HIV/AIDS in the country. The non-financial costs o f engagement were also considered excessive,
especially in a country known for i t s high fiduciary standards.

67.
In recent years, Botswana has expressed renewed interest in Bank Group services. Initially
Botswana wanted to benefit from the Bank Group’s global knowledge and technical expertise in the
face o f increasingly complex developmental challenges such as HIV/AIDS, inequality, and
competitiveness and economic diversification challenges. With the advent o f new instruments, lower
borrowing rates and longer maturities, IBRD financial solutions have now become attractive to which
requests for financing o f critical infrastructure were added. As has been the case in other M I C settings,
the onset o f the global economic crisis has accelerated the desire to deepen and broaden the
relationship on the part o f both partners.
68.
In addition to financial investments, which are critical if Botswana i s to tackle poverty and
inequality more effectively and rapidly, the World Bank has been asked to deepen and broaden i t s
analytical knowledge base, which has been depleted during the long hiatus. Government has also
requested the Bank to prepare policy options in areas it deems critical for competitiveness and public
sector effectiveness, drawing on the Bank’s international experience. Where appropriate, the
instrument o f choice may be reimbursable technical assistance, as i s already the case for the Bank in
the water sector, and the use o f IFC advisory services in tertiary education and the telecom sector.

-

As the partnership with Botswana - as an important middle income client in Africa continues
69.
to mature, the Bank intends to gradually deepen and broaden the policy dialogue in order to help the
country more effectively address the poverty and inequality challenges and providing upon request the
full array o f the Bank’s analytical and financing support, while remaining selective and demand
driven.
70.
The need to strengthen engagement with Botswana comes at a time when the Bank Group i s
revamping its support to middle-income countries through the development o f a set o f flexible, clientresponsive instruments and solutions. The strategy set out in this CPS i s designed around principles
drawn from the WBG’s and the Africa Region’s Middle Income Strategies, and builds on lessons from
an Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) review o f WBG scaled-up support to the MICs.
Even with its excellent track record, Botswana faces a difficult road ahead. In the midst o f the
7 1,
worst global economic downturn in decades, it must keep the economy out o f recession, increase
efficiency by accelerating investments in physical and human resources, improve i t s public sector,
manage i t s HIV/AIDS pandemic, all the while maintaining i t s reputation for macroeconomic
prudence. The impact o f the global economic crisis i s taking place at a time when the political space
for greater dialogue i s widening. The WBG i s well positioned to help with these challenges indirectly
with knowledge and experience, and directly with financial instruments.

17

Activities presented in this Country Partnership Strategy will also have regional and global
72.
public goods dimensions, adding to the importance o f this partnership. Energy and transport
infrastructure investments will support greater regional integration among Southern African countries
through increased trade and energy sharing. Work in support o f Botswana’s fight against HIV/AIDS
will have beneficial impacts throughout Southern Africa, as will the work on environmental
management and energy efficiency. The Botswana CPS i s designed to bring benefits not only for
Botswana, but also for the region, and the world.

A. PROPOSED
WORLD BANKGROUP
PROGRAM
Four critical support areas
73.
Consistent with Botswana’s vision and development strategies, the overall strategic objective
o f the Bank’s engagement i s to help Botswana use all o f i t s resources (both non-renewable and
renewable) to sustain growth and combat poverty and inequality. The WBG’s Botswana program will
focus on four elements o f the Government’s short and long t e r m agendas. In so doing, the Bank will
need to fill a number o f analytical gaps3’, in order to better understand the apparent contradiction
between the strong track record in governance, macro-fiscal management and growth vis-a-vis high
levels o f poverty, inequality and human development indicators, and to continue identifying key
bottlenecks to economic diversification.
To support Botswana’s efforts to manage the fallout from the global economic crisis, the
74.
WBG will accelerate and deepen i t s work on public sector management. To help Botswana through i t s
HIV/AIDS crisis, the WBG will seek ways to increase the effectiveness o f HIV/AIDS expenditures in
the country. To help Botswana develop an economy that can compete globally, create jobs and reduce
dependence on diamonds, the WBG will provide technical input and financing for critical
infrastructure investments in electricity, transportation and water, and support the Government’s
efforts to improve education outcomes. To help the Government manage pressing environmental
issues and maximize the economic benefits o f i t s natural endowments, the WBG will work to improve
wildlife management and promote natural resource management and eco-tourism.
This CPS comes at a time when the full impact o f the global economic meltdown on the
75.
Botswana economy i s s t i l l unfolding. Adjustments to the program will therefore have to be made in
the coming months. Detailed work programs will be agreed on with the Government in annual
business planning discussions. The broad outlines o f each o f the currently agreed program areas are
given below.

I.

Enhancing Public Sector Effectiveness

76.
Botswana faces two related challenges that are driving i t s desire to increase public sector
efficiency and effectiveness. As the global crisis deepens, Botswana’s public sector-dependent
economy i s likely to become even more so in the near term. In the medium term, as diamond revenues
decline, the economy must diversify and Botswana’s broad social safety net and extensive public
services will have to be supported with fewer fiscal resources. On both fronts, the WBG’s global
knowledge base can provide critical support.
77.
Public sector effectiveness has emerged as a potential core area for the Bank’s knowledge
services. In addition to gearing up to deal with the fallout from the global financial crisis, Botswana’s
public sector i s undergoing a shift in focus in the area of planning and budgeting. Efforts are underway

30

See Annex B4 for the Bank’s proposed AAA program.

18

to implement an increasingly results-based approach to planning and spending to reduce inefficiencies
in public spending programs, prioritize spending and prepare for the eventual decline in diamond
revenues, costly HIV/AIDS and related social assistance programs and the accelerating pace o f
infrastructure investments.
78.
The bulk o f Bank support in this area i s being delivered through a Public ExpenditureReview
(PER) that analyzes the outlook in the medium and longer term for revenues and expenditures in
Botswana, assesses planning, budgeting and financial management, and reviews social service
delivery (including social protection) and infrastructure spending plans. The Bank sees the PER as an
entry point into a dialogue that leads to a greater understanding o f how Botswana can more effectively
use all i t s assets for better development outcomes, in particular the reduction o f poverty and
inequality.
79.
To complement the PER work, the Bank i s supporting the strengthening o f M&E capacity o f
the Vision 2016 Council (IDF grant o f US$175,408), which monitors and evaluates progress towards
the achievement o f the goals and objectives outlined in Vision 2016, and that o f relevant Line
Ministries and Offices such as the Government Implementation and Coordination Office (GICO) as
well as civil society organizations. Strengthening Statistical Capacity for Poverty Analysis (multicountry TFSCB3’ grant o f US$260,000), a weak link hampering effective targeting o f Governmentfunded programs i s also underway to increase the capacity to compile, analyze and disseminate
poverty-related statistical information (poverty related household survey data will be available by
2010). The M F D P has also requested assistance in the area o f macroeconomic modeling, to improve
forecasting and simulation capacity and support the overall objective o f strengthening the framework
for medium term budgeting. Within the framework o f the PER, the Bank will also provide assistance
in the area o f debt sustainability analysis and debt strategy and management.
Furthermore, in the area o f accounting the Bank i s helping to strengthen Botswana’s National
80.
Accountancy Body (IDF grant o f US$486,300), and has agreed to provide a policy note on the key
issues involved with the introduction o f accrual accounting in collaboration with local and regional
bodies. If requested, the Bank could also provide technical assistance through i t s fee-for-service
program in the areas o f public debt management and domestic debt market development, in order to
improve the Government’s effectiveness in these areas. The Reserves Advisory and Management
Program (RAMP) i s also available to Botswana to support the strengthening o f the country’s capacity
in asset wealth management. In addition, capacity building for NBFI has been requested by MFDP.

8 1.
Botswana’s public sector management will also benefit from several regional knowledge
services, including a Southern Africa Regional Trade and Integration Study, a Southern Africa
Regional HIV/AIDS Strategy and a Regional Investment Climate Assessment building on the recently
completed country level Investment Climate Assessments.

II.

Fighting HIV/AIDS and Improving Education Outcomes

82.
In recent years, Botswana’s HIV/AIDS program has benefited from the support o f
international donors, including the European Commission, the Gates Foundation, Merck, the U.S.
Government (PEPFAR), Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM) and other
selected bilateral sources. However, even the combined levels o f donor and Government spending
have not kept pace with the cost and complexity o f the epidemic response. The Government o f
Botswana, therefore, requested an IBRD operation in anticipation that this additional financing and the
technical resources that come with it will support a more efficient and evidence-based response to the
pandemic.
3 1 Trust

Fund for Statistical Capacity Building. The grant covers Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia and Swaziland.

19

83.
In response to the Government’s request, the Bank has mobilized an IBRD loan for
HIV/AIDS (US$50 million, FY09) designed to enhance overall program efficiency and prevention, an
area that has received less attention in Government’s heavily treatment-oriented program (See B o x 3).
The IBRD-supported operation focuses on a multi-sector response, with particular emphasis on sectors
with pipeline IBRD operations (such as energy and transport). The Botswana HIV/AIDS operation
underpins a more effective delivery o f both prevention programs and basic health services.
84.
T o increase concessionality in support o f the fight against HTV/AIDS, the European
Commission has committed to contribute US$20 million to “buy-down” the interest rate o f the
proposed IBRD loan in what marks the first-ever IBRD “buy-down” arrangement in Africa (see also
B o x 3 for details)32.Symptomatic o f the general challenges o f public sector effectiveness, and despite
strong political will repeatedly expressed by senior leadership, it took a relatively long time to have a
project ready for Board approval in July 2008, and it has been lagging effectiveness since then. Project
effectiveness, originally planned for September 2008, has been delayed until M a y 2009. Government
and N A C A will have to significantly speed up internal processes if the country i s to successfully
combat these cross-cutting challenges posed by the HIV/AIDS pandemic.

In addition to the HIV/AIDS project, the Bank i s also providing analytical support in terms o f
85.
estimating the impact o f the global financial crisis on programs addressing the pandemic, in particular
public treatment programs. The Bank i s also supportive o f regional initiatives in Southern Africa, the
global epicenter o f the pandemic. This includes the ‘Champions for an HTV-free Generation” o f which
the former President o f Botswana, Mr. Festus Mogae i s a founding member, and which focuses in
particular at providing senior leadership in the area o f prevention.

With a view to enhancing the quality o f education outcomes, the Bank has recently been
86.
requested to provide analytical work in the sector. This work will complement work that other partners
(in particular the European Commission and UNICEF) have already undertaken. It comes in response
to Government’s recognition o f the importance o f human capital for competitiveness and
diversification.

III.

Increased Competitiveness- Infrastructure and the Climatefor
Investment and Growth

87.
Efficient, secure and cost effective infrastructure as well as an attractive investment climate
and sound financial sector are critical elements for Botswana’s continued economic growth and
increased competitiveness. In recognition o f the large demand for investment and the challenges o f
delivering such infrastructure expansion and service improvement, the Government has asked the
Bank to provide knowledge and financial products t o support in improving Botswana’s strategic
infrastructure.
In the electricity sector, in the broader strategic context, Botswana i s faced with two main
88.
how to achieve electricity security beyond 20 13 &id (ii)
how to make responsible use o f
challenges: (i)
i t s existing (coal) and potential (less carbon intensive and renewable) energy resources in a responsible
manner over the medium to long term. Both challenges are to be met while maximizing the pro-poor
developmental impact o f investments in the sector, ensuring the viability o f the sector and while
maintaining a balance between meeting Botswana’s development goals and acheiving a l o w carbon
footprint to address climate change considerations. Botswana i s faced with considerable challenges in
this regard, and i s looking for development partners, including the WBG to assist in this effort.

32 While these resources come out of the EC’s country allocation for Botswana, the EC has indicated that they had not
previously been programmed and would now become available to Botswana through a program supported by an IBRD loan.

20

Box 3: Innovative Financing Partnership for StrengtheningHIV/AIDS Prevention Efforts
Botswana’s first case of HIV infection was diagnosed in 1985. Today, Botswana i s one of the countries in the
southern Africa region most impacted by HIV/AIDS epidemic. With a national adult prevalence rate that i s
nearly 24 percent - the second highest in the world - an estimated 283,000 Batswana adults, many in their prime
of their lives, are suffering from the debilitating disease.
Recognizingthat Botswana’s status as a middle income country precludes i t from receiving concessional
financing, the World Bank, in cooperation with the European Commission, developed an innovative financing
instrument specifically tailored to the country’s needs.
The US$50 million Botswana National HIV/AIDS Prevention Support Project (BNAPS) i s designed to assist
the Government of Botswana in increasing the coverage, efficiency, and sustainability of HIV/AIDS
interventions, and enabling it to make the transition from an “emergency” response to a broader, more strategic,
and sustainable approach.
The project’s innovative “buy down” design allows a grant donor, in this case the European Commission, to
‘buy down’ the interest payments o f the IBRD loan. The European Commission has agreed to provide US$20
million in i t s next four-year Economic Development Framework for Botswana to help finance the interest
payments for this prevention effort.
The BNAPS i s the first IBRD “buy-down” being implemented in the Afiica Region after China.
The innovative design of the BNAPS project i s being looked at as a potential model to support development
efforts in other middle-income countries. The project agreement was signed in Gaborone on January 29,2009,
marking the first financial transaction between the Government o f Botswana and the World Bank in over 15
years.

Electricity Sector - The Government’s Plan

Given the prospect o f zero electricity imports from South Africa within four years, addressing
89.
the electricity sector crisis i s the most acute area o f infrastructure need, and the Government o f
Botswana has therefore made this the top priority request for the Bank’s program.
Without a secure supply o f power, Botswana risks not meeting i t s competitiveness goals or
even being able to maintain i t s economic status quo. A rapid increase in electricity generation capacity
i s therefore vital for preventing a crisis in the sector, which would further deepen the negative
economic effects currently experienced by Botswana through the current global economic crisis. If
power imports from South Africa cannot be replaced by 2013, this would not only render
diversification efforts meaningless, but also lead to a further economic contraction and loss o f
investments, with significant economic and social consequences including deepening poverty and
inequality.

90.

9 1.
T o achieve national energy security, the Government i s proposing a publicly funded project to
expand the existing “Morupuleyycoal-fired power plant (Plant A: 132 MW) by a further 600 M W , plus
the required transmission upgrades. “Morupule By’will be implemented and operated by the Botswana
Power Corporation (BPC), which i s owned by Government. The expected completion o f the plant i s
end-2012 with the f i r s t unit starting operation in early-2013. The fuel supply will come from the
expansion o f an existing underground coal mine (Morupule Colliery Limited). Given the size o f
Botswana’s economy, and hence the proposed added capacity by Morupule B, the technology choice
for this expansion i s “Circulating Fluidized Bed Combustion” (CFB) with a total project cost o f
US$1.6 billion. The Government’s options at this stage are limited to coal since it i s the only
economically viable option in the medium term for Botswana to achieve national electricity security.
Morupule B expansion i s the least cost option for the national system and part o f the optimal

21

expansion plan o f the Southern Africa Power Pool (SAPP). The Government i s committed to
responsible development o f i t s coal resources.

92.
Given Botswana’s vast coal reserves, the country also has an opportunity to contribute to
regional energy security (after having secured i t s own power supply through Morupule B) while
boosting exports and achieving some o f i t s economic diversification goals within the natural resource
sector. T o this end, the Government i s also considering supporting a private-led effort to construct a
new coal-to-power plant for export mainly to South Africa’s power utility, ESKOM. BPC plans to
retain up to 25 percent for domestic consumption, if required. The “Mmamabula” project (1,200 MW)
i s proposed as an Independent Power Project - IPP (coal mine and power plant) and, if realized as
planned, would be the first coal-fired generation project in Botswana to use high efficiency
“supercritical” coal boiler technology.
93.
The Mmamabula project has suffered long delays mainly due to the complications o f
structuring such a large project with private sector funding for the first time in Southern Africa. Given
these difficulties and uncertainties o f Mmamabula on the one hand, and the threat o f zero supplies
from South Africa as o f 201 3 on the other hand, the Government o f Botswana has decided as part o f
i t s long term energy strategy to move ahead swiftly with the expansion o f Morupule B for domestic
energy security, while pursuingthe Mmamabula option in parallel as a possible export project. Both
projects are part o f the optimization plan o f the Southern Africa Power Pool (SAPP) until 2025.
94.
T o expand the domestic energy resource mix and to mitigate climate change concerns, the
Government also intends to provide incentives to the private sector to accelerate exploration for CoalBed Methane (CBM), which emits 50 percent less C 0 2 than coal, in already-awarded and future coal
concessions.
95.
Furthermore, the Government i s advancing i t s renewable energy agenda and has recently
completed a pre-feasibility study for a commercial scale concentrated solar power plant (CSP) with a
projected size between 50-200 MW to be located in the Kalahari Desert. The Government plans to
submit an investment plan for possible support from the Clean Technology Fund (CTF). The
Government’s strategy also includes some new and yet untested technologies including carbon capture
and underground storage (CCS), for which Botswana’s geology shows promise.
Electricity Sector - Value-Added of Possible World Bank Group Assistance

96.
Potentially the World Bank Group i s well placed to assist Botswana in the energy sector. It
has the international expertise from many other middle income countries as to how to develop long
term, l o w carbon growth energy programs, how to ramp up quickly generation and transmission
capacity in times o f crisis and how to put the sector on a more financially sustainable footing with
protection for the poor, while managing the great complexity and environmental trade-offs
surrounding coal-fired power plants.
97.
All Bank Group assistance for Botswana’s electricity sector would be designed consistent with
the applicable Bank policies and strategies, namely, the Afiica Action Plan (AAP), the Clean Energv
Investment Framework (CEIF) and in particular the Development and Climate Change: A Strategic
Frameworkfor the World Bank Group (DCCSF). In regard to the two coal power projects planned by
Botswana - the Morupule B expansion and the Mmamabula IPP projects the Bank’s assistance
would be designed consistent with the DCCSF, along principal guidelines (in anticipation o f the
there i s a demonstrated developmental impact o f the
upcoming Energy Sector Strategy in FY 10): (i)
project including improving overall energy security, reducing power shortage or access to the poor;
(ii)
assistance i s being provided to identify and prepare l o w carbon projects; (iii)
optimization o f
energy resources by considering the possibility o f meeting the country’s needs through energy

-

22

efficiency (both supply and demand) and conservation; (iv) after full consideration o f viable
alternatives to the least cost (including environmental externalities) options and when the additional
financing from donors for their incremental cost i s not available; (v) use the best appropriate available
technology t o allow for high efficiency and therefore lower GHG emissions intensity; and (vi) an
approach to incorporate environmental externalities will be developed.
98.
Consistent with these principles, the Bank Group could provide attractive financing to support
the public and private funded initiatives. In the context o f this CPS the Bank could support the
Government through a combination o f the interventions highlighted below:
Support for Morupule B: IBRD support o f US$450 million (FY09/10) to Government through a
combination o f a Sector Investment Loan (SIL) and/or Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG). Assistance
in the structuring o f the financing plan and helping to mitigate the financial risks faced by the
project, the Government i s considering: (i)
an IBRD S I L to be disbursed in a mix o f currencies
(including Pula financing if terms are favorable), with long maturity and grace periods (27 and 8
a PCG to extend the maturity and terms o f commercial financing
years respectively), and (ii)
available to the project in Pula, South African Rand or other currencies as feasible.
Support to the private sector in structuring the financindguarantee package for Mmamabula:
Assuming the project proceeds, the Bank could support it through a Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG)
which could improve the likelihood o f financial closing (projected for FY 10/11). In addition,
MIGA i s in principle willing to consider providing insurance support for this project. Meanwhile,
I F C i s in preliminary discussions with the private sponsors who will need to raise significant
amounts o f long-term debt for the project.
Advisorv Services to manage large scale and complex infrastructure proiects: BPC and
Government skills could be complemented with well defined technical inputs. The existing
Morupule power station was built from 1978-1983 and the challenges posed by the two proposed
projects are significant. Technical assistance and capacity building would also address among
others the area o f high level strategic communications which would allow Botswana to make a
convincing case to all concerned stakeholders regarding the generation requirements under a
responsible framework for coal based generation consistent with the long t e r m mitigation
scenarios being developed. The Bank and Government have already started joint work in this
agenda.
Technical assistance to develop a l o w carbon growth scenario: The Bank would also develop an
instrument (Technical Assistance Loan or mobilization o f Grants) to advise and support the
Government and BPC in preparing a long term mitigation scenario that builds on the technology
options available for Botswana. This would include assessing the options for renewable energy
( C B M and solar) as well as technology mixes over time. A long term mitigation scenario could
also explore new technologies such as carbon capture and storage (CCS) as experiences from
prototypes in other parts o f the world become available. Bank support would enable the
implementation o f relevant IBRD sector strategies, as well as the ‘Clean Energy Investment
Framework’ (CEIF) and the ‘Development and Climate Change Strategic Framework’ (DCCSF).
CDF Framework Assistance. Botswana i s eager to access Carbon Finance opportunities for some
renewable energy and energy efficiency options. The Bank could assist in the preparation o f a
framework to access such resources into the future to support initiatives-such as Compact
Fluorescent Lamps (CFL), Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) and Coal-Bed Methane (CBM). The
Carbon Partnership Facility (CPF) and the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) could also be explored.

23

0

Environment and Social Safeguard Development. The proposed electricity sector support would
also include assistance from IBRD to Botswana to strengthen its capacity with regard to
environmental and social safeguards in line with IBRD guidelines that would make the proposed
projects more sustainable. Activities could include support for a cross-border assessment o f
pollution in the immediate area and cumulative transboundary effects along with South Africa (to
cover air and water). Also a review o f social safeguard policies could look into the capacity to
manage resettlement as well as the planningto consider the expected large influx o f short t e r m
labor and informal j o b seekers and associated risks (including HIV/AIDS). The social safeguard
review would also include possible assistance to BPC and Government on effective stakeholder
consultations (local and international) to ensure broad acceptance o f the plans and appropriate
safeguards, including for Indigenous Peoples.

Furthermore, the Bank could use the ongoing macro and fiscal dialogue and the assistance in
99.
the area o f public expenditure management (as outlined above) to assist Botswana with achieving
more effective revenue management for better outcomes, especially in human development sectors.
Also, to maximize the benefits o f the large investments in the sector, IFC through i t s investments,
would seek to provide advisory and TA services on community and SME development.
100. Under this CPS, the commitment o f Government and BPC to look at medium and long term
issues in the above outlined context33,will prove critical to determine the type o f IBRD support-to
Botswana’s electricity sector. A sector wide approach will certainly be a determinant to support the
sustainability o f the development model more broadly. The challenge will be to support a balanced
approach that considers development, environmental sustainability and climate change considerations
simultaneously.

101. Under a sustainable framework, the Bank Group could support the electricity sector,
including the responsible use o f coal, in a manner that i s consistent with pro-poor development
domestic electricity security beyond 20 13; (ii)
continued access
objectives in Botswana achieving: (i)
and rural electrification (a Vision 20 16 objective), which requires the development o f at least
electricity tariff trajectory which protects the ~ 0 0 2(iv)
~ ; possible export o f
Morupule B; (iii)
electricity contributing to the solution o f regional energy crisis; and (v) a l o w carbon growth
trajectory.
102. Management will carefully screen the two projects for ensuring consistency with the above
criteria and principles in the Botswana and sub-regional contexts and will present for Board
consideration any proposed investments and guarantees with detailed information with regard to the
above mentioned considerations.
Transport

103. The Government recognizes that efficient and cost effective transport i s one o f the most
important vehicles for growth and increased competitiveness and to promote economic diversification.
Botswana’s location at the center o f the southern African region puts it in the position to serve as a
land-bridge connecting South Africa and Namibia to Zambia, Angola and eastern Africa. In fact,
Botswana i s a key member o f SADC which i s involved in the pro osed regional ‘North-South
Corridor’ initiative (spearheaded by EAC, COMESA and SADC) linking the Copperbelt to the

E

33 Government i s also currently in the process of investigating a media allegation with regard to possible corruption during
the ‘Engineering, Procurement and Construction’ (EPC) contract award process for Morupule B. The case i s currently being
handled by Botswana’s Directorate on Corruption and Economic Crime (DCEC) in the Presidency and Government i s aware
that only satisfactoryresolution o f this case would allow the WBG to provide financial support.
34 The Bank organized a first workshop on tariff reform in February 2009.
35 For more information visit www.northsouthcorridor.org.

24

southern ports in Africa. However, the transport sector has been subject to an increasingly tight budget
envelope as the Government directs more o f its spending to the social sectors. Partly as a consequence,
the sector has seen a steady decline in experienced professional staff. In line with i t s vision for the
transport sector, the Government has turned to bilateral and multilateral partners such as the OPEC
fund, Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA), AfDB and Japan Bank for
International Cooperation (JBIC).

104. At the Government’s request, the World Bank will contribute to these efforts through an
Integrated Transport Project (US$180.5 million, FY09) that will include analytical and technical
assistance, as well as physical investments related to road asset management and preservation, and
urban traffic and transport improvements. While the project will focus o n urban roads infrastructure
investment, it will also build capacity, strengthen institutions and provide training to the sector. It will
support long-term performance and output-based contracting, develop a National Multimodal
Transport Master Plan, undertake a Regional Integration Study, and a study o f the MmamabulaEllisras railway link. The OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID) may also provide
parallel financing estimated at US$20 million.
Competitiveness Analyses

105. To inform the policy dialogue, a synthesis report o f strategic constraints to competitiveness
will be launched in FY 10. It will take stock and identify the remaining key bottlenecks to greater
domestic and international foreign investment. The Bank has completed an Investment Climate
Assessment in 2007 and, as a follow-up, Government has requested the Bank to undertake a study into
the facilitation o f the development and formalization o f micro enterprises through business support
schemes. Currently the sector engages a quarter o f a million Batswana, but very little i s known about
the nature, magnitude o f linkages between these enterprises and the formal economy. In addition, in
agriculture Government has requested policy advice from the Bank in the areas o f agricultural supply
response and land tenure. Furthermore, and as a follow-up to the Financial System Stability
Assessment o f 2007, the Bank proposes to provide support on the regulatory and supervisory aspects
o f Non-Bank Financial Institutions (NBFI), which had been identified as a risk, as well as review other
financial legislation as requested by the Government.

IK

The Environment

Water

106. Water i s Botswana’s scarcest natural resource and water availability and conservation are
critical to Botswana’s development. Ninety-one percent o f the country i s classified as semi-arid and
the remainder as arid36making Botswana one o f the world’s most water-stressed countries. There are
good water resources in the northwest and north but transfer schemes are required for rest o f country.
Currently over a hundred villages and settlements have serious water shortages. The main issue i s that
the water sector institutional framework in place until now has been outgrown and the sector i s not
financially sustainable. Accountabilities for water sector delivery are not clear, as a result there are
uneven levels o f service, tariffs lack a clear rationale, and subsidies are not well targeted. At present it
appears nearly impossible to ensure universal access to piped water by 20 16 without reforms regarding
the accountability for water supply water resources management.

This aridity zones are based on an aridity index (AI)derived from the ratio o f mean annual precipitation (MAP)to mean
annual potential evapo-transpiration(PET). Arid zones have an AI o f 0.05 to 0.20, while semi-arid zones have an AI of 0.20
to 0.50.
36

25

107. Through a Fee Based Service Agreement (FBSA), the Bank i s assisting with the
implementation o f a water sector reform in accordance with the National Water Sector Master Plan
which has been extensively reviewed and consulted upon over the past few years. The reform o f
institutions and policies i s required to meet the country’s aspiration to reach universal access by 2016
and to improve standards o f water supply sector delivery throughout Botswana. The technical
assistance provided by the Bank i s managed by Government. It also includes support for water
conservation and management and a Regional Environmental and Social Assessment study. Phase 1
o f the fee-based services has been completed and presented at the Ministerial level. The most critical
issues to follow-up are: (i)
the urgent need to resolve current financial distortions in the sector and redesign the overall tariff structure; and (ii)
ensure the minimum resources (staff and budget) to carry the
reform through to i t s conclusion. A Phase I1 o f the fee-based services i s under discussion, and
Government has expressed interest in possible further support from IBRD to implement the reforms
including a possible sector loan.
108. As part o f the energy sector dialogue the Bank i s also advising on technology options (for
example, dry cooling o f power plants) to reduce water consumption in the power sector.
109. Botswana i s also participating in an on-going regional GEF project on Groundwater and
Drought Management (US$7 million, FY05) to develop a regional strategy for SADC countries t o
enhance the capacity o f its member states in developing drought management policies, specifically in
relation to the role, availability and supply potential o f groundwater resources.
Wildlife and Nature-Based Tourism

110. Botswana’s wildlife resources are extensive and globally significant, and a growing source o f
economic activity. In recent years, the Government has recognized the need to strike a balance
between conservation and promoting sustainable utilization o f wildlife resources. In this context, the
Government has requested Bank assistance in developing a Global Environment Facility (GEF) cofinanced project to strengthen conservation, promote sustainable use and mainstream wildlife and
biodiversity resources in Botswana’s economic development. In response, the Bank i s preparing a
Wildlife Conflict Management and Biodiversity Conservation for Improved Rural Livelihoods Project
(US$5.5 million, FY 10). The Bank team will also provide a policy note on nature-based tourism, to
strengthen the country’s ability to tap into that promising sector. Support in this area i s particularly
important given that several donors previously active in the environment sector have shifted their
support to the health sector in view o f the magnitude o f the €€IV/AIDS situation.

The Lending Program
111. Table 2 sets out the agreed initial lending program for FY09-11. For the outer years (FY 1213), possible areas o f Bank engagement will be determined through an annual business planning
process and reflected in the CPS Progress Report. During CPS consultations, the Government has also
been made aware o f the availability o f budget support instruments (DPL, DDO). Given the uncertainty
surrounding the future impact o f the global economic crisis, retaining flexibility with regard to Bank
interventions will be critical.
112. For the purpose o f IBRD’s internal risk exposure analysis, an indicative lending envelope o f
up.to US$1 billion i s assumed for the CPS period. This lending level would significantly increase the
WBG’s exposure to Botswana. At the same time, given Botswana’s credit rating and track record o f
creditworthiness, the country’s currently l o w level o f international debt and high level o f foreign
exchange reserves would s t i l l leave WBG exposure within prudent limits, with the understanding that
IBRD’s capacity to lend can change over time and that lending plans are indicative.

26

Table 2 : Indicative IBRD Lending Program FY09-11

I Amount (US$

Name

HIV/AIDS Project*
Morupule B

$50
$450
$180.5
$680.5

IntegratedTransport
Subtotal:
Mmamabula IPP Project
Subtotal:

$100
$100
$780.5

Total FY09-11:

Note:
* approved by Board July 10,2008
For the outer years (FY 12-13), possible areas o f Bank engagement will be determined during
the annual business planning process and reflected in the CPS Progress Report

IFC and M I G A
IFC will support the competitiveness agenda through selective strategic interventions. In
113.
addition to i t s possible engagement in the power sector, IFC Advisory Services has been appointed as
transaction advisor to the Government on a public-private partnership for the new Botswana
University o f Science and Technology (BIUST) and the privatization o f the Botswana
Telecommunications Corporation (BTC). The Corporation i s also exploring options for providing
finance to mining beneficiation, and advisory services in the health sector. IFC’s support may also be
required for the Mmamabula IPP which will need to raise large amounts o f long-term debt if it
proceeds. Investment opportunities for the private sector will increase as reforms to strengthen
Botswana’s competitiveness bear fruit and as the privatization agenda advances in the coming years.

114. MIGA will also support the country’s competitiveness agenda through the provision o f
political risk insurance, if and when needed by foreign investors active in the country. To date few
investors have sought such support from MIGA, primarily due to the market’s perception o f low
political risk. However, this may change with the impact o f the financial crisis, especially as
commercial lenders to projects review their risk appetite. Specifically, MIGA’s insurance can be used
as a credit enhancement tool (to improve lending terms and conditions o f private projects) in middle
income countries like Botswana. In this regard, MIGA will continue to work closely with the Bank
and IFC, especially in respect o f projects in the infrastructure and extractive sectors, given their
significant impact on growth.

Monitoring Results
115.
Annex 3 provides a set o f indicators to measure the outcomes o f WBG support under this
CPS. These indicators are designed to capture the key areas o f Bank interventions in a way that
recognizes that at least in early stages o f this new partnership, implementation delays may occur.
Tracking progress may be complicated by a lack o f data as well as changing priorities o f the
Government to which the strategy will need to adapt.

27

B. PARTNERSHIPS
116.
Botswana’s strong economic performance and it’s middle-income status have resulted in donors
gradually leaving the country. Except in the area o f HTV/AIDS, which benefits from strong support by
official donors and foundations, not many donors are present or active today. Official Development
Assistance (ODA) fell from US$148 million in 1990 to a mere US$28 million in 2003 but has since been
on an upward trend reaching US$104 million, or 1.0 percent o f GNI in 2007, reflecting the increased
needs brought on by the HIV/AIDS situation. Indeed, over 85 percent o f ODA i s directed to the Health
& Population sector. The three largest official donors are the United States followed by the European
Commission and Japan.
117. As part o f the scaling-up o f Bank Group engagement in Botswana, Bank teams have reached out
to other donors active in Botswana to forge strategic partnerships and to share knowledge. The European
Commission in particular has emerged as an important and supportive partner as demonstrated by the
“IBRD buy-down” arrangement o f the HN/AIDS project. OFID i s planning to parallel finance the
Integrated Transport project and the AfDB for the Morupule B project.
Using i t s convening power, the Bank will also explore how Botswana may be able to better
118.
harness i t s positive international reputation to further stimulate private sector interest and investment.
Botswana i s also actively reaching out to fellow middle income countries for South - South learning. In
the course o f the CPS the Bank will identify potential areas and countries where it can play a role as an
effective knowledge broker in strategic areas.
119. Donor coordination in recent years in Botswana has not been characteristic given that several
development partners had reduced i t s presence as the country joined the ranks o f the MICs. Government
has made efforts to bring the partners together in a “Donor Forum” in line with Paris and Accra
Declarations, but this i s s t i l l a recent activity that may be bolstered as the Government refines its strategy
o f what they want role they assign to each development partner. The Government i s firmly in the
coordination driver’s seat.

The WBG will continue to support better coordination through greater decentralization o f sector
120.
and country staff to the Pretoria office. Opening a Country Office in Gaborone in 2009, building on the
Development Information Center (DIC) opened in Gaborone in 2006, would also significantly facilitate
the delivery o f the CPS.

IV.

RISKS

121.
Credit Risk. Botswana i s a well-performing upper middle-income country, and has the best
sovereign rating in Africa. Botswana maintains a sovereign rating from the commercial agencies that i s
five notches above investment grade: similarly rated sovereigns include Chile, Korea and Poland.
Despite the good track record o f prudent economic policies, Botswana’s overall creditworthiness i s
constrained by i t s diamond-dependent narrow economic base and associated problems which have
become more apparent with the onset o f the global economic crisis in recent months.
122.
The global economic downturn has exacerbated downside risks for Botswana, as the severe
contraction o f the diamond industry may result in substantial imbalances in i t s fiscal and external
accounts. Unlike most other emerging markets, Botswana i s a net external creditor, and hence has not
been dependent on external financing, but the balances may change under a potentially long-lived global
recession. Additionally, while the financial sector i s s t i l l fairly robust, with ample liquidity and high
capitalization and profitability, the banking system nevertheless remains vulnerable to the effects o f a
protracted global economic downturn on diamond export revenues, which i s the main direct and indirect
income source for a great number o f borrowers. The likelihood o f rapidly deteriorating public finances

28

and the potentially lengthy downturn in the diamond industry led Standard and Poor to revise, in February
2009, Botswana’s rating outlook to negative from positive; subsequently Moody’s also changed i t s ratings
outlook, from positive to stable. IBRD exposure to Botswana i s currently nonexistent, but this CPS,
which i s designed t o help address Botswana’s major challenges, i s expected to bring exposure to
unprecedented levels in terms o f the size o f i t s economy and population.
123.
The planned large electricity investments (Morupule B) are likely to represent a significant
portion, close to 20 percent, o f public capital spending over the coming 4-5 years. While the proposed
investments are large, they are affordable from a debt perspective. Beyond the country’s extremely l o w
public external debt levels, debt sustainability analyses indicate that there i s little risk o f debt distress in
Botswana under a wide variety o f stress scenarios. One potential concern i s the impact on the real
exchange rate.37However, as it i s expected that the bulk o f expenditures will finance imports, this will
limit the exchange rate impact. The development o f Morupule B will affect the current account balance
as a result o f the large associated projected imports.
124.
Reputational Risk. The Bank Group’s engagement in coal-to-power developments i s likely to
attract attention and criticism from those concerned with climate change and from those who see a risk o f
a worsening the HIV/AIDS situation in the project area through the immigration o f people from within
and outside o f Botswana in search o f jobs. In addition, a media allegation with regard to corruption during
the ‘Engineering, Procurement and Construction’ (EPC) contract award process for Morupule B i s
currently being handled by Botswana’s Directorate on Corruption and Economic Crime (DCEC) in the
Presidency. Government i s aware that only satisfactory resolution o f this case would allow the WBG to
provide financial support.
T o mitigate these risks, the Government and the Bank Group need to communicate effectively the
125.
national and regional benefits o f this engagement and the efforts being made to use the cleanest possible
technology, the responsible development o f coal in line with international agreements and best practices
and high standards for fiduciary, environmental and social safeguards. A communications strategy i s in
place and the Bank team i s also supporting the Government in the development o f i t s own
communications strategy and capacity (see B o x 4). Regarding HIV/AIDS risks, specific programs in the
locales o f proposed power plants will be targeted to contain and prevent new HIV/AIDS cases.

Box 4: Strategic Communications for Development Results
The Government of Botswana i s f i l l y aware o f the importance of strategic communications for development and
has taken significant steps in the past few years to boost its communication capacity and effectiveness and
increase openness in the governing process. It plans to increase proactive communications with stakeholders
about issues critical to the country’s well-being - such as inequality and unemployment; the current electricity
crisis and the Government’s response against an overall backdrop of a need for infrastructure investment and
upgrade; economic growth and economic diversification; the fight against HIV/AIDS; managing the environment
and promoting tourism; and growing the private sector. At a broad level, the World Bank plans to assist the
Government’s communications efforts with capacity building of communications staff within the Ministries and
helping the Government develop mechanisms through which it can systematically listen to the needs, concerns
and aspirations of stakeholders and create platforms for dialogue around critical public policies. The Bank will
also support Government efforts in each o f the key strategic elements o f Infrastructure, HIV/AIDS, and
Knowledge Products and Services. I t will equally work to ensure that the World Bank’s work in these areas i s
shared broadly with all stakeholders and opportunities are created to expand dialogue and discussion within the
country around these themes.

Here the case o f Mozal aluminium smelter in Mozambique, built to produce aluminium for export, i s illustrative. Mozal I
and I1 amounted to about $2 billion in investment in a national economy o f $6 billion, larger in relative terms than the
proposed Morupule B investments in Botswana (but similar to the combination o f Morupule B and Mmamabula, the latter
expected to be privately financed). The investments were executed at a faster pace than i s being proposed in the Botswana
case. Despite this, there was l i t t l e impact seen on the exchange rate as most o f the resources financed imports.
37

29

126.
Commitment Risk. While the Government has expressed interest in a closer partnership with
the Bank Group, there i s a risk that it may decide not to follow-through on some o f the proposed
activities. While this strategy i s designed to be flexible to adjust to the Government’s needs, a
significant shift in scope or focus could derail implementation. T o mitigate this risk, the Bank will
maintain a close dialogue with the Government t o anticipate possible changes and will continue to
demonstrate strong value-added in areas o f partnership. The opening o f a Country Office in Gaborone
would also deepen the dialogue in the partnership.
127.
Implementation Risk. Government does not have recent experience in preparing and
implementingBank operations, beyond the recently signed H I V / A I D S project. Implementation
capacity i s often low, although technical capacity i s high. This could lead to delays in project
preparation and implementation as well as concerns over the non-financial cost o f doing business with
the Bank. This risk i s high in the energy sector. T o mitigate this risk, opening a Country Office in
Gaborone would provide close implementation support, including providing efficient reviews o f
fiduciary and safeguard functions.

30

Annex 1: BOTSWANA’S DEVELOPMENT VISION AND STRATEGIC PLANS
128. In 1996 when Botswana celebrated 30 years o f independence, the nation saw it fit to examine its past
performance and to define a better future in which “Prosperity For All” will be achieved by 2016, when the
Batswana will be celebrating 50 years o f their independence. “Vision 2016” i s a long t e r m development
strategy based on Botswana’s five national principles: democracy, development, self-reliance, unity and
both^^^. It seeks to propel the country’s socio economic and political development into that o f a “competitive,
winning and prosperous nation” through seven strategic pillars that are closely aligned with MDGs3’. Vision
20 16 provides the framework for the six-year National Development Plans (with the exception o f NDP10)
which lay out Government’s medium t e r m development strategy and policy. The overriding objective o f the
NDPs i s to ensure that resources are used effectively to achieve national priorities. The planning system in
Botswana i s relatively strong and well-functioning with particular emphasis given to a broad-based consultative
system.
129. In April 2003, Botswana launched the NDP9 for 2003-2008, with the theme “Towards Realizations of
Vision 2016, sustainable and diversiJied development through competitiveness in global markets”. The main
policy goal o f NDP9 i s to increase diversification and to foster employment in labor-intensive industries. It also
puts emphasis on development o f human resources (including the fight against HIV/AIDS), privatization and
labor market reforms. A review o f the economic performance o f NDP9 revealed that “growth was slower than
planned in the first half o f NDP9, and the growth rate was declining.” The Government had fallen short o f
meeting set targets on diversification and employment creation. The implementation o f Government’s plans has
suffered from capacity and skills constraints, which in turn has led to delays. Energy constraints also contributed
to delays in implementing the Government’s rural electrification program. N D P 10 i s expected to carry forward
the unrealized targets into the future.
130. The goals o f Vision 20 16 have been cascaded down into N D P 10 resulting in 10 key results areas and 16
national goals. The strategic thrusts o f NDP10 will be to accelerate competitiveness through knowledge and
productive human resources, sustainable growth and environment, enhanced well-being and social protection,
security, transparency and governance. Under the theme “Accelerating Vision 2016 through NDPlO ”, this
development plan i s different from previous development plans since it i s the first results-oriented plan which
will be supported by a strengthened monitoring and evaluation system (M&E) and it spans a seven year horizon
to coincide with the timeframe o f “Vision 2016” and overlap the assessment o f the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) in 20 15. The consultative process was guided by multi-sectoral reference groups comprised o f
Government officials, private sector, trade unions and NGOs.
13 1.
Despite weaknesses in terms o f strategic focus, NDP10 i s an adequate planning instrument and the basis
for the strategic interventions as envisaged under the CPS in HIV/AIDS, infrastructure (transport, energy, water)
and client - driven knowledge services.
132.
To address the poverty situation, the Government has also put in place a National Poverty Reduction
Strategy (NPRS) focused on reducing poverty through broad-based growth, enhancing human capital o f the
poor, creation o f cost-effective pro-poor social safety nets, an effective response to HIV/AIDS, and
strengthening institutions for the poor. The implementation o f the NPRS i s vested in the Rural Development
Council (RDC), underliningthe strongly rural nexus o f poverty. While the Government has pursued a number o f
poverty alleviating measures, a major weakness remains the lack o f explicit poverty reduction links in policies
and programs o f the NDP. The implementation o f the PRS also suffers from lack o f data needed for better
targeting and an insufficient monitoring and evaluation system.

38
39

Setswana word for respect, manners
Vision 2016 predates the MDGs by two years.

31

Annex 2 : HIV/AIDS IN BOTSWANA
133. Botswana’s first case o f HIV infection was diagnosed in 1985. Today, the country faces
the second most severe HIV/AIDS epidemic in the world (after Swaziland). It i s estimated that in
2008, 283,000 adults were living with W / A I D S in Botswana (NACA, 2008). This indicates a
national adult (15-49 years) prevalence o f nearly 25 percent4’. Rising mortality rates have
paralleled the maturing epidemic over the past decade. AIDS-attributed mortality in Botswana
increased from 4 percent to 27 percent o f all reported deaths between 1992 and 2003. The
principal mode o f epidemic transmission in Botswana i s heterosexual. Key factors fueling the
HIV/AIDS epidemic include the high incidence o f multiple concurrent sexual partners and
intergenerational sexual relationships, unprotected sex, the vulnerability o f women, persistent
inequality and poverty, and high levels o f population mobility, including cross-border challenges.

134.
The pandemic weighs heavily on society, the economy, families and the fiscus. There are
already 13 1,000 AIDS orphans in Botswana. By 2004, the Central Statistics Office estimates that
l i f e expectancy had decreased to 56 years (2007). (It i s estimated that life expectancy would have
increased to 70 years by 2000, in the absence o f the HIVIAIDS pandemic). As estimated by the
Botswana Central Statistics Office (CSO), W / A I D S dramatically reduced life expectancy at
birth by 10 years (from 65.3 to 55.6 years) within a decade (1991-2001). HIV/AIDS has distorted
the population structure o f Botswana. The magnitude o f the epidemic tripled crude mortality
rates (deaths per 100,000) in Botswana between1991-2003. Although different demographic
projection models vary in predicting the specific degree o f epidemic impact, all concurs that the
population structure o f Botswana will be radically altered, given unprecedented death rates
among young adults across all social strata over the past two decades. Traditional social safety
nets are stretched to their limits as a smaller number o f adults will have to support larger numbers
o f the young and elderly and the sick.
Key health indicators are reversing - infant mortality i s up from 45 (per 1,000 births) in
135.
1990 to 56 in 2006. Tuberculosis (TB) continues to pose a heavy burden in Botswana. The
number o f new TB cases per year has increased 21 1 percent since 1990. In 2008, there were an
estimated 551 new TB cases per 100,000 population. The TB treatment (Directly Observed
Therapy - DOTS) coverage and DOTS detection rates are estimated at 70 percent and 80 percent,
respectively. An estimated 54 percent o f new TB patients are W - p o s i t i v e and 38 percent o f
AIDS deaths are due to TB, emphasizing the magnitude o f the challenge posed by this dual
epidemic. In addition, in January 2008, Botswana health authorities reported their f i r s t known
cases o f virtually untreatable, extensively drug resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB), a highly
contagious strain f i r s t detected in the Southern African region. This poses a risk not just to
Botswana, but to the entire region o f Southern Africa, the world’s epicenter o f the pandemic.
136.
Government finances over 80 percent o f the national HIV/AIDS program. The national
H I V / A I D S program, coordinated by the National AIDS Coordinating Agency (NACA), has been
very effective in treatment. Botswana was the first African country to provide no-cost,
antiretroviral (ARV) therapy, capitalizing on both its strong health system and strong
Government commitment to rapidly expand access to these critical services. Today, an estimated
90 percent o f individuals with advanced HIV infection are receiving antiretroviral therapy. The
cost o f this disease-specific Government allocation has increased dramatically from US$69.8
million in 2000-200 1,t o US$130 million in 2005. The specter o f providing second-line ARV

40

Current status o f the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Botswana (Draft, March 2008). NACA.

32

Annex 2

drugs to an increasing number o f HIV positive patients looms in the fiscal horizon, especially
because these drugs cost 13 times more than the first-line drugs41.An economic analysis o f
Botswana's financing and delivery o f HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment and social support
prepared by the World Bank found that despite high levels o f own and foreign resources allocated
to the fight against HIV/AIDS, Botswana faces an increasing funding deficit (up to US$300
million by 2009). Since it will be difficult to find the fiscal space for higher budget outlays in this
area without crowding out other important development spending, the need to increase efficiency
and effectiveness o f spending i s now even greater. A renewed emphasis on prevention i s called
for, including prevention o f disinhibiting sexual behavior o f HIV positive persons who are
already o n ARV treatment.

Graph 1: New adult HIV infections and AIDS deaths

137.
Graph 1 (above) illustrates the dynamics o f the epidemic over the past 25 years. The
number o f new infections rose rapidly during the early 199Os, peaking in the mid-1990s. The
number o f AIDS deaths started to grow rapidly about 10 years subsequent to this rise in new
infections, peaking in 2003, just before the emergency expansion o f the national AIDS treatment
program. By 2003, the number o f new infections, with respect to the adult population o f
Botswana, was approximately equal to the number o f AIDS deaths. The successful expansion o f
the treatment program has reduced the number o f AIDS deaths by half. According to recent
estimates, the national treatment program had averted about 52,000 adults' deaths by end-2007.
The most significant challenge for the national response to HIV/AIDS, currently, i s to strengthen
efforts to reduce the number o f new infections s t i l l occurring each year. During 2008, it i s
projected that there were 14,100 new adult infections and 690 new child infections in Botswana.
The Prevention o f Mother To Child Transmission Program (PMCTP) has demonstrated
significant success in helping to reduce child infections. PMCTP increased i t s coverage from 37
percent o f women (2003) who took prophylaxis to reduce transmission to the unborn child to 89
percent in 2007 (NDPlO draft report). I t i s estimated that the program has resulted in a decline in
transmission to 4 percent, which i s a Western EuropeadNorth American standard.

41 Experience from places where ARV has long been widely available shows that after a few years, the "first-line" of
ARV no longer works for an increasing number of patients due to drug resistance, and these patients must then switch
to "second-line" drugs.

33

W

m

kd
8

c
M
a

e

-.5

a

U

E

U

0

a

r,a
Y

a

F
U
E

m
a

s

00

m

Annex 4: BOTSWANA: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
The country financing parameters for Botswana set out below have been approved by the
Regional Vice President, AFR on June 13,2008 and distributed to the Board on June 16,2008.
Item
A. Cost Sharing. Limit on the
proportion o f individual project cost
that the Bank may finance

Parameter
Upto 100
percent

RemarksiExplanation
While continuing to emphasize borrower commitment and
ownership o f individual projects, the Bank would retain the
option o f financing up to 100 percent o f project costs.
However, specific arrangements would be determined for
individual projects, taking into account project specific
considerations. In practice, the Bank’s financing share in
many projects i s expected to be less than 100 percent given
Government contribution and other donor participation.

B. Recurrent Cost Financing. Any
limits that would apply to the overall
amount o f recurrent expenditures that
the Bank may finance

No countrylevel limit

C. Local Cost Financing. Are the
requirements for Bank financing o f
local expenditures met, namely that:
(i)financing requirements for the
country’s development programme
would exceed the public sector’s own
resources (e.g., from taxation and
other revenues)
and expected
domestic borrowing; and (ii)the
financing o f foreign expenditures
alone would not enable the Bank to
assist in the financing o f individual
projects
D. Taxes and Duties. Are there any
taxes and duties that the Bank would
not finance?

Yes

N o country-level limit on Bank financing o f recurrent costs
i s proposed. On a project by project basis, the Bank may
finance recurrent costs after careful consideration o f the
sustainability o f project achievements; and implied future
budgetary outlays, within the overall context o f
Botswana’s aggregate fiscal position and prospects.
The requirements for local cost financing are met. The
Bank can finance local costs in any proportions required by
individual projects.

None

The Bank may finance the costs o f taxes and duties
associated with project expenditures. No taxes and duties
have been identified as excessive, unreasonable or
discriminatory. At the project level, the Bank would
examine whether taxes and duties constitute an excessively
high share o f project cost.

39

Annex 4

BOTSWANA: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
The following provides additional information on the country financing parameters for Botswana
established pursuant to OP/BP 6.00, Bank Financing.
Introduction: Botswana has enjoyed several decades o f sustained real GDP per capita growth,
which was the result of its prudent management of mineral wealth since the 1970s. This has
allowed the Government to build up savings and to invest in physical and human infrastructure
needed for development. Furthermore, the Government has one o f the most meritocratic,
transparent and efficient bureaucracy in Africa. However, poverty level remains high; prevalence
of HIV/AIDS i s threatening the country’s productive capacity as well as public finances; while
unemployment i s also stubbornly high at around 18 percent. The Government’s development
program aims to address these challenges by continuing to invest in human development as well
as attemptingto diversify the economy through increased competitiveness.

A.
Cost Sharing: Government ownership of projects i s strong. The political leadership has
shown a strong commitment to its development program, which i s entirely homegrown as
articulated in its Vision 2016 and the latest National Development Plan (NDP), which builds on
Vision 2016 and focuses on economic diversification away from mineral production, employment
creation and poverty alleviation. Botswana has a comprehensive and well functioning budget
system, with fiscal and development policy and management being anchored in NDPs which in
many respects, i s a textbook example of an MTEF: there i s a close link between the central
Government’s annual budgets and the NDP and in each year, capital expenditure allocations in
the budget are derived directly from the investment program in the plan.
Government ownership i s key and will continue to be emphasized. The Bank’s financing share in
individual projects would be determined in a manner which supports Government ownership of
projects, and on that basis counterpart funding by Government will generally be expected in all
projects. And in view of the fact that HIV/AIDS will increasingly exert pressure on public
finances, enhanced flexibility i s warranted for some projects. Therefore, while continuing to
emphasize client commitment and ownership of individual projects, the Bank would retain the
option of financing up to 100 percent of project costs.

B. Recurrent Costs: The authorities in Botswana pursue a prudent macroeconomic policy which
can be seen from the long period o f strong and sustained per capita growth as well as low public
debt (less than 10 percent of GDP). Strong diamond exports have also meant strong current
account surpluses, which have enabled large build up reserves (2 years worth of imports) as well
as supporting the Government’s ambitious development agenda. The Government of Botswana
aims to dedicate 30 percent of it budget to development -although this has not been achieved in
recent years- and finances around 85 percent o f it within i t s budget (donors and loans make up the
rest) resources and has the desire to allocate more o f the national resources for investment in
pursuit of sustainable growth and economic diversification. The Government’s commitment to its
development agenda, coupled with i t s sound public financial management track record indicates
that the Government will have no difficulties financing recurrent costs after the Bank exits.

40

Annex 4

Given Botswana’s exemplary track record o f public finance management, and its commitment to
i t s development agenda, we envisage no problem for the Government to finance recurrent costs
after Bank exits. N o country-level limit on Bank financing o f recurrent costs i s proposed. On a
project by project basis, the Bank may finance recurrent costs after careful consideration o f the
sustainability o f project achievements; and implied future budgetary outlays, within the overall
context o f Botswana’s aggregate fiscal position and prospects.

C. Local Cost Financing: Financing requirements for the country’s development program
exceed the public sector’s own resources (e.g., from taxation and other revenues) and expected
domestic borrowing. Despite Botswana’s excellent track record in economic management, it
faces serious challenges to development and sustainable growth, which in turn are likely to put
pressure on public finances going forward: HTV/AIDS and anticipated decline in diamond
production. Therefore, the anticipated loss o f diamond revenue, coupled with increasing health
costs for H I V / A I D S related spending as well as loss o f productive human capital makes the case
for supporting Botswana’s development program warranted.
The local cost component o f envisaged investment lending i s expected to be significant.
Therefore, the financing o f foreign expenditures alone would not enable the Bank to assist in the
financing o f individual projects. The two requirements for Bank financing o f local costs are met,
and the Bank may finance local and foreign costs in the proportion required for individual
projects.

D.
Taxes and Duties Financing: Taxes and duties have been assessed as reasonable and the
Bank may therefore finance taxes and duties associated with project expenditures. At the project
level, the Bank would consider whether taxes and duties constitute an excessively high share o f
projects. Changes in tax and customs and/or related exemptions could trigger a review o f this
parameter. Major taxes and duties are summarized below.
Item

Personal Income Tax

Tax rates (range)

5 percent-25 percent depending on income
level

Value-added Tax

Customs Tariffs

25 percent i s the maximum rate (can be higher
for mining), however, concessional rate o f 15
percent applies
for some categories o f
manufacturing and for businesses operating
within the jurisdiction o f Botswana’s
International Financial Services Center (IFSC)
10 percent (there are zero-rated exempt items
like maize and sorghum meal, petrol, diesel,
paraffin and exports)
The common ad valorem rates have 39 bands
ranging from zero to 55 percent.

41

Annex 5 : Botswana: World Bank and IMF Work Programs

As o f March 12,2009
Provisional timing of
missions
I
A. Mutual information on relevar work programs
World Bank indicative 1. Country Partnership Strategy
work program in the
next 12 months
2. Electricity Program
0
Morupule B Generation and
Transmission Power Project
0
Mmamabula IPP Power Project PRG
(TBD)
Title

Products

Expected delivery date

Bank Board 44, FY09

FY09/10
FY 10/11 (TBD)

Bank Board Q1, FY09
(approved)

3. HIV/AIDS Project

Bank Board 44, FY09

4. IntegratedTransport Project

5. Wildlife Conflict Management and
Biodiversity Conservation for
Improved Rural Livelihoods Project
(Global Environment Facility)
6. Statistics/Capacity-building
0
Strengthening Monitoring and
Evaluationcapacity for Vision 20 16
Council (IDF Grant)
0
Strengthening Institute & Accountants
(IDF Grant)
0
Strengthening Statistical Capacity for
Poverty Analysis

FYlO

F Y 10; On-going

F Y 10; On-going
F Y109

7. Carbon Finance Assistance Program

FYlO

8. Post ICA Follow-up/Financial Systems
Stability Assessment (TA)

FYlO

9. Water Sector:
0 FBSC Technical Advisory Services
(Phases 1 & 2)
10. Sustainable Development (SDN) Policy
Notes
11. PER/PFM Reform (TA)
12. Development Policy Review (DPR)
13. Skills Gap/Labor Markets
14. Macro-Modeling (TA)
15. Capacity building in NBFI (TA)
16. Strategic Issues in Competitiveness
Study

42

FY09/FY 10
FYlO
FYlO
FYll
FYlO
FYlO
FYlO
FYlO

Annex 5

IMF work program in
the next 12 months

Fund request to Bank
Bank request to Fund
Joint products in the
next 12 months

STA TA on monetary and balance o f
payments statistics

Ongoing

MCM TA on monetary and financial sector
issues, including: revision of the Bank of
Botswana Act and the Banking Act;
macroeconomic modeling; payment systems
modernization; capacity building at the nonbank financial institutionsregulatory
authority.

Expected FY 20 10

FAD TA on tax administration and public
financial management

Expected FY 20 10

LEG TA on tax administration and income
tax law reform

Expected FY 20 10

Periodic update on progress
Periodic macro update
C. Agreement on joint products and missions
Follow up TA related to recommendations
Expected FY 20 10
from 2007 Financial Sector Assessment
Program (FSAP)

43

Annex A2

Botswana a t a qlance

4/6/09

Botswana

subSaharan
Africa

Upper
middle
income

1.9
582
1.3
60

600
24,242
2.4
36

823
41,497
0.6
75

75-79

11.5
6,100
12.420

762
952
1,870

5,750
6,987
11,868

30-34

4.0
2.7

6.2
3.7

Key Development Indicators

Age dlstrlbutlon. 2007

(ZOW

Female

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (Oh)
Urban population (% of total population)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

45-49

15-19
0-4

GDP growth (Oh)
GDP per capita growth (%)

15

10

5

5

0

10

15

percent

(most recent estimate, ZOOS-ZOO8)

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty haadcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

50
72
50
94
27

50
90

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, mala (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment. female (Oh of age group)
Access to an improved water source (56 of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

"

80
82
109
107

69
50
99
88

94
92
112
109

95
42

58
31

95
63

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2006):
European Commission
United States
Germany
Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

I

70
22

Under-6 mortality rate (per 1,000)
200
180
I60
140
120
100
80
BO
40
20
0

I

1990

1995

2000

2008

2008 '

IS80

I990

2000

105

145

31

65

6
12
15

8
15
19

4
1
7

26
25
3

10.4
106

3.9
106

0.5
18

0.6
37

12.5
10.2

11.4
6.3

8.5
12.0

12.7
4.3

0.8

1.9
119

5.1
100

6.8
52

I

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
12
10
8
B
4
2
0
2

Long-Term Economic Trends
05

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 100)

1980-90 1990-2000
2000-08
(average annual growth %J
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

1.o
1,061

1.4
3,792

1.7
6,177

1.9
12,126

3.2
11.0

2.3
5.6

1.2
5.0

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

14.7
50.7
5.1
34.6

(% of GDP)
4.9
2.4
61.0
58.9
5.1
4.4
34.1
38.6

1.8
50.2
3.4
46.0

2.5
11.3
11.4
15.2

-1.2
5.6
3.8
7.5

0.6
4.5
4.5
5.3

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

52.0
21.3
40.1

33.2
24.1
37.4

23.2
22.9
35.0

34.5
19.6
32.1

6.3
14.9
7.6

6.4
6.0
5.2

2.0
4.7
3.6

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

53.1
66.4
27.4

55.1
49.8
41.6

52.6
33.7
51.7

46.6
47.0
34.0

12.5
9.2

4.3
4.4

5.0
4.3

Note Figures in italics are for years other than those specified 2006 data are preliminary
a Aid data are for 2006
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

44

indicates data are not available

Annex A2
Botswana
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2008

(US$ millionsj
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

2,682
2,005
681

4,714
5,866
-557

Volcs and avauntability

547
8.9

-283
-2.3

Regulatory quality

26

117

Conlro of corruption

6,300

9,100

Current account balance
as a % of GDP
Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)
Reserves, induding gold

Govomance Indicators, 2000 and 2007

Rule of law

0
02007
WOO0

Central Government Finance
(% of GDP)
Current revenue (induding grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure
Overall surpiusldeflcit
Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

42.8
36.6
25.5

35.5
21.9
25.6

7.1

-1.5

25
15

25

50

75

(00

Coun(ry'6 prcsntila rank (C-100)
higher v d u u rmNy bsnw nlingr

Souroe' Kaufmann-Kraay-Maitruul,World Bank

25
15

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

2007

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

56.0

33.2

21

83

0.5

0.4

46
22.1

..

46
21.t
30.9

..

1,307

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC. MDRI)

453
69

382
53

Agriculturalland (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protectedareas (% of land area)

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

7.3
2.0

3.1
0.8

Freshwater resources per capita (a.meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

8.1

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

57
-6

279
62

C 0 2 emissions per capita (mt)

2.5

2.4

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $per kg of oil equivalent)

9.2

11.7

1,065

1,032

IBRD
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

16
0
7
1

0
0
1
0

IDA
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

9
0
1

6
0
0

2
2
1

6
6
0

0

1

-

-

-

-

Composition of total external debt, 2008

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

(US$ millions)
Owl*, m"lu
I.tr,l
234

US$ millions

Private Sector Development

2000

2008

-

76
2.3
11

Ranked es a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Access tolcost of flnancing
Anticompetitive or informal practices

2000

2007

Stock market capitalization (Oh of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

15.8
10.3

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property(days)

IFC (fiscal yead
Total disbursed and outstanding porifolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account

24.3
11,6

MlGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

47.7
9.7

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2008 data are preliminary.
.. indicatesdata are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, DevelopmentData Group (DECDG)

45

4/6/09

Annex A2

Millennium Development Goals

Botswana

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rater for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition(% of diidren under 5)

1990

I995

2000

2007

3.2
10.7

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primaryschooiing
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

88
76
48
89

Goal 3: eliminate gender dlrparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagriculturalsector (% of nonagriculturalemployment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament(%)

87

82
90
75

88
95
76
94

109
34
5

38
9

102
41
17

100
4s
11

Goal 4: reduce under4 mortality bytwo-thirds
Under4 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportionof one-year olds mnunized. 56)

58
45
87

66
50
89

101
74
90

124
90
90

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptiveprevalence(% of women ages 15-49)

77
33

87

94
44

240

409
73

93
38
24.2

380

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIWAIDS and other maJordiseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 1549)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people wlthout sustainable accesr to bask needs
Access to an improved water sourca (% of population)
A m s s to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (Oh of total land area)
Nationallyprotected areas (% of total land area)
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per.100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

Measler lmmunlzatlon (% of I-year oidr)

Education Indicators (K)

28.5
600
75

23.9
551
80

94
40

95
41
22.1

1.6
7.3

2.2
7.6

2.5
9.2

95
42
21.1
30.9
2.4
11.7

1.9
0.0
0.0

3.8
0.0
0.1
1.o

7.9
12.9
2.9
3.5

7.3
75.8
4.3
4.8

ICT Indicators (per 100 people)

1W 1

n

50
40

W25

2wo

2002

2w4

2008

E

30

n

20
10
0

+Pnmiry net enrollmint

lQQ0

1%

2wo

20m

2WO

2002

2w4

2w8

rib0

--P-R i b 0 of #de to mi ~nMmaw 8 iecondary
sdusabon

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.

.. indicates data are not available.

Development Economics.Development Data Group (DECDG).

46

4/6/09

Annex B2 - Botswana
Selected Indicators* o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As o f April 9,2009
Indicator
Porlfolio Assessment
Number o f Projects Under Implementation
Average ImplementationPeriod (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a'
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number "
Percent o f Projects at Risk by Amount a,
Disbursement Ratio (percent) e
Porlfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$millions)
percent of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
percent of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Last Five FYs
20
195.0
20.0
11.4

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0.7
0
0
0
0
0

Last
Five FYs

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age o f projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andor implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

*

beginning o f the year: Investment projects only.
A l l indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

47

E

U

Ee

i

5

P

e

C
7
.L

i
c
c

E
a

E
2

P

E

E

q - 7

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

31C;rr
m m r r

0
v,

x

a

I?

. . . .

. .

.

.

.* ..

.. .. .. ..

. .

. .

*. .

0
N

2
0

N

3

3

W

3
3

m b W 3
b N

N

3

v,

0

N

E:

N

W

vl

m
v,

0

N
N

m

s

W

10

0

0

N

W

N

0
0

3

v,

W
VI

0

%
m

2

2

W

W
0

0

2

W

N
b

m
d

3

d

0
0
CI

N

N
v,

N

3

It

N

W

0
P

3

m
m

W
W

N d

3

22
I

rz

0

E:

3
I

W

0

%
m

2

0

E:

v,

x

d

m

."

h

d

m

L

5

8

*sa
."

0

c)

v)

s

2

d

z
'E

0

8

m

5

a
v)

8

3

I

n
v)
8
0

s
8
a

9
3

9

3

m

m

c?9

m

m
W
m

4:

N

v,

I?

2

W
0
0

m

m

2

N

v,
0
0

2
W
I?

2

.. .. .. .. .. .. ..

2

. . . . . . .

:

:

:

:

:

-

e

*.

3

0

N

3

0

I

:

0

e

: w :

3

e

g

0

N

:

. . . .

.

. . . .

: o o

e

.. .. .. ..

: m

. . . .

.

2

N

2

:

c;'

0
N

: m :

3

2
3
I

m

b

2

0
0
N

: m :

3

: m

z

3
I

3

00

0

0
N

: -

3

:

: o
0

m
3
I

m

rz

: m :

gc;'

0
0

N

: o
oo
m
3
I

ID
0
0

N

m

m

N
N

0
0
N

: -

:

: o
m
m
3
I

i

0

c)

55:

C

8

v3 z3 'z:

2

.. .. .. .. ..

* . .

. . . .

.. .. .. .. ..

** .. ..

. . . .

0
(u

2
0
(u

.. .. .. ..

3
3

0
r4

.. .. .. ..

5

0
(u

m
0

0
(u

00

0
0
(u

P
0
0

3

(u

9\90?

W
0
0

35%

(u

m
0

0

i

(u

c
W

.s

g

8

+

n

:

m
v,

CC

W
d

3

m

.. .. .. ..

C
h

cc

m

d

Iz

m

.. .. *. ?
W

?

cu

W

h

--

c.l
d

3

2
c.l

m

2

q

mm

'
c;.'

O H

3

m

3

C

h

E
C

d

W

h

0

c

c

h

oc

C

c

Lc!909'c!

W W 0 c . l
W

h

b
C

O S ? ? ?

I - m o w

W

c

303

* x

h

3

U
C

c

3

Iz

m

h

v

c

C

h

w
I

-.

m

d - .

P j w
W

m

e4

B
e,
V

e

a

FI

8

B

0 0 0

0 0 0

0 0 0

o m 0

:
F

0 0 0

0 0 0

coco
0 0
0 0
( V ( V 0

IBRD 33376
25°E

20°E

To
Lusaka

ZAMBIA

BOTSWANA

ANGOLA
Kasane
To
Menongue

Lin

Ok

CHOBE

a
av

i

ng

Ng amas
er

nti
ya

o

X audu
m

NGAMILAND

NAMIBIA

ZIMBABWE

Okavango
Swamps

Nokeneng

To
Gweru

Maun

20°S

Tsau
Tsau

b
Sehithwa

Lake
Ngami

Makgadikgadi
Salt Pans
Bote

Rakops

ti

NORTHNORTHEAST

Orapa

Lake
Xau

Letlhakane

C E N T R A L
GHANZI

Mot
lo
Seruli

Okwa

Mamuno

Selebi-Phikwe
Sefophe

Serowe

D e s e r

Palapye

L i mp

op

tsane
Lo

K a l a h a r i
Kang

Shashe
se

ut

Ghanzi

To
Messina

Francistown

o

e
E is

20°S

Nata

Mahalapye

t

KWENENG

Tshane
Tshane

KGATLENG
KGATLENG

KGALAGADI

Jwaneng
Khakhea

Molepolole

SOUTHERN

Werda
W
erda

Lobatse
Mose lebe

SOUTH AFRICA

GABORONE

Kanye

25°S

Mochudi

SOUTHEAST

25°S
To
Pretoria

Mo l o p o

Mo
lop

TTshabong
shabong

B O TS WANA

o

To
Kimberley

Bokspits

DISTRICT CAPITALS*
NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

0

50

100

MAIN ROADS

150 Kilometers

RAILROADS
0

25

50

75

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

100 Miles

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

20°E

25°E

* The town councils of Francistown,
Gaborone, Lobatse, and Selebi-Pikwe
have status equal to Districts.
SEPTEMBER 2004

