Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 50642-SV

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR

October 29,2009

Central America Country Management Unit
Latin America and Caribbean Region
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. Its content may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The last CAS was discussed on February 22,2005
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
The U S Dollar i s the current currency in El Salvador
Fiscal Year
January 1 - December 3 1
SELECTED ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Analytical and Advisory Activities
AAA
Spain InternationalCooperation Agency
AECI
Central America
CA
Central American Bank for Economic Integration
CABEI
Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment
CAPRA
Catastrophic Deferred Drawdown Option
CAT DDO
Conditional Cash Transfer
CCT
Country Environmental Assessment
CEA
CEPREDENAC Central American Coordination Centre for Disaster
Prevention
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
CFAA
National
e-procurement System
COMPRASAL
Country Partnership Strategy
CPS
Civil Society Organization
cso
Deferred Drawdown Option
DDO
Development Policy Loan
DPL
US-DominicanRepublic-CentralAmerican Free Trade
DR-CAFTA
Agreement
European Commission
EC
Education with Community Participation program
EDUCO
Economic and Sector Work
ESW
Foreign Direct Investment
FDI
Farabundo
Marti Nacional Liberation Front
FMLN
Financial Sector Adjustment Program
FSAP
Fiscal Year
FY
Governance and Anticorruption
GAC
Gross Domestic Product
GDP
Global Environment Facility
GEF
Inter American Development Bank
IDB
Institutional Development Fund
IDF
InternationalFund for Agriculture Development
IFAD
InternationalFinancial Corporation
IFC
InternationalMonetary Fund
IMF
Japan InternationalCooperation Agency
JICA
Monitoring and Evaluation
M&E
Millenium Challenge Corporation
MCC
Millennium Development Goals
MDG
Micro,
Small, and Medium Size Enterprise
MSME
Non Financial Public Sector
NFPS

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NGO
NPL
PAC
PEFA
PER
PFM
PFSS
PPP
REDD
RED1
ROSC
SAFI
SBA
SME
SSGER
TA
TAL
UNDP

USAID
WBI
WGI

Non-Governmental Organization
Non-Performing Loan
Anti-Crisis Plan
Public Financial Management (PFM) Performance
Measurement Framework
Public Expenditure Review
Public Financial Management
Public Finance and Social Sector DPL
Public Private Partnership
ReducedEmissions from Deforestation and Degradation
Recent Economic Developments in Infkastructure Study
Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes
Integrated Financial Management system
Stand By Arrangement
Small and Medium-size Enterprise
Sustaining Social Gains for Economic Recovery DPL
Technical Assistance
Technical Assistance Loan
United Nations Development Programme
United States Agency for International Development'
World Bank Institute
Worldwide Governance Indicators

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

Vice-president
Country Director
CO Representativemanager
Task Managers

IBRD
Pamela Cox
Laura Frigenti
Alberto Leyton
Andrea Kucey
Alberto Leyton

IFC
Jyrki Koskelo
Atul Mehta
Hector Gomez Ang
John Barham
Felix Knidlberger

EL SALVADOR
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary

I. Introduction ................................................................................................................

1

I1. Country Context ......................................................................................................... 1
A . Recent Economic Developments ................................................................................ 5
B. Macroeconomic Prospects and Debt Sustainability ................................................... 8
I11. Development Challenges and Government Priorities ..............................................
A . Growth and Competitiveness .....................................................................................
B. Poverty Reduction and Social Sectors .......................................................................
C . The Public Sector and Institutional Development .....................................................
D. Environment and Disaster Mitigation........................................................................

11
12
13
15
17

I V. World Bank Group Strategy .....................................................................................
A . Lessons from the Last CPS (see also the CAS Completion Report) .........................
B World Bank Country Partnership Program FY 10-12 ................................................
C . Development Partners ...............................................................................................
D. CPS Consultations .....................................................................................................

18
18
20
27
28

V . Risks and Mitigation.................................................................................................

28

.

Tables
Table 1. El Salvador Progress Towards Millennium Development Goals .......................... 3
Table 2. El Salvador Key Economic Indicators 2005-2009 ................................................ 7
Table 3 . Medium Term Macroeconomic Scenario .............................................................. 9
Table 4 . CPS Strategic Objectives and Areas for Support ................................................
21
Table 5 . Proposed Lending Program for FYlO .................................................................
25
Figures
Figure 1. Poverty headcount ratio. total and by area (percentage) .....................................

2

Boxes
Box 1. Crime and Violence in El Salvador: An Impediment to Social and Economic
Growth .................................................................................................................................
4
Box 2 . Governance and Anti-corruption in El Salvador .................................................. 16
Box 3 . Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA) Initiative ................26

Annexes
Annex 1.
Annex 2 .
Annex 3 .
Annex 4 .
Annex 5 .
Annex 6 .

El Salvador CPS FY 10-12 Results Matrix........................................................ 30
El Salvador Country Assistance Strategy FY05-FY09 Completion Rep0rt .....34
Public Consultations on the CPS ...................................................................... 67
Debt Sustainability Analysis ............................................................................. 69
Trust Fund Portfolio.......................................................................................... 72
External Partners in El Salvador .......................................................................
73

Standard CAS Annexes
CAS Annex A l - El Salvador at a Glance .......................................................................... 74
CAS Annex B 2 - Selected Indicators o f IBRD Portfolio Performance and Management 77
78
CAS Annex B3 - Base Case IBRD Program Summary ....................................................
CAS Annex B3 - 2 IFC Program, 2005 - 2009 ................................................................. 79
80
C.AS Annex B 4 - Summary o f Non-Lending Services......................................................
CAS Annex B 6 - El Salvador - Key Economic Indicators ................................................ 81
CAS Annex B 7 - El Salvador - Key Exposure Indicators ................................................ 84
CAS Annex B8 El Salvador IBRD Operations Portfolio ................................................. 85
CAS Annex B8-2 IFC Operations Portfolio...................................................................... 86
MAP

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the collaboration and contribution o f the Government o f El
Salvador in the preparation o f this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) .
Special thanks to the stakeholders who participated in the CPS Consultation during August 17-21 for the
discussions and contributions to the preparation o f this program.
Contributors to the preparation o f this CPS include: Ana Lucia Armijos. John Barham. Sajitha Bashir.
Sarah Berger. Rafael Cortez. Michael Drabble. Maria Lucia Guerra Bradford. Hector Gomez. Armando
Guzman. Jania Ibarra. Felix Knidlberger. Humberto Lopez. Sonia Molina. Fernando Montenegro.
Edmundo Murmgarra. Sabine Perrissin. Jessica Poppele. Eduardo Wallentin and Gregor W o l f.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) comes at the beginning of a new
political cycle for El Salvador. After 20 years in the opposition, the Frente Farabundo
Marti para la Liberacion Nacional (FMLN) has come to power following the
Presidential elections that took place in March 2009. The democratic transition,
including fair elections, respect for the political process and smooth cooperative
transition i s significant and i s an important contribution to political stability in the region.
The FMLN received broad support in the elections, and so far has shown significant
moderation balancing concerns across party lines.

2.
President Mauricio Funes ran on a pro-poor platform that stressed
broadening o f social programs and inclusive economic growth. The government’s
electoral platform included a clear social policy agenda, with an emphasis on
employment, job creation, provision o f basic health and education services and social
protection for the poor. The creation o f institutional mechanisms to promote the
participatory development o f economic and social policy was also a cornerstone o f the
electoral platform.

3.

The new government came to power against the backdrop of a severe global
economic crisis that i s being strongly felt in El Salvador. Following several years o f
positive growth performance, the current crisis i s having a significant effect on the
country’s economy. Despite initial projections above 4 percent, GDP growth reached
only 2.5 percent in 2008. Current projections foresee a GDP decline o f about 2.5 percent
in 2009. This would be the first full-year o f GDP contraction in over two decades. By
early 2009, tens o f thousands o f Salvadoran households had been affected by the loss o f
jobs, especially in the export sector, reduction in incomes and a sharp drop in
remittances.

4.

The impact o f the global economic crisis on El Salvador has generated
economic and social risks, limiting the ability o f the new government to implement
its long-term social policy agenda. The current economic contraction and financial
market instability compound the problem o f a dramatic increase in the poverty rate
following the food and o i l price hike in 2008, and threaten hard-won recent poverty and
social gains. After several years o f pro-poor economic growth the poverty headcount rate
increased from 35.5 percent in 2007 to 42.3 in 2008, reaching the highest ratio since
2002. The dramatic reverse o f poverty trends shows that Salvadorian economy i s s t i l l
fragile and highly vulnerable to shocks. This i s particularly worrying in the current
environment o f the financial crisis which will hit the employment channel as well.

5. I n response to the economic and social reality, President Funes presented the
government’s “Anti-Crisis Plan” within weeks of taking office. The Anti-Crisis Plan
(PAC) proposes responses geared to mitigate the immediate effects o f the crisis on the
most vulnerable population as well as to prepare the conditions for a broad-based
recovery once global conditions start improving. The PAC comprises the following
components: (i)an income protection and employment generation program; (ii)the
creation o f a comprehensive and universal social protection system; (iii)the
strengthening o f public finances; and (iv) a comprehensive consultative process to

1

prepare a national development plan for medium-term recovery and long-term
development.

6.

T o compound the challenges described above, the new government was also
confronted with a rapidly deteriorating fiscal outlook. The current fiscal challenges
to recover a
were brought o n by the impact o f the crisis on tax collection, and include: (i)
solid fiscal balance which has deteriorated due to the crisis; and (ii)
to finance priority
investments required to mitigate the social effects o f the crisis and set the stage for a
strong economic recovery. T o address the challenges the government i s proposing tax
reform and rationalization o f subsidies to improve the medium-term outlook.

7.
The CPS i s based on the strategic principle o f meeting immediate needs to
mitigate the impact of the crisis while, at the same time, addressing longer-term
development challenges. Given the current economic uncertainties, the CPS proposes a
flexible approach where only the lending operations o f the first year are specified and
new activities will be defined in close dialogue with the authorities as the National
Development Plan i s defined. The CPS proposes a three year US$650 million lending
program, subject to availability o f IBRD resources, including US$250 million for FY 10.
The government has selected three strategic objectives for Bank support: (i)strengthen
fundamentals for economic recovery by addressing macro and institutional
increase economic
vulnerabilities; (ii)strengthen delivery o f social services; and (iii)
opportunities, particularly for the poor. The I F C program includes advisory services and
financial assistance aligned with the government’s priorities and programs building o n
current and potential synergies with the Bank when feasible.
8.
This CPS has identified modest outcomes which it expects to influence. The
Results Framework (Annex 2) i s organized according to the three strategic objectives
mentioned above. Given the limited size and breadth o f the current Bank program, the
CPS proposes a streamlined results matrix which includes an indicative set o f outcomes
that are consistent with the scope o f the crisis response program that has been defined to
date. Performance towards outcomes will be assessed at the CPS Progress Report and the
Results Framework will be updated to reflect progress made and new priorities identified
for Bank support.
9.
The lessons in the CAS Completion Report have been taken into account in
the design o f the CPS, including the importance o f consensus-building efforts to
ensure successful implementation of the program in a politically polarized
environment. The 2005 CAS underestimated the implications o f El Salvador’s divided
political environment. While the expectation i s that the current situation is different, the
Bank and Government intend to mitigate the risk o f individual loans becoming political
instruments by presenting a package .of loans to be approved by Congress. As such, this
CPS i s accompanied by three operations: a US$lOO million Sustaining Social Gains for
Economic Recovery DPL, a US$50 million Income Support and Employability Project,
and a US$20 million Fiscal Management and Public Sector Development Technical
Assistance Project.

ii

El Salvador CPS
I. Introduction

1.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), covering the fiscal years 20102012, comes at the beginning o f a new political cycle for El Salvador and against the
backdrop of a global economic crisis. After 20 years in the opposition, the Frente
Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion Nacional (FMLN) came to power with an explicit
agenda to accelerate implementation o f social programs and promote inclusive economic
growth. However, the current economic reality, and more specifically the fiscal impact
o f the crisis, will make delivering on campaign promises difficult. The WBG strategy i s
supporting the government with a flexible approach designed to balance the need to
mitigate the impact o f the crisis while, at the same time, address the longer-term
development challenges. The CPS proposes an indicative lending program o f US$650
million’ o f which US$250 million i s confirmed for FY10. The IFC program includes both
advisory services and financial assistance aligned with the new government’s priorities
and programs building on current and potential synergies with the Bank when feasible.
11.

Country Context

2.
El Salvador i s a lower middle income country which stands out in the Latin
America region for its structural economic reforms and stable macro policies. El
Salvador i s a small and densely populated country in Central America with a population
o f 6.9 million people and a GNI per capita o f US$3,480 (2008). El Salvador has pursued
an outward oriented development strategy, including being the first nation to implement a
.regional free-trade agreement (DR-CAFTA) with the U.S. in March 2006. Facilitated by
a dollarized monetary regime, a sound macroeconomic framework and a strong record o f
economic reforms, El Salvador has diversified i t s export sector, and improved i t s access
to international financial markets.

3.
El Salvador has had relatively strong economic performance in recent years.
Over the last CAS period (2005-2009) economic growth steadily improved from 2.3
percent in 2003 reaching 4.2 percent in 2006 and 4.7 in 2007, up from 2.1 percent over
the period 2000 to 2004. The observed acceleration in economic growth was triggered to
a large extent by rapid improvements in the external environment which resulted in
cumulative export growth o f 26.2 percent between 2002 and 2007. In addition, the
country’s traditional sound macroeconomic management facilitated the transmission o f
positive global developments. Although fairly positive compared to previous periods,
economic performance continues to be below the Central American average in many
respects.
Progress on the economic front has been accompanied by improvements in
4.
the country’s social conditions, with the main social indicators-including poverty
and inequality-showing significant gains in recent years. Higher income levels,
combined with increasing social sector spending and reforms in some key sectors,
~~~

~~

’ Subject to availability o f IBRD resources.
1

resulted in a decline in poverty levels from 43.6 in 2001 to 35.5 percent in 2007. In
addition, a number o f social indicators such as l i f e expectancy, infant and child mortality,
and child nutrition have improved. School enrollment levels have risen significantly from 89 percent and 46 percent for primary and secondary in 2001 to 92 percent and 54
percent respectively in 2007. In several areas, including in primary education and access
to water and sanitation, the improvements in the indicators have been accompanied by a
reduction in the gap between the poor and the non-poor.

5.
In fact, most o f the current decade can be characterized by years o f pro-poor
economic growth. During 2002-2006 the annual average growth rate o f incomes for the
first deciles (the poorest) was much higher in comparison to Salvadorans in upper parts o f
the income distribution. Overall, inequality -measured by the Gini coefficientdiminished by 6 points, from 0.52 in 2001 to 0.46 in 2008. These improvements are also
in line with an increase in social spending aimed at attacking poverty, in particular o f Red
Solidaria -a poverty reduction program initiated in 2006.
’

Poverty trends in the 2000’s can be divided in two periods: a poverty
6.
reduction phase until 2006 and the reverse o f the tendency in 2007-2008. In the first
phase o f the cycle poverty f e l l 8.6 percentage points. This phenomenon was even
stronger in rural areas (decreased 17.4 percentage points), and also lead to a more equal
income distribution. In 2007-2008, the food crisis hit El Salvador hard, and almost all
the gains in terms o f poverty reduction were lost. The poverty headcount rate increased
from 35.5 percent in 2007 to 42.3 in 2008, reaching the highest ratio since 2002.

7.
The dramatic reverse o f poverty trends shows that Salvadorian economy i s
still fragile and highly vulnerable to shocks. Thus, public policies should focus on both
protecting and generating employment, and shielding salaries and incomes. The food
crisis has already showed the fragility o f the price channel: food staples’ prices grew 17
percent in 2008 while per capita income increased only 5 percent. This i s particularly
worrying in the current environment o f the financial crisis which will hit the employment
channel as well,
Figure 1. Poverty headcount ratio, total and by area (percentage)
46

I I 601

-

+Urban0

-Rural

I

44-

30 36 42

45.?

40

40.i

3432

1

8

8

8

Source: World Bank staff calculations using EHPM and sample weights

2

8 8 8 8

8.
The need to create economic opportunities for the cohorts entering the labor
market i s a challenge for El Salvador, which has a relatively young population.
About 34 percent o f the population i s between 0 and 14 years old, and half o f the
population i s less than 30. Limited access to high school education as well as to
opportunities for quality employment has constrained youth development.
The
unemployment rate for youth (15 to 24 years old) i s nearly three times higher than for
adults, around 11-5 percent. Joblessness i s also particularly high among women (more
than twice the rate o f men) and individuals with no education (54 percent higher
compared to the next group, namely those with incomplete primary education).

Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
rn Population below $1 (PPP) per day, percentage
Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education
Net enrollment ratio in primary education
Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women
Share of women in wage employment in the non-agriculture
sector
Goal 4: Reduce Child Mortality
UnderJive mortality rate per 1,000 live births
Goal 5: Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio
Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Antiretroviral therapy coverage among people with advanced
HIV infection, %
Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
rn Proportion ofpopulation using improved drinking water sources

Baseline
2000

Progress
2007

Target
2015

12.6

8.2

6.3

I 87’

I 97’

I

100

46.5

45.5

50

30

19

17

173

57.1

39

4.6

79.6

100

83.5

86.9

80.5

10.
The projected reduction in remittances from the United States will also have
a perceptible impact on incomes and poverty. A key feature o f incomes in El Salvador
i s the increasingly important role o f remittances which account for 15.4 and 9.2 percent
o f total rural and urban incomes. In 2008 workers remittances (mainly from the U S )
represented 17.1 percent o f GDP, but current projections for 2009 indicate that these
3

’

flows could decline by 10 percent. Beyond the macroeconomic and income poverty
implications , there i s a concern ‘that lower remittances flows will also negatively affect
poverty levels and other social indicators such as education enrollment and child
malnutrition, as households adjust spending to declining revenues.
Box 1. Crime and Violence in El Salvador: An Impediment to Social and Economic Growth
In 2006, El Salvador registered the highest rate o f homicides in all Latin America (58 o f every 100,000
inhabitants).’ A Bank report on Crime and Violence in Central America (CA) puts this rate in perspective:
in 2006 there were 14,257 people murdered in C A versus 336 murders in Spain (a country with roughly the
same population). The problem i s regional, with the three northern C A countries most affected.

The cost o f crime and violence i s high. According to 2008 surveys almost three-quarters o f Central
Americans indicate that crime i s “very much” a threat to society’s well-being. One study suggests the
overall costs in economic terms could equal as much as 7.7 percent o f the region’s GDP.
I t i s a convergence of factors that drive the sobering statistics in El Salvador, including: i)the socioeconomic dynamics o f inequality and limited opportunity; ii)drug trafficking and the ready availability o f
drugs, drug money and weapons; and iii)ineffective police and criminal justice institutions.
El Salvador i s an economically unequal society with high levels of poverty and an expanding
youth population. H a l f o f the population in El Salvador i s under 30 years old. Many young people
have limited education with just over one-third enrolling in high school. The unemployment rate for
youth i s over 10% and o f those who do work, 80% are in low-paying informal jobs. Many live in
marginalized urban areas with limited access to social services alongside wealthy Salvadorans whose
wealth and lifestyle makes deprivation that much more vivid.
Enormous sums of drug money flow into El Salvador and feed the gangs and criminal networks
that draw-in large numbers of Salvadoran youth. The prevalence o f youth gangs in SV and other
C A countries i s judged to be a product o f limited education and economic opportunities. At the same
time, more than 3 million arms are believed to be in circulation in CA, and less than one third are
legally registered. Eighty percent o f murders are carried out with guns and most victims are men 15-34
years old. Drug trafficking raises the stakes.
Only 25 YOof Salvadorans surveyed by Latinobarometro in 2007 considered that “they could
avail themselves of the judicial system to defend their interest^"^ which indicates an inefficient and
corrupt criminal justice system. As a follow-up to the 1992 Peace accords, El Salvador created a more
independent judiciary including a new national police force. But, much remains to be done in terms o f
access to justice. Modernization o f policing through the use o f modem information systems along with
community and problem-oriented policing i s among changes needed for justice sector reform. The l i n k s
between police, prosecutors and the judiciary also need strengthening. The courts would benefit from
information systems and training to enable more efficient and transparent case management.

Salvadoran policy makers have been responding to citizens’ demands for greater security. The limited longterm impact o f the initial anti-gang policies based mainly on repression gave way to a broader set o f policy

interventions. Since 2007, efforts have included measures to improve collection o f data on crimes,
convictions and incarcerations to inform policy making; to professionalize the courts and the police; and to
address the socio-economic factors which lead young people into criminal behavior. The government’s
“Anti-Crisis Plan”, which responds to the current economic crisis, aims to address the crisis impacts by
concurrently focusing on reducing inequality through both short- and-long term social policy reforms.

Murders increased between 2002-2005 and then leveled o f f 2006-2008.
According to WB estimates the value-added o f cocaine transiting the region i s roughly 20 times Panama’s and
Guatemala’s combined defense budget o f $364 million
The Merida Initiative and Central America: The Challenges of Containing Public Insecurity and Criminal Violence,
Diana Villiers Negroponte, Foreign Policy at Brookings Working Paper Number 3, May 2009. p. 27.

4

11.

Increasing levels o f crime and violence continue to affect not only El
Salvador, but the sub-region more generally, and threaten development progress.
Current statistics indicate 12 cases o f violent crimes per day in El Salvador. The rising
incidence o f drug trafficking in neighboring countries is also cause for increasing
concern. This situation i s affecting youth in particular, as seen by the high incidence o f
youth gangs. This is a complex issue that goes beyond country borders. Progress will
require a comprehensive and multilateral approach, along with specific interventions at
local levels, to strengthen prevention initiatives (see B o x 1).

12.
Within this context, the FMLN came to power in June 2009, after winning
the Congressional and Presidential elections, with a pro-poor agenda aimed at
accelerating implementation of social programs. The democratic transition, including
fair elections, respect for the political process and smooth cooperative change o f
administration i s significant and stands out in the region. The party received broad
support, and so far has shown significant moderation balancing concerns across party
lines.

13.
The new government, however, does not have a majority in Congress and
will need to negotiate all initiatives requiring congressional support. This represents
an additional challenge for the government to implement policies and programs, as well
as to ratify World Bank lending activities. In fact five operations which been approved
under the previous CAS had to be canceled when Congress failed to ratify the loans.
Although this experience suggests political issues could be a major obstacle for the
development o f public policies, the notably smooth political transition process may
indicate that political practices are evolving and that the traditionally polarized system
could be overcome within this new context.
The new authorities have requested support from the multilateral banks to
14.
help the country cope with the crisis. In view o f the current situation, the authorities
have indicated the need for a combination o f financing resources to help close existing
financing gaps and finance the development program, as well as technical assistance to
support i t s implementation. Recognizing the importance o f a sound macro framework,
the authorities have also agreed with the IMF o n a new three year Standby Arrangement,
which they intend to treat as precautionary.

A. Recent Economic Developments
15.
Until 2008 the growth performance o f El Salvador was broadly positive, but
the global crisis i s having a significant effect on the country’s economy. In 2008 El
Salvador started feeling the effects o f the global crisis and, despite initial projections
above 4 percent, GDP growth reached only 2.5 percent. Current projections foresee a
decline o f GDP by about 2.5 percent in 2009. This would be the first full-year GDP
contraction in over two decades.

16.

There are several elements behind the evolution of economic activity,
including lower domestic investment, a dramatic deterioration in export

5

performance, and a marked decline in workers’ remittances. O n the investment front,
gross domestic investment i s expected to decline from 16.1 percent o f GDP in 2007 to
about 13.1 percent in 2009. This decline would be mainly driven by lower private
investment which already declined from 14.1 percent o f GDP in 2007 to 12.8 percent o f
GDP in 2008 and i s expected to further decline to 11.1 percent in 2009. At the same
public investment has not been able to offset this change as it just increased only from 2
percent o f GDP in 2007 to 2.1 percent in 2008 and 2009. O n the export front, following
the positive developments o f the past few years, exports receipts declined over the first
half o f 2009 by 16.5 percent with respect to the same period o f 2008 on account o f both
lower volume (-14 percent) and lower prices (-2.5 percent). For the year as a whole,
export receipts are expected to decline by about 15 percent in 2009.
Remittances, which in El Salvador represented 18.1 percent o f GDP in 2007,
17.
started to decrease in the second semester o f 2008 and abruptly dropped in the first
quarter o f 2009. Indeed, over the first six months o f 2009 remittances reached
US$1,740 million and this would be in contrast with the flow over the first six months o f
2008 when remittances reached US$1,939 million (Le., a decline o f more than 10
percent). Despite this decline, for 2009 as a whole, remittances are expected to represent
15.7 percent o f GDP.

18.
The economic contraction i s having a negative impact on the country’s labor
markets. The global financial crisis and decline in remittances forced El Salvador’s
banks to restrict credit to the S M E sector, the main source o f employment in El Salvador.
The 2008 (formal) unemployment rate was 5.9 percent (the lowest in more than one
decade) and even if El Salvador does not report periodical figures, the available
information points to an increase in 2009. According to the Salvadoran Social Security
Institute (ISSS), formal employment was falling at an annualized rate o f 3 percent in
February 2009. Taking into account the existing correlation between national
employment rates and social security contributions (.78), the country’s unemployment
could increase to about 9-10 percent by end 2009 (the highest in more than one decade).

El Salvador had been making continued improvements on the fiscal front
19.
over the past few years, with the non financial public sector deficit falling to 1.9
percent o f GDP in 2007 from a peak o f 4.4 percent in 2001 and 2002. Notably, the
primary balance showed a surplus o f 0.6 percent o f GDP in 2007 for the first time in
more than a decade. The observed fiscal consolidation was largely due to strong revenue
performance as the government managed to increase tax revenues by nearly 1.0 percent
o f GDP between 2005 and 2007. However, this trend did not persist in 2008 as public
spending increased at faster rate than fiscal revenue (15 and 10 percent with respect to
2007 respectively). A s a result, 2008 closed with a fiscal deficit o f 3.1 percent o f GDP.
20.
The crisis has resulted in an increasingly tight fiscal situation. The fiscal
situation has continued to deteriorate during the first half o f 2009 to a large extent
because o f the negative impact o f the crisis on tax collection. A s in many other countries,
the economic slowdown has resulted in a significant decline in tax revenue. During the
first half o f 2009 tax collection (which represents three quarters o f fiscal revenues) was

6

12 percent lower than during the same period o f the previous year and for the year as
whole estimates o f Government revenue have been cut down from 17.2 percent o f GDP
to 15.5 percent.
21.
On the spending side, the government has been showing restraint keeping
spending levels below those envisaged in the IMF Standby program approved in
early 2009. Yet, as a percentage o f GDP public spending i s expected to increase from an
early estimate o f 20.1 percent to a current estimate if 20.8 percent. The combination o f
these elements i s expected to result in a public sector fiscal deficit o f 5.3 percent o f GDP
in 2009. The Government has also sought multilateral support to cover the fiscal gap o f
2009.
Table 2. El Salvador - Key Economic Indicators 2005-2009
(percentage o f GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Income and prices
GDP growth (% change)
Inflation (end o f period % change)
Investment and savings
Gross domestic investment
Gross domestic savings
Consolidated public sector accounts
Total revenues and grants
Total tax revenues
Total expenditure
Primary balance
Overall balance
Public Sector Debt
Total debt
Balance of payments
Current account balance
Trade balance
Exports (including maquila)
Imports (including maquila)
Foreign direct investment
Remittances
Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (billions of U S dollars)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009*

3.1
4.3

4.2
4.9

4.7
4.9

2.5
5.5

-2.5
1.o

15.7
12.4

16.1
12.5

16.1
10.4

15.0
7.7

13.1
11.4

16.3
12.5
19.8
-1.3
-3.5

17.2
13.3
20.1
-0.5
-2.9

17.1
13.4
19.0
0.6
-1.9

16.9
13.0
19.9
-0.7
-3.1

15.5
12.0
20.8
-2.9
-5.3

42.0

41.9

39.1

41.2

47.7

-3.3
-17.2
20.2
-37.4
2.3
17.7

-3.6
-18.9
20.2
- 39.1
1.3
18.6

-5.5
-20.0
19.8
-39.8
7.0
18.1

-7.2
-19.9
20.8
-40.7
3.3
17.1

-1.7
-12.6
17.5
-30.2
0.4
15.7

17.1

18.7

20.4

22.1

22.2

* Projected
Source: Ministry o f Finance, Central Bank, IMF and World Bank staff estimates

22.
On the external front the current account deficit i s expected to improve in
2009. After averaging 3.5 percent o f GDP in 2005-2006, the current account deficit
expanded to 5.5 percent o f GDP in 2007. This deficit was financed by large capital
inflows (7.0 percent o f GDP), in part related to the sale o f three major domestic banks to
foreign buyers in 2007. The current account deficit further deteriorated in 2008 to 7.2
percent as a result o f the high food and oil prices. As with most countries in the region,
imports have contracted more than exports in 2009. As a result, the current account
deficit i s expected to fall to 1.7 percent o f GDP as the trade balance improves.
7

'

23.
The banking sector in El Salvador has coped relatively well with both the
global crisis and the change in administration. In addition to the challenges put by
global developments, during 2009 Salvadoran investors and bankers were concerned
about the political risks following the election, including a possible run on the banks. To
address this concern, the Superintendence o f Banks raised the liquidity requirements from
25 percent to 28 percent o f deposits, counting as liquid only assets deposited abroad in
highly liquid instruments (managed by the Central Bank). As a result o f the raised
requirements and o f their own concerns, banks raised their liquidity ratios to an average
that, by M a y 2009, had reached 46 percent o f assets.
24.
Currently, capital adequacy ratios are at levels comparable to those observed
before the current financial turmoil and well above the regulatory minimum o f 12
percent. The system i s relatively liquid with net liquid assets to short-term liabilities o f
34.4 percent. However, the combined effect o f the growth slowdown and lower
remittances growth i s leading to an increase in non-performing loans (NPLs). By
February 2009 NPLs had increased by 30 percent relative to the same month in 2008.
While there are no data relative to sectors, it i s significant that the two banks with the
higher exposure to consumer credit have the highest level o f NPLs and the highest rate o f
growth o f these loans. By February, four o f the five largest banks had provisioned
between 100 percent and 122 percent o f the NPLs, and only one o f them was marginally
below 100 percent.
25.
As part o f the recovery plan, the Government i s also planning to escalate
public sector banking lending through two existing first tier institutions-Banco
Hipotecario and Banco de Fomento Agropecuario-and through a second-tier institution
that would be turned into a first tier bank -Banco Multilateral de Inversiones (BMI).’
However, this strategy will require close monitoring to ensure the financial soundness o f
these institutions.

B. MacroeconomicProspects and Debt Sustainability
26.
Recent indicators suggesting that economic activity i s starting to turn around
in the United States are particularly relevant in the Salvadoran context. 48 percent
o f Salvadoran exports are directed to the United States and workers’ remittances (mainly
from the United States) represent more than 15 percent o f GDP. Thus, a recovery in the
United States i s expected to result (although with some lags) in a larger demand for
Salvadoran products as well as allow remittances flows to revert the decline o f 2009.
Current estimates foresee a recovery in GDP growth rates to about 0.5 percent in 2010, 2
percent in 20 11, and around 3 percent in 20 12 and 4 percent in 20 13 and 20 14. (Table 3).

BMI was created to provide medium and long-term resources to the banks. Since dollarization, the
commercial banks’ demand for BMI finds declined sharply because they could mobilize long-term
resources much cheaper than the cost o f BMI funds.

8

Table 3. Medium Term Macroeconomic Scenario
(% o f GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2010
2011
2012

2013

2014

Income and prices
GDP growth (% change)
Inflation (cpi end o f period % change)
Investment and savings
Gross domestic investment
Gross domestic savings
Consolidated Public Sector
Total revenues and grants
Total tax revenue
Total expenditures
Primary balance
Overall balance
Public Debt
Total debt
Balance of Payments
Current account balance
Trade balance
Exports of goods (f.0.b)
Imports of goods (f.0.b.)
Foreign direct investment
Remittances
Memorandum Item

0.5
2.5

2.0
2.8

3.0
2.8

4.0
2.8

4.0
2.8

13.7
11.1

15.0
12.3

16.0
13.4

16.5
13.8

16.5
13.8

17.0
13.1
21.3
-1.3
-4.3

17.7
13.9
21.0
-0.3
-3.3

18.3
14.6
21.0
0.3
-2.7

18.8
15.2
20.8
0.9
-2

18.9
15.3
20.7
1.o
-1.8

48.8

50.1

49.5

48.3

46.2

-2.6
-14.2
17.2
31.4
0.8
15.5

-2.7
-14.4
17.7
32.1
0.8
15.7

-2.6
-14.5
17.9
32.4
1.4
16.1

-2.7
-14.8
18.0
32.7
1.9
16.2

-2.7
14.8
17.9
32.7
2.4
16.2

27.3

29.2

Nominal GDP (billions o f U S dollars)
23.0
24.0
25.4
Source: Ministry o f Finance, EIU forecasts and World Bank staff estimates.

27.
Inflation i s expected to remain under control in the medium term. The current
medium t e r m macroeconomic framework incorporates projections for the inflation rate
that would be consistent with a moderate increase to 2.5 percent in 2010 and 2.8 percent
in 2011 and beyond. These projections already incorporate the rebound in o i l prices
observed since February 2009 (when the barrel o f WTI o i l reached US$39.1) to US$69.9
by midyear, and the recovery in food prices which after having declined by 40 percent in
the second half o f 2008 increased about 12 percent between January and June 2009.
The current account deficit i s likely to widen in 2010, but remain at levels
28.
experienced before the food and fuel crisis. Improvements in the current account are
likely to be driven by a combination o f factors including additional pressure o n imports
as commodity and food prices recover, and the relief from an expected recovery in
remittance flows as the US labor market improves. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is
also expected to recover from less than 1 percent o f GDP in 2009 to pre-crisis levels o f
approximately 2 to 3 percent.
The difficult fiscal situation will continue to be the main source o f
29.
macroeconomic concern in the coming years. The 2010 fiscal deficit (projected at 4.3
percent o f GDP) i s expected to decline slightly with respect to the one in 2009 as the
modest recovery projected for next year will not likely result in dramatic improvements

9

on the tax collection front. Similarly, the 2010 budget i s expected to include about
US$350 million (1.5 percent o f GDP) in programs and projects from the government’s
“Anti-Crisis Plan” pushing public spending to 21.3 percent o f GDP. In order to cover the
additional financing needs emerging from the revised deficit for 2010 the government i s
relying on multilateral support. The Inter American Development Bank (IDB) i s
preparing a US$200 million budget support operation planned for 2010 disbursement.
Beyond 2010, permanent commitments associated to the “Anti-Crisis Plan” could add to
public spending between US$200 and US$250 million (depending on how coverage o f
the programs evolves) per year (0.8 percent to 1 percent o f GDP).
Public debt levels are also a concern. After declining from 42.1 percent o f GDP
30.
in 2003 to 39.1 percent o f GDP in 2007, the stock o f total public debt increased to 41.2
percent o f GDP (of which 23.7 was external public debt) in 2008 and i s expected to
further increase in 2009 to 47.7 percent o f GDP (of which 30 percent would be external
public debt).

31.

The government i s aware o f the need to reduce the fiscal deficit once the
crisis i s over and bring the debt path to a sustainable level. In this regard, with World
Bank and IMF support, the administration i s working on the preparation o f legislation

that will include a reform o f the tax administration. Measures under consideration include
administrative actions to fight tax evasion, introduction o f new taxes (such as a new tax
on vehicles) and adjustment o f some taxes (such as those on alcoholic beverages). On the
spending side, the government i s preparing a plan to rationalize existing subsidies in the
water, transport, and gas sectors. This would be in addition to the actions already taken
on the electricity front (supported by the Bank’s Public Finance and Social Sector
Development Policy Loan) to reduce the electricity subsidy for firms. As a result, the
fiscal deficit i s expected to decline to less than 2 percent o f GDP in 2014.
32.
A revised DSA has been prepared to reflect the recent deterioration in the
medium term macroeconomic outlook. The DSA indicates that public debt i s expected
to increase to above 50 percent o f GDP in 201 1 and then start declining as the overall
balance o f the public sector increases. As for the evolution o f the external debt, Annex 4
indicates that the total external debt to GDP ratio will decline to about 40 percent o f GDP
by 2014.

33.

Despite the global crisis economic fundamentals remain solid and the
government has agreed with the IMF on a macro framework to set the debt
trajectory on a sustainable path. The macro framework described above would be
supported by a new three year Standby Arrangement (SBA) with the IMF that the
authorities intend to treat as precautionary. The IMF and authorities agreed that given the
current context it was more appropriate to reach agreement on a new SBA, than to extend
the SBA approved earlier in 2009.

10

111. Development Challenges and Government Priorities
34.
The new administration faces several development challenges and the way in
which they are addressed could have profound implications for the future. A s
summarized above, the economic challenges have both a short and long term dimension.
On the fiscal front, the short term challenge i s to reduce the deficit to sustainable levels.
In the longer run, actions are needed to increase the fiscal space to finance priority
investments. Similarly, with respect to accelerating growth, short term actions should
focus o n reactivating the economy, while in the long run, measures are needed to address
the country’s l o w structural growth rate. Finally, in terms o f poverty reduction,
immediate action is needed to protect the income o f those most affected by the crisis
while promoting longer t e r m policies to further reduce poverty. Improving public sector
management and strengthening institutions i s a transversal theme for improving long
term prospects.
35.
Within this context, the government has prioritized the implementation o f an
“Anti-Crisis Plan” for 2009-2011 that was announced immediately after its
inauguration. The Anti-Crisis Plan (PAC) recognizes the short-term impact o f the crisis
and, without ignoring medium-term challenges; proposes responses geared to both
mitigate the immediate effects o f the crisis o n the most vulnerable population as well as
t o prepare the conditions for a broad-based recovery once global conditions start
improving. The P A C comprises the following components:
i.

*.

11.

...

111.

iv.

An income protection and employment generation program to protect vulnerable
populations with households’ income impacted by either loss o f jobs or lower
remittances and would facilitate reinsertion o f affected population into the labor
market; accompanied by a number o f actions to stimulate production by facilitating
access t o financial services and lowering production costs in rural areas;
The creation o f a comprehensive and universal social protection system that would
extend the former “Red Solidaria” program to urban areas and would also expand
provision o f education, health and nutrition related programs;
The strengthening o f public finances to face fiscal challenges by implementing a
number o f actions o n both the revenue and expenditure sides to expand the fiscal
space for priority spending; and
The implementation o f a comprehensive consultative process to prepare a national
development plan and sector specific policies in a participatory manner in
preparation o f the medium-term recovery and long-term development.

The PAC balances well the short-term needs as well as the medium-term
36.
strategic priorities for the country. The measures proposed are also in line with crisis
response in other countries, including proposing measures t o strengthen public finance
while protecting spending, mitigating the shock o n the most vulnerable and using the
opportunity o f the crisis to promote policies which will be positive for the country’s long
term development. A potential challenge for implementation is that most programs
proposed are new, which may be particularly difficult given the capacity constraints

11

associated with a change in administration. To contain the cost o f the P A C and ensure i t s
financing, the government has been selective in choosing which programs to include in
the PAC, and also indicated that the P A C will be accommodated within the budget.
37.
While the government i s still refining its long run development strategy it has
expressed its intention to continue implementationof ongoing policies and programs
that proved effective and to adjust and strengthen interventions in areas where
results were not as significant. The following sections introduce specific development
challenges in priority areas: growth and competitiveness, poverty and inequality, public
sector and institutional development, and environment and disaster mitigation.
A. Growth and Competitiveness

38.

Beyond the measures necessary to ensure macroeconomic stability in the
shorter term, one o f El Salvador’s key challenges i s improving growth prospects. El
Salvador has succeeded in fostering trade openness and increasing non-traditional
exports. Since C A F T A DR was implemented, yearly average trade flows have reached
US$5,219 million. C A F T A DR has also allowed the country to strengthen exports
towards Central America and the Dominican Republic, and in 2008 exports increased
12.8 percent. However, the current global environment is negatively impacting trade
flows, and therefore it will be important to continue efforts to enhance the country’s
competitiveness as a way to foster opportunities for the private sector, particularly for

SMEs.
39.
Analytical work carried out over the past years by the Bank has identified a
number o f priority areas that appear to be bottlenecks limiting the country’s growth
potential. These areas include the need to improve: (i)human capital particularly as
regards the labor force; (ii)logistics infrastructure and services to help export
the investment climate.
competitiveness; and (iii)
40.
Despite the progress made on the education front, the Salvadoran education
system still has important gaps in secondary education. El Salvador has made good
progress in expanding access to primary education. In 2007, 97 percent o f children aged
6- 11 were enrolled in primary school. However, with a net enrollment ratio in secondary
education o f 59 percent in 2007,6 it is estimated that El Salvador’s secondary enrollment
i s much lower than that o f similar middle income countries. These gaps are compounded
by quality issues (e.g., student performance, as measured by standardized achievement
tests, is poor at the lower secondary level) which appear to affect particularly the poor (El
Salvador, Poverty Assessment, Report No. 29594). For example, sixth graders perform
below the regional average in every subject area (mathematics, science, reading). These
human capital issues place the country in a distinct disadvantage in terms o f
competitiveness as apart from i t s direct role as a factor o f production, education and
human capital determine the rate o f technological innovation in countries that produce
technology and the rate o f technological absorption in countries that imitate it.

Source: Ministry o f Education o f El Salvador.

12

41.
The new government plans to address these issues through a two pronged
approach. On the one hand it i s reorganizing the Ministry o f Education and working on a
comprehensive strategy for the sector covering 2009-20 14. Priorities include improving
the quality and coverage o f education and upgrading the professional standards o f
teachers. Efforts will be made to better integrate’ science and technology across the
curriculum (see next paragraph). On the other hand, the government i s also working to
improve the human capital o f adults in the labor force through targeted training programs.
The Ministry o f Education’s new organizational structure gives a prominent
42.
role to the development o f science and technology education and research, including
a focus on improving science education from pre-school to high school and training
o f scientific and technological professionals. A reflection o f the government’s
commitment i s the creation o f a position o f Vice Minister for Science and Technology
within the Ministry o f Education with the mandate o f integrating the competitiveness
agenda in the education system. This emphasis i s particularly welcome taking into
account El Salvador’s relatively low ranking on the World Competitiveness Index (79 out
o f 134 countries). The indicators on innovation and technological capacity tend to rank
in the bottom quarter.

43.
Infrastructure has improved (particularly electricity and telecommunication)
over the past few years but Salvadoran firms still find it expensive to produce and
difficult to ship their output. According to the 2006 “ E l Salvador, Recent Developments
in Infrastructure ” (Report No. 37689) direct logistics costs for value-added goodsnamely, trucking service contracts, warehousing, and ocean borne shipping tariffsremain a heavy and growing burden on Salvadoran producers. Moreover, indirect or
“hidden” costs caused by delivery delays, lost, damaged and stolen cargo are hurting
sales and directly affecting the competitiveness o f the country’s firms. Infrastructure
upgrades appear to be particularly needed in rural areas and the government has indicated
that this i s one o f its priorities.
44.
Attention i s also needed to some key determinants o f the Salvadoran
investment climate. The 2007 Latin American and the Caribbean Regional Study
Economic Performance in Latin America and the Caribbean: A Microeconomic
Perspective (Report No. 407 17) reviewed the investment climate o f the region. The study
found that the productivity o f the Salvadoran f i r m s (and therefore the country’s growth
prospects) could be significantly enhanced by addressing the country’s high crime rates
which in addition to negatively affecting the safety o f the f i r m s and i t s workers also
impose costs (such as expenses on security). Similarly, the study also found that
regulatory and institutional quality aspects were among the key elements that needed to
be addressed to improve the country’s investment climate.

B. Poverty Reduction and Social Sectors
45.
The main anti-poverty program in El Salvador has been the Red Solidaria,
now renamed “Comunidades Solidarias Rurales”. This program i s designed to combat
poverty in rural areas through conditional cash transfers (CCT), providing cash to poor

13

households based on children’s regular health check-ups and school enrollment and
attendance. Evaluations show the program i s fulfilling i t s objectives o f supporting the
consumption o f poor rural households. Moreover, the expansion o f this program in rural
areas has been accompanied by significant increases in the availability o f public health
and education services, thereby facilitating access to and, utilization of, these services.
Coverage o f the program reached 100 poor municipalities as o f August 2009 (there i s a
total o f 262 municipalities in El Salvador).

46.

There i s currently no systematic approach to social protection, and no
specific mechanism to address urban poverty. This i s particularly important in the
current environment, as the economic crisis i s expected to have a disproportionately
higher impact in urban areas. Moreover, data indicate that the evolution o f remittances i s
likely to result in a larger reduction in urban centers than in rural areas.’ Among urban
poor, youth are particularly vulnerable. High youth unemployment rates and related low
levels o f education and training increase their susceptibility to crime and violence. In
response, the government i s working towards a universal social protection system which
includes support for poor urban households through new program called “Cornunidades
Solidarias Urbanas.’’ As part o f the enhanced social protection system, the government
i s designing a short-term income protection program to mitigate j o b loss and income
reduction during the crisis followed b y a more systematic and permanent labor
intermediation and quaiification system.

47.
I n addition to strengthening social protection, there i s also a need to address
inequalities in school enrollments. According to the FY07 Latin American and the
Caribbean Flagship, Poverty Reduction and Growth: Virtuous and Vicious Circles, 75
percent o f Salvadoran children in the lower 3 deciles o f the income distribution have less
than 6 years o f education. More dramatically, about half o f those have one or less years
o f education. At the other end, only 8 percent o f the poorest have 12 or more years o f
education. T h i s i s in contrast with the higher three deciles o f the income distribution
where approximately 35 percent have 12 or more years o f education.
48.
El Salvador has made good progress in the health sector as changes in some
health indicators suggest. An example o f this i s the reduction in the mortality rate o f
children under five, from 30 to 19 per 1,000 live births between 2000 and 2007.
Reductions o f similar magnitude have been reported for other health outcomes such as
maternal mortality and infant malnutrition as w e l l as access to health services. Many o f
these achievements are likely associated with improvements in socioeconomic
infrastructure related to living conditions. T h i s progress notwithstanding, indicators based
on micro-data from 2004 and 2007 show that health care utilization among ill people
remained almost unchanged. On the supply side, however, there are some notable
changes, including an indication that the quality o f health services provided by the
systems as a whole has improved.8
Estimates for 2007 indicate that as a percentage o f total volume received by households, 53 percent o f remittances go
to urban areas versus 47 percent to rural.
The fraction o f hcalth care users rating health services as excellent (or also good in urban areas) increased
approximately by 3 percentage points.

*

14

49.

I

Despite progress in recent years, El Salvador faces significant challenges in
most social infrastructure categories, particularly in the poorest areas o f the
country. The policy challenges identified in the 2006 report “El Salvador, Recent
Developments in Infiastructure ” remain valid today, including the need to: address
shortfalls in the provision o f basic infrastructure within severe fiscal constraints. The
study found the water sector in particular to be performing far below expectations. Water
and sanitation has an important impact on living conditions and health indicators and
actions such as re-designing subsidies to ensure the poor are primary beneficiaries would
contribute to achieving the goal o f universal access to infrastructure.

50.
I t i s important to safeguard the advances in health outcomes achieved over
the last decade. Regional experience in Argentina, Peru and Mexico has shown
deterioration in some social indicators following economic crisis. It i s therefore
important to continue to improve the health system, particularly in times o f crisis,
The
including the efficiency and effectiveness o f spending on health systems.
government i s preparing an action plan to achieve universal coverage, greater equity and
enhanced quality through the creation o f an integrated network o f health care services.
The current challenges which need to be addressed relate to increasing access,
particularly for vulnerable populations; reforming the structure and organization o f the
health care system; developing human resources; re-enforcing gains acquired in recent
years in disease prevention (e.g., dengue, HIV/AIDS, malaria etc.); and formulating a
national drug policy. It i s also important to strengthen epidemiological surveillance,
particularly in the context o f the HlNl epidemic.
C. The Public Sector and Institutional Development

5 1.
The government intends to accelerate efforts to strengthen public financial
management (PFM) and increase the transparency o f government spending. A
recent assessment o f the current situation in El Salvador, sponsored by the European
Commission in collaboration with the Bank and IDB, determined that the country’s PFM
system possesses a number o f strengths, such as a sound legal and institutional
framework for managing and monitoring revenue and expenditure budgets, cash flows
and balances, and debt. In addition, the country’s integrated financial management
system (SAFI), conceived not only as a technological platform but as a set o f rules,
processes, and skills, has contributed to fiscal discipline and enabled greater transparency
by allowing the timely issuance o f budget execution and other fiscal reports.
52.

Going forward, the agreed program focuses on further strengthening o f
public resource management with particular emphasis on expanding the PFM
system, adhering to established international norms where appropriate, increasing
the transparency of public spending (including procurement) and improving budget
processes. In this latter regard, a key goal i s to move towards a medium-term and
results-based budget framework, with an emphasis on the “bottom-up” preparation o f
costed strategic plans and ensuing investment programs, consistent with the “top-down”
fiscal framework. On the control side, the government has adopted international

15

standards (COS0 framework) and has put in place internal regulations to further
stimulate effective operation o f internal control u n i t s in all public institutions.
Box 2. Governance and Anti-corruption in El Salvador
El Salvador has made important progress in developing i t s democratic institutions and overall governance
fiamework. In the last 20 years, subsequent administrations have undertaken a series o f structural reforms
to stabilize the economy, open markets and trade, and modernize public sector institutions. These sustained
reform efforts have succeeded in placing E l Salvador among the leading reformers in the L A C region
according to indicators put forth in the Doing Business Report or the Global Competitiveness Index.
Similarly, governance indicators are also relatively positive such as the Worldwide Governance Indicators
(WGI) or the Transparency International Corruption Perception Index (TI-CPI).

Based on the Bank's assessment as well as several sources o f information and following the LCR G A C
Approach, the following table summarizes the status o f progress and performance o f El Salvador's country
systems in 12 dimensions o f Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC):

I

1

I Clean and efficient tax administrationagencies

2

Transparent comprehensive and open budgets

I

3

Integratedfinancial management systems for central and sub-national governments

4

Transparent and competitive procurement systems

5

Independent and effective oversight bodies

6

Competitive markets and effective regulatory frameworks to regulate public services
and monopolies

7

Prudential regulation and supervision o f banking sector

8

Asset and Income declaration for public officials

9

Independent, efficient, accessiblejustice systems

....
.....
.

....
..
..
..
..
. ..
. ..
I

I

88.

8.

8.8

.8.

8
8

10 Transparency in campaign financing and legislative voting records
11 Professionalized civil service and efficient and transparent delivery of services
12 Adoption and implementation of freedom o f information laws, social monitoring and
independent media

8.

Likewise, the PEFA'' report has confirmed most o f these perceptions in a more systematic way and has
revealed strengths and weaknesses o f existing Public Expenditure and Financial Management systems and
practices. W h i l e the report recognizes the existence o f a robust legal fiamework, procedures and supporting
instruments for the overall budgeting and financial management cycle, it also flags the need for further
strengthening particularly in two main areas: (i)the linkage between policy planning and budgeting; and
(ii) the auditing and external control mechanisms and credibility.

53.
Strengthening o f existing tax administration systems i s also critical in the
current circumstances. Although the government has already made progress in
enhancing the overall efficiency and effectiveness o f tax collection mechanisms, there i s
For example, the TI-CPI ranks E l Salvador in the 67 place among 180 countries and as the 3rdbest perceived countries
in LAC. The WGI ranks El Salvador in the gth place in the Government Effectiveness dimension among 17 LAC
countries and in the 4Ih place in the Control of Corruption dimension.
lo
Informe del DesempeAo de la Gestidn de las Finanzas (PEFA), Informe final versi6n 10 de mayo de 2009, Oficina
Europea de Cooperacion EuropeAid (AidCo). Rotterdam, 25 August 2009.

16

s t i l l room for improvement. Further integration between the internal revenue and customs
agencies i s an area o f opportunity that would yield significant return in terms o f tax
collection from a strengthened control system. Integration o f both control procedures and
databases i s planned as a complement to tax policy measures to address the critical fiscal
situation.

54.

Beyond improving expenditure management and controls and in recognition
o f the importance of adequate and proactive disclosure, a number of actions are
planned to facilitate public dissemination of critical aspects o f public financial
management. A state-of-the art public procurement dissemination tool (COMPRASAL)
has been successfully implemented and i s now recording and publicizing all central
government procurement activities including bidding processes and contracts.
COMPRASAL has allowed enhanced transparency and credibility o f public sector
performance with respect to an area commonly perceived as most vulnerable to
mismanagement and corruption. It i s expected that the government will further automate
bidding processes and convert COMPRASAL into a fully transactional tool. The
government i s also committed to revisit and adjust, as needed, the legal framework
governing public procurement to promote greater transparency and enhance efficiency.

55.
Further development o f the transparency and freedom o f information
agenda i s deemed critical in view of existing negative perceptions and mistrust
among other stakeholders, particularly members o f the legislature, the media and
specialized non-government groups. The transparency and freedom o f public information
agenda has gained support among these groups and it i s expected that, within the next
two years, the government will have established i t s normative framework and developed
institutional capacity to make all public sector information accessible to the public.
D. Environment and Disaster Mitigation

56.
Environmental degradation i s a problem in El Salvador and increases its
vulnerability to natural disasters. El Salvador has the second highest economic risk
exposure to two or more hazards, according to the World Bank funded Natural Disaster
Hotspot study. l1 Due to i t s geographical location and geotectonic characteristics, El
Salvador i s exposed to a variety o f natural hazards, and i s one o f the most seismically
active regions on earth. Natural disaster data from El Salvador12 indicate 41 natural
disaster events for the period 1982 to 2007, with total economic damages estimated at
US$4.57 bi1li0n.l~ The country i s also susceptible to climate change forces which can
exacerbate risk o f natural disasters.

See World Bank, Natural Disaster Hotspots, A Global Risk Analysis (Washington, DC: Disaster Risk Management
Series, 2005).
Prevention Web. EL Salvador. Data and Statistics.
httD://www.preventionweb.net/enalish/countries/statistics/?cid=I 3 1 accessed: March 2009.
l3
Economic damage by disaster type was reported as follows: earthquakes accounted for US$3.35 billion; storms
US$744 million; floods US$282 million; and droughts $193 million.

17

57.

El Salvador faces severe degradation o f its natural resources, especially its
natural forests, soil, air quality, and water resources. Only two percent o f i t s natural
forests remain, which in the region compares only with Haiti. Yet, there i s evidence o f a
significant recovery o f secondary forests and biodiversity, as reported by ongoing studies.
The health impact o f environmental degradation has been estimated at around 2.5 percent
o f gross domestic product (GDP). Water pollution i s one o f the most pressing
environmental problems that El Salvador faces. Inadequate quantity and quality o f the
potable water supply, sanitation facilities and practices, and hygiene conditions are
associated with various illnesses in both adults and children.
58.
These problems compromise El Salvador’s long-term economic growth,
impose significant socioeconomic costs (particularly for vulnerable groups such as
poor children), and have created a growing unmet demand in urban areas for
adequate water supply, sanitation services, wastewater treatment, and clean and
efficient public transport. From an environmental policy perspective, the challenge i s to
strengthen environmental institutions and policies so that they effectively engage in
territorial planning, protect the environment and the country’s natural heritage (avoiding
unrealistic regulations that might hinder competitiveness and investment) while
supporting trade-driven growth and a much needed expansion in infrastructure.

IV. World Bank Group Strategy
A. Lessons from the Last CAS (see also the CAS Completion Report)

59.
The Bank Group’s assistance over the four-year period covered by the
previous CAS (FY05-08) envisaged a strategic program o f lending and non-lending
activities to support the three main pillars o f the government’s development plan: (i)
to accelerate broad-based, equitable economic growth and increase employment; (ii)
to
improve equity through building human capital and expanding access to socioeconomic
infrastructure, assets and markets; and (iii)
to enhance security and reduce vulnerability
including support to governance and environmental agendas.

60.
During the CAS period, however, the political context evolved in such a way
that, by the time the CAS Progress Report was prepared (in February 2008) several
adjustments were made to the original targets and program. An impasse in the
National Assembly on several domestic issues led the opposition to block US$500
million in new foreign borrowing requiring a sovereign guarantee, including five Bank
operations, as well as loans from the Central American Bank for Economic Integration
(CABEI), the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) and the IDB. The
Bank operations were eventually cancelled after failing to become effective within 18
months o f Board approval. This setback in the implementation o f the CAS lending
program led the Bank and the Government to adjust the assistance strategy by
minimizing the lending targets and emphasizing non-lending activities to prepare the reengagement for the new CAS cycle.

18

61.

The CAS Completion Report found that in most cases anticipated projects
went ahead under alternative financing arrangements, and progress was made
towards CPS outcomes, although the pace of reforms did slow during the period.
The overall objectives and country development goals set forth in the original CAS
remained valid, but specific targets and CAS outcomes had to be revised due to the
cancellation o f several lending activities. The Progress Report also proposed a stronger
focus on analytical and advisory services which also led to positive CAS outcomes in the
absence o f new lending.

62.

An important lesson emerging from the CAS Completion report relates to
the political polarization in El Salvador and the importance o f consensus-building
efforts to ensure successful implementation of proposed programs. The 2005 CAS
underestimated the implications o f El Salvador’s divided political environment. Despite
proactive local outreach effort, including during the project preparation phase, the Bank’s
loans became hostage to political negotiations. While the expectation i s that the current
situation i s different (see paragraph 97), the Bank intends to manage this risk by
presenting a package o f loans to be approved by Congress which represent a carefully
selected program focused o n priorities where there i s broad support. It i s hoped that this
approach will minimize the chance that individual loans are captured in a political debate
and that Congress can agree on a comprehensive approach and budget financing to
address the crisis. The Bank will o f course continue its consultation efforts and elaborate
an information and communication strategy to engage with the country legislative branch,
political parties and other stakeholders, including local communities as appropriate.

63.
A second lesson i s the importance of analytical work to identify gaps in
specific sectors, inform stakeholders and build consensus around important
development issues. Experience in El Salvador has shown that the government values
the Bank not only as a lending facility, but also for the range o f global expertise it can
bring to complex development issues. Even in the case where Bank projects were not
ultimately approved in Congress, the Bank continued i t s engagement in critical sectors
through analytical work with a positive impact. Analytical work also prepared the
ground for future engagement in areas o f mutual interest. This lesson is also relevant for
areas where the government and the Bank may not agree o n a policy agenda or need for
financing, but where a continued engagement through analytical work is useful to sustain
the dialogue.
64.
Finally, an important operational lesson emerging from the CAS Completion
Report i s to carefully consider capacity and implementation issues early in the
process o f project design. Future operations in El Salvador must be designed based on
an assessment o f the capacity available in the country, and with due consideration o f the
country’s political economy issues. Complexity in design should be reduced to the extent
possible, and where it i s not, clear project implementation plans are needed before the
project becomes effective. This latter point i s particularly relevant in the current country
circumstances characterized by the presence o f an inexperienced administration that
needs to come up to speed in the midst o f critical conditions and to create capacities
while implementing the intended policies and programs.
19

B. World Bank Country Partnership Program FY10-12

65.
The overall aim o f the CPS i s to support the government of El Salvador’s
focus on addressing poverty and inequality through three strategic objectives: (i)
strengthen fundamentals for economic recovery by addressing macro and
institutional vulnerabilities; (ii)strengthen social service delivery; and (iii)increase
economic opportunities, particularly for the poor. Taking into account lessons
identified in the CAS Completion Report, this CPS i s selective and focuses in areas
where there i s clear commitment from the government at various levels. The analytical
work i s designed to be demand-driven and flexible in order to provide just-in-time
support to the newly elected government in priority areas.
Principles of Engagement

66.
A strategic principle guiding the CPS i s to support the government’s
approach of balancing the immediate response to the economic and social aspects o f
the crisis, while also beginning to respond to the longer-term development
challenges. Recognizing the imbalance between country needs and resources, and t o
maximize the efficiency o f the interventions, the government has requested that Bank
assistance is based o n this principle. As such it is reflected in the design o f the operations
to be delivered which include shorter-term interventions but with a view to supporting
longer-term development.

67.

A second principle f o r this CPS includes selectivity and flexibility which i s in
line with best practice in Middle Income Countries, and i s particularly necessary
given the high degree o f uncertainty in terms o f the global economic outlook. A
flexible approach is needed to support the government as it defines the long term
government program and works to achieve political consensus. Flexibility will also
apply t o the use o f instruments, which include a combination o f development policy
lending, investment lending, analytical work and technical assistance to support the
government’s policy agenda and sustain dialogue during this critical period.
In
accordance with this principle, the FY 10 lending program i s well-defined and selective,
however the outer years o f the CPS will be agreed with government based o n the
evolution o f the country environment, and where the needs are most pressing. If political
polarization should become an issue, as it did during the previous CPS, the Bank would
adjust its program to achieve results through dialogue and AAA.

68.

Lessons learned in the CAS Completion Report suggest successful programs
require continuous consultation to secure broad support. This principle has been
adopted both for the preparation o f the CPS and ongoing work program discussions
including o n specific operations. Broad consultations with relevant stakeholders
including political parties from the opposition as well as private sector representatives
would alert teams o f potential gridlock and help design mitigation measures during
project preparation. In addition to the project level consultation, the Bank will sustain a
permanent dialogue with all players and monitor potential risks that could affect the
program.

20

Strategic Objectives Supported by the CPS and Results-BasedApproach

69.

I n line with the results-based approach, this CPS has identified several
outcomes which it expects to influence during the CPS period. The CPS Results
Framework (Annex 2) i s organized according to the three strategic objectives o f the CPS.
Given the limited size and breadth o f the current Bank program, the CPS proposes a
streamlined results matrix which includes an indicative set o f outcomes that are
consistent with the scope o f the crisis response program that has been defined to date.
Performance towards outcomes will be assessed at the CPS Progress Report and the
Results Framework will be updated to reflect progress and potential new priorities for
Bank support.

Strengthen fundamentals for
economic recovery by addressing
macro and institutional
vulnerabilities

-

-

Expandfiscal space

-

Improve targeting of
subsidies
Implement results-based
budgeting

-

Enhance access to
information

-

Improve fiscal transparenqv

-

Strengthen delivery o f social
services

Strengthen disaster risk
management

-

Increase economic opportunities,
particularly for the poor

Selected Areas for Support
Protect the income of the
urban poor, through the
implementation of targeted
programs
Support design of a
Universal Social Protection
System
Ensure access to basic health
services
Improve quality ofprimav
education and expand access
opportunities to secondary
schools

-

Enhance employment
opportunities

-

Improve quality of science
and technology education
and training
Promote rural infrastructure
and local development

-

Strengthen Financial Sector
Invest in In3astructure

Objective 1. Strengthen fundamentals for economic recovery by addressing macro
and institutional vulnerabilities

70.
Macro-stability and Expanding Fiscal Space. The two-tranche Public Finance
and Social Sector (PFSS) D P L is central to this objective and will help set the framework
for a possible follow-on programmatic DPL series. The PER under preparation provides
analysis and recommendations in the areas o f fiscal management and targeting o f
subsidies, and i s complemented by on-demand technical assistance in debt management
and public procurement to optimize the use o f scarce public resources. The US$20
million Fiscal Management TAL accompanying this CPS supports efforts to enhance tax
collection capabilities through strengthened controls and integration o f databases and
procedures. The Sustaining Social Gains for Economic Recovery (SSGER) DPL, .also
accompanying this CPS extends the policy actions o f the PFSS DPL by supporting
further actions to reduce the cost o f other untargeted subsidies and releasing fiscal space
for protecting critical expenditures in the social sectors. Given the fiscal challenges the
21

country i s facing, compounded with the natural disaster risk profile, the government may
also consider the possibility o f a DPL with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
(CAT DDO) to provide a source o f immediately available liquidity during a state o f
emergency caused by a natural disaster.

71.
Public Sector Performance and Transparency. The PFSS DPL supports
enhancing public sector performance and transparency, as does the Fiscal Management
and Public Sector Performance TAL, which also accompanies this CPS. The T A L also
contributes to results related to multi-year and performance-based budgeting, fiscal
transparency and access to information, e.g., improving El Salvador’s ratings in selected
PEFA indicators and increasing the number o f public sector procurement transactions
recorded and disseminated through COMPRASAL. Trust Funds also support activities
related to fiscal transparency and building fiscal management capacity.
72.
Institutional Strengthening. Building institutional capacities and systems in
critical areas o f the public sector i s needed to strengthen fundamentals for economic
recovery, but also to implement development policies more broadly. The TAL aims at
strengthening capacity in several Ministries, including the broader capacity to carry out
policy planning and produce national statistics.
Objective 2. Strengthen delivery o f social services

73,
Poverty and Social Protection. Drawing from recent Bank analysis o f unfolding
income vulnerabilities and poverty impacts, the Bank i s working with the government to
strengthen the institutional and policy-making capacity o f the government to develop
medium term social policies that target the .urban poor. The Income Support and
Employability Project w i l l support strengthening the capacity in the government to design
and implement inclusive social policies, particularly on social protection and
employment. Through i t s labor market services, this Project also provides opportunities
targeted to young under-employed men as well as to head-of-household women.
74.
The SSGER DPL also supports efforts to strengthen institutional capacity and
policy making in the social sector line Ministries and the Secretaria Te‘cnica de la
Presidencia. Both these efforts will contribute to the design o f a Universal Social
Protection system to improve the targeting o f social assistance programs. Also in the
context o f the Income Support and Employability Project, the Bank i s helping the
Government to design an income and job training program, the Flagship o f the
Government’s Anti Crisis Plan, to limit income poverty impacts and improve poverty
targeting in urban areas. W h i l e this program i s temporary, it will build capacity to
respond to future shocks.
H e a l t h and Education. The SSGER DPL promotes policy actions in critical
75.
areas to protect the most vulnerable population and has helped establish a strong dialogue
across government, including health and education ministries. A possible follow-on DPL
series along with specific investment operations are likely to provide continuity for Bank
support to key social sector reforms. Ongoing Bank projects and AAA (such as the

22

Pharmaceutical Study and Income Vulnerabilities and Poverty Note) also support
outcomes related to protecting and enhancing coverage o f basic health services. The
US$143 million Hospital Reconstruction and Basic Health Services Project has been
supporting the government’s efforts to expand primary health care coverage to more than
500,000 additional households using the targeting criteria set by the Red Solidaria design.
Building up on i t s experience in other countries, IFC will seek opportunities in tertiary
education areas where access to lower segments o f the population could be expanded in a
sustainable manner.

76.

C r i m e and Violence. While there are limitations in t e r n s o f Bank interventions
in this area, it remains an important country and regional concern and the Bank i s able to
assist the government in a number o f important components o f this agenda. Box 1 draws
on recently completed analytical work and suggests efforts are needed to address social
inequality and issues related to youth, unemployment, poverty, and education. For
instance, the Income Support and Employability Project supports activities to address
crime and violence through temporary income support and improved labor market
services in poor municipalities where crime and violence are pronounced, and where
dwelling improvements and public safety initiatives are also taking place. l4 Youthtargeted activities include a JSDF grant to address youth violence through cultural
programs and learning.
Objective 3. Increase economic opportunities, particularly f o r the poor

77.
Job Creation. Building on recent analytical work, the Bank will support the
government’s efforts to mitigate the current labor impact o f the crisis, and also enhance
employment opportunities in the medium-term. Although designed to respond to
temporary social needs, the Income Support and Employability Project will include
longer-term interventions to help create a labor force intermediation and qualification
system and develop institutional capacity at the local and national level. The operation
would also support efforts to strengthen the capacity to manage labor markets through
building training capacity and providing institutional support, including through local
employment offices which are not currently able to respond to policy strategy. Increasing
employment i s also the IFC’s principal strategic objective in El Salvador.
Complementing investment operations, IFC will continue to support strengthening the
investment climate, as it i s currently doing through a business licensing (registration,
construction and operation) simplification project at the municipal level. I t will also seek
to leverage synergies with the Bank.

78.
Science and Technology. One significant expected outcome o f the institutional
strengthening supported through the SSGER DPL i s an assessment o f the relevance and
quality o f science and technology curriculum and teaching, particularly at the secondary
education level. The Bank expects to remain engaged through analytical work and
possible lending to support medium-term policy measures to improve science and
technology education and innovation.
l4

The government identified these municipalities through a targeting instrument based on an urban
poverty map and additional information on crime.

23

79.
Rural Infrastructure. The government i s interested in a more strategic and
decentralized approach to rural development and has requested Bank support for a rural
infrastructure and development project focused on the provision o f basic infrastructure
and financing for income-generating activities. This project i s being designed to help
address the impact o f the crisis by creating employment and support public investment in
rural areas in order to improve competitiveness in the longer term, including a more
market-oriented approach to rural development, capitalizing on CAFTA opportunities.’
80.
Financial Sector. IFC’s financial sector strategy w i l l remain closely focused on
MSME financing and in meeting the needs o f underserved populations. IFC w i l l use
established loan wholesaling programs with local banks to support these groups, as well
as developing new financial products to meet their needs. In addition, IFC intends to
maintain i t s support for the expansion o f El Salvador-based corporates, especially those
able to integrate SMEs into their operations or have an impact on low-income groups.
The Government has also requested a Financial Sector Assessment (FSAP) to help
identify potential risks and opportunities affecting the financial sector in the current
circumstances. A small Bank Trust Fund supports improving Corporate Financial
reporting.
8 1.
Infrastructure.
IFC’s infrastructure investments will be concentrated on
improving El Salvador’s logistics and power supply. Activity in logistics includes
upgrading the highway network, port system, and energy supplies-notably o f renewable
energy sources such as hydropower. In addition, IFC’s Advisory Services arm has
opened an office in San Salvador from which it w i l l coordinate Investment Climate
operations regionally. Beyond the Rural Infrastructure and Local Development Project,
there may be interest during the CPS period for additional infrastructure projects.
82.
Potential IFC investments would support CPS outcomes related to creating
economic opportunities. Currently IFC plans to focus on: (i)
renewable energy projects
and (ii)supporting local companies in the real sector with expansion plans and/or a
regional footprint. IFC i s considering a series o f investments in the agribusiness,
fertilizer, commercial real estate development, and waste managemenuenergy generation
that fit the country strategy. Opportunities for collaboration with the Bank include
awarding an operating concession for the port o f L a Uni6n and supporting the design o f
private-public partnership (PPP) solutions to carry out specific initiatives in the health
industry and for urban infrastructure and massive transportation in the metropolitan area
o f San Salvador. In the power sector, IFC expects to build on the joint Central America
energy strategy developed with the Bank.
83.
The Bank i s also preparing several pieces o f regional analytical work which
will be relevant for El Salvador, particularly in terms o f creating opportunities for
broad-based economic growth. Studies are under preparation at this time in the
following areas: (i)enhancing regional competitiveness; (ii)
the CAFTA complementary
IsAs this project i s in the early stage o f preparation there are currently no outcomes included in the Results
Framework, however it i s expected that these would be added at the time o f the Progress Report.

24

agenda; (iii)regional energy opportunities; (iv) creating conditions for employment
generation; (v) pharmaceuticals; and (vi) addressing crime and violence issues in the subregion. El Salvador i s also participating in a regional project on Remittance Pricing
database which could support efforts to channel a larger portion o f remittances into the
economy. The Bank i s prepared to provide hrther support in these areas should the
Government request it. The dissemination o f these studies may lead to follow-up at the
country level. During the CPS cycle, the Bank also expects to provide specific policy
advice for El Salvador on enhancing competitiveness and economic recovery following
the crisis.
Proposed Program of Support

84.
Implementation o f the ongoing portfolio supports the strategic objectives o f
the CPS. The current Bank’s portfolio in El Salvador includes a Development Policy
Loan (US$450 million), two investment operations nearing project completion (US$16 1
million) and a GEF grant (US$5 million). The two ongoing investment operations are
rated moderately satisfactory mostly due to the slow pace o f implementation, which i s
common during election transitions. The current undisbursed balance i s US$286 million
which reflects primarily the undisbursed balance o f the DPL (US$250 million). The
Bank has a small portfolio (US$2.5 million) o f Trust Funds under implementation (see
Annex 5) which supports ongoing projects and those proposed in the CPS.

85.
The indicative envelope for the CPS period FY10-FY12 i s estimated at
US$650 million, and i s expected to include a mix of investment and DPL lending.
Three operations accompany this CPS: a U S $ l 00 million Sustaining Social Gains for
Economic Recovery DPL, a US$50 million Income Support and Employability Project,
and a US$20 million Fiscal Management and Public Sector Development TA.
Table 5. Proposed Lending Program for FYlO
Lending activity
Proposed amount

Fiscal Management and Public Sector Development
Technical Assistance Loan
Income Support and Employability Project
Sustaining Social Gains for Economic Recovery DPL
Rural Infrastructure and Local Development Project
Total

US$20 ’million
US$ 50 million
US$ 100 million
US$ 80 million
US$250 million

86.

The proposed three-year period i s deemed appropriate given the uncertain
circumstances related to the global environment and the economic situation in the
U S in particular which factors prominently in El Salvador’s economic prospects.
While the CPS does not cover the entire 5 year political cycle it will cover roughly half o f
the new Government’s potential tenure and allow the CPS to be flexible enough to
address the current challenges noted in the Anti-Crisis Plan and respond quickly to the
evolving medium-term agenda. The Progress Report will provide an opportunity for
adjustments as needed.

87.
Programmingfor the outer years o f the CPS will be flexible. Early indications
following discussions with government suggest possible future lending would support
areas under the three strategic objectives, and include possible financing for the health
25

sector, urban infrastructure, and higher education. I t i s anticipated that possible future
DPL lending will reflect a certain level o f continuity with the areas supported by the
PFSS and SSGER DPLs: (i)fiscal reform; (ii)public sector management; and (iii)
improving social sector service delivery and protecting vulnerable populations. The
indicative envelope for FY11- 12 i s US$400 million. The actual allocation for outer years
will be agreed on the basis o f the identification o f specific priority operations, assessment
o f the country’s absorption capacity and i s subject to the availability o f IBRD funds.
88.
The proposed program o f analytical and advisory services will facilitate both
maintaining engagement in priority areas while at the same time generating
necessary analytical foundations to facilitate preparation o f new lending operations.
Ongoing and recently completed analytical work will be used to stimulate discussion with
a broad range o f stakeholders as the government articulates the country’s National
Development Plan. It will also serve as a strong underpinning for future lending,
including Development Policy Lending. Finally, in line with the CASCR findings, M A
has proven to be an effective instrument in El Salvador in terms o f achieving results.
89.
The Bank will also continue to provide policy and technical advice in the
growing Global Public Goods agenda, where the Bank has a comparative
advantage. For example, climate change i s o f high concern for El Salvador because o f
their vulnerability to natural disasters which i s expected to increase. El Salvador i s a
participant in the Bank-led Forest Carbon Partnership Facility, which aims to achieve
Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD). Similarly, government
interest in a CAT D D O and possible infrastructure projects could be an entry point for
discussions on environmental management. The Country Environmental Assessment
(CEA), completed in FY08 also remains valid. The Bank i s also providing A M support
for disaster management through CAPRA (see Box 3).
Box 3. Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA) Initiative

The CAPRA initiative i s a flagship Bank knowledge product that seeks to provide Central American
countries with an innovative tool to assess risk. CAPRA’s goal i s to enhance disaster risk understanding,
communication and awareness in Central America, in order to support the adoption o f risk strategies to
reduce the impact o f disasters triggered by natural events.
CAPRA provides a Geographic Information System (GIs)-based platform o f information on hazard risk.
The software i s on-line, open source, and free to download. The hazard and risk maps that are generated by
CAPRA software are available in the CAPRA Geonode a data clearing house where risk data i s served,
catalogued, maintained, visualised and manipulated. With the series o f user-friendly applications, such as
costhenefit analysis tools and technical premium calculators, CAPRA supports decision-makers in
implementing mitigation strategies and incorporating risk in development planning.

-

CAPRA i s a collaborative initiative; jointly financed by the Bank and the IDB, it i s led by the Central
American Coordination Centre for Disaster Prevention (CEPREDENAC), in partnership with Central
American countries and the UN International Strategy for Disaster Reduction Secretariat.

90.
The government has also expressed a strong interest in Bank technical
assistance. The Bank will be responsive to government needs and seek to provide justin-time advice on request. Some areas where the government has expressed an interest
include procurement and public finance management, and as mentioned above in the

26

development o f the National Development Plan. In line with the approach taken for
lending operations and AAA, the CPS adopts a flexible approach to respond to
government priorities. Trust Funds will be sought to leverage CPS activities and enhance
their impact.
C. Development Partners

91.
The Country Partnership strategy i s coordinated with El Salvador’s other
development partners, notably the IDB. This CPS was prepared in close coordination
with the IDB and government to ensure an efficient division o f labor based on
comparative advantage. In human development the Bank will take a lead role in
education and health, and IDB has a regional operation focusing on medicines. In the
area o f social protection both the Bank and IDB will be involved, but the Bank will focus
i t s efforts on the design o f essential components o f a universal social protection system.
IDB i s likely to remain engaged in the infrastructure sectors. There i s strong
coordination with IDB on PFM issues, including supporting efforts to improve the fiscal
situation. Past experience shows the value o f some joint activities (e.g., joint PER and
CAPRA Initiative) and during the CPS period the Bank w i l l continue to work with IDB
to identify areas for possible collaboration. In parallel to the CPS consultation process,
the Bank held a meeting with development partners to discuss the proposed Bank
program, as well as opportunities to establish specific channels for donor coordination.
92.
The Government has taken the lead in promoting division o f labor among
donors in line with development needs. In light o f the financing needs arising from the
international economic crisis working with donors has become increasingly important for
El Salvador. The main multilateral partners are CABEI, the IDB, the European
Commission (EC), the UN agencies and the World Bank. Bilateral agencies like USAID,
JICA (Japan) and AECI (Spain) continue to provide support in the country. The
Millennium Challenge Corporation i s funding a transportation project in the North o f the
country. The Bank i s working with UN agencies closely, in particular in the preparation
o f the urban employment program. The donor community plans to establish regular
meetings with other partners to improve coordination efforts, reduce duplication and to
promote the design complementary programs. There are very few external partners active
in El Salvador which should facilitate donor coordination and division o f labor.
93.
The Bank has been collaborating closely with the IMF. A workshop was
organized jointly by the Bank and the IDB and IMF in May 2009, before the new
government took office in order to discuss possible areas o f support. These coordination
efforts have continued since then and consultation with the IMF has been particularly
close in the context o f preparing the review o f macroeconomic development and in the
update o f the Debt Sustainability Analysis. Looking forward the Bank will continue to
work with the IMF particularly in the context o f the tax reforms being currently
considered by the administration.

27

D. CPS Consultations

94.
During the week of August 17, 2009, the Bank held a series of CPS
consultations. Participants included NGOs, think tanks, universities, the media, private
sector representatives and members o f Congress. Stakeholders were broadly supportive
o f the focus o f the Bank program and the Bank’s relevance in El Salvador. Many agreed
with the flexible nature o f the CPS, particularly in light o f the current environment and
given that a longer-term national strategy i s not yet clearly articulated. At the same time,
participants raised some priorities for the Bank to consider, including concerns regarding
the impact o f the crisis on poverty, unemployment and security; the severity o f fiscal
constraints and the implications for longer-term debt sustainability; and how the country
could sustain higher rates o f growth in the future. Stakeholders were also particularly
concerned about the increasing levels o f crime and violence in El Salvador. Participants
o f the CPS process were asked to complete a brief survey to solicit feedback, and these
discussions were supplemented by a web-based consultation process. Most respondents
found the Bank had an important role to play in El Salvador.
V.

R i s k s and Mitigation

95.

On the macroeconomic front, the main risks derive from the global financial
crisis and more specifically from a deep and prolonged global deceleration. The
current global situation i s negatively impacting El Salvador as credit to the private sector
becomes tighter, remittances and foreign direct investment decrease, and the U S demand
for Salvadoran products declines. While these factors have been taken into account in the
preparation o f the CPS, to the extent that the global slowdown lasts longer or i s deeper
than anticipated, the government may find some difficulties implementing i t s program. In
particular, there i s a risk to the fiscal situation if tax collection does not recuperate as
quickly as predicted. The Bank will maintain actively engaged through development
policy lending.

96.
A critical element behind the efforts to mitigate macroeconomic risks i s
related to the need to find fiscal space to address the country’s emerging needs and
also maintain a sustainable fiscal policy stance. On the social front, the expansion o f
social protection programs i s expected to mitigate some o f the risks by improving income
prospects for the poorest. Rising unemployment may exacerbate the problem o f crime
and violence which could also increase social and economic costs and negatively impact
institutions. The strong focus in the CPS o f addressing inequality and focusing on job
creation, particularly for youth in urban areas, aims in part to mitigate this risk.

97.
The highly polarized political climate in El Salvador could affect program
implementation. Although the recent presidential elections suggest a consensus on the
need for a greater focus on policies to stimulate growth, reduce unemployment, improve
revenues and address the needs o f the most vulnerable segments o f the population, the
government w i l l face political challenges in creating a consensus on future economic
policies. The recent history, including the approval o f the Bank and IDB loans in late
2008 and agreement on the appointment o f the Supreme Court justice for example,
indicate that there i s room for collaboration in the current environment. The Government
28

and the Bank recognize the need for effective dialogue and consensus-building processes,
including involvement o f the opposition in defining fiscal priorities and the opportunity
to comment on project design. The Bank may help by providing technical input to the
economic debate and engaging in policy dialogue with stakeholders.
98.
CPS implementation i s also susceptible to risks deriving from natural
disasters, to which El Salvador i s subject by virtue o f its geographic location. As
with other Central American countries, El Salvador i s highly vulnerable to multiple
natural disasters risks -floods, hurricanes and earthquakes. A major climatic or seismic
disaster would, o f course, pose a significant threat to economic growth and fiscal stability
and could also delay the government’s program including the need to divert allocation o f
funding to support emergency related efforts. Government focus o n social protection, in
rural and urban areas, is intended in part to help the population’s most vulnerable
segments better withstand this recurring shocks.
99.
Finally, CPS implementation could be also affected by limited institutional
capacity. The current government i s a new administration with no previous executive
experience. The government will need time to develop necessary implementation
capabilities. The Bank program envisages technical support and training as part o f the
preparation o f all proposed engagements to strengthen absorption capacity. Still, realistic
timeframes and outcome projections will need to be considered in the preparation o f all
proposed activities.

29

8

.
I

.I
c

.k
c

9

s
e

0
*

-8
-EB*
-

.I

c,

.I

5C

3

3
m

.
I

B

5

a,
*
3
C

B

3

m
C
0

*
3
*

.
I

.
I

c

t

2
l

P
C

m

PU

3

bo
C
m

.
I

E

w

'0

m

c)

e

$

8

E
U

20
C

8a,
i

8

m

I

m
*
C
a,

9

w

e

8

8

B
M
e

a,
i

5;
3

a,

.2
c

0
a,

g
-

0

m

.-0

m

a

.
I

I

.
I

.e

I

4

%

3
-

r0

c)

.-m

I
E

ii

I

z
s
a

I

3a
2a

c)

C

3
E

0

I

m
Q)

0

m

m

Annex 2. El Salvador Country Assistance Strategy FY05-FY09 Completion Report

country:
CAS Coverage:
Date o f Progress Report:
CAS Completion Report completed by:

El Salvador
FY05-08 (extended to FY09)
February 1,2008
Sabine Perrissin
Date: September 17,2009

Introduction
The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for El Salvador, covering the period FY05 to
FYOS, was discussed in January 2005. The CAS aimed to support the Government’s
development plan “Safe Country 2004-2009”, and envisaged a strategic program o f lending and
a series o f programmatic Development Policy Lending loans
non-lending activities, including: (i)
(US$300 million total), the first o f which was considered by the Board at the time o f the CAS
discussion; (ii)six investment operations (US$185 million total); (iii)
several Analytical and
Advisory Activities (AAA), and technical assistance; and (iv) targeted private sector assistance
provided by IFC and MIGA.
However, the CAS program evolved substantially as political and economic events
unfolded. Even though President Antonio Saca had won the presidential election o f 2004 with a
solid margin o f 58 percent o f the vote (to 38 percent for it nearest rival), El Salvador’s political
environment was characterized by a high level o f polarization. Moreover, power in the National
Assembly remained divided between the ruling National Republic Alliance Party (ARENA) and
the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front Party (FMLN), giving the latter the possibility to
block the passage o f items requiring a two-thirds majority, such as foreign loans requiring a
sovereign guarantee.
I n the initial phase following Board discussion o f the CAS, the Bank proceeded to prepare
and present to the Board five operations totaling US$265 million between February and
December 2005: (i)Environmental Services; (ii)Excellence and Innovation o f Secondary
Education; (iii)
Social Protection and Local Development; (iv) Land Administration; and (v) the
Second Broad Based Growth Development Policy Lending.

Yet, Bank-approved operations were soon to become pawns in the National Assembly.
Indeed, an impasse in the National Assembly on several domestic issues led the opposition to
block US$SOO million in new foreign borrowing, including the five World Bank operations
mentioned above, as well as loans from the Central American Bank for Economic Integration
(CABEI), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Inter American
Development Bank. The Bank operations were eventually cancelled after failing to become
effective within 18 months from Board approval.
This setback in the implementation o f the CAS lending program led the Bank and the
Government to reassess the assistance strategy in late 2007. The shift in the assistance
strategy was formalized through the CAS Progress Report in February 2008 when, besides the
five cancelled operations, two other lending operations were dropped from the original pipeline.

34

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

The Progress Report included a set o f revised outcomes and greater focus o n AAA and nonlending technical assistance (TA). I t also extended the CAS coverage period by one year,
through FY09, to coincide with the country’s political cycle. Despite the fact that the Bank was
unable to implement its lending program, i t remained strongly engaged through non-lending and
technical assistance which were highly valued by the Government.
The continued engagement of the Bank resulted in new lending towards the end o f the CAS
period (late 2008) when fiscal pressures emerged in the context o f the global financial crisis.
Moreover, in addition to the increasing amount o f outstanding short-term debt that needed to be
rolled over in a context o f tight credit markets (both domestic and international), the mediumterm fiscal situation was further complicated by the need to amortize a bond series in 201 1 that
would more than double the country’s debt service that year. Against this background the
Government reached out to the opposition party which, for the first time in the last 20 years had
reasonable chances o f winning the presidential elections scheduled for March 2009 (and
eventually won). This created a series o f incentives for both ARENA and the FMLN to jointly
address the country’s financing needs through multilateral budget support, which in the case o f
the Bank took the form o f a DPL. Although not planned at the time o f the Progress Report, the
new Bank-financed DPL was consistent with the Bank’s response to support several countries in
the Region who were facing similar challenges. The D P L was approved in January 2009 and has
disbursed i t s first tranche.
The Government Strategy

El Salvador has long been recognized as a regional leader in the implementation o f
economic reforms. Since the early 1 9 9 0 ’ ~the
~ country has tackled a number o f key challenges
including trade liberalization, tax reform, financial sector strengthening, and promotion o f
private participation in telecoms, energy, and pensions. O n the social front, the country also
increased the resources devoted to schooling, health and other basic services.
I n spite of these key improvements, several key challenges remained, at the time o f CAS
preparation, with the potential to slow down or reverse progress:

.
.
.

.

Economic performance. Although El Salvador had generally maintained a solid
track record o f macroeconomic policy since the end o f the civil war, the fiscal
accounts had started to deteriorate and the current account deficit was on the rise.
Governance. Further efforts to modernize the public sector were s t i l l required to
improve the efficiency and transparency o f public institutions.
Growth. Several areas critical to growth needed further improvement, such as: trade,
investment climate, infrastructure, and the overall educational level o f the population.
Poverty. Despite significant progress since the 1 9 9 0 ’ ~regional
~
and spatial
dimensions o f poverty remained important.
Vulnerability to external shocks. Natural disaster or unfavorable external economic
developments can have a significant adverse impact, leading to decelerating growth
levels.

Page I 35

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

.

Crime and Violence. This was a critical issue, with significant economic, social
welfare, health and governance impacts. Persistently high levels o f crime and
violence affect the investment climate, undermine social capital and erode the assets
and incomes o f the poor.
Political polarization and lack o f national consensus. The division o f power
between the two lead parties increased transaction costs for the Executive,
introducing some degree o f uncertainty and slowing down the reform process.

The Government's "Safe Country 2004-2009" development plan aimed to address these
challenges. The Government plan, summarized in Annex 1, was articulated in three main
accelerating broad-based growth; (ii)
improving equity and building human capital;
pillars: (i)
and (iii)
enhancing security and reducing vulnerability. When financing from the multilaterals
failed to receive approval from the National Assembly, the Government sought and secured
alternate sources o f financing that did not require a qualified majority in Congress (e.g., the
issuance o f short-term bonds or reliance on the Pension Trust or bilateral suppok in the form o f
grants) to implement i t s development plan albeit at a slower pace and at a higher cost than
anticipated.
The Government development plan was adjusted in 2008 to face the social impact of the
food and o i l price crisis as well as the economic impact of the global crisis. El Salvador's
strategy to protect vulnerable households from the impact o f high commodity prices relied on the
expansion o f the existing safety net, reduction o f import tariffs for selective agricultural goods,
support for agricultural production, and increases in transport subsidies. The Government also
strengthened the monitoring o f the financial sector to be able to react to any potential problem in
the banking sector in the context o f the global financial crisis, and negotiated access to long-term
multilateral financing. Multilateral support came as a package including a US$SOO million
precautionary Standby Agreement from the IMF, a US$500 million budget support loan and a
US$400 million operation under the Liquidity Program for Growth Sustainability from the
IDB, and a US$450 million Public Finance and Social Sector Development Policy Loan (DPL)
from the World Bank.
Results achieved and Progress towards Country Development Goals
&ogress towards Country Development Goals

Although political developments during the CAS period weakened the Government's ability to
advance i t s policy agenda in the National Assembly, El Salvador made much progress in
achieving country development goals which remain relevant today.

The macroeconomic environment improved between 2005 and 2008. The Government
maintained a sound macroeconomic framework during the original CAS period, and over the
period 2005-2009 economic growth steadily improved reaching 4.2 percent in 2006 and
4.7 percent in 2007. Although slightly below the Central American average, the economy was
growing at double its historical levels in the period 2005-2007. This improvement reflects an
increase in broad economic activity since the end o f 2005, driven by stronger performance in the
tourism, non-traditional agriculture, construction, financial and transport sectors. Foreign direct
Page I 36

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

investment and non-traditional exports also showed positive trends. Some progress was also
made in stabilizing the non-financial public sector debt through reducing spending and
increasing tax revenues. Notwithstanding progress in structural reforms and sound
macroeconomic management, growth decreased to 2.5 percent in 2008, reflecting a decline in
export performance, a tightening o f domestic credit markets and a slowdown in remittances and
foreign direct investment, due to the global financial crisis.

El Salvador’s relatively strong economic performance was accompanied by important
socioeconomic progress and reductions in poverty (from 43.6% in 2001 to 35.5% in 2007).
Access to basic services, including safe water and sanitation has increased; and core health
outcomes, such as l i f e expectancy, infant and child mortality, and child nutrition have all
improved. In several areas, including in basic education, infant mortality, and access to potable
water, the gaps between the poor and the non-poor have also declined over the period. The
Government also designed and implemented a national strategy for a more effective social
protection program which targeted poor households in rural areas.
El Salvador continued to make progress in its governance agenda, particularly in the
public sector through improvements in public financial management and control tools.
According to a recent Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment,
P F M functions in El Salvador are reasonably well-developed and rank above the L A C regional
average. During the CAS period further progress was also made in strengthening internal
controls through the expansion o f the Integrated Financial Management System (SAFI). El
Salvador’s ranks relatively well in Doing Business (#72 in 2009 DB up from #77 in 2008 DB).
W h i l e indicators related to Starting a Business improved significantly, in some areas ratings have
remained stagnant and more work may be needed.

Overview of Results Delivered by the CASprogram
In terms o f World Bank contribution, as discussed in paragraph 5, a substantially revised World
Bank program and outcomes were established in the CAS Progress Report to respond to
developments on the ground and the inability to lend in the new political environment. The CAS
Completion Report finds the results were satisfactory for all three pillars, with stronger results in
Pillars Iand 111. The following sections provide an assessment o f progress in each o f the three
pillars. Specific indicators and further detail on CAS outcomes and progress towards long-term
development goals are included in Annex 2.
Pillar I:Accelerating Broad-based Growth and Increasinp EmDlovment

The Country Development Goal under the first pillar was to provide a foundation for an
accelerated broad-based growth path by fostering trade openness, improving the investment
climate, and maintaining a sound macroeconomic framework. The Government achieved all the
CAS outcomes under this pillar. However, the expected growth and employment benefits have
been overtaken by the effects o f the global financial crisis.
Over the CAS period significant progress was made on the trade and investment climate
fronts. El Salvador was the first country in Central America to begin full implementation o f the
DR-CAFTA Treaty in mid-2006. The CAS outcomes in this area were the approval by the

Page I 37

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

National Assembly o f the package o f legal amendments required to ensure consistency with DRCAFTA provisions in 2005, and the March 2006 ratification o f the DR-CAFTA. Similarly, El
Salvador has greatly improved i t s overall investment climate by simplifying regulations and
facilitating most critical requirements to start and close businesses, access financing, and enforce
contracts. Both CAS outcomes in this area were exceeded, Le., the cost to start a business as a
percentage o f income per capita f e l l from 128 percent in 2004 to 49.6 percent in 2009, and the
number o f days needed to start a business fell from 115 days to 17 days. The “El Salvador
EJciente” program led by the Presidency Office was probably one o f the critical elements
contributing to these results, as well as the passage o f new commerce-related legislation.
The country’s traditionally sound macroeconomic management was maintained in recent
years. Until El Salvador was hit by the global crisis in mid-2008, the country was on track to
achieve the CAS outcomes. The Government made significant progress in reducing the NonFinancial Public Sector (NFPS) deficit and in stabilizing NFPS debt ratio as percentage of GPD,
primarily through implementation o f the fiscal reform package approved in 2004 that led to an
increase in tax revenues o f 1 percent o f GDP between 2005 and 2007 (although tax collection
declined in 2008 as a result o f the crisis) and the elimination o f early retirement provisions to
improve the sustainability o f the public pensions system.
Moreover, recognizing the challenges associated with its unfavorable debt service profile,
El Salvador took steps to improve its public debt management capacity. Progress was
achieved in the development o f the cash-flow simulation model and scenario analysis and in
design o f a preliminary debt management strategy.
World Bank support under Pillar I : Progress towards achieving CAS outcomes under
Pillar I was satisfactory. The Bank supported the Government’s impressive record in Pillar I
through a mix o f analytical work, development policy lending, ongoing investment lending (e.g.,
Public Sector Modernization Project) and grant-supported technical assistance. The DPL series
underpinned by important analytical work (CEM, PER, Regional ICA, FSAP) contributed
substantially to progress achieved under this Pillar. Although funds for DPL I1 were never
approved by the Congress resulting in cancellation o f the loan, i t s triggers were completed. DPL
I11 was halted prior to Board approval, however, i t s preparation contributed to policy dialogue
with the authorities. As new lending came to a standstill, the Bank remained engaged through the
preparation o f the ROSC on accounting and auditing and the implementation o f several grants
(REDI, IDF and a WBI/BNPP grant). In addition, the Bank provided technical assistance based
on the 2005 diagnostic “Needs Assessment o f Public Debt Management and Domestic Debt
Market Development”, including help in the establishment o f a debt management office. Due to
i t s continued engagement with the authorities, the Bank was able to respond quickly to requests
for budget support as the effects o f the global financial crisis rocked El Salvador. Lending
resumed in January 2009, to support the Government’s goal o f maintaining macro stability
through the implementation o f a two-tranche Public Finance and Social Sector Development
DPL.

Page I 38

E l Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

Pillar I
I
:
Improving:Eauitv through Building Human CaDital and ExuandinPAccess to Basic
Infrastructure Assets and Market

The second pillar o f the Government’s plan aimed to achieve universal primary education and
improve access to secondary education, improve access to basic health services in targeted areas,
and improve land tenure security and land transactions. The Government achieved all the
outcomes linked to health service delivery and partially achieved the CAS outcomes for
education. l7

El Salvador has a strong history o f education reforms and i s expected to meet the
Millennium Development Goals in the sector. The country has made good progress in
expanding access to both primary and lower secondary education, and the C A S outcomes have
been exceeded, with net primary enrollment rate and primary completion rate both standing at
97.7 percent in 2007.’’ At the secondary level, coverage i s s t i l l an issue as only 58.6 percent o f
children now attend secondary education (a 10 percent increase from the 2003 ratio). The
Government i s addressing this problem through an innovative program, “EDUCAME”, which
aims to provide secondary education to young people who have abandoned the formal education
system and are part o f the labor force. Further challenges will need to be addressed, however,
with respect to equity, quality and efficiency both in primary and secondary education. Progress
in the education sector was achieved through the implementation o f the Government’s landmark
education strategy: “Plan 2021 ”.
Progress was also achieved in terms of quality and access to health services. Recent
information f i o m household surveys indicates that the quality o f health services provided by the
in terms o f CAS outcomes related to
systems as a whole has improved ~ 1 i g h t l y . lSimilarly
~
expanding coverage and quality o f health services to the most vulnerable, coverage in poor
targeted areas was extended to 635,805 people, and access to basic healthcare was improved
through the rehabilitation or reconstruction o f several main hospitals. The Government achieved
this progress through the creation o f a Health Sector Fund to improve health coverage, funded by
excise taxes on cigarettes, beer, alcoholic beverages, and guns and by extending coverage o f
essential health and nutrition services through a targeted community-based outreach approach.
This approach was successful in covering the country’s poorest municipalities using the same
targeting criteria as the conditional cash transfer program Red Solidaria.
World Bank support under Pillar 11: Bank support to the Government’s CAS
achievements under Pillar I1 was moderately satisfactory; while highly relevant, the impact
o f support was more limited than envisioned. The Government highly valued the technical
expertise brought into the preparation o f the new operations (Secondary Education and Land
Administration 11) and secured alternate financing to implement them when IBRD lending
became unavailable, while the Bank remained engaged in the education sector through technical
l7 The Original CAS also supported land tenure security under this Pillar. Although the Government continued to
advance on this agenda, the Bank-financed loan included in the CAS was cancelled and so the Bank program as
revised in the Progress Report no longer included support for outcomes in this area.
Source: MINED, Ministry o f Education.
Source: Human Development for Poverty Reduction in El Salvador AAA: Income Vulnerabilities and Poverty in
El Salvador

Page I 39

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

assistance and non-lending activities. The Bank also continued supervising the Earthquake
Emergency Recovery and Health Services Extension project which contributed to expanding
health access to a half-a-million people primarily through support to a target community-based
approach and by advancing on the reconstruction or rehabilitation o f several key hospitals. The
Bank also produced a study on HIV/AIDS and a regional study o f Health Strategies and
Reforms.
Pillar III:Enhancinp Security and Reducinp Vulnerability

Under Pillar 111, the Government aimed to improve governance, reduce vulnerability, provide
better environmental protection, and reduce crime and violence. Remarkable progress was
achieved in the design and implementation o f social protection programs. Progress was also
observed in the other six areas supported by the CAS, albeit more modest. Outcomes were
partially achieved in four o f these six areas and there was some progress toward the outcomes in
areas o f developing environmental assessment capacity and regional catastrophic insurance
program.

El Salvador has continued to improve its overall governance framework for the public
sector by further developing and improving its public financial management and control
tools. In terms o f CAS outcomes, the Integrated Financial Management System (SAFI)
continued to be expanded and according to a recent Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability (PEFA) assessment, 95 percent o f central government expenditures are being
recorded, accounted and controlled according to international Performance Measurement
Framework (PFM) standards, just short o f the CAS goal o f reaching all public sector entities.
Progress was also achieved on the public procurement front, where the Government
implementedthe state-of-the-art public procurement dissemination tool COMPRASAL. This tool
has allowed enhanced transparency and credibility o f public sector performance with respect to
an area perceived as vulnerable to mismanagement and corruption.

The Government’s main vehicle in order to expand opportunities to vulnerable groups has
been the expansion o f the Red Solidaria program. Red Solidaria was launched in 2005 as a
conditional cash transfer program targeted to households with children living in the country’s
poorest municipalities and now covers about 85,000 households. An independent evaluation
found that the program i s among the best in the region, along with programs in Brazil and Chile.
In terms o f CAS outcomes, approximately 500,000 people were pulled out o f poverty, primarily
in rural areas. The expansion o f Red Solidaria in rural areas has been accompanied by significant
increases in the availability o f public health and education services, thereby facilitating access to
and, utilization of, these services. The challenge for El Salvador moving forward will be to
maintain the gains achieved in recent years, to expand the Red Solidaria program in rural areas,
and to design specific interventions targeted to the urban poor.
Environmental protection remains a challenge in El Salvador. The country suffers from
significant environmental degradation which has led to poor water resource management as well
as loss o f biodiversity and natural resources. Developing a national environmental policy and
strategy and consolidating the regulatory and legal framework for environmental management

Page I 4 0

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

were high priorities for the Government at the onset o f the CAS. Some progress was made
toward the CAS outcome o f a tested strategy for protected area consolidation; 3,100 hectares o f
protected areas were legalized, including all remaining subtropical dry forest remnants in the
region.

On the disaster risk management front, the Government has made significant progress in
improving its ability to manage disasters through some key measures, including (i)
appointing
one single entity, the Ministry for Environment and Natural Resources (MARN) to oversee the
national policy for risk prevention and reduction; (ii)
including environmental risks and disasters
in the National Environmental Law regulation, and (iii)
improving prevention and management
o f environmental risk and degradation through the formulation o f a land development plan (Plan
Nacional de Ordenamiento y Desarrollo Territorial). Still, the country’s exposure to natural
disasters remains a significant threat to economic and social development. The creation o f a
regional catastrophic insurance program, the specific outcome supported by the CAS, was not
achieved. As questions began to emerge about the feasibility o f a catastrophe insurance program
for Central America, the scheme evolved into a flagship program to create the Central American
Probabilistic Risk Assessment tool (CAPRA). Developed in partnership with other multi-lateral
agencies, CAPRA i s an innovative Bank knowledge product that uses open-source information
to create a comprehensive approach to risk management. CAPRA i s a multi-hazard disaster risk
analysis and communication tool which supports the decision-making process in risk reduction,
public and private investments, emergency management, and financial risk transfer strategies. It
i s extremely relevant for El Salvador and could serve as the basis for developing a national
catastrophe risk insurance program.
Crime and violence continue to pose serious risks to El Salvador’s economic and social
development, as they do in most Central American countries. Heavy-handed anti-gang
policies were put into law in 2003 and 2005 (“mano dura”). Their limited longer-term impact
made way for a broader set o f policy interventions beginning in 2007, including improving
collection o f data on crimes, convictions and incarcerations to inform policy-making, efforts to
professionalize the courts and the police and activities to address underlying socioeconomic
factors. The potential impact o f these measures has been overtaken by the economic and social
effects o f the global financial crisis. So while a consensus had been reached on priorities for
tackling crime and violence problems, this issue will have to be taken up again in the new
context. Crime and violence will likely continue to be a key challenge, not just for El Salvador
but for the Central American region as a whole, and more specific activities could be considered
in a new CAS. The regional Crime and Violence Policy Options Study which i s under
preparation by the Bank i s designed to inform national dialogues on crime and violence.
World Bank support under Pillar 111: Bank support to the Government’s CAS
achievements under Pillar I11 was moderately satisfactory. As was the case for Pillar 11, Bank
support was highly relevant, but i t s impact was more limited than expected. Most notably, the
Bank was a key partner in the design and implementation o f the Social Protection (Red
Solidaria) program, providing support for institutional design and sustainability, sharing
international best practice on similar conditional cash transfer efforts in other countries and
supporting the development o f an ongoing impact evaluation effort to allow for recalibration o f
the program as needed. The Bank contributed to progress in the area o f governance primarily

Page 1 41

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

through DPL Iand DPL 11, and through the Public Sector Reform and Judicial Modernization
projects. Some progress was made through the implementation o f the Protected Areas
Consolidation and Administration Project (PACAP), a GEF grant aimed at Strengthening El
Salvador’s Natural Protected Areas System, prioritizing conservation efforts, and addressing land
tenure and sustainable development within pilot protected areas to preserve globally important
biodiversity.
The relationship with the Government was also maintained through various analytical works
(CPAR, CEA, etc.). Lending resumed in early 2009 in the form o f a new DPL which, in addition
to addressing fiscal issues, supports the Government’s efforts to expand opportunities for
vulnerable groups and expand coverage o f targeted social protection.
Partners and Other Donors

IFC
IFC has focused attention on Central America more closely by opening local offices and
assigning investment staff to the region in the last year. This has led to the development o f a
substantial pipeline o f new transactions in the food processing, retail, financial institutions, real
estate development, manufacturing, and renewable energy sectors with country and regional
perspectives. Financial markets and infrastructure investments w i l l be o f strategic importance
going forward. IFC has also opened an Advisory Services office in San Salvador. W h i l e only
two projects were committed during this CAS period, El Salvador has benefitted from regional
projects, particularly in the financial and transport sectors geared towards strengthening regional
integration. IFC portfolio detail i s available in Annex 6.

other PartnersDonom

As mentioned above, to implement programs originally supported by cancelled Bank loans
(2006-2007), the Government mobilized alternative funding sources including grants from
bilateral donors. Indeed the Red Solidaria program was financed in part with grants from the
European Union and Luxembourg. Similarly, a significant inflow from the United States
Millennium Challenge Corporation supported other investment projects. CABEI also provided
funding to contribute to the implementation o f World Bank operations that were cancelled. More
recently, the IMF, IDB and the World Bank put together (paragraph 10) a complementary
financial package to support the country’s economic strategy to cope with the adverse effects o f
the global financial crisis. For example, the IMF intervention sought to provide a contingent line
o f liquidity to the Central Bank. Similarly the IDB operation under the Liquidity Program for
Growth Sustainability window sought to provide liquidity to the private sector by facilitating
productive sector access to financial resources. Finally, the Bank’s D P L and the parallel IDB’s
budget support operation were designed to provide liquidity to the Ministry o f Finance. Effective
collaboration among multilateral institutions in delivering this package was welcomed and
acknowledged by Government authorities.
Important exogenous factors affecting the CAS outcomes
Political developments weakened the Government’s ability to advance its policy agenda in
the National Assembly as both the 2004 and the 2006 mid-term elections intensified the

Page I 4 2

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

division o f power in the Assembly and provided the main opposition party with veto powers over
certain decisions such as foreign loans. The opposition blocked new foreign borrowing between
September 2006 and June 2007, forcing the Government to use alternative financing vehicles
such as trust funds (Fideicomisos). On the economic front, the global economic turmoil and
the slowdown o f the U.S. economy have affected El Salvador’s expected growth rates (2008
and 2009) and negatively impacted poverty outcomes.
Borrower Performance

,

The Government’s development plan, “Safe Country 2004-2009” was ambitious and during
the almost five years o f implementation o f its plan, the Administration worked to establish
the conditions to accelerate economic growth and decrease poverty levels. Owing to i t s good
performance and despite the difficult political context, the Government achieved progress
towards the country development goals, which the CAS supported, under all three strategic
pillars o f i t s development plan, exceeding targets in some cases.
The Government’s strong ownership o f the design and outcomes o f the plan “Safe Country
2004-2009’’ lead to the achievement o f several key indicators established under the various
CAS objectives, effectively demonstrating the positive performance o f the Borrower as well
as its commitment to achieving its medium-term development goals. More specifically, the
Borrower completed actions and policies originally agreed upon in the development plan
supported by the CAS, such as the implementation o f the fiscal reform package approved in
2004, the elimination o f early retirement provisions to improve sustainability o f the public
pensions, and the implementation o f the action plan to improve tax administration.
The Government’s failure to obtain congressional approval o f loans from multilateral
agencies had a serious negative impact on the implementation o f the lending program. To
i t s credit, however, the Government was able to secure alternate sources o f financing to
implement projects, and, together with World Bank management decided to maintain a policy
dialogue through other instruments, such as technical assistance, analytical work and grants.

Bank Performance (Moderately Satisfactory)
Design of the Country Assistance Strategy and Progress Report
The CAS and CAS Progress Report design was appropriate and relevant. The Strategyclosely aligned with the Government’s “Safe Country 2004-2009” development plan and i t s
three pillars-was amply discussed with the Government and other stakeholders who engaged
early in the process. These early discussions improved the CAS design and set the basis for good
implementation. A critical decision was the inclusion o f the DPL series, which addressed
emerging challenges, particularly with regards to macro stability and fiscal consolidation. The
Progress Report laid out the changes in strategic direction and revisions to the Results Matrix.
I n light o f the evolving Salvadoran political context, the CAS specific outcomes were
adjusted to respond to developments on the ground and the inability to lend in the new
environment. The Bank emphasized continued support to ongoing operations as well as
proactive and innovative non-lending activities to maintain the Bank’s engagement on key issues

Page I43

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

on the Government’s development agenda and provide a foundation for possible future lending
should opportunities open up. Such opportunity did open up in the second half o f 2008, when
the Government requested new lending in the form o f Development Policy Lending to cope with
the developing economic downturn. While this DPL had not been planned in the original CAS,
i t s objectives were consistent with the three pillars o f the Government’s development plan and
the CAS.

Risk Idenitjkation
The CAS identified three sources o f r i s k s that could impact program implementation,
namely: possible political gridlock, the threat o f natural disaster, and a deteriorating external
environment which could forestall needed growth. While the country did not experience any
devastating natural disaster during the CAS period, the other two potential risks did materialize.
Political gridlock led to the cancellation o f five World Bank loans, and the ongoing global
slowdown has impacted El Salvador. Although the risk o f political gridlock had been
anticipated, the Bank did not f i l l y appreciate the extent o f the risk, and therefore did not include
appropriate mitigation measures at the program and project levels. This i s the primary reason for
the ‘‘Moderately Satisfactory” rating on World Bank performance.

World Bank Engagement with the Government and beyond
Given the cancellation o f several operations, Bank management opted to remain engaged in
El Salvador through: (i) the continued implementation o f ongoing projects, which, in some
cases meant allowing some operations to go beyond their normal life-span thus increasing
the number o f overage projects in the portfolio, and (ii)the development o f non-lending
activities. Engagement through proposed non-lending activities was welcomed not only by the
Government, but also by a myriad other groups, who supported the presence o f the Bank in El
Salvador. For example, the Salvadoran Foundation for Economic and Social Development
(FUSADES), an influential and well-regarded think-tank, expressed i t s interest in working
jointly with the Bank, especially on analytical activities addressing transparency, crime and
violence, poverty and quality o f public expenditures. The value added o f World Bank work,
especially i t s innovative project designs and policy advice in critical areas such as economic
growth and fiscal management was highly regarded by the Government. Last but not least, the
presence o f a local office in San Salvador has been a key factor in maintaining a dialogue with
the authorities and engaging other stakeholders, including the opposition party, opinion-makers,
representatives o f multilateral organizations and civil society on the ground.

IBRD Lending
During the CAS period, the Bank approved seven operations, including three DPLs for
US%650million and four investment operations for US%151million. Two o f these seven
operations (the DPL I and the Public Finance and Social Sector DPL) were actually
implemented, the latter s t i l l ongoing. Five operations were canceled by the Bank as they failed
to reach effectiveness within the expected timeframe, due to extreme polarization in the
Salvadoran Congress. Given this setback in the Bank’s program, two operations planned in the
original CAS (the DPL I11 and the SME Participation in CAFTA) were dropped, and the
Modernization o f the State was postponed to the next CAS period.

Page I 44

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

Development Policy Lending
The approved DPLs have been an appropriate instrument to support El Salvador’s
development strategy and priorities. Indeed a Quality Assurance Review (QAR) rated the first
DPL as “highly satisfactory”, noting that the program responded to the Government’s policy
agenda, was timely and took into account the political cycle, focused on key issues, and brought
analytical depth highly valued by the Government and other stakeholders. Quality-at-Entry,
Quality o f Supervision and Overall Bank Performance were rated “highly satisfactory” in IEG’s
Implementation Completion Report. Yet, the difficulty faced by the Executive in obtaining
Congressional support for external loans impacted the DPL program. D P L I I , aimed at
addressing fiscal issues and strengthening the international trade and business environment, was
canceled and DPL I11 was dropped. Despite the cancellation o f DPL 11, the Government
advanced the implementation o f all policy actions agreed under that operation. As for the Public
Finance and Social Sector DPL, it has been critical to maintaining a fluid dialogue with the
authorities at a time o f economic turmoil, while supporting continuity o f the institutional and
social sector program and assisting with fiscal needs.
DPLs prepared during the CAS period were closely aligned with Government policies and
underpinned by a substantial body o f analytic work carried out by the Bank in partnership with
the Government o f El Salvador. The programmatic DPL approach took into account the lessons
learned from past operations in El Salvador and the latest thinking on budget support for wellperforming countries such as El Salvador. The DPL instrument was new and the Salvador DPL I
was the very first DPL ever approved by the World Bank Board. DPL 11, aimed at addressing
fiscal issues and strengthening the international trade and business environment, was supported
by extensive work done by the Bank and findings set forth in the CEM, PER, DR-CAFTA
studies, as well as the Investment Climate Assessment. Despite the cancellation o f the loan, the
Government advanced the implementation o f all policy actions agreed under the first and second
DPL operations.

Page I45

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

Policy and InstitutionalReforms supported by DPL series and related AAA
Area o f Action

Macroeconomic
Stability an'd
Fiscal
Consolidation

DPL I
0 Implementation
o f the fiscal
reform package
approved in
2004
.
Elimination o f
early retirement
provisions to
improve
sustainability o f
the public
pensions system

DPL I1
Increase o f excise taxes
approved by the Assembly
and later successfully
implemented
Issue budget formulation
policy for 2006 consistent
with a NFPS deficit target
o f 2.3% o f GDP
Issuance o f new rules on
loan classification,
provisioning and credit risk
administration consistent
with international best
practices

DPL I11
0 Banks began
implementation o f
new rules on loan
classification,
provisioning and
credit risk
administration
0 NFPS deficit at 3%
o f GDP for 2005

AAA
CEM
PER
FSAP

A two-tranche Public Finance and Social Sector Development Policy Loan (DPL) for US$450
million, not planned under the Bank program, was approved by the World Bank on January 22,
2009. The two-tranche approach was particularly effective in both facilitating discussion and
consensus in Congress as both major parties were interested in easing the fiscal situation for the
upcoming administration, and protecting continuity in the implementation o f critical actions and
policies openly discussed with the two key parties. This ongoing loan is intended to support the
Government's program for addressing fiscal and related public finance management issues and
for maintaining and/or enhancing the social gains achieved over the past decade. This new
financing package allowed the Government to reasonably address liquidity problems in 2008 and
2009, which contributed to the achievement o f CAS outcomes.
Investment Lending

The long effectiveness delays experienced with all operations approved under the CAS
contributed to Unsatisfactory Implementation Progress (IP) ratings, and subsequent
cancellation o f several operations. Performance indicators are available in Annex 7. All
investment operations implemented during the CAS period were designed and approved under
the previous CAS. Three operations suffered implementation challenges (the Public Sector
Modernization (closed in 2007), and the ongoing Judicial Modernization, and Hospital
Reconstruction and Health Services). These challenges stemmed primarily from overly
ambitious objectives and complex designs. The Bank intensified supervision as issues arose and
in most cases implementation recovered.
The Judicial Modernization project is expected to reach partial results. The Hospital
Reconstruction and Health Services project will likely receive an extension and an assessment o f
project achievements will be provided in the context o f the Implementation Completion Report.
However, the significant implementation delays this operation has suffered point to some early
as this project finances construction o f several hospitals, more intensive supervision
findings: (i)
furthermore, this project
and greater technical expertise would have helped implementation; (ii)
has been susceptible to political interference and changing political priorities which have
Page I 46

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

hindered implementation. This type o f risk, including mitigation measures, should be better
reflected in future operations.
Quality-at-Entry. IEG evaluated five o f the seven operations delivered and rated Quality-atEntry satisfactory in all cases (two “satisfactory”, two “moderately satisfactory” and one “highly
satisfactory”). Detail i s available in Annex 7.
Quality o f Bank Supervision. Six lending operations were under implementation at the onset o f
the CAS, o f which two are ongoing (the Hospital Reconstruction and Health Services and the
Judicial Reform). The other four closed during the CAS period, together with the DPL I
approved in FY07. IEG rated the quality o f Bank Supervision satisfactory on all five operations.
Furthermore, IEG rated Overall Bank Performance “Satisfactory” for four out o f the five
operations while a fifth one was rated “Moderately Satisfactory” rating. Detail i s available in
Annex 7.

AAA and Economic and Sector Work
The non-lending program carried out during the CAS period was critical to maintaining
the Bank’s engagement on key issues o f the Government’s development agenda. The AAA,
which was closely coordinated with other donors (e.g., the PER was prepared jointly with the
IDB), was also an important element behind the Bank’s rapid response to the Authorities’
request for budget support in the second half o f 2008. A concerted effort was made to enhance
dissemination o f analytical work during the run-up to the March 2009 elections, which was key
to informing the current Administration prior to i t s taking office in June 2009. The Bank, IDB
and IMF held a two-day workshop for the incoming President, members o f his transition team,
and members o f Congress, to discuss the country’s short- and long-term development challenges
and propose steps to address those challenges. Participants in the workshop appreciated the
analyses and best-practice examples brought to the table to help the new Administration work
through the costs and benefits o f proposed policy responses. The point was also made that such
independent analyses could be particularly helpful in building a consensus in Congress to
approve loans from multilaterals, a stumbling block in the past.

Economic and sector work conducted during the CAS period has been relevant and o f good
quality. Findings in all analytical work were used to inform current or planned Government
programs. Though at the time o f the CAS Progress Report new investment lending was not
under preparation, the Bank continued to provide technical support to project implementation
and policy dialogue in key sectors. In some cases (e.g., social protection, education) the Bank
supported programs financed with Government financing through non-lending TA.

Justification of Ratingfor Overall Bank PerfoPmance

Bank performance i s rated as Moderately Satisfactory based on the following:
While Bank management was proactive and engaged despite the difficult political
context in El Salvador to try and build consensus in Congress, the Bank could have
better estimated the extent o f the risk o f political polarization to the CAS program.

Page I 4 7

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

On the positive side: CAS (and Progress Report) design was appropriate and relevant
and Bank management remained flexible to adapt the outcomes as the ‘country political
context evolved.
The Bank was able to maintain a dialogue with the Borrower in spite o f limited
lending options, to provide a foundation for possible future lending;

The Bank provided extensive and timely support to the Government, both from Task
Managers and Management based in Washington, but especially through the
decentralized office in San Salvador;
Project preparation was solid, based on quality sector work, in close collaboration
with the Borrower. IEG rated Quality-at-Entry satisfactory on all five operations it
evaluated, that were approved under the CAS;
Quality-of-Bank Supervision was rated by IEG satisfactory on all five operations it
evaluated that closed under the CAS.
Sustainability of the CAS outcomes
The sustainability o f the CAS outcomes cannot be guaranteed given the variety o f risks
identified in the CAS and DPLs. These include:

Fiscal risks. El Salvador NFPS debt burden o f 39.2 percent o f GDP at end 2008 i s
expected to boost to above 45 percent o f GDP in 2009 and could reach 50 percent in
2010, increasing the country’s vulnerability to potential shocks as the fiscal space will
shrink accordingly.

.

.
.

Political risks. Despite the strong electoral mandate o f President Funes, a divided
Assembly could become an obstacle to certain reforms and the impasse experienced
during the CAS period in the approval o f foreign loans could reoccur.
External risks. The global recession could continue affecting negatively El
Salvador’s economy and delay the recovery.
Implementation risks. The arrival o f the FMLN to power for the first time since the
end o f the civil war could result in significant changes in line ministries, which, in
turn, could affect implementation capacity.
Natural disaster risks. The country has proven vulnerable to earthquakes and
hurricanes, which could hurt the performance o f the economy and negatively affect
CAS outcomes.

Lessons and Recommendations
Two types o f lessons may be drawn from this CAS program design and implementation:
strategic lessons (some are sector-specific) and operational lessons. Most o f these lessons
emerged from Implementation Completion Reports and Cancellation Notes, and from discussion
with task managers and staff whose assessments are the result o f direct experience or knowledge
o f our work in El Salvador.

Page I 4 8

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

Strategic lessons

The polarized political environment in El Salvador requires the Bank to identify areas o f
consensus across the board to define the appropriate mix o f lending and non-lending assistance.
Given the Salvadoran context, the Bank’s consultation process needs to be extended beyond the
executive branch to engage with the legislative branch and other stakeholders. B y the same
token, proactive local outreach effort and a strong communication strategy are critical.
Experience suggests that successful programs require continuous consultation to secure broad
support.

When considering Development Policy Lending in a highly politicized context like El Salvador,
the Bank could proceed with multiple-tranche operations (as in the case o f the Public Finance
and Social Sector DPL) to minimize the number o f Congressional approvals needed in the
context o f a DPL series, although clearly this line o f action would result in lower flexibility to
submitting several loans as a package for
adjust the program. Similarly there may be value in (i)
focusing project preparation on few larger operations as opposed
congressional approval, and (ii)
to many small operations.
In cases where the Borrower decides to use grant funds to finance projects prepared with Bank
assistance, Bank management needs to decide whether to remain engaged in project
implementation by offering non-lending technical assistance. In El Salvador, non-lending
technical assistance proved to be a viable alternative to lending.

Analytical work i s an extremely important tool to identify gaps in specific sectors, inform
stakeholders, build consensus around important development issues and prepare the groundwork
for future engagement in areas o f mutual interest. Experience in El Salvador has shown that the
Government greatly values the range o f global expertise the Bank can bring to complex
development issues.
In addition, experience in implementing this CAS program has shown that the Bank can have a
positive impact even in the absence o f a significant lending program. In terms o f results, many
CAS outcomes were achieved through technical assistance and analytical work.

Recommendations
Greater flexibility in the new CAS. The country faces a number o f challenges associated with
the global crisis including significant uncertainty as to the timing o f the recovery. Flexibility to
react to potential emerging but s t i l l unknown challenges appears to be critical in this context.
Need for effective dialogue and consensus-building, Although, recent agreements between the
Government and opposition parties regarding the country’s financing needs suggest that there
may be some space for collaboration and consensus on key issues, the new Administration will
face serious political and economic challenges in ensuring support for i t s future economic
policies. The need for more effective dialogue and consensus-building i s an urgent challenge,
which donors, including the World Bank, could help address by providing necessary technical
input to the economic debate.

Page I 4 9

El Salvador Country Partnership Strategy FY05-FY09- Completion Report

Sector-specific: Disaster Risk Management. Given the fiscal challenges Latin American
countries are facing as a result o f the global financial crisis, the possibility o f Development
Policy Lending with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT DDO) could be a costefficient option for El Salvador to strengthen its risk financing framework. Contingent loans such
as the C A T D D O provide a source o f immediately available liquidity during a state o f
emergency caused by a natural disaster, while allowing the country to pursue i t s development
programs during a catastrophe.
Sector-specific: Procurement Reform. Procurement reform i s complex and often unsuccessful
unless the appropriate tools are applied. Reforms can fall into the trap o f starting by tackling
structural change (Le., legal reform) rather than addressing non-structural changes. The new
CAS could benefit from the lessons learnt in Panama and Peru, two countries where procurement
reform has advanced significantly supported by just-in-time technical assistance from the Bank.
B y leveraging the banks international reach and knowledge base the policy dialogue was backed
up with high-level advice on how to modernize and reform the various components o f the public
procurement system. The CAS could highlight the importance o f a well-functioning public
procurement system in a modem state. The Bank’s role in providing technical advice will be
critical in this process.
Sector-specific: Land Administration. A pragmatic and incremental approach to legal reforms
i s often the best approach. The Land Administration Iproject envisaged support for key reforms,
some o f which turned out to be too ambitious, such as legislative changes. I t became clear that,
given the sensitivity o f land administration reform, flexibility and incremental learning and
experimentation was more effective to consolidate gains and move forward.

Operational lessons
Future operations in El Salvador should be designed based on an assessment o f the capacity
available in the country, and with due consideration o f the country’s political economy.
Complexity in design, particularly multiplicity o f implementing agencies, should be reduced to
the extent possible, and where it i s not, clear project implementation plans must be available
before the project becomes effective.
During the project preparation phase, the Bank’s team should elaborate an information and
communication strategy in order to engage with the country’s legislative branch o f and other
stakeholders, including local communities where appropriate.
Project management in complex political environments requires Bank Task Team Leaders
(TTLs) with a specific skills set encompassing negotiation, conflict resolution, and alliance
building abilities.
Building an adequate system o f Monitoring and Evaluation (including baseline data collection) i s
not only essential to assess progress but also to make effective mid-course corrections during
implementation as and when needed. M&E needs to be in place in advance o f implementation
and needs to include a focus on project impacts.

Page I 50

El Salvador CAS Completion Report ANNEX 1

Government Strategy “Safe Country 2004-2009”
Pillar I
Accelerating Broad-Based
Equitable Growth and Increasing
Employment

Building Human Capital and
Expanding Access to Basic
Infrastructure, Assets and
Markets

Vulnerability

Government Priorities

Ensuring sound macromanagement and fiscal
responsibility.
0 Deepening insertion in world
markets through regional
integration and trade.
Increasing productivity and
competitiveness through
improving the investment
climate and taking advantage of
technology and connectivity.
0 Generating employment and
opportunities by supporting
SMEs.
0 Improving market regulation
and supervision.
0

Modernizing education and
building country the knowledge
society.
0 Improving quality and
universal coverage of health
services.
0 Designing local and regional
strategies- focused on
expanding access to basic
infrastructure, promoting
agricultural diversificationand
facilitatingprivate sector
investment.
0 Strengthening family assets by
facilitating access to housing
and expanding land
administration and titling
efforts.
0

51

Making El Salvador a safe
through control and reduction
of violence.
0 Ensuring social and economic
rights of individuals and
businesses by strengthening
rule of law.
0 Modernizingpublic
administration and services, in
order to improve transparency
and efficiency o f resource use.
Promoting social cohesion and
stronger families through a
more effective social safety net
and improving quality of l i f e at
the local level.
Enhancingthe interest of future
generations by protecting the
environment.
0

I I”’

0

W X .

.

.

.

-0

8

g

.d

P

e,

a

43

0

g
m
Y

I

cd

e,
i

i

8
c

N

Y

d

3
a,

90

z

E .

El Salvador CAS Completion Report ANNEX 3

-

El Salvador Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries

CAS Plans
(February 2005)

Progress Report
(February 2008)

FY

Project

US%
(m)
Status

US%
(m)

2005

DPL I

100

Delivered FY05

100

Land Administration I1

40
5

Delivered but cancelled

Environmental Services Project
Subtotal

2006

D P L I1
Education Reform I 1
Social Protection and Local
Development
Ensuring SME Participation in CAFTA
Subtotal

2007

145

Delivered but cancelled
Subtotal

100
85

Delivered but cancelled

35
10

Delivered but cancelled

230

Delivered but cancelled

Dropped
Subtotal

D P L I11

100

Dropped

Modernization o f the State I1

10

Forwarded to FY 10

Subtotal

110

2009

100

Subtotal

0

0

Additional Actual Projects:
Public Finance and Social Sector D P L

450

Subtotal

0

4511

Total FY05-09

485

550

62

El Salvador CAS Completion Report ANNEX 4

-

El Salvador Planned Non-lendinn and Actual Deliveries
CAS Plans
(February 2005)

Progress Report
(February 2008)

FY
2005

Products
Investment Climate Assessment
CAFTA Regional Study
Shocks and Social Protection Study
ROSC (A+A)
PSIAs on Tax and Pension Reforms in CAFTA

Status
Delivered2005
Delivered2005
Delivered2006
Delivered2007
Delivered2005

2006

Recent Economic Developments in Infrastructure
Education Study (regional)
Corporate Social Responsibility Strategy
Country Environmental Analysis
Country FinancialAccountability Assessment Update
Health Strategy (regional)

Delivered2006
TA delivered 2009
Completed 2006
Actual
Completed 2007
Completed 2007
Additional Actual Products:
Poverty Assessment

2007

Additional Actual Products:

Country Procurement Assessment Review
Study on HIV/AIDS situation and
response

2008

2009

Progress Report Plans (February 2008)
Regional ICA Update
Public Debt Management Technical Assistance
Program
Regional Crime and Violence Study
Central America Social Services Delivery (regional)
Poverty Assessment Update
PER
Regional Hazard Risk Insurance Study*
CEM Update**

ComDletion ReDort (June 2009)
Completed 2009
Delivered2008
Underway (to be completed in FY 10)
Underway (to be completed in FY10)
Delivered2009
Underway (to be completed in FY10)
Dropped
Dropped ( 2 )
Additional Actual Products:
Policy Notes (completed in FY09)
CAPRA (to be comdeted in FY 10)

* The Regional Hazard Risk Insurance Study was replaced by the Central America Disaster Risk Strategy CAPRA
(to be completed in FYlO)
** The CEMupdate was replaced by Policy Notes (delivered in FY09)
63

El Salvador CAS Completion Report ANNEX 5

-

El Salvador Key Economic Indicators 2005-2009
(percentage o f GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Income and prices
GDP growth (?!change)
Inflation (end o f period % change)
Investment and savings
Gross domestic investment
Gross domestic savings
Consolidated public sector accounts
Total revenues and grants
Total tax revenues
Total expenditure
Primary balance
Overall balance
Public Sector Debt
Total debt
Balance of payments
Current account balance
Trade balance
Exports (including maquila)
Imports (including maquila)
Foreign direct investment
Remittances
Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (billions o f US dollars)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009*

3.1
4.3

4.2
4.9

4.7
4.9

2.5
5.5

-2.5
1.5

15.7
12.4

16.1
12.5

16.1
10.4

15.0
7.7

13.1
11.4

16.3
12.5
19.8
-1.3
-3.5

17.2
13.3
20.1
-0.5
-2.9

17.1
13.4
19.0
0.6
-1.9

16.9
13.0
19.9
-0.7
-3.1

15.7
12.1
20.8
-2.7
-5.1

42.0

41.9

39.1

41.2

47.5

-3.3
-17.2
20.2
-37.4
2.3
17.7

-3.6
-18.9
20.2
- 39.1
1.3
18.6

-5.5
-20.0
19.8
-39.8
7.0
18.1

-7.2
-19.9
20.8
-40.7
3.3
17.1

-1.8
-12.6
17.5
-30.1
0.4
15.4

17.1

18.7

20.4

22.1

22.2

* Projected
Source: Ministry o f Finance, Central Bank, IMF and World Bank staff estimates

64

El Salvador CAS Completion Report ANNEX 6

El Salvador CAS - I F C Portfolio

As o f M a y 2009, IFC had five active clients in El Salvador and an outstanding
balance o f $86.24 million. In Calendar Year 2008, IFC clients employed 5,880 workers
compared with 1,166 in C Y 2005. Payments to the government by IFC clients rose to
$8.5 million in C Y 2008, an increase o f 90% in the same time period. The number o f
SME loans saw an increase o f 80% to 24,000. The number o f microfinance loans posted
a rise o f 51%. Eighty percent o f transactions had high development outcomes in FY
2009. Financial institutions accounted for $64 million, or 57% o f the committed balance,
as o f June 30 2009. The balance o f the investments i s in air transportation, commercial
real estate, and a US$49,000 equity stake in a hand tools manufacturing company.
IFC has three clients in the financial services industry. Fundaci6n Calpiii i s a nonprofit organization that supports micro and small enterprises in all sectors o f the
economy. IFC lent Calpia $10 million in 2004. Average loan sizes are $1,000 equivalent.
Up to 20,000 individuals benefit directly or indirectly from access to credit provided by
IFC through i t s facility to Calpia. In 2004, IFC lent Banco Agricola $50 million to
promote primary mortgage lending and strengthen its balance sheet by providing scarce
long-term funding. This has enhanced i t s ability to offer medium- and long-term funding
to companies in key sectors, complementing the government’s effort to help SMEs and
export-oriented corporates benefit from regional trade liberalization. A $3 0 million loan
in 2005 to Banco Uno to finance i t s regional expansion was prepaid when the bank was
sold to a foreign investor.
8

IFC has supported mortgage lender L a Hipotecaria in i t s primary business o f
providing long term mortgages for the low and middle income segment o f the residential
mortgage market in Panama and El Salvador. By providing long term mortgages, the
client can make house purchases more affordable, particularly for lower income
consumers.
In the infrastructure sector, IFC committed $30 million in 2005 to TACA, a
Salvadorian airline to expand i t s network, and so provide safe air travel service to and
fiom Central America. This i s needed to facilitate regional economic growth.

In the commercial real estate sector, IFC supported Metrocentro with a $25
million loan in 2004 to anchor urban development in a strategic development zone,
develop a modern retailing industry, and creating small business opportunities and jobs.
8

El Salvador has a history o f sound economic policymaking. It has well-managed
banks and corporations which have already taken strategic positions in neighboring
countries. However, the local and regional economies are heavily exposed to the U S
either through exports or worker remittance flows. IFC i s preparing to support its current
clients and seek new opportunities to help viable companies survive the crisis and
maintain employment.
I

65

El Salvador C A S Completion Report ANNEX 7

Portfolio Indicators and IEG Ratings

- Investment tending

Ef Salvador

Net C o n r n Amt

160 X I

610 sf

119.31

76.5

.............................

Undisb 831 31 N

I

192.0 I

208.9 I

748.0 I

IEG - Quality-at-Entry Ratings

IEG - Quality of Supervision Ratings

SV SECONDARYEOU

SV PUBLIC SECT0

66

Annex 3. Public Consultations on the CPS

The Bank held a series o f meetings to obtain feedback on the Bank’s proposed program in El
Salvador during the third week in August, 2009. A total o f about 50 participants from NGOs,
think tanks, universities, the media, private sector representatives and members o f Congress
participated in the consultations in San Salvador.

A PowerPoint presentation was prepared and delivered to describe the Bank’s program which
includes operations in response to the Government’s Anti Crisis Plan as well as the country’s
longer-term development challenges. Participants were supportive o f the focus o f the Bank
program and the Bank’s role in support o f the country. At the same time, participants raised
some issues and priorities for the Bank to consider. Below is a summary o f the views expressed
by different stakeholders during the meeting.
The current economic crisis. The various participants broadly agreed with the development
challenges as described in the presentation, and supported the Bank’s program in response to the
current country context. Several groups o f stakeholders raised concerns about the impact o f the
crisis on unemployment and security in particular. Some suggested the crisis would be an
opportunity to create more efficient public policies for the medium- and long-term.

Several participants raised concerns regarding the fiscal situation and the implications for longerterm debt sustainability. Many suggested the need for fiscal reform and suggested the Bank’s
knowledge in this area could help. It will be important that the country move towards a more
sustainable debt trajectory in the near future.
Medium-term agenda. There were several discussions regarding the medium-term agenda,
including h o w to achieve higher rates o f growth and the need for economic development to
accompany social development. Some participants mentioned the positive role I F C could play in
the private sector. Other participants mentioned that more could be done to promote Public
Private Partnerships for example.

Many participants recognized there was scope to improve public finance management, including
the quality o f public spending and implementation o f enhanced procurement practices. There
was also broad support to enhance transparency and public access to information.

All stakeholders were particularly concerned about the increasing levels o f crime and violence in
El Salvador. While the Bank has conducted some analytical work in this area participants
suggested more could be done as this i s an issue o f critical importance to the National agenda.
Several stakeholders also raised the fact the Bank should continue to be active in Global Public
Goods such as the environment and climate change. These issues represent serious challenges
for El Salvador and should not be lost in the current focus on the economic crisis.
Instruments and Implementation. There were some questions raised regarding the role o f
Development Policy Loans (DPL) and the activities which it could finance. The Country
Manager explained the difference between investment and DPL lending, including that:
“Development policy lending funds are disbursed against satisfactory implementation o f the

67

development policy lending program, including compliance with tranche release conditions and
maintenance o f a satisfactory macroeconomic policy fiamework. The borrower commits not to
use development policy lending funds for ineligible expenditures. The Bank normally disburses
the loan proceeds into an account that forms part o f the country’s official foreign exchange
reserves (normally held by the central bank), and an amount equivalent to the loan proceeds i s
credited to an account o f the government to finance budgeted expenditures.” This was important
to clarify as some participants believed finds would be disbursed directly to Sector Ministries or
to finance expenditures which were not agreed within the budget.
There were some concerns raised regarding the current Government’s implementation capacity,
and the fact that there were significant delays in implementing the current Bank portfolio. There
i s a need to work with the new government to further build capacity, and the Bank i s well placed
to provide knowledge services, technical assistance and capacity building. This i s important for
the short term as well, as many o f the interventions identified in the Anti Crisis Plan represent
new activities which will need to be designed.
CPS Bank Program. Many participants agreed with the flexible nature o f the CPS, particularly
in light o f the current environment and given that a longer term National vision will need to be
developed.

There were no specific issues raised with the indicative projects mentioned for the outer years o f
the CPS. In fact, several participants supported a possible Urban Transport Project, and several
stakeholders mentioned the importance o f science and technology and in particular the idea o f a
National system to promote innovation.
Some stakeholders did suggest the possibility o f working with local governments directly. This
would also help communities to see tangible results o f the Bank’s financing in El Salvador.

Risks. Finally participants agreed with the risk related to the polarized political environment and
suggested more could be done to expand consultations during CPS implementation and promote
a political dialogue.
In response the Bank will work to continue to consult with various stakeholders regularly,
including in the preparation o f specific projects, and will incorporate to the extent possible
recommendations made during the CPS consultations meetings into the design o f the CPS.

Participants o f the CPS process were asked to complete a brief survey to solicit feedback. These
discussions were supplemented by a web-based consultation process. Most respondents found
the Bank had an important role to play in El Salvador.

68

Annex 4. Debt Sustainability Analysis

1.
The outlook on El Salvador’s medium-term macroeconomic prospects has deteriorated
since the last D S A was prepared in the context o f the Public Finance and Social Sector
Development Policy Loan. As a result debt dynamics have also changed. The revised debt
sustainability analysis in this Program Document i s based on the macroeconomic framework
developed by IMF staff for the Standby Program and Bank staff projections.
2.
The debt sustainability analysis (Table A.l) indicates that the public debt to GDP ratio is
expected to continue on an increasing path until 201 1, when it will reach 50.1 percent o f GDP
before starting to decline to reach 46.2 percent in 2014. This trajectory would be consistent with
a primary fiscal balance deficit averaging 1.5 percent o f GDP over 2009-2011, and a primary
balance surplus averaging .7 percent o f GDP over 2012-2014. The fiscal improvement after 2011
would be driven by both an expected better economic environment and the fiscal interventions o f
the Government (tax reform and rationalization o f subsidies). As for the trajectory o f the total
external debt, the revised macroeconomic framework assumes an average non interest current
account balance surplus o f 0.4 percent o f GDP over 2009-2014 and is consistent with stable debt
dynamics until 2011 (at about 44 percent o f GDP) before declining to 40.5 percent o f GDP in
2014.
Table A.l. Debt Sustainability Analysis
Projection
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

2014

Total External Debt (%of GDP)
Public Debt (YOo f GDP)

44.2
47.7

44.4
48.8

44.3
50.1

42.9
49.5

41.8
48.3

40.5
46.2

Key Assumptions
Real GDP growth (%)
Inflation (%, e-o-p)

-2.5
1.0

0.5
2.5

2.0
2.8

3.0
2.8

4.0
2.8

4.0
2.8

1.7
-2.9

0.5
-1.3

2.0
-0.3

3.0
0.3

4.0
0.9

4.0
1.0

5.9

6.5

6.4

6.4

6.3

6.3

-15.0
-23.0

2.8
6.6

6.5
6.0

7.0
6.8

7.4
8.5

8.1
8.5

1.2

-0.2

0.2

0.4

0.1

0.0

Growth o f real primary spending (% o f GDP)
Primary balance (% o f GDP)
Nominal interest rate on public debt (%)
Growth o f exports (US dollar, %)
Growth o f imports (US dollar, %)
Non-interest current account balance (% o f
GDP)

3.
Thus, even though the higher public debt levels in the revised D S A imply an increase in
the country’s vulnerabilities, in the absence o f a crisis scenario the medium-term public and
external positions o f El Salvador remain sustainable.

69

4.

There are, however, a number o f risks to the medium-term outlook associated with the
global situation, as well as with the ability o f the new administration to maintain macro stability
and push structural reforms in a very volatile environment. Table A 2 presents projected debt
dynamics under more pessimistic alternative scenarios:
o Under less optimistic growth scenarios with growth .5 percentage points over 2009-2014
lower than the one in the baseline (3.5 percent over 2008-2013) -scenarios A1 and B1-

the total external debt to GDP ratio would be about 1 percentage point o f GDP higher
than under the baseline scenario, whereas the public debt would be 2.5 percentage points
o f GDP higher than under the baseline scenario.
o Under tighter financial market conditions resulting in higher interest rates both for the
external and the public debt o f around .5 percentage points over 2008-2013 -scenarios
A 2 and €32-, projected debt indicators for 2014 would be .5 higher than under the baseline
scenarios for the external debt and 1.4 percent higher for the public debt.
o Under a more difficult external environment -scenario A3- resulting in a higher current
account deficit (-8 percentage points o f GDP), the total external debt to GDP ratio would
reach about 44.7 percent in 2014.
o Under a looser fiscal policy -scenario B3- with an average primary balance deficit o f .7
percent o f GDP over 2009-2014 rather than the assumed 0.4 percent o f GDP under the
baseline scenario, the public debt to GDP ratio would be in 2014 about 2 percentage
points o f GDP higher than under the baseline scenario.
o Scenarios projecting the impact o f contemporaneous shocks (albeit more moderate than
those in Al-A3 and Bl-B3) -scenarios A 4 and B4- would result in indicators for 2014 o f
43.3 percent o f GDP and 48.7 percent o f GDP for the external and public debt,
respectively.
o

Scenarios based o n key variables fixed at 10 year historical levels -scenarios A5 and B5would result in an external debt t o GDP ratio 2014 projection that is 2.3 percentage
points lower than under the baseline and in a 2014 public debt to GDP ratio that i s 1
percentage point higher than under the baseline.

70

Table A2.3. Debt Sustainability Analysis: Alternative Scenarios
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
External Debt Sustainability Analysis

.

A l . Real GDP growth i s baseline
minus 1/2 sad.
A2. Interest rate o n external debt i s
baseline plus 1/2 s.d.
A3. Non-interest C A B i s baseline
minus 1/2 s.d.
A4. Combination o f Al-A3 using 1/4
s.d. shocks
A5. K e y variables are at their 10 year
historical averages

2014

44.2

44.6

44.7

43.5

42.6

41.5

44.2

44.4

44.4

43.2

42.2

41

44.2

45.2

45.9

45.4

45.1

44.7

44.2

44.9

45.4

44.6

44.1

43.3

44.2

42.5

40.7

39.1

38.6

38.2

47.7

49.2

51.8

50.8

50.2

48.7

47.7

49.1

51.6

50.4

49.4

47.6

47.7

49.3

51.9

50.8

50

48.2

47.7

49.3

52.1

51.1

50.4

48.7

47.7

46.5

47.8

46.9

47.4

47.2

Public Debt Sustainability Analysis

B1. Real GDP growth i s baseline
minus 1/2 sad.
B2. Interest rate o n public debt i s
baseline plus 1 s.d.
B3. Primary balance i s baseline minus
1/2 sad.
B4. Combination o f B1-B3 using '/4
s.d. shocks
B5. K e y variables are at their 10 year
historical averages

71

4

3
3
3

3

$
N

9
W

2
00
VI

0

s
W
00

3
)9
3

In

m

8
z

Annex 6. External Partners in El Salvador

l-

Partner

Bilateral
S a h 2008)

-

JICA (2007)

10
-

MCC(2008-

56.4

X
-

X
-

X

X

I

X

X

X
I

I

46 1

I

X

Luxembur

EU (2007-2013)

X
X
-

OPS/WHO
UNDP
UNFPA
WFP

-'$500 I llion in

I
7 2010

73

X
-

CAS Annex A l - El Salvador at a Glance

El Salvador a t a glance

9/24/08

El
Salvador

Latin
Amenca
&Carib.

Lower
middle
income

6.9
21
13
60

563
20,421
12
70

3,437
35,513
10
42

29.5
2,850
4,840

3,118
5,540
9,320

6,485
1887
4,544

4.7
3.3

57
4.5

9.7
8.6

Povertyheadcountratio at$125aday(PPP,%)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality(par 1000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)

72
22
6

8
18
73
22
5

69
41
25

Adult literacy, male (%of ages 25 and older)
Adult literacy, female (%of ages 25 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (%of age group)
Gross primaryenrollment,female (%of age group)

82
79
113
IP

91
89
PO
16

93
85
112
139

Access to animprovedwatersource (%of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (%of population)

84
86

91
78

88
54

Key Development Indicators

Agedldrlbutlon, 2007

72007)
Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Populationgrowth (a
Urban population (%of total population)
GNI(Atlas method,US$ billions)
GNIpercapita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international S )
GDP growth (%)
GDP percapitagrowth (%)

1

a

5

10

15

5

10

15

prcent

( m o s t recent estimate, 2000-2007)

N e t A i d Flows

1980

1990

2000

U n d e r 4 mortality rate (per 1,000)

2007

/US%millions)
Net ODA and official aid
T o p 3donors (,n 2006)
Spain
Japan
United States

96

347

180

157

0
43

3
8
247

22
67
37

44
30
25

Aid (%Of GNi)
Aid percapita (US$)

2.8
21

7.4
60

14
29

09
23

l7.4
l7.O

24.0
47

2.3
3.2

49
40

10

10
130

10
130

10
90

I
I

I

1

1990

1995

2000

2006

OEl Salvador DLatln Amenca a t h e Canbbean

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per caplta (Oh)

Lo ng-Term Eco n o m Ic Trends
95

Consumer prices (annual %change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual %change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 130)

05

1980-90 1990-2000
2000-07
(average annual growth %j
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

4.6
3,574

Agnculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

51
4801

62
0'04

69
20,215

1.1
0.2

19
4.8

14
2.7

(%ofGDP)
774
27 2
22 1
55 3

0 5
316
24 7
57 9

0 7
29 0
22 1
60 3

-11
02
-0 1
07

12
51
52
40

27
23
24
29

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

7 18
14.0
0.3

68 9
99
0 9

87 9
132
139

93 4
111
6 2

08
01
22

53
28
71

33
17
25

Exports of goods and services
Imports o f goods and services
Gross savings

34.2
33.2
a.3

186
3 12
63

27 4
42 4
07

26 3
47 0
It4

-3 4
04

0 4
n6

49
49

Note: Figures in italics are for years otherthan thosa specified. 2007 data are preliminary. .,indicates data are not available.
a.Aiddataarefor2006.
Development Economics Development Data Group (DECDG)

74

El Salvador
Balance o f Payments and Trade
(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net tradein goods andservices

2000

2,963
4,947
-1975

2007

I

4,073
7,890
-3,877

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2007
Voice and amntablity
Pollboa stablity

Workers' remittances and
corn pensatio n of employees (receipts)

1765

3.776

Regulatoryquality

Current account balance
as a %of GDP

-429
-3.3

-11s
-5.5

Rule of law

Reserves, including gold

2,033

2,88

Control of curu@on

(%of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Taxrevenue
Current expenditure

P.1
xl.2
11.8

#.4
0.4
#.1

Overall surplusldeficit

-2.3

-2.3

25

0

02007
02000

Central Government Flnance

50

30
25

Source KaufmanMmey.Mastnm

Wodd Bank

Paved mads (%of total)
Fixediineandmobilephone
subscribers (per 1,000people)
High technology exports
(%of manufactured exports)

25

100

hrgher velu86 impybdtermtm$!s

Technology and Infrastructure

Highest marginal taxrate(%)
Individual
Corporate

75

Cwntry's percenble rank (&loo)

2000

2007

8.8

22

x15

6.0

2.8

81

82
1 4
19

E x t e r n a l D e b t a n d R e s o u r c e Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debtrelief(HIPC,MDRI)
Totaldebt (%of GDP)
Total debt service (%of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity(net inflows)

4,467
369

9,06
10 3

34.0
6.6

49.0
0 .1

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. maters)
Freshwaterwthdrawal (%of internal resources)

7.2

n3
0

204
0

CO2 emissions percapita (mt)

0.93

0.94

6.5

6.4

658

694

-

Agncultural land (%of land area)
Forest area (%of land area)
Nationally protected areas (%of land area)

-

GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Energyuse per capita (kg o f oil equivalent)

25.6

2,669

Short-tem
1230

4847 574

US$ millions

P r l v a t e S e c t o r D eve l o p m e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to starta business (%of GNipercapita)
Time required to register property(days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(%of managers surveyedwho agreed)
Crime
Anticompatitive o r informal practices
Stock market capitalization (%of GDP)
Bank capitalto asset ratio (%)

2000

2008

2000

..
..

n
49.6
31
2007

49.0
44.5

25.5
8.8

33.4
116

Note' Figures in italics areforyears otherthanthosespecified. 2007dataare preliminary
..indicates data are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics Development Data Group (DECDG)

75

9/24/08

Millennium Development Goals

El Salvador

with selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(esfirnateclosest to date sho wn, +?years)
G o a l 1: halve the rates f o r extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $125 a day (P PPI %of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (%of population)
Shareof income orconsumption to the poorest qunitile(%)
Prevalenceof mainutntion (%of childrenunder5)
G o a l 2: ensure that children are able t o complete p r i m a r y s c h o o l i n g
Pnmaryschool enrollment (net, %)
Pnmarycompletion rate (%of relevant age group)
Secondaryschool enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacyrate (%of people ages 15-24)
G o a l 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boy; in pnmaryandsecondalyeducation (Oh)
Women employed in the nonagnculturalsector (%of nonagnculturalemployment)
Proportion of seats held bywomen in national parliament (%)
G o a l 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1000)
Infant mortalityrate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-yearolds immunized,%)
G o a l 5: reduce maternal m o r t a l i t y by three-fourths
Maternal mortalityratio (modeled estimate, per 00,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (%of women ages 15-49)
G o a l 6: halt and begin t o reverse the spread o f HlVlAlDS and o t h e r m
Prevalenceof HN(%of populationages 15-49)
incidenceof tuberculosis (per 00,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)
G o a l 7: halve the proportion o f people without sustainable access t o
Access to an improvedwter source (%of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (%of population)
Forest area (Ohof total land area)
Nationally protected areas (%of total land area)
CO2 emissions (metnc tons per capita)
GDP perunit ofenergyuse(c0nstant 2005PPP $ perkgofoilequivaient)
G o a l 8: develop a global partnership f o r development
Telephone mainlines (per 0 0 people)
Mobile phone subscnbers (per 0 0 people)
Internet users (per 0 0 people)
Personal computers (per 0 0 people)

Education indicators (X)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 1,000 people)

100

125 1

100

75

75
50
50
25

2000

2002

2004

20W

25
0

0
1990

1995

2000

2006

2000

2002

2004

2006

-.O- Pnmary net enroiiment mtio
-Ratio

ofgirii to boys in pnmary &secondary
education

OEl Salvador OLatin Amenca

Note Figures initaiics are foryears otherthan thosespecified.

a the Canbbean

indicates dataare not available

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

76

OFixed t mobile subsonbers

Olntemet U S ~ R

9/24/08

-

C A S Annex B2 Selected Indicators o f IBRD Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date
9/18/2009

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation
a

Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2007

2008

2009

2010

4
6.2
25.0
2.6
25.0
2.6
8.3

3
6.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
34.2

4
5.6
25.0
2.9
25.0
2.9
56.9

4
5.9
25.0
2.9
25.0
2.9
11.5

no
660
165

no
325
108

no
277
92

no
310
91

26
793.7

Last Five
FYs
8
267.7

9.1
3.5

0.0
0.0

Since FY 80

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

77

-

CAS Annex B3 Base Case IBRD Program Summary
As of September 18,2009

Proposed IBRDllDA Base-Case Lending Program a
year

2010

Pro] ID.

Strategic
Rewards b
(H/M/L)
H
H
H

US$(M)

Fiscal Mgmt. and Public Sector Perf. TAL
Sustaining Social Gains
Income Support and Employability
Rural Infrastructure and Local Development
Overall Result

.78

20.0
100.0
50.0
80.0
250.0

,

lmplementation
b Risks
(H/ML)
M
M
H

-

CAS Annex B3 2 IFC Program, 2005 - 2009
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

50
50

0.25
0.25

0.70
0.70

0
0

10.10
10.10

40

100

100

0

100

60
100

100

100

0

100

Net Commitments bv Investment Instrument (%)
Equity
0
0
Loan
100
0
Guarantee & Risk Product
0
100
Total
100
100

0
0
100
100

0
0
0
0

0
50
50
100

Commitments (US$m)
Gross
Net**

Net Commitments bv Sector (%)
Financial Markets
Transportation &
Warehousing
Total

79

-

C A S Annex B4 Summary o f Non-Lending Services
As of September 18,2009

Product

Completion FY

Recent completions
Country Procurement Assessment Review
ROSC (A+A module)
Study on HIVIAIDS Situation and Response
Regional Study on C. America Health Reforms
Country Financial Accountability Assessment Review
Regional ICA Update
Public Debt Management Technical Assistance
Program
Strengthening Poverty Reduction
C. America Social Services Delivery

FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY08
FY08
FY08
FYO9
FYO9

Underway
Regional Crime and Violence Policy Options Study
Central America Disaster Strategy
Regional Energy Study
Public Expenditure Review
El Salvador Governance Diagnostic
Policy Dialogue and Consensus Building
Human Development for Poverty Reduction

FYI0
FYI0
FYI0
FYI0
FYI0
FYI0
FYI 1

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

80

cost
(US$OOO)

Audiencea Objectiveb

G,B
G, PD,B
PD,B
G, B
G, B
G, PD,D

KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PD
KG, PD,PS
KG, PS
KG, PD

G

KG, PS

74.2

G, PD,B

KG, PD

357.3

G, PD,B
G, PD,B
G, PD,B
G, PD,B
G, PD,B
G, PD,B
G, PD,B

KG, PD,PS
KG, PD,PS
KG, PD,PS
KG, PD,PS
KG, PD,PS
KG
KG, PD,PS

172.7

0

m

2

3

0

10

2

00

N

Ir

b N b

m

b,

m

o

\ O
N

3

W

N

m *

Ir

m

3

e
m

N b

4:

m
3

m o

00

N

3

P
m

4: b,

bb,WZ

00

4:

N

N O
N b

3

i

0

r

m

z09

-?

0

T F

8

3

i

m
m

N

0

m
m

r

0

w

N b

b m

m

0

I

N

0

909

m
w
c o r n

0

n

P

0 0

c o b
N
m
N

m m m o

0

2 3

2

3
3

3

P
“

%

m

N

2 2

c o o
N m

ern

0

z

0

c?

0

3

4:

3

0

3

2

-

9

3

m

m

00

3

ci

1
g
N

N b

2

8
3

W I r

c!\q

N b

0

b m

0

Irb
N b

m

I

O

2

r

“r:
G N

0

m
P

-

0
n

m

B
0

.&
0

m
rn

.&
a,
0

*

3

%

E
Y

cd

Y

mtl
0

&
E

4

D

nn

..m

m m

0

Y

8

rn

8

$
a
a

E
M

B
0

‘E
CA

EE

0 0
v v
r n Y
m

Y

a
..

0

Y

0

Y

F4

B

g

B

a

a
rn

Y

a

!? .-E

>

E

a

.B

.e

rn
m
m

88

m m od-P
m
m m
o m
w z m
m
md-

: m
w

f

3

m w p

I
3

:

rl

3

P

Y

: m

:-:y

P

m m

v,

h

"
E
u

.d

0

m

Y

.. ..

: -

w

m

t'9

m w

3

Y m q

m o m
d r \D

."*d
rd

.3

u

a

Q

e,
*

E!

Q

5

e,
x

3

rd

2

m
00

CAS Annex B7 - El Salvador - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

Actual
2007

2006

Esthated

2008

2009

2010

2011

Projected
2012

2013

9723

10475

11817

12053

11415

10973

10352

9487

Net disbursements (US$m)a

1605

785

1301

236

-638

-442

-621

-865

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a

1284

1191

1282

2430

2272

2251

1846

1706

TDOKGS~

109.4

110.1

116.6

140.2

129.2

116.7

102.2

86.8

TDO/GDP

52.1

51.4

53.4

54.4

49.9

46.1

41.2

35.3

TDSKGS

14.4

12.5

12.7

28.3

25.7

23.9

18.2

15.6

8.3

1'1.0

10.0

8.1

7.5

7.7

7.7

50.3

52.9

59.3

68.9

62.8

46.8

59.6

0.7

0.8

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.9

0.8

417

40 1

400

580

745

1040

1097

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

10

9

9

8

7

6

124.9

109.0

86.2

*79.8

26.8

5.o

5.0

3.8

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)"

Debt and debt service indicators (%)

ConcessionaVTDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public

55.2

DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (us$m)d
Of which present value o f
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

IDA TDO (US$mld

11

.

6

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)
Footnote: IBRD exposure projections assume IBRD lending o f US$250 million in FYlO plus and an indicative IBRD lending
program of US$400 million in F Y 11-12 that remains subject to the Bank's capacity to lend.

* as of end-September
a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net short- term capital.

b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

84

Q)

0

Q)

B

gv)

Be

m * ( v m t t

0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0

(v(vcv(v(v(v

MAP SECTION

90°W

89°W

88°W

To
Quezaltepeque
To
Nueva
Ocotepeque

To
Ipala

G U AT EM ALA

Metapán

N

TA
Nueva
San Salvador

Osicala
Ciudad Barrios

Cojutepeque

To
ro

la

MORAZÁN

SAN
VICENTE

Jibo
a

Olocuilta

San Francisco
(Gotera)
Santa Rosa
de Lima

Volcán de
Vicente
(2,182 m)

Tecoluca

San Luis

pa

Zacatecoluca

LA
PA Z

Santiago
de María

SAN MIGUEL

USULUTÁN

90°W
La Herradura

Jiquilisco

EL SA LVA D O R

Bahía de Jiq

Volcán de
San Miguel
(2,130 m)

Usulután
uilis
c

n
Gr a

San Miguel

B
La ahía
Un de
ión

San Miguel
de d e

La Unión
Laguna de
Olomega

o

Intipuca

DEPARTMENT CAPITALS

PAN AMERICAN HIGHWAY

DEPARTMENT BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

13°N

0

0
89°W

10

20

10

30

20

40 Kilometers

30 Miles
88°W

IBRD 33401R

NOVEMBER 2006

RAILROADS

Golfo de
F onseca

PA CI FI C O CE A N

RIVERS
MAIN ROADS

To
Nacaome

LA
UNIÓN

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

Nueva
Esparta

San Vicente

Acajutla

La Libertad

Sensuntepeque

Ilobasco

Lago de
Illepango

14°N

Jocoaitique

CABAÑAS

Le m

A

S O N S O N AT E

To
Marcala

pa

N

Sonsonate

SAN
SALVADOR

OR

Izalco

Armenia

Lem

LÁ

Lago de
Coatepeque

Suchitoto

AT

LA
L I B E R TA D

SC

A

CU

A

H

Aguilares

Volcán de
Santa Ana
(2,365 m)

VA D

H

U

C

N

SAL

La Hachadura

PÁ

N

Ahuachapán

Chalatenango

Embalse
Cerrón Grande

SA

Santa
Ana

Goascorán

Lempa
Chalchuapa

To
Taxisco

Tejutla

Nueva
Concepción

SA

To
Jalpatagua

14°N

EL SALVADOR

C H A L AT E N A N G O

N

Candelaria de
la Frontera

z
Pa

HO NDURA S

Cerro
El Pital
(2,730 m)

A

To
Jutiapa

La Palma

A

Lago de
Güija

