Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 47750-CV

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE
FOR THE PERIOD FY09-12

Public Disclosure Authorized

March 25,2009

Country Department for Cape Verde (AFCF1)
Africa Region

r

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The previous Country Assistance Strategy for Cape Verde (Report No. 30941-CV)
was discussed by the Board on February 22,2005

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as o f March 20,2009)

Currency Unit: Cape Verdean Escudo
CVE 125.48 = lSDR
CVE 109.69 =€l.OO (Peg)
CVE 85.16 = US$l.OO
1 SDR = US$1.47

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 3 1
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

..

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DNSI
DPL
DSA
DTIS
EC
ECOWAS
EDF
ENAPOR

MIGA
MSME
MTEF
NCDs
NOS1

I
I

National Directorate for Statistics and Information Technology
Development Policy Loan
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
European Commission
Economic Community o f West Afiican States
European Development Fund
Empresa Nacional de Administrap70 dos Portos (National Enterprise for Port

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Non-Communicable Diseases
Nzicleo Operacional da Sociedade de InformapTo (Operational Nucleus for the

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

Operators o f Cape Verde)
United States Dollar
Value-added Tax
World Trade Organization

USD

VAT
WTO

1-

World Bank
~

Vice President: Obiageli K. Ezekwesili (AFRVP)
Country Director: Habib Fetini (AFCF1)
Task Team Leaders: Sybille Crystal (AFCSN)
McDonald Benjamin (AFCSN)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the close and fruitful collaboration with the Government of
Cape Verde in the preparation o f this Country Partnership Strategy.
The preparation o f this CPS was a team effort by the World Bank Group’s Cape Verde Country Team.
Many team members made substantial contributions by drafting parts o f the document, participating in
review meetings and providing comments and advice. Special thanks go to Joelle Dehasse, CPS task team
leader until July 2008 and author o f the CAS Completion Report; Manuela Francisco, Senior Economist
for Cape Verde, who greatly supported the team during the preparation o f the CPS; Clara Ana Coutinho
de Sousa, acting Senior Economist for Cape Verde since January 2009; Zeze Weiss, Senior Social
Development and Civil Society Specialist, who carried out the CPS consultations, and Harifera
Raobelison and Danette Metcalfe, who edited and finalized the Board package o f the CPS.

iv

THE REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

vii

I. INTRODUCTION

1

11. COUNTRY CONTEXT
2.1 GEOGRAPHIC,
HISTORICAL
AND POLITICAL CONTEXT
2.2 POVERTY AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS
2.3 RECENTECONOMICDEVELOPMENTS
2.4 MEDIUM
TERMOUTLOOK AND SUSTAINABILITY

1
1
2
4
5

111. KEY DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
3.1 PROMOTING EFFECTIVEGOVERNANCE
3.2 STRENGTHENING HUMAN
DEVELOPMENT
STRUCTURAL AND SECTORAL CHALLENGES FORCOMPETITIVENESS
3.3 ADDRESSING
3.4 INVESTING
IN INFRASTRUCTURE
3.5 ENHANCINGSOCIAL COHESION

8
8
10
10
13
17

IV. CAPE VERDE’ S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY AND PRIORITIES
4.1 CAPE VERDE’S VISION OF ECONOMIC
TRANSFORMATION
4.2 CAPE VERDE’S GROWTH
AND POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY FOR 2008-1 1
4.3 CAPE VERDE’S INTEGRATION IN THE GLOBALECONOMY

18
18
19
20

V. WORLD BANK GROUP COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
5.1 LESSONS
LEARNED
AND K E Y PRINCIPLES FOR THE NEW PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
5.2. CPS OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGIC PRIORITIES
5.3 DELIVERING
THE CPS PROGRAM
5.4 IFC AND MIGA ACTIVITIES
5.5 PARTNERSHIPS AND HARMONIZATION WITH DONORS

20
20
21
28
30
30

VI. COUNTRY MONITORING AND EVALUATION AND RISK MANAGEMENT
6.1 MONITORING
AND EVALUATINGTHEBANK’SPORTFOLIO
6.2 MONITORING
AND EVALUATING
RESULTS
6.3 MAIN RISKS AND MITIGATING
MEASURES

32
32
32
32

VII. CONCLUDING R E M A R K S

34

List o f Tables
Table 1: Trends in Poverty in Cape Verde between 200 1 and 2007

Table 2: Basic Macroeconomic Indicators, 2004- 12
Table 3 : Indicative IDA and IBRD Financing Envelope and Program for FY09-12
Table 4: Indicative Knowledge Program for FY09-12
Table 5: Estimated Joint Budget Support for Cape Verde, 2008-1 1
Table 6: Development Partners and Current Areas o f Intervention

3
6
29
29
31
31

V

List of Fipures
Figure 1: Productivity per Worker and Ratio o f Cost to Output per Worker

12

List o f Boxes
Box 1: Electra’s Institutionaland Operational Challenges
Box 2: Cape Verde’s Economic TransformationStrate-gy

14
19

List of Amendixes
Country Specific appendixes
Appendix 1: CPS Results Matrix
Appendix 2: CAS Completion Report FY05-08
Appendix 3 : Joint World Bank-Fund Debt SustainabilityAnalysis
Appendix 4: Constraints Reported by Enterprises - Cape Verde and ICA Comparator Countries
Appendix 5: Poverty Map
Appendix 6: Development Partners and Current Areas o f Intervention
Appendix 7: CPS Consultations on the Country Partnership Strategy
Appendix 8: Millennium Development Goals
Standard CPS Annexes
Cape Verde at a Glance
CPS Annex B2: Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
CPS Annex B3: IBRDADA Program Summary
CPS Annex B3: IFC Program, FY05-09
CPS Annex B4: Summary of Non-lending Services
CPS Annex B5: Social Indicators
CPS Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
CPS Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
CPS Annex B8: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
CPS Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRDADA and Grants)

35
40
73
88
89
91
92
95

97
100
101
102
103
104
105
107
108
109

Map No. IBRD 33383

vi

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
Background. This FY09-12 Country Partnership Strategy for Cape Verde sets out the proposed
financial and technical support o f the World Bank Group in line with development priorities established
by the country’s Authorities in their Second Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper for 2008-1 1.
Since Cape Verde graduated to Middle Income Country status in January 2008, this will be the first Bank
strategy that treats Cape Verde as an IBRD-IDA blend country.

ii.
Country Context. Cape Verde i s a small archipelago with a stable democratic system. It
achieved annual real economic growth of seven percent per year during the 2004-07 period, to reach a
GNI per capita estimated at US$2,380 for 2008, and reduced poverty by 10 percentage points to 27
percent, due largely to strong economic management. Nonetheless, the economic slowdown in Europe
affected economic performance in Cape Verde in the second half o f 2008, due to a decline in foreign
direct investment, tourism and remittances flows that impacted negatively on Cape Verde’s growth. The
medium-term outlook i s subject to a number of further significant downside risks. The fiscal position
could be undermined if the financial situation o f Electra, the electricity and water utility, does not
improve and if large public investments programs are not well managed. Cape Verde’s strong track record
of macroeconomic management and solid structural reforms augur well for i t s willingness to take prompt
and difficult decisions that help mitigate the effects of the current global financial turmoil.
iii.
Country Priorities. Cape Verde’s overarching vision i s to achieve economic transformation
based on its geo-strategic, natural and cultural assets, notably as a hub for transshipment, offshore
financial and other services and tourism. These priorities are the foundation for i t s GPRSP-I1 for
2008-11, which focuses on the following five pillars: public sector governance; human capital
development; competitiveness; infrastructure; and social cohesion. Cape Verde has set ambitious goals to
boost economic growth and reduce unemployment under the GPRSP-I1 that will be hampered by the
global financial crisis, given the country’s vulnerability to decreases in tourism, remittances and foreign
direct investment.
iv.
Bank Program and Instruments. The Bank’s overarching objective for this CPS i s to help the
Government sustain high levels of growth and reduce unemployment, poverty and inequality. The
proposed Bank strategy aims to provide selective, demand-driven assistance that deepens the Cape VerdeBank partnership in three key areas that constitute the pillars o f the CPS: (1) promoting good governance
and public sector capacity; (2) improving competitiveness and the investment climate for private sectorled growth; and (3) strengthening human capital and social inclusion. Moreover, in the same way as Cape
Verde i s pursuing a broader transformation agenda, the World Bank Group aims to transform its
relationship with Cape Verde over the period o f the Strategy. This will involve a much broader menu of
financial and technical support than in the past, ranging from the ongoing IDA, AAA and trust fund
support to include IBRD lending; an expanded IFC program; MIGA and IBRD guarantees; new hedging
products; specialized technical assistance, for example on debt management; and facilitation o f SouthSouth Exchanges.
v.
The Bank will concentrate its financial resources in selected areas within the three pillars o f the
CPS so as to achieve transformative change. This implies focusing resources in a sector over time until a
transformation point i s reached beyond which the sector i s elevated irreversibly to a higher functioning
level. For example, the full IBRD envelope of US$52.8 million will be assigned to the critical energy
sector and build on previous assistance in that sector in order to support decisive change. The PRSC
series o f around US$10 million per year over four years will focus on governance and competitiveness
reforms and build on the previous PRSCs and the ongoing Growth and Competitiveness operation in
order to reinforce this priority area. New IDA-and GEF-financed investment projects totaling US$13
million over the next four years will also address governance and competitiveness reforms, as well as
bolster support through the ongoing Road Sector operation so as to achieve transformative change via
continuing and enhanced support to the transport sector. The program of lending will moreover seek to

vii

promote social inclusion even as it supports higher growth and efficiency. It builds on an existing, wellperforming portfolio o f three operations totaling US$48.5 million that i s well-aligned with the CPS
objectives. Non-lending support during the CPS period will cover core diagnostics and include policy
notes that provide flexible and rapid responses to Government on key issues. Capacity enhancement will
be an integral part of Bank support and to this end, the Strategy will draw on trust fund resources and
specialized skills within the Bank. The Bank’s program will also continue to be coordinated closely with
donor partners, notably partners in the Budget Support Group that engages in joint policy dialogue with
Government on budget support.
vi.
IFC and MIGA. The Strategy provides a framework for the participation o f IFC and MIGA,
especially to support the development o f private participation in infrastructure. IFC’s current investment
portfolio in Cape Verde i s limited, with a total of US$8 million in investments in the telecommunications
and banking sectors. Looking ahead, IFC will focus on opportunities to improve financing options for
SMEs in Cape Verde, and public-private infrastructure projects, notably in telecommunications. IFC’s
PEP-Africa program, in coordination with IDA, has prepared studies on key sectors for the economic
transformation agenda. MIGA does not have any exposure in Cape Verde at present, but i s prepared to
provide guarantees for private sector-led investments in infrastructure as well as technical assistance on
structuring sustainable public-private partnerships.
vii.
R i s k s . The first main risk relates to the medium-term effects on Cape Verde o f the ongoing
international financial crisis and the global economic slowdown. Cape Verde i s highly exposed to
external risks in light o f its open economy and i t s dependence on tourism receipts, remittances, donors
financing and foreign direct investment. The difficulty in predicting a turnaround in the global context
heightens these risks further and makes it difficult to gauge the amplitude and duration of adverse effects.
A preliminary sensitivity analysis indicates that adverse external shocks would have more negative effects
on growth than on fiscal and external balances, due to self-stabilizing features in these accounts. Factors
that mitigate the risks related to the global crisis include Cape Verde’s build-up of sizable international
reserves in recent years; i t s standing line o f credit with the Central Bank o f Portugal; i t s continued
monitoring under the IMF PSI, i t s access to budget support from the Budget Support Group o f donors,
including the Bank, and the country’s solid track record o f proactive economic management and timely
adjustment to shocks. The forthcoming Poverty Assessment will simulate the poverty impact o f potential
shocks across different groups so as to identify additional mitigation measures for vulnerable groups. If
unpredictable negative developments warrant it, an early CPS Progress Report i s envisaged so as to
ensure flexibility and timely adjustments in the Bank’s response. The second main risk i s that the next
Presidentialelections will take place early in 201 1 and the timing o f more difficult institutional reforms
will need to take this into consideration. The third main risk i s that the Government faces a range o f
contingent liabilities related to public or semi-public companies either not operating efficiently or being
affected by the economic downturn. The Bank will provide support that directly addresses the financial
position o f the most prominent o f these risks, namely Electra. A fourth risk i s that shortcomings in
administrative capacity could affect the implementation o f the GPRSP-I1 and reforms supported by the
Strategy. To this end, the Bank and other donors are financing a combination o f capacity-building
activities and technical support. The fifth main risk i s that, with Cape Verde’s graduation to MIC status
in January 2008, donors may begin to withdraw concessional aid at a faster pace than foreseen. The Bank
will seek to moderate this risk by supporting Cape Verde’s continued access to concessional financing as
an IDNIBRD blend country and by encouraging donor partners to do the same.
viii.
0
0
0

In i t s discussion of the CPS, the Board may wish to consider the following issues:
Does the CPS adequately address key development priorities for Cape Verde?
Does the CPS adequately address risks, notably in the context o f the global economic slowdown?
I s the policy, institutionaland results framework underpinningthe CPS appropriate?

...

Vlll

I.INTRODUCTION

1.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY09-12 sets out the proposed financial and
technical support o f the World Bank Group (WBG) in line with development priorities established
by Cape Verde’s Authorities. Cape Verde’s overarching vision i s that o f achieving economic
transformation on the basis o f i t s geo-strategic, natural and cultural assets, notably as a hub for
transshipment, offshore financial and other services and tourism. These priorities are the foundation for
i t s Second Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (GPRSP-11) for 2008-201 1, which focuses on
the same five pillars as the earlier GPRSP through 2008, namely public sector governance, human capital
development, infrastructure, competitiveness and social cohesion. Cape Verde achieved annual real
economic growth o f seven percent and reduced poverty by 10 percentage points during the previous CAS
period through strong economic management. I t has set ambitious goals to boost economic growth and
reduce unemployment under the GPRSP-I1 that will be hampered by the global financial crisis, given the
country’s vulnerability to declines in tourism, remittances and foreign direct investment. Supporting
Cape Verde to maintain the impetus o f reforms and consolidate i t s progress on a strong medium term
development agenda through this crisis period will be a key challenge for the strategy.

2.
Since Cape Verde graduated to Middle Income Country (MIC) status in January 2008, this
will be its first Country Partnership Strategy as an IBRD-IDA blend country.’ The Bank has
enjoyed a strong and productive working relationship with Cape Verde and the Authorities have asked the
Bank Group to deepen its partnership in three key areas that constitute the pillars o f the CPS: (1)
Promoting good governance and public sector capacity; (2) Improving competitiveness and the
investment climate for private sector-led growth, and (3) Strengthening human capital and social
inclusion. The Bank w i l l concentrate i t s financial resources in selected areas within these pillars so as to
support Cape Verde in pursuing a broader transformation agenda. Moreover, the WBG aims at
transforming i t s relationship with Cape Verde over the CPS period. This will involve a considerably
broader menu o f technical and financial support than in the past, ranging from the ongoing IDA, AAA
and trust fund support to include IBRD lending; an expanded IFC program; MIGA and IBRD guarantees;
new hedging products; specialized technical assistance, for example on debt management; and facilitation
o f South-South Exchanges. This program o f support would be implemented in close coordination with
donor partners.
11. COUNTRY CONTEXT
2.1

GEOGRAPHICAL,
HISTORICAL
AND POLITICAL CONTEXT

3.
Cape Verde i s a small archipelago of ten islands located off the west coast o f Africa. The
country has around 500,000 inhabitants and i s located some 300 miles o f f the coast o f Senegal and i s
slightly larger than the State o f Rhode Island with 1,557 square miles. I t s location on the geographic
band o f the Sahel greatly influences i t s climate. Cape Verde has few natural resources’ and suffers from
serious water shortages. These have been exacerbated by cycles o f long-term drought that have
contributed to significant emigration throughout Cape Verde’s history, so that it i s believed that around
twice as many Cape Verdeans live abroad as on the islandsm3The Diaspora maintains close relations with

’

As o f January 2008, Cape Verde has graduated from the UN list o f Least Developed Countries. The country has not graduated
from IDA and will continue to borrow from IDA under the Small States Exception.
The most important natural resources are salt, pozolan (volcanic rock used in cement production) and limestone.
The population in Praia, the capital, i s estimated at 106,052 and in Mindelo, the second largest city, at 67,844. Some 500,000
people o f Cape Verdean ancestry live in the United States, mainly in New England. Portugal, France, Italy, Senegal and the
Netherlands also have large Cape Verdean communities.

1

the country, sending home remittances equivalent to 9.2 percent o f GDP in 2007. With barely 10 percent
o f its surface as arable land and with limited mineral resources, Cape Verde’s arid conditions and
mountainous terrain place the country at a disadvantage for agricultural production and it i s a net importer
o f food and fuel.

4.

Cape Verde has recorded important political gains during the last few decades and is
recognized as one of the most open countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. First colonized by Portugal in
1456, the islands were settled by refugees fleeing political and religious persecution in Europe, who in
turn brought slaves from the African continent and developed a mestiqo (mixed race) culture, with
influences from the cultural traditions o f Europe, the Middle East and Africa-this cultural heritage has,
for example, given rise to a rich and distinctive musical tradition. Cape Verde gained independence in
1975, and following a brief political union with Guinea-Bissau until 1980, charted i t s own course as a
one-party state until constitutional reforms in 1991 brought about a peaceful transition to a multi-party
democracy. Since then, Cape Verde has consolidated i t s democratic institutions and developed a strong
track record o f peaceful elections and transfers o f power, a free and diverse press, and active civil society
and grass-roots organizations. The Partido African0 da Independincia de Cab0 Verde (PAICV), which
ruled the country from independence in 1975 until 1991, regained power in January 2001. The PAICV
also obtained a new parliamentay majority in January 2006 and President Pedro Pires was reelected for a
five-year term in February 2006. With the next presidential elections scheduled for February 20 11, there
i s a window o f opportunity for major structural reforms in the early phase o f implementation o f the CPS
before the country prepares for the next general elections.

2.2

POVERTY AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS

5.
Rapid growth since the early 1990s has sharply reduced poverty, although inequality
remains high. The analysis o f the latest three poverty surveys’ suggests that the share o f the population
in absolute poverty decreased from 49 percent in 1988-89 to 37 percent in 2001-02 and to 27 percent in
2007 (see Table 1). This i s an important achievement, driven by rapid growth in real income per capitafor example, during the last CAS period (2005-2008) income per person rose at 5 percent per year, faster
than in most small island states or the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. At the same time, inequality rose
sharply during the 1990s and has remained high since then, with a Gini coefficient for consumption o f
0.49 in 2007. Progress in reducing poverty has been slower in rural areas, where 72 percent o f the poor
live and where 30 percent o f the population lives in absolute poverty, compared to 12 percent o f the urban
population. It has also varied across islands and socioeconomic groups: the islands with the largest rural
populations (Santo Antgo, Santiago, Silo Nicolau and Fogo) have experienced the highest rates o f poverty
and food insecurity.6 The major investments that drove the recent economic boom were concentrated on
the island o f Sal (with i t s tourism infrastructure), in the capital city o f Praia, and in Mindelo on the island
o f Sgo Vicente, with i t s deep water port and active business community.

The most recent municipal elections in May 2008 saw the opposition MpD (Movement for Democracy) win a narrow majority
o f mayoral contests, including the key municipalities of Santa Catarina, SBo Vicente, Sal and Praia.
These comprise the 1988-89 and 2001-02 IDRF household surveys (Znqukrito ds Despensas e Receitas Familiares) and the
2007 QUIBB (Unified Survey of Core Welfare Indicators).
Food Vulnerability Study o f Families in Rural Areas, Food Security Services Department, 2005.

2

Table 1. Trends in Poverty in Cape Verde between 2001 and 2007
2001

Urban and rural areas
Urban
Rural
StratalIslands
Praia
Rest of Santiago
Santo. Anta0
SBo Vicente
Fog0
Other islands
Socio-economic group
Wage workers
Self-employed agriculture
Other self-employed
Other dependants
No employment
National
Source: Instituto Nation

2007

Headcount

Poverty
Gap

YO
o f the
population

Yo o f
the
poor

Headcount

Poverty
gap

YO
o f the
population

Yo o f
the
poor

25.0
51.1

7.9
20.0

55.1
44.9

37.5
62.5

13.2
44.3

3.3
14.3

56.8
43.2

28.2
71.8

19.1
49.3
54.2
25.5
42.1
28.6

5.0
19.2
22.1
7.9
15.8
9.6

22.0
32.4
10.8
15.2
8.8
10.9

11.4
43.6
15.9
10.6
10.1
8.5

11.6
41.5
45.6
13.6
39.0
14.3

2.7
13.3
14.4
3.2
13.2
3.9

25.0
29.9
9.5
15.6
8.1
11.8

10.9
46.6
16.3
8.0
11.9
6.3

31.9
45.3
28.9
57.1
41.2

12.1
16.5
10.0
21.6
14.5

36.8
9.9
16.6
3.6
33.0

31.9
12.3
13.1
5.7
37.1

18.7
42.9
20.8
35.9
32.7

5.6
14.5
6.1
12.5
9.5

35.9
8.5
17.1
4.6
34.0

25.2
13.6
13.3
6.2
41.7

36.7

13.3

100.0

100.0

26.6

8.1

100.0

100.0

de Estatistica and Bank staff.

6.
Cape Verde i s on track to meet the Millennium Development Goals (MDG). With sustained
economic growth and significant investments in human capital, there has been solid progress on social
indicators and on the,Millennium Development Goals (see Annex B5 and Appendix 8). The country
ranks 102 out o f 177 countries in the UNDP’s 2007/2008 Human Development Index, which i s the thirdhighest ranking in Africa. Cape Verde i s on track to reach most o f the MDGs by 2015. The sharp
reduction in poverty since 1990 has been complemented by significantly increased access to education
and health care. The net primary enrollment rate in elementary education rose from 72 percent in 1990/91
to 95 percent in 2005/06, while net secondary enrollment reached nearly 60 percent in 2005/06. The
literacy rate in Cape Verde i s 79 percent (84 percent in urban areas and 74 percent in rural areas), and
while it still varies by gender (72 percent for women and 87 percent for men), Cape Verde has now
achieved parity for girls and boys in school e n r ~ l l m e n t .Infant
~
mortality has been reduced from 45 to 25
per 1,000 live births since 1990, maternal mortality has also declined as births attended by skilled health
personnel have risen sharply from 54 percent in 1995 to around 90 percent, and l i f e expectancy at birth
(71 years) i s the third highest in Africa. Cape Verde has made important efforts to contain the spread o f
infectious diseases. The most recent survey points to an HIV/AIDS prevalence rate o f 0.8 percent, versus
0.5 percent in the mid-l990s, while the incidence o f tuberculosis has been around 165 per 100,000 since
the early 1990s. Cape Verde has also made progress on reforestation, with the forest area rising from 14
percent to slightly over 20 percent o f land area since 1990. In addition, it has become an increasingly
open economy, with trade rising from 56 to 75 percent o f GDP since 1990, internet access rising from
zero to 7 percent over the past decade and telephony (mobile and fixed line) experiencing an eight-fold
increase to 40 percent since 2000.
7.
At the same time, Cape Verde faces important social challenges with high unemployment
among vulnerable groups. Though the proportion o f the labor force unable to find formal work fell

’Unified Survey o f Basic Welfare Indicators (QUIBB) 2006.
3

from 26 to 18 percent between 1998 and 2008, unemployment remains high, particularly among youth,
women and rural populations, and there are sharp differences across islands, reflecting a misalignment
between skills and job opportunities and constraints in domestic migration. At the same time,
unemployment has risen sharply among migrant workers from the African continent as construction for
the tourism industry on the island o f Sal has stalled with the global crisis, leading to economic hardships
and increased petty crime.8 Moreover, among the employed population, almost one-quarter work less
than 35 hours per week, and a significant share o f the economically active population, especially the poor,
gain their livelihoods in the informal sector, where they work temporary jobs primarily in constructionor
working as street vendors. In rural communities, especially during bad agricultural years, families have
depended on temporary jobs created by the Government’s works program (known as FAIMO), which had
now been replaced by a community-driven small works program known as Micro-realizaq6es.
Unemployment among young people i s seen as a key contributor to social problems (e.g. increasing
delinquency, early pregnancy, prostitution, drugs and alcohol abuse).

8.
Gender inequality i s less pronounced than elsewhere in Africa, but still needs to be
addressed. Women in Cape Verde are likely to be poorer than men. In urban areas they account for
close to 40 percent o f non-agriculturaljobs, and when employed tend to earn less than men at similar
levels of education and experiences. In rural areas, they account for close to 50 percent o f farmers, but
tend to farm smaller plots o f land. In the public sphere, women account for 15 percent o f the members o f
the Legislature, while 50 percent o f the current Administration’s Cabinet Ministers are women. Women
have experienced impressive gains in education and health, including parity in enrollments, declines in
maternal mortality, and a decline in total fertility from 5.4 to 3.4 since 1990. In 2005 Cape Verde ratified
the women’s rights protocol o f the African Charter and its legal framework promotes equal rights.
Continued challenges include reducing the incidence o f domestic violence, strengthening access to basic
social services for female-headed households and furthering equality o f opportunity in access to jobs and
to justice.
2.3

RECENT
ECONOMICDEVELOPMENTS

9.
Cape Verde has experienced robust economic growth in recent years. Real GDP averaged 7
percent during 2004-07, peaking at 10.8 percent in 2006. The strong economic performance reflects a
major economic transformation in the economy towards a service-based economy led by the tourism
s e ~ t o r . ~Growth has been driven by strong public and private investment (through significant FDI)
directed largely towards infrastructure development, tourism, and the telecommunications industry.
Sound monetary policy, targeted at strengthening the peg of the Cape Verde escudo to the euro, has been
an important factor in maintaining price stability. Official foreign reserves grew from 2.8 to 3.9 months
of imports during 2005-07, and when an interest rate misalignment with the Euribor rate contributed to a
temporary decline in reserves, the Central Bank raised its interest rates by 100 basis points in October
2008, reversing the trend in net outflows. As a result, it i s estimated that in 2008 reserves remained at 3.9
months of prospective imports. Fiscal policy has also been characterized by prudence. Higher than
expected tax collection and continued expenditure control brought the 2008 fiscal deficit (including
grants) down to 1.2 percent of GDP from a high of 6.3 percent of GDP in 2005. This fiscal performance
has helped contain external and domestic debt (see Table 2 in Section 2.4), although fiscal risks persist,
notably due to the weak performance o f the electricity utility, Electra (see Box 1 in Section 3.4).
10.
The fifth Policy Support Instrument (PSI) review was successfully completed in December
2008.’0 All quantitative assessment criteria were met, some by wide margins, and steady progress was

* At the same time, difficulties on the continent, e.g. in Guinea-Bissau, could lead to increased migration to Cape Verde.
Services account for 76 percent of GDP, compared to 17 percent for industry and 8 percent for agriculture.
the IMF approved the three-year PSI for 2006-2009.

loIn July 2006,

4

made in implementingthe structural assessment criteria. The authorities have indicated in the Letter of
Intent for the 5th PSI review that they intend to request an extension o f the PSI for at least four more
years until 2013 (Le. a one-year extension o f the current PSI followed by a new 3-year PSI).

11.
The Cape Verdean economy withstood the 2008 food and fuel shocks and the initial months
o f the global crisis relatively well, but slowed in the latter part o f the year and 2009 i s expected to be
more difficult. Inflation rose to an estimated 6.8 percent in 2008 from 4.4 percent the previous year as a
result o f increases in food and fuel prices that were largely passed through to consumers." The country's
large stocks of cereal reserves and the appreciation of the Cape Verde escudo against the United States
dollar in the first eight months of 2008 somewhat mitigated inflationary pressures from rising food and
fuel prices, so that Bank simulations o f the net impact on poverty from the shocks suggest around a one
percent increase. Cape Verde's economy also held up relatively well in the first months of the global
financial crisis, with net tourism receipts declining by less than two percent in 2008 compared to 2007.'*
Foreign direct investment rose by 9 percent in 2008, due to the strong performance in the first semester,
but during the second half o f 2008, real estate investments decelerated because developers, mainly
Europeans, faced difficulties securing long-term financing. Remittances declined by 17 percent in 2008,
following on an earlier decline in 2007. These trends are expected to continue into 2009 (see next
Section).
2.4

MEDIUM
TERMOUTLOOK AND SUSTAINABILITY'3

12.
The global financial crisis means that growth projections in the GPRSP-I1 will need to be
revised downwards. Before the global financial crisis arose in late 2008, the GPRSP-I1 was issued with
projected growth rates of around 8 percent for 2008-09 and double-digit growth for 2010-11. These rates
were based on projections o f continued strong growth in tourism and infrastructure, but will clearly need
to be revised downwards-ven
before the crisis, a double-digit growth rate had occurred only in 2006,
largely due to one-off events. The medium term outlook, revised in March 2009, points to a GDP growth
rate of 3-4 percent in 2009, revised downwards from a January 2009 projection of 5 percent growth for
the year. Revisions reflect principally the impact of the global slowdown on tourism and foreign direct
investment (FDI) flows-FDI i s expected to decline by 14 percent in 2009 and single digit declines are
also expected in tourism and remittances in light o f the recession in the Euro zone. Growth i s projected to
recover slightly to 4-5 percent in 2010, and then to increase to 6-6.5 percent in 2011 and 2012,
considerably below the medium term trend observed in recent years. The eventual recovery i s expected
to be led by private investment in tourism, public investment in infrastructure, and private con~umption.'~
Inflation i s projected to decline to an average of 3.3 percent in 2009 and 2.7 percent in 2010 (see Table 2).
The projected trend in inflation reflects an anticipated decline in commodity prices and the related easing

The authorities introduced some measures to curtail the impact o f food and oil price, including the elimination of international
trade taxes and VAT on cereals; improvements in importation and distribution efficiency; increased amounts and coverage of
non-contributory pensions; investment in new equipment to increase fuel efficiency; creation of a sole logistic company to handle
imports; strengthening o f regulatory capacity, and a revised petroleum products adjustment mechanism to increase transparency.
Utility tariffs were also raised by 5 percent in June 2008 in response to higher petroleum prices. In the medium to long term,
Cape Verde will invest in renewable energies to reduce its dependence on oil imports. Bank and IMF staff have moreover
recommended building up buffers of foreign reserves and fiscal space, and Cape Verde i s receiving TA from IMF staff to
enhance its capacity to assess macroeconomic risks.
The true shortfall as a result o f the crisis i s not merely relative to actual values for 2007 but relative to projections for 2008, as
tourism receipts were expected to grow by 32 percent in 2008 and 24 percent in 2009.
l3Revised projections are preliminary and will continue to be revised in consultation with the Government on a regular basis,
iven the rapidly changing international environment.
The tourism sector i s also driving growth in other sectors, such as construction, retail, transportation, agribusinesslfishing,
telecommunications, energy, water, financial services and personal services. It could also drive growth in other sectors that
supply inputs, including food, handicraftsand light manufacturing.

'

5

of inflationary pressures. Continued fiscal discipline and the fixed exchange rate with respect to the euro
provide a solid anchor for low inflationary expectations.

13.
While the medium-term impact of the global economic slowdown on Cape Verde is hard to
estimate, Cape Verde has built up some buffers against external shocks as a result of strong
economic performance in recent years. The Authorities have some scope to manage the external
shocks since the country has built up fiscal space and international reserves that enable Cape Verde to
mitigate their impact. Progress in the implementation o f structural measures has also been steady,
reinforcing the positive effects o f prudent macroeconomic management. Inflation i s expected to stabilize
at around 2 percent by 2010-11, in line with euro zone rates, as a result of the currency peg. Despite
continued fiscal prudence, the overall budget deficit (including grants) i s projected to increase steeply to
5.7 percent o f GDP in 2009 to provide some fiscal stimulus and average about 5 percent o f GDP during
20 10- 12. Tax revenues as a percentage of GDP are expected to decline as the economy slows down but
average 22 percent for 2010-12. Overall expenditure i s projected at 37 percent o f GDP in 2009, notably
due to an expansion in public investment designed to ease infrastructure bottlenecks. Spending will
gradually decline to 34 percent in 2012. Improvements in tax administration and in public expenditure
management will help to contain the fiscal deficit. The overall budget and the Government's medium
term fiscal program are appropriate as the spending expansion i s directed to infrastructure spending, the
deficit i s mostly financed by concessional loans, and debt sustainability i s preserved. The current account
deficit (including official transfers), which deteriorated from 5 percent of GDP in 2006 to 9.1 percent in
2007 and 13 percent of GDP in 2008 i s projected to deteriorate further to 14.7 percent o f GDP in 2009 as
a result o f the slowdown in tourism receipts and remittances. Projections indicate that the current account
deficit (including official transfers) will improve slightly to 13.9 percent in 2010 and average 12 percent a
year during 201 1-2012. As the Cape Verdean economy recovers and the economic conditions in Europe
improve, imports o f investment goods are expected to increase-largely driven by FDI inflows-and
tourism receipts will grow, although remittances are expected to remain subdued. Notwithstanding the
large current account deficit, internationalreserves are projected to remain above 3 months o f imports.
Table 2. Basic MacroeconomicIndicators, 2004-12
2004

2005

2006l

2007'

2008'

Real GDP growth (% annual change)

4.4

6.5

10.8

6.9

6.0

Real GDP per capita growth (%
annual change)

2.5

4.6

8.8

5.0

4.0

Indicator

Overall fiscal balance, including
-4.9
-0.7
-1.2
-3.8
-6.3
grants (% o f GDP)
Budget Financing
3.8
6.3
4.9
0.7
1.2
Foreign (net)
0.9
3.2
3.0
2.0
2.7
Domestic (net)
3.8
2.9
2.9
-0.8
-0.8
Net errors and omissions
-0.9
0.2
-1.0
-0.5
-0.7
Current account balance, including
-14.4
-3.4
-5.0
-9.1
-13.0
official transfers (% o f GDP)
Reserve coverage (months of
prospective imports of goods and
2.4
2.8
3.1
3.9
3.9
services)
CPI annual average ('YOannual
-1.9
0.4
4.8
4.4
6.8
change)
88.9
87.1
72.6
62.3
60.2
Total Central 'Government debt
'Preliminary; 2Projections
Source: IMF, Ministry of Finance and Public Administration, and Staff estimates.

2010'

2011'

2012'

3.5

5.0

6.6

6.3

1.6

3.0

4.5

4.3

-5.7

-5.1

-4.6

-5.5

5.7
5.0
0.7
0.0

5.1
3.6
1.4
0.1

4.6
4.0
0.6
0.0

5.5
3.9
1.6
0.0

-14.7

-13.9

-12.5

-11.9

3.7

3.6

3.7

3.8

3.3

2.7

2.0

2.0

58.8

59.7

60.6

59.4

2009'

6

14.
Significant progress with debt sustainability management sets a good basis for maintaining
sustainable debt levels over the medium term. The share of total central Government net debt and
guarantees to GDP started to decline in 2005, and has been declining sharply since then. It f e l l to 57
percent o f GDP in 2008, down from 87 in 2005, owing to the rapid GDP growth and prudent fiscal
stance. The domestic debt-to-GDP ratio was reduced from 33 in 2005 to 13.8 percent in 2008. An
analysis of the sustainability o f Cape Verde’s public debt carried out in December 2008 concluded that,
despite the likely gradual reduction in access to concessional loans, the risk of debt distress i s low and all
external debt indicators would remain below the relevant thresholds under the baseline and alternative
scenarios (see Appendix 3). The main risks to the debt outlook are currency exposure and contingent
liabilities. Notwithstanding the fact that the debt trajectory has shifted upwards since the 2008 Debt
Sustainability Analysis (DSA), Cape Verde’s risk o f debt distress remains low.
15.
The medium term effects of the rapidly changing external environment on Cape Verde’s
economy are difficult to gauge and overall risks remain tilted towards the down-side. A preliminary
sensitivity analysis undertaken in March 2009 shows that a decline in tourism inflows equivalent to 1
percent o f GDP would reduce current growth projections by around 0.75-1 percentage points, with a more
modest impact on the fiscal balance, o f 0.1 percent of GDP. l5Due to partial self-stabilization-xplained
by the fact that less tourism implies the need for less imports for tourism-the impact on the balance o f
payments would be small, between 0-0.1 months of prospective imports. An increase in oil prices of
US$10 per barrel (from US$44 per barrel) would reduce the growth rate by 0.1-0.3 percentage points and
would have an effect on the balance o f payments equivalent to around 0.1 months o f prospective imports,
however the fiscal impact would be negligible. There are also downward risks to the economic outlook
associated with steeper decreases in FDI and other capital flows, including donor assistance. Indeed the
tightening o f liquidity conditions in Europe has already led to a deceleration in new real estate projects
because developers, mainly Europeans, have faced difficulties securing long-term financing.I6 Moreover,
remittances could decline further as a result of weakening labor markets in the European Union, with
potentially negative effects on household welfare and on external balances. Additional risks include
volatility in commodity prices and a potential indirect impact of the financial crisis on Cape Verde banks.
While domestic banks have virtually no exposure to sub-prime assets, ownership of banks in Cape Verde
i s highly concentrated under Portuguese ownership. A further fiscal risk derives from Electra, the public
electricity and water utility, which i s in a critical financial situation. Losses equivalent to 1.3 percent of
GDP erased half of Electra’s net worth in 2007, and credit has been curtailed by the o i l companies that
constitute i t s main suppliers. The resulting power supply disruptions have an immediate negative impact
on economic growth. The explicit risks to the budget are known, as domestic debt equal to around 4.5
percent o f GDP at the end of 2008 had to be issued in favor of Electra.”
16.
A number of,factors help to mitigate these down-side risks. The mitigating factors include:
the recent build-up o f foreign exchange reserves and fiscal space; the accumulation of grain stocks to
buffer against droughts and other food shocks;” the standing line o f credit extended by the Central Bank
o f Portugal to support the peg of the escudo to the euro; effective public expenditure management (with
expanded public investment foreseen in 2009 together with restraint on current expenditures); and
continued adherence to the IMF PSI. In addition, the Government has a strong track record o f fiscal
discipline and o f rapid and prudent adjustments to changing economic condition^.'^ This will place the
l 5 The potential impacts identified in the (partial) sensitivity analysis do not take into account shifts in structure or off-setting
policy measures by the Government that could potentially mitigate effects such as weaker tourism demand or FDI.
l6 Sensitivity analysis indicates that an adverse shock to FDI, grants or remittances equivalent to 1 percent of GDP would yield
impacts on GDP, the balance o f payments and fiscal accounts that are similar to those for tourism inflows.
” The implicit fiscal risks are currently being assessed by the government, especially the amounts needed to recapitalize the
company.
GPRSP-I1 also refers to Government’s intention to prepare a Strategic Action Plan for a National Disaster Reduction Platform.
This came out clearly during last year’s food and fuel crisis.

’’

7

Government in good stead as it faces the volatile global economic conditions. Under these conditions, the
Bank and IMF staffs will be supporting the Government by engaging in enhanced surveillance o f key
economic variables and will stand ready to adjust projections and policy advice as needed.

111.

3.1

KEY DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES

PROMOTING EFFECTIVE
GOVERNANCE

17.
Cape Verde could usefully consolidate and extend significant recent advances in
governance. It receives fairly high ratings for rule o f law and accountability.20It has conducted a series
of reforms since 2005 that are described in more detail in the CAS Completion Report (see Appendix 2).
However, important reforms remain to be completed in such areas as state reform and decentralization,
procurement and financial management, and security and the rule o f law. The Government i s committed
to advancing on these reforms under the first pillar o f the GPRSP-11.
18.
A broad and participatory State restructuring effort has been well designed but civil service
reform (CSR) has been slow and some follow-up actions may be politically difficult. The
Government has launched a comprehensive review o f its CSR legal and regulatory framework, with the
goal of providing the State with a better trained and motivated workforce. Several crucial pieces o f
legislations have been drafted or adopted already,21and a human resource database has been developed
and integrated with payroll, which i s a key step towards CSR. However, progress has been delayed by
vested interests and by the need to identify the requisite technical skills to design key parts o f the reform
package, e.g. in relation to remuneration. Further work i s required on streamlining, organizing and
enhancing the capacity and efficiency of the civil service to meet the GPRSP-I1 objective o f efficient
attention to citizens' needs. As an example, a fairly straightfonvard merging of functions has proven
difficult to implement in the case of the Road Institute and a unit with overlapping functions in the
Ministry.
19.
Decentralization i s taking root but further reform i s needed to reap the full benefits. Since
municipalities in Cape Verde are
and have limited resource bases, central Government transfers
constitute their most important source o f funds. Municipalities have become active in their areas of
responsibilities, and transfers to them have risen since the 2005 local finances law, but the framework law
on decentralization, adopted by the Council o f Ministers in March 2008, s t i l l needs to be ratified by
Parliament and implementation in order to rationalize existing state structures, and it has been difficult to
achieve a consensus. The Government recognizes that key challenges include: (a) enhancing the regional
coordination model without creating more structures; (b) clarifying roles and responsibilities not only
through the law but via concrete transfers agreements/decisions; and (c) addressing such issues as land
sales regulation, municipalities' arrears and accountability.

20.

The Government intends to consolidate important achievements in the area of financial
management and e-government. Achievements during the past few years under the e-government
initiative, under the auspices of the NOS1 (the Operational Nucleus for the Information Society, or Cubo
Verde Digital), include: (a) rollout of a functioning Integrated Financial Management and Information
System (known as SIGOF) in the national Government and the largest municipalities; (b) timely

The overall 2008 CPIA rating i s 4.2 with the transparency, accountability and corruption in public sector rating at 4.5 and the
property rights and rule-based governance rating at 4.
They include the Organic Law on civil service, endorsed in 2008 by the Council o f Ministers, and draft laws on mobility and
salary reform.
22 Only two have more than 50,000 people.
2o

''

8

transmission of state accounts to Parliament on a quarterly basis and publication o f the 2009 budget on
the web; (c) revamping of the tax registry and the introductionof the VAT; (d) approval o f Organic Laws
for control functions and strengthening o f the Court of Auditors, and (e) reengineering of various
administrative processes to create an electronic single-window for the most used services. Further
extension and capacity building around systems, as well as ensuring appropriate treatment o f contingent
liabilities and introducing program-budgeting to align annual budgets with the GPRSP-I1 and both
sectoral and overall Medium Term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEFs) are key priorities. In addition, the
Government intends to further the financial management reforms in the areas of (a) oversight of fiscal
risks at the sub-national level; (b) oversight o f contingent liabilities related to public sector entities; (c)
increasing the effectiveness and coverage of internal controls, which will require further recruitment and
capacity building, and (d) enhancing the scope, content and follow-up of external audits conducted
through the Tribunal das Contas, which will also require further recruitment and capacity building.
Moreover, the Authorities consider that the timeliness and comprehensiveness of donor information on
projects could also be enhanced.

21.
A new procurement law in line with international good practices sets a good foundation for
further progress on procurement reform. The new law was approved by the Legislature in 2007 and
implementingrules and regulations were issued in December 2008. A new procurement management and
information system i s being set up that will be linked with the SIGOF. The critical next steps include
establishing the new public procurement institutional framework, which includes a new regulatory
authority (known as ARAP) to deal with policy, complaints and audits, as well as procurement
management units in the contracting authorities to conduct procurement transactions at the level of these
authorities. The Government i s now working towards accompanying the above steps with comprehensive
national procurement capacity development, a strengthened procurement control framework and effective
independent audits by ARAP to ensure compliance with the new rules.
22.

Cape Verde has taken steps to address challenges from the global drugs trade and from
money-laundering that could undermine security and good governance. Cape Verde has been caught
up in a rerouting o f drugs from Colombia and Venezuela through various West African States for
consumption in Europe, and the fragile conditions o f some States on the African continent has served to
enhance the risk for Cape Verde as well. Moreover, its large off-shore banking sector makes it vulnerable
to money laundering(see Section 3.3). At the same time, street crime had begun to rise in Praia and on
Sal. The Authorities have taken prompt enforcement measures to address these challenges before they
take root and have implemented measures in the area o f national defense and security and the rule o f
l a d 3 that are crucial for safeguarding the quality o f l i f e o f Cape Verdeans and attracting and protecting
foreign investments. Indeed, Praia i s seen by international investors as one o f the most secure capitals on
the continent. At a sub-regional level, Cape Verde has been coordinating with other ECOWAS countries
on security issues. Cape Verde has hosted two international conferences on drugs enforcement and on
anti-money laundering (AML) since October 2008 to brainstorm on effective approaches, has adopted
legislation on AML to strengthen controls, and i s developing legislation to counter the financing o f
terrorism (CFT), although more will need to be done in the context o f strengthened banking supervision,
notably of the off-shore banking sector. These are more crime-focused aspects of a broader program to
strengthen the rule of law that has been under way to promote greater access to justice through, e.g.,
digitization of the laws and the Official Gazette, establishment of Casas de Direito (legal centers) to
provide legal services to the poor (with a particular focus on women), and strengthening of alternative
dispute resolution mechanisms.

These include the creation o f the National Police, the reform o f the Armed Forces, the training o f the judicial police and the
enhancement o f maritime surveillance.
23

9

3.2

STRENGTHENING

HUMAN
DEVELOPMENT

23.

Cape Verde’s key challenge in the area of human development i s a misalignment between
the skills required in the jobs market and the education and training provided to its youth. While
Cape Verde has made significant progress in primary and secondary education, the country faces a
significant challenge in ensuring employment opportunities for its relatively young population. The main
reason i s that insufficient youth emerge from secondary schools or from the Technical and Vocational
Education and Training (TVET) system with the requisite skills sets for the services and technology
industry.24 Higher education in Cape Verde i s still nascent, with the country’s two universities (one
private, one public) established only in 2001 and 2005 and as yet characterized by fairly limited and
inequitable access. The challenge is: (a) to better identify market demand for skilled labor in specific
growth sectors such as construction, tourism and commerce; (b) to improve the existing planning,
financing and coordination mechanisms in order to promote more, and more effective, demand-driven
training delivery using existing, under-utilized training centers in more cost-effective ways and with
greater engagement by the private sector. The required technical and managerial skills for key sectors
such as tourism, construction and finance are still rare, and those who possess them often have higher
ambitions. Thus upgrading TVET i s imperative to ensure Cape Verde’s competitiveness in growth
sectors, and to this end, the Government recently created an Institute for Employment and Professional
Training to address these issues.

24.
Cape Verde has satisfactory health indicators for its level o f income, but faces challenges in
terms o f adequate resources to address both infectious diseases and the rising non-communicable
diseases that characterize a middle income country. As noted above (Section 2.2), Cape Verde has
made significant progress in reducing both infant and maternal mortality rates, increasing l i f e expectancy,
and containing the spread o f infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis. However, its open
economy, large inflows o f tourism and proximity to the continent place Cape Verde at continued risk of
communicable diseases, while the cost of outreach to more remote underserved populations i s high. At
the same time, as l i f e expectancy has increased, so has the prevalence o f non-communicable diseases
(NCDs), such as hypertension and diabetes, which generally imply much higher unit costs to treat. The
National Health Policy for 2007-10 identifies addressing NCDs and promoting preventive health as key
priorities; proposes possible scenarios which would sustain the development of the health system, and
develops strategic orientations for health sector reforms. A subsequent public expenditure tracking
survey for the health sector detected several problems to be addressed, such as weak budgeting and
expenditures processes at the decentralized level (delegacias de satide). Thus an appropriately resourced
program i s needed to increase coverage and efficiency in health services.
3.3

ADDRESSING STRUCTURAL AND SECTORAL CHALLENGESFORCOMPETITIVENESS

25.

Cape Verde has taken numerous measures to promote competitiveness, even though it still
faces a range o f challenges. The key areas in which further advances are required are related to the ease
of doing business, support for smaller businesses, access to land and finance, the cost of labor, and trade
facilitation. Substantial progress has been made in each of these areas in recent years, but there i s further
scope to promote a robust reform agenda in each case.

26.
Cape Verde has been advancing solidly on the ease of doing business and i s turning to
increase support to micro and small-scale enterprises. Although Cape Verde experienced a decline in
i t s Doing Business ranking in 2009, the ranking has not captured the remarkable improvements in the

24

To reduce unemployment to 10 percent by 2012, 6,000 people need to be trained annually. In 2008, only 1,853 were trained.

10

ease of starting of a business in Cape Verde.25The one-stop shops-known as Casu do Cidadzo-on Sal
and in.Praia enable entrepreneurs to register a business in one day and citizens to obtain basic registration
documents within minutes. Since July 2008, more than 300 businesses have been registered within 24
hours, and since December 2007 over 3,000 certificates have been issued through the on-line facility,
including many to emigrants abroad. The 2009 Doing Business survey ranks Cape Verde at 79 (out of
178 countries) for ease o f dealing with licenses and permits and 40 for enforcing contracts-its cost of
enforcing contracts in terms of both duration and expense are significantly ahead o f regional averages
(see Appendix 4). Laws and regulations are publicly available (on the internet) and are not changed
arbitrarily. Mechanisms exist to resolve conflict o f rules and these are regarded as highly transparent,
ensuring a high level o f protection o f property rights. A greater challenge and a key priority for
Government i s to enhance support to micro and small scale enterprises (MSMEs) to operate on a more
equal footing. To this end, the Government launched the Agincia de Desenvolvimento EconGmico e
ZnnovaqCo (ADEI) with a mandate to provide incubator services, coaching and consulting services,
business development services including access to finance, market linkages, and promotion o f
information and communication technology. Plans are under way to open the ADEI office by July 2009.
The agency will face challenges in ensuring it has (a) highly qualified staff to provide high-value
technical assistance; (b) technology infrastructure , for the incubator and other information and
communications technology requirements; (c) a management information system that i s up to the task,
and (d) a clear demarcation o f responsibilitieswith NOSI.

27.
Effective land management is an essential element o f a policy to promote competitiveness.
A new land use law has been approved and a law on land registration i s well advanced. The legal
framework for titling and applying liens for most lands i s clear and land i s frequently used to collateralize
loans. Moreover, the implementation o f the cadastre system i s progressing well with UNDP support. At
the same time, local governments are not yet well equipped to deal adequately with land management
issues, and rural-urban migration has led to squatting on public lands in rural areas or at the urban
periphery, with unclear control rights for the de facto tenants. In addition, land registration remains
expensive and time consuming, leading to problems with unregistered transactions and subsequent delays
in regularization or in compensating true owners if the land i s to be reallocated for public use. Land use
planning thus, features as an integral element of the GPRSP pillar on infrastructuredevelopment.
28.

While the new labor law contains some positive reforms, various elements of the reform
have increased rigidities in the labor market that need to be addressed. A new labor law was
approved in 2007, following many years o f negotiations among the Government, unions and the business
sector, and reflects a delicate balance of different interests. The law introduces some favorable labor
market measures, notably the elimination of wage indexationto inflation-which i s important in light of
Cape Verde’s currency peg and consequent limitations on devaluation as a means o f enhancing
competitiveness-and greater flexibility for employers to change selected aspects of the labor contract.
At the same time, the law introduced important protections for workers, including limits to the number o f
years workers can be offered temporary contracts, the obligation to pay vacation days not taken, more
days o f maternity leave, and extended worker protections. The key challenge i s that it remains difficult to
release a redundant or non-performing worker, requiring a sequence o f notices and compensation that i s
regarded as costly. This in turn means that only a relatively privileged few enjoy the benefits o f these
protections since the cost of firing workers i s an important factor behind the creation of less formal sector
jobs-the
informal sector i s estimated to account for 40 percent o f the economy. While labor
productivity i s high in Cape Verde, the high costs o f labor relative to the value of their output make it
hard for the country to compete (see Figure 1). Therefore successful pursuit o f Cape Verde’s economic
transformation agenda will require additional labor reforms, especially in relation to the cost of firing

*’

A one-stop shop for business registration had been open on Sal since March 2007 and a second one-stop shop was opened in
the capital city in July 2008, however the Doing Business survey was limited to the capital city and had a cut-off o f June 2008.

11

workers, so as not to undermine the advantages offered by its geo-strategic location-even as it seeks to
maintain social cohesion with its labor policy. In light o f the delicacy of these reforms, the Government
i s evaluating the appropriate timing for next steps in this area.

Figure 1. Productivity per Worker and Ratio of Cost to Output per Worker
Vaiue- Added
per Worker
H Valua-Added per
w r k a r in Garments

Dommmn
Republic
Gwans
Philippmus

-

-

Indonesia

--

South Wncs

Maunttus
Senegal

I

C w Veda _,__
0%

~ _ _ I - - - _ ,- , I
20%

40%

I

60%

labor cost perworker (%of value added1

I Source: Summary of Cape Verde Investment Climate Assessment, AFTFP Note 27, August 2008.
29.
Cape Verde has a large financial sector relative to its GDP that has in general been able to
support the goals of growth and economic development. The market for financial services appears
competitive and credit has supported (and outpaced) the recent high growth rates in the economy. The
country has five on-shore commercial banks with assets amounting to about 90 percent o f GDP. They are
funded in large measure by emigrants, who provide half of all time deposits. Cape Verde also has seven
functioning off-shore banks and several others that have recently been licensed but are not yet operating,
with total assets amounting to an additional 150 percent o f GDP.26All banks are private. The two largest
on-shore banks (both foreign-owned) account for 90 percent o f the on-shore market by assets. The
relatively well-insulated from developments in
banking sector i s amply profitable and-being
international financial markets-has so far been little affected by the financial turmoil. Second-round
effects from the global slowdown may prove more important, as large tourism-related construction
projects slow and remittances decline, although this must be weighed against continued overall growth in
the economy. Domestic banks have experienced no apparent pressure on deposits or on wholesale
funding from parent banks. Still, strong domestic credit growth and strengthened prudential regulations
drove the aggregate capital asset ratio of the banking sector down to the prudentially required minimum
o f 10 percent, implying inadequate capital to support further rapid growth or a severe downturn.
Moreover, the strong reliance on emigrant deposits presents a risk in a system without deposit insurance
that competes for funding with insured U.S.and Euro area banks.27

30.
Even with Cape Verde's large financial sector, access to finance remains challenging for
smaller enterprises and there are certain risks that warrant close supervision. In terms o f access to
finance, credit to the private sector i s well above the regional average-at 45 percent o f GDP-and
banking transactions have been facilitated by the rapid spread of ATMs, point-of-sale transactions and
electronic banking since 2000, however the Government remains concerned about adequate access to
finance for SMEs. W h i l e around 45 percent o f firms have loans, small, domestically-owned
microenterprises, notably those whose managers have less education, face difficulties in obtaining
26 The banking sector dwarfs the nascent stock market, which had a capitalization of 16 percent o f GDP at end-2007 and limited
turnover, especially of shares.
Banks see the 14 percent reserve requirement and 50 percent loan-to-depositratio as reassuring to depositors.

''

12

overdrafts or loans.28However, an arguably more pressing concern for the financial sector i s that the offshore sector i s on the one hand not contributing significantly to the Government’s objective o f
diversifying growth in the economy, and on the other hand, presents important risks, especially
reputational risk. This i s because: (a) balance sheets have been expanding rapidly as non-resident
deposits have been attracted by favorable bank-secrecy and taxation regimes; (b) the regulatory regime i s
lighter than for on-shores; (c) compliance with prudential requirements-including capital adequacy-is
low, and (d) there has been forbearance in supervision mostly as a result o f inadequate use of enforcement
tools. The risks of money laundering and vulnerability to contagion from the financial crisis in other
countries are therefore also higher. Priority reforms to mitigate reputational and other risks should focus
on harmonizing the regulatory framework with those for the on-shore sector, tightening licensing
requirements to allow only banks with clear majority ownership links with well-supervised financial
institutions abroad to operate in Cape Verde, implementing the newly approved anti-money laundering
legislation and strengthening supervisory practices and capacity.

31.
Cape Verde has taken several key steps to reduce trade barriers and facilitate trade,
including accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO). In 2004, a streamlined tariff regime
was introduced that removed discriminatory taxes on trade, other than bands established with ECOWAS
partners, and brought the sin l e average most-favored nation tariff down to 10.9 percent. In July 2008,
Cape Verde became the 153‘ member o f the WTO, and the country expects to enter into an Economic
Partnership Agreement (EPA) with the European Union (EU), which i s by far i t s largest trading partner.
Cape Verde also has relative efficient customs when compared with other countries on the continent. I t s
introduction of ASYCUDA++ systems accelerated processing of cargo, and procedures are relatively
streamlined in terms o f the number o f steps for approvals, although there i s still scope to reduce the
number o f days for exporting and importing products-nineteen and five, respectively.

9

3.4

INVESTING
N
I INFRASTRUCTURE

32.
Investment in infrastructure i s critical for the Government’s economic transformation
agenda, especially in energy, water, transportation, and infrastructure for the tourism and fisheries
sectors. The Government has a limited ability to tap into long-term financing for infrastructure projects.
Despite significant flows of private investments to tourism and real estate, the country relies heavily on
donors to finance major public investments. Cape Verde invests heavily in infrastructure (US$400 per
capita in 2006), however a review o f the broader reform agenda suggests that infrastructurei s the key area
in which clear progress on reforms, including more public-privatepartnerships (PPPs), i s most required to
achieve economic transformation.
33.
The high cost and inadequate supply o f electricity i s without doubt one o f the most
important constraints to the economic development o f the country.29 While Cape Verde will always
face high costs of electrification as an archipelago, the present sector arrangements warrant significant
upgradingand a reassessment. Electra, the national power utility, supplies electricity in the nine inhabited
islands of the country and also operates as a water distribution utility in the four main islands.30Electra’s
financial performance has deteriorated rapidly, mainly due to lack of investments in generation, delayed
and partial tariff adjustments, customer arrears, obsolete equipment, and an escalation o f non-technical

**

Recent studies by IFC PEP-Africaand the 2006 Investment Climate Assessment point to weak capacity for preparing bankable
projects as an impediment to accessing credit, in addition to the cost o f credit.
29 The 2008 DTIS and 2006 ICA survey findings indicate that electricity supply i s by far the number one constraint faced by
Cape Verdean operators. Sixty percent o f enterprises consider that power supply i s a major obstacle to their operations, and the
private sector reports that outages account for losses amounting to up to 11 percent o f sales. Enterprises also complain of high
rates (twice those o f Portugal) and poor service.
30 The main islands are Santiago, SsLo Vicente, Boavista and Sal. Water supplies in the smaller islands are managed by the
municipalities.

13

losses due to fraud and unauthorized connections to the grid (see Box 1). While Electra increased
generation by over 8 percent per year to 250MWh during 2002-06, the current system relies almost
entirely on multiple, inefficiently small, expensive and polluting diesel-run generators on each island,
connected to clients by an inadequately low voltage transmission system and an ageing distribution
network. The resulting power supply disruptions have an immediate negative impact on economic
growth, and while power outages are infrequent compared to other countries in the region, there i s not yet
a widespread practice o f back-up generation so that the outages are more costly and disruptive to
business. Even though Cape Verde has exceptional wind energy potential, at 3 percent o f generation this
i s as yet largely untapped. Finally, with losses equivalent to 1.3 percent o f GDP in just one year (2007)
erasing half of Electra’s net worth, the company i s de-capitalized and without credit from its main
suppliers, the oil companies. The explicit fiscal risks to the budget are clear, since domestic debt issued
to cover Electra’s losses reached approximately 4.5 percent o f GDP by the end of 2008.31 Government
therefore intends to invest heavily in more sustainable, low-cost wind generation (includingvia PPPs) and
in upgradingthe network while seeking greater efficiency in the management of Electra.
Box 1. Electra’s Institutional and Operational Challenges

Access to electricity in Cape Verde i s relatively high at 70 percent (90 percent in urban areas but less than 50 percent in rural
areas). The cost of electricity and water service provision i s high due to the small scale of each service center and consequent
widespread use o f diesel rather than less expensive heavy fuel oil for thermal generation, scarcity o f fresh water resources and
the need to desalinize sea water, and high logistical costs due to the insularity of the country.
Unsatisfactory and deteriorating financial performance. Electra was privatized in 1999, when EDP (the main Portuguese
integrated power utility) acquired a majority equity stake, and coverage expanded rapidly until 2003, when most of the key
relevant indicators began to deteriorate. T h e company’s disappointing operational performance, combined with delayed and
partial tariff adjustments, resulted in a deterioration of Electra’s financial performance, and since EDP and the Authorities
were unable to resolve their dispute over tariffs, they agreed in 2006 to an amicable resolution involving a financial
restructuring of Electra that reduced its debts substantially (from €76 to €45 million) and raised Government’s ownership
stake to 85 percent, and EDP departed. A new management team took over, but has not been able to improve Electra’s
operational performance. On the contrary, distribution losses rose to 25 percent in 2007, compared to 18 percent in 2003, with
losses exceeding 30 percent in Praia, reflecting a significant level o f uncontrolled fraud.
Key challenges. These include: (a) improving the company’s commercial performance; (b) ensuring the approval o f more
timely and better calibrated tariff adjustments by the Economic Regulation Agency (ARE); (c) significantly increasing
generation and reducing its cost by consolidating generation in larger units using heavy fuel oil, upgrading transmission lines,
and pursuing substantial investment in wind energy through independent power producer arrangements (which would also
provide a steady supply of energy during non-peak hours for desalination); (d) upgrading the ageing distribution network; (e)
instituting good corporate governance practices in Electra, with more active monitoring, and (9 mobilizing direct financing
and guarantees for Electra.

34.
Water supply i s a critical issue owing to low and erratic rainfall. The country has the lowest
underground water resources in sub-Saharan Africa after Djibouti. Water i s an expensive commodity.32
Desalination plants require substantial energy supplies and account for about 88 percent o f the water
supplied by Electra, although users complement this with water from surface run-off or underground
sources (using wells and boreholes) that i s not supplied by Electra. Electra’s production of water
averaged slightly over 4 million cubic meters during 2003-06, of which around 30 percent translated into
losses rather than sales, which i s worrisome in light o f the high cost o f desalination.
35.
Effective regulation o f service providers in the various infrastructure sectors i s essential. To
this end, the Government established the Ag2nciu de RegulumentuCfio EconGmicu (ARE) in 2004 to
regulate petroleum products, electricity, water, telecommunications and urban and maritime passenger
3 ’ The implicit fiscal risks are currently being assessed by the government, especially the amounts needed to recapitalize the
company.
3 2 The costs o f running generators and buying desalinated water are two of the cost drivers behind the 11 percent of total hotel
operating costs which are made up by utilities.

14

transport. Since then, responsibility for telecommunications has been transferred to the National Agency
for Communications. ARE i s responsible for setting and implementing tariffs for petroleum products,
electricity and water but has not always carried out this mandate effectively, and will require further
capacity-building support.

36.
Transportation i s another key area requiring a strong reform agenda, one that takes an
integrated, multi-modal approach to linking the islands o f the archipelago. There has been rapid
growth in the movement of vessels, merchandise and passengers between 1995 and 2006. For example,
tons of merchandise rose by 260 percent to 1.7 million tons and the number of passengers increased by
250 percent to 673,000 over the period. Nevertheless, shipping costs in Cape Verde are extremely high,
with a container costing €1,000 to transport from Praia to Sal versus €2,000 from Lisbon to Sal. Interisland transport costs not only erode the cost advantage of Cape Verdean suppliers over overseas
suppliers but also discourage economic activities in the peripheral islands that depend on inputs from
outside. While the Government has privatized inter-island shipping, the maritime fleet33remains small
and obsolete, providing insufficient and unreliable services. Moreover, logistical facilities for transferring
cargo from maritime to road or air transport are extremely limited, adding to storage costs and delays that
undermine competitiveness. Impressive investment has been undertaken to upgrade airports (in Praia and
on Sal, Silo Vicente and Boa Vista), and port facilities (notably in Mindelo and Praia, with plans under
way to expand the port o f Palmeira on Sal), as well as to rehabilitate the core road network to a level that
can be maintained on a sustainable basis. Nonetheless, bottlenecks in coordination between air, sea
(ferry) and road transport remain to be addressed to support trade, tourism and inter-island connectivity
more broadly. Addressing these bottlenecks i s essential if Cape Verde wishes to make use of i t s geostrategic location to achieve its economic transformation objectives.

37.

The transportation sector concentrates most o f the key unfinished elements o f Cape Verde’s
privatization agenda, and reform of the sector i s essential to the country’s development. W h i l e port
infrastructure i s undergoing considerable rehabilitation and upgrading to address physical constraints,
management o f the sector by the State’s port authority, ENAPOR, continues to be inadequate, with an
unwieldy bureaucracy and poor governance that deter investment in inter-island shipping services. There
i s strong political will to develop Cape Verde as a hub/gateway for cargo and passengers; however Cape
Verde suffers from competition from Dakar, which has a much larger cargo base and equally rapid
customs clearance. Privatization of ENAPOR has long been on the Government’s agenda but has been
delayed since the 1990s4ue in part to the difficulties it would likely imply in down-sizing the number
of stevedores and administrative port staff. The same holds for Estaleiros Navais de Cabo Verde
(CABNAVE), a shipyard, and INTERBASE, a fish freezing and storage facility. In the case of air
transport, the national airline (Transportes Ae‘reos de Cabo Verde or TACV) has long been slated for
privatization but the process has been postponed repeatedly due to s t i f f resistance within the firm, the
dilemma of how to handle less profitable inter-islandroutes and insufficient political commitment. Until
recently, TACV had a monopoly on domestic flights and it continues to etljoy public subsidies, although
competitive carriers have now been allowed to open scheduled services in the domestic market. Good
international access via air and reliable inter-island service will be essential to drive down high
transportation costs, which i s in turn essential so as not to constrain growth in Cape Verde’s tourism
industry. Thus to achieve the economic transformation objective of becoming an international hub for
transshipments and transit, Cape Verde will need to make transformative changes in institutional
arrangements for its ports and its air transport.

38.
Since tourism accounts for 18 percent o f GDP and the vast majority of FDI, it i s important
that a long-term comprehensive strategy be developed for investing in the sector. The Government
i s preparing a Tourism Master Plan that should clarify how the country’s development strategy will
33

The 13 members o f the association o f ship-owners have a fleet o f about 20 vessels in operating condition.

15

pursue tourism development; what kind o f tourism should be pursued; how benefits can be extended to
more islands and to small enterprises through the value chain; what kind o f infrastructure investments (in
water, electricity and waste management) are needed to sustain the industry; what kind o f structuring o f
investment incentives i s required to ensure sustained rather than speculative investment, and how to
ensure that tourism i s not developed at the expense of the environment. Moving forward, it i s clear that
more careful zoning and development master plans are needed to promote desirable spatial development
within municipalities or for each island, and further engagement o f the municipalities and UNOTUR, the
new Chamber of Tourism, i s warranted with regard to the development o f tourism on public lands under
the Integrated Tourism Development Zones. Finally, it will be important to systematically brand Cape
Verde in a way that looks beyond its white sand beaches to highlight the country’s more unique cultural
and natural features, including its music.

39.
The fisheries sector needs investment in infrastructure and strengthening of its institutional
and regulatory framework. The sector’s contributionto GDP has fallen from 2 percent o f GDP in 2000
to 1 percent in 2007, however with 60 of this generated by small-scale fishermen (who generally earn
incomes well below average GDPhapita), the sector may represent as much as 5 percent o f the
economically active population-creatingjobs for small-scale fishermen, fishmongers (most o f whom are
women) and seasonal workers employed in industrial fishing and canning. There i s limited industrial
fishing by publicly owned fleets and productivity has been low. Fish resources are not exploited, handled
or graded effectively; current subsidies for ice, fuel and vessel credits are not well targeted, and the sector
i s facing overfishing as production has not risen beyond 10,000 tons per year. The 2007 World Bank
Fisheries Assessment concluded that Cape Verde simply has less exploitable fish than has been assumed
in the past and has been unable to recently assess the status of major fish stocks; the most likely scenario
suggests that most fish resources are fully or over-exploited. Furthermore, most of the country’s fish
resources are high value fish in deep waters and illegal fishing by foreign ships i s a problem as Cape
Verde only has a very limited surveillance capacity. It also has a relatively weak capacity to negotiate
with the large foreign companies or make inroads into the complex commercial arrangements prevailing
in many EU markets.34 Moreover, significant upgrading o f infrastructure and management capacity will
be required to realize the economic transformation objective of turning Cape Verde into a regional fishing
center, since INTERBASE i s not energy efficient and does not meet EU sanitary requirements (which
prevents European fishing vessels from storing their catch before returning to Europe) and faces stiff
competition from Las Palmas and Dakar. Reforms are therefore required in the sector to seize the
opportunities that it offers, notably to address the challenges faced by INTERBASE, reduce small-scale
fishing effort, promote alternative livelihoods to fishing, and adjust industrial fisheries to their
commercial potential.
40.
The country’s important infrastructure and growth agenda will require effective
environmental management to ensure that development i s sustainable. As noted earlier, Cape Verde
has experienced some success in increasing forest cover. At the same time, i t s limited institutional and
supervisory capacity and shortcomings in enforcement of environment-related legislation represent a
concern. For example, inappropriate sewage and solid waste disposal or inadequate phytosanitary
controls on handling o f foods can undermine the tourism industry. Despite the general robustness o f the
environmental regulatory framework, there i s a need for a substantial increase in human resources and
capacity at the level of the country’s environmental directorate to ensure adequate implementation of the
ongoing Second National Environmental Action Plan35and to enforce environment-related legislation.
Cape Verde has a number o f international fisheries agreements with international bodies and with the EU, Japan and a number
o f African countries. T h e fishing licenses issued to E U flag vessels in 2008 are expected to yield €325,000. Licenses to Japan
yielded US$144, 000 in 2007, and US$164,000 are forecast for 2008.
35 The Second National Environmental Action Plan has a 10-year horizon (2004-2014). I t s general objective i s to provide the
country with a strategy that promotes a rationale use o f natural resources and a sustainable management o f economic activities.
34

16

Other challenges include: (a) the sustainable management o f natural resources to minimize the negative
impact o f growth on the environment; (b) the promotion o f more environmentally friendly solutions such
as investing in wind and other renewable energy sources; (c) addressing the lack o f water, sanitation,
urban planning, and protection o f coastal zones; (d) containing the loss o f biodiversity; and (e) curbing
illegal sand extraction and use for cement, since this both destroys coastal zones and can lead to salt-water
contamination o f scarce freshwater aquifers.

3.5

ENHANCING
SOCIAL COHESION

41.

With the strong recent gains in poverty reduction, the timing i s now appropriate for
implementing a better targeted social assistance strategy. As poverty has been reduced dramatically
during the last 20 years, the Government can consider targeting social assistance resources more closely
to the poor instead o f providing transfers and benefits to a large share o f the population that needs these
transfers less than before. There are s t i l l pockets o f poverty, especially on some o f the islands (see
Appendix 5), and this poorer population i s especially vulnerable to the deceleration in economic growth
Also, the cost o f universal programs such as school lunches
associated with the global economic
i s high for the Government and earlier support for such interventions, such as from the World Food
Programme, i s drying up as the country has achieved M I C status. Cape Verde has the technical capacity
to implement targeted intervention and has begun to evaluate the merits o f alternative approaches.

42.

While promoting social solidarity i s an important aspect o f the Government’s strategy, the
existing instruments used by the Government to achieve that goal fall short of expectations. The
Government has attempted to increase the effectiveness o f social policies via a combination o f
decentralization and community involvement or community-driven initiatives that draw on the country’s
well-organized community-based organizations. These principles are at the core o f the new National
Program to Fight Poverty (PNLP). Yet good quantitative data on the impact and cost effectiveness o f this
program are not available. There are also several direct cash transfers and a community-led small works
scheme that provides a safety net for rural areas (known as Micro-realizap7esYwhich has replaced the
former rural public works program, known as FAIMO). In addition, various institutions provide support
for schooling for disadvantaged students and income-generating activities for single mothers. While these
individual programs may be useful as mechanisms to protect the poor in times o f crisis, they are not
sufficient and do not constitute a coherent social protection strategy. Furthermore, their targeting
performance i s not well documented. A much more systematic approach would be needed in terms o f
planning, coordinating, monitoring and evaluating safety net programs.

43.

Implementing a conditional cash transfer (CCT) program can help to improve the targeting
o f social assistance and have a greater impact in terms of poverty reduction. There are several
reasons that militate in favor o f a CCT program aimed at increasing secondary enrollment rates among the
poor: econometric analyses show that the returns to education become significant only with a secondary
education, suggesting that a primary education i s not enough to emerge from poverty; costs are a key
obstacle for sending children to secondary schools, especially for the (poorer) rural population; unlike
primary school education which i s quasi-universal, there are very large differences in net secondary
enrollments between the poorest and the richest quintiles?’ investment in secondary education i s needed
for Cape Verde’s economic transformation to a competitive service economy, and secondary education
provides youth with mobile human capital that they can use anywhere in the country, especially in areas
where job prospects are most attractive. Experience from a range o f Latin American countries suggests
that CCT programs can be highly effective both as short-term transfer mechanisms to reduce poverty and

36

37

The evidence on the recent food price crisis suggests that households in the poorest areas were affected the most.
Children from better off households are twice as likely to go to secondary school as children from the poorest households.

17

as long-term investments to reduce the transmission o f poverty from one generation to the next. Although
no decision has been reached on CCT mechanisms in Cape Verde, the approach i s being studied.

44.

Another key area in which social cohesion can be strengthened i s social security. The system
as a whole i s very young demographically, and there are more than ten contributors for each current
benefit recipient, so that early measures to promote changes will greatly reduce the long-term costs o f
reforms. For example, the coverage of contributing members by the National Institute o f Social Security
(INPS) i s fairly limited, at one-quarter o f formal sector employees, although the number o f beneficiaries
under the non-contributory solidarity support has been extended. In addition, while its defined benefit
pension plan i s well funded, its medical coverage i s under-financed and drives up total contribution rates

to well above 20 percent, which i s prohibitive for many employers and thus constrains formal sector
employment. Third, the INPS surplus (of about 2 percent of GDP) and its accumulation of reserves have
in the past encouraged governments to press the INPS into purchasing Government bonds to finance
budget deficits. As a result, the INPS investment portfolio i s heavily weighted towards non-tradable
Government bonds, which has a direct effect on the long-term finances of the scheme. Therefore a
review of investment policies i s warranted.

45.

The Diaspora also plays an important role in the country’s social cohesion and should be
able to further its impact on development. Cape Verde’s remittances account for close to 10 percent o f
GDP. These remittances have been instrumental not only in boosting incomes in the country but also in
insuring against volatility. A large share i s channeled into local investments indirectly via banking
system deposits that are on-lent to domestic enterprises, while the other main use of remittances i s to
increase and smooth household consumption. Proposals have at times been floated to encourage
recipients to use more o f their remittances to finance income-generating activities instead of
consumption-ven
though the persons in charge o f remittance expenditure often lack entrepreneurial
skills. More fruitful alternative ways to draw on the Cape Verdean Diaspora may be to create niche
markets for the sale and marketing of typically Cape Verdean products, and to facilitate knowledge
transfers to local entrepreneurs from the skilled workers and entrepreneurs in the Diaspora.

IV.

4.1

CAPE VERDE’S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY AND PRIORITIES

CAPE VERDE’S VISION OF ECONOMICTRANSFORMATION

46.
Cape Verde’s development i s guided by the vision of the economic transformation of its
economy in a way that takes advantage o f its geo-strategic position as well as its natural and
cultural assets. This vision translates into a strategy to promote Cape Verde as a multi-purpose service
centre, with a combination of hub services for transshipment and distribution, fish processing and
financial services, in addition to building on its growing tourism business. The Economic Transformation
Strategy (ETS), which was grounded in extensive dialogue early in 2001, i s at the foundation of the
country’s earlier GPRSP for 2004-07 and i t s current strategy for 2008-11. I f focuses on ensuring
consistent broad-based growth by expanding and diversifying the nation’s productive base and deepening
reforms and investments to build a more competitive economy.

18

Box 2. Cape Verde’s Economic Transformation Strategy
The key elements of the ETS focus on building upon Cape Verde’s location to explore natural competitive advantages while
using textiles and tourism as a bridge in the near term. The comparative advantages include: (a) its location as a gateway to
Africa; (b) the sea, and Cape Verde’s potential with its deep water ports as a hub for transshipments, its marine resources and
fisheries, and its beaches and climate for tourism; (c) ‘air space’ with air cargo, passenger transportation, refueling, stopover
duty-free shopping and air traffic control; (d) its good governance for its investment climate; (e) its strategic partners, for market
access and trade relations, and (f)its relatively skilled human resources for use in high-tech, high-end services.
The transformation strategy envisages development of several industry clusters around the sea, including processing and
marketing of marine resources for export in the sub-region, as well as having Cape Verde serve as a transshipment port. The
strategy also proposes the development of an offshore services industry to support the above-mentioned programs and to
provide support services such as I T outsourcing, finance, investment and insurance to the Lusophone and African markets. It
also aims to attract increasingly high value-added tourism.
Maximizing these advantages will require (a) massive investments in infrastructuredevelopment to attract investors, particularly
to tourism, (b) non-traditional sources of financing and increased private sector development, and (c) building human resources
capacities and skills (that are specialized and high technology) to fully develop an information and services economy.

4.2

CAPE VERDE’S GROWTH
AND POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY FOR 2008-11

47.

The overarching objectives o f the GPRSP-I1 are to reduce unemployment to below 10
percent, attain an accelerated real economic growth rate above 10 percent, and cut poverty by
half?’ The four-year GPRSP-I1draws on the ETS as well as strategic documents such as the Government
Program and the ‘Grand Options o f the Plan’, and maintains the thrust of the earlier GPRSP while putting
greater emphasis on infrastructure and private sector development to support growth and reduce poverty.
The specific actions are broadly grouped under the same five strategic pillars as for the first GPRSP:

9 Pillar 1: Promote Government Reform. The objective i s to: modernize the public administration;
design and implement better management practices in public finances; advance with decentralization,
and undertake civil service reforms to streamline the administrative structure and upgrade human
resource management and capacity building. The goal i s to ensure effective, accountable and
transparent support to citizens within solid democratic institutions. The Government also aims to
align spending allocations more closely with GPRSP-I1 priorities within a medium-term framework
that emphasizes public investment for growth.
9 Pillar 2: Develop Human Resources. The objective i s to develop more competitive human
resources, with advanced levels o f scientific, technical and technological knowledge and the requisite
skills for the services industries, while ensuring very broad access to educational opportunities. A
key objective i s to increase employment, especially for youth, and to strengthen Cape Verde’s
competitive advantage at a global level.
9 Pillar 3: Competitiveness - Meeting the Challenges o f Sustainable Development and
Globalization. The objective i s to pursue reforms and investments that ensure macroeconomic
stability as a prerequisite for sustainable competitiveness, growth and development in the country and
to strengthen productivity, the quality o f services, opportunities for employment, regulatory capacity
and the business environment.
9 Pillar 4: The Country’s Economic Infrastructure. The objective i s to increase investment in
infrastructure to meet the daily needs of i t s citizens, to overcome infrastructure bottlenecks, and to
keep pace with the fast growing tourism industry, in partnership with donors and the private sector.

38 The

Joint IDA-IMF Staff Advisory Note on the GPRSP-I1(Report No. 43927-CV) was discussed by the Board on July 8, 2008.

19

9 Pillar 5: Strengthen Social Cohesion. The aim i s to substantially reduce poverty by reducing
unemployment, improving access to microcredit, enhancing labor conditions, extending the coverage
of the social protection system, strengthening food security, ensuring better health services for all,
supporting youth development and integration into the economy, and promoting the gender
dimension. This would include the provision of a more decentralized delivery of social services.

48.

Cape Verde’s program under GPRSP-I1 i s costed at 82 billion Cape Verdean escudos,
approximately equivalent to one billion U S dollars. More than half o f this amount i s guaranteed as it
corresponds to the consolidated budget approved for 2008. The gap o f US$460 million over 2009-11 will
be sought from external and internal sources, notably multilateral and bilateral donor assistance. The
largest share of the program i s for infrastructure(50 percent), followed by human capital development (19
percent), good governance (1 1 percent), competitiveness (8 percent), social cohesion (7 percent), and
cross-cuttingissues, including gender and environment (5 percent).

4.3

CAPE VERDE’S INTEGRATION IN THE GLOBAL
ECONOMY

49.
Cape Verde entered a Special Partnership Agreement (SPA) with the EU in November 2007 and
acceded to the WTO in July 2008. The SPA focuses more on political dialogue, policy convergence on
issues of security, stability, migration and regional integration. I t i s distinct from the Economic
Partnership Agreements that the EU i s seeking with signatories o f the Cotonou Agreement.39 Cape Verde
expects that WTO accession will attract higher levels of FDI, strengthen domestic policies and institutions
for the conduct of international trade for goods and services, enhance the ease and security o f market
access to major export markets and provide access to a trade dispute settlement me~hanism.~’
Progressive
liberalization o f the customs code by 20 18 will, however, imply lower customs revenues, which account
for a sizable share o f tax revenues. In addition to these institutions, Cape Verde i s a member of the
African Union; the Economic Community of West African States, with which it coordinates tariff
policies; the Community o f Lusophone Countries, with which it has established closer relations not only
with Portugal but also with Angola and Brazil; and the Permanent Inter-State Committee to Fight Drought
in the Sahel. While its main trading partners are EU countries, Cape Verde i s seeking greater SouthSouth cooperation on both knowledge sharing and trade with nations ranging from Mauritius to China.
V. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

5.1

LESSONS
LEARNED
AND K E Y PRINCIPLES FOR THE NEW PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

50.
The Bank’s FYO5-OS CAS was broadly implemented as planned and contributed to the
envisioned outcomes in line with GPRSP objectives. The shift to increased budget support bolstered
the reform program and strengthened country dialogue, donor coordination and harmonization. The
portfolio included a good mix o f IDA investment operations that supported activities to complement the
policy reform program supported by the PRSC series and the AAA program that was implemented
reflected CAS priorities (see Appendix 2).

’’

Cape Verde i s a member o f the EU’s Cotonou partnership with 79 African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) States. Since some of
the trade preferences under the partnership do not meet WTO requirements, the EU i s seeking to enter into EPAs with the ACP
signatories. T h e EU i s hnding project in Cape Verde under the ‘Special Partnership’ out o f the €5lmillion earmarked for Cape
Verde over 2008-13 under the 10th European Development Fund (EDF) -the funding part o f Cotonou. The EU has agreed that
Cape Verde be a pilot for the EU’s new ‘Partnership for Mobility’.
40 The need to introduce reforms relating to industrial and intellectual property rights explains the long duration o f the
negotiations (9 years). I n recognition o f the economic impact that membership may have on the country, Cape Verde will have
until 2018 to meet all of its WTO convergence targets which will involve new legislation on commercial, customs and copyright
law, and on health regulation.

20

5 1.

The main lessons that the WBG can draw from previous strategies are that:

In light of the pressing need for investment in infrastructureand the Government’s fiscal constraints,
the WBG program should help Government to leverage financing for infrastructurevia public-private
partnerships. In the energy sector, which experienced a failed PPP, a new approach needs to be
developed for the sector, namely one that promotes effective management and places greater
emphasis on alternative, renewable sources o f energy.
Some risks were not anticipated, such as the combination o f the failed PPP in energy, municipal
arrears, and the weakness of the regulator for the energy and water sector, which weakened Electra
and created additional contingent liabilities for the State.
The development partners should have a clear strategy for building public and private capacity as
weak capacity continues to present a constraint to effective implementation o f Government programs
and private sector activities.
The Government experienced difficulties preparing the MTEF and delays setting up the M&E system,
although both were needed for better planning and monitoring o f GPRSP-I1and o f CAS results.
Given Cape Verde’s economic vulnerabilities, development partners, including the WBG, should
continue to provide Cape Verde with access to concessional financing and maintain other special
economic arrangements to help the country make a smooth transition to middle-income status and
ensure that the development gains are not jeopardized.
The joint budget support program has been very effective in advancing the reform agenda and
coordinating donor support. The WBG should continue efforts to strengthen donor harmonization to
ensure synergies and reduce transaction costs for Cape Verde’s Government.
The Bank needs to have more direct outreach to non-government actors, including Parliament, civil
society and the private sector. There i s also a need for greater responsiveness to Government’s
requests for TA.

52.
The CPS will be guided by the principles of selectivity, partnership, and a broadening and
deepening o f the Bank’s relationship with a new M I C client. The selectivity o f the Bank’s support
across and within sectors i s designed to achieve a more transformative impact. To this end, for example,
the Bank will assign its entire IBRD portfolio to the energy sector (see Section 5.3), and the International
Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) are ready to
support the sector as well. The Bank will also seek partnerships with other donors with a view to
ensuring continued donor coordination of budget support under the auspices o f the Budget Support Group
(BSG) o f donors, but also, where feasible, coordinated and harmonized support on sectoral investments.
Moreover, with Cape Verde’s graduation to blend country status, the WBG will offer a considerably
broader menu o f technical and financial support, ranging from the ongoing IDA, AAA and trust fund
support to include IBRD lending; an expanded IFC program for trade finance, SMEs and PPPs; MIGA
and IBRD guarantees; new hedging products; specialized technical assistance, for example on debt
management; and facilitation o f South-South Exchanges. Indeed, the WBG will offer more knowledge
services designed to build capacity and inform policy dialogue in the country. TA such as that being
provided by the Treasury Department could evolve into fee-based analytical and advisory services.
5.2

CPS OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGIC PRIORITIES

53.
The Bank’s objective for this CPS i s to help the Government sustain high levels o f growth
and reduce unemployment, poverty and inequality. To achieve these major results, the Bank would
provide technical and financial support to: (a) promote good governance and public sector capacity;
(b) improve competitiveness and the investment climate for private sector-led growth, and (c) strengthen
human capital and social inclusion. These three areas are discussed in detail below and related indicators
and areas supported by donor partners are detailed further in the results matrix in Appendix 1.
21

Strategic Priority One: Promoting Good Governance and Public Sector Capacity

54.
This strategic priority i s aligned with Pillar Io f the GPRSP-II on Government Reform, and
will focus on three CPS outcomes. These are: (1) reduced and better managed liabilities; (2)
strengthened management of public resources at central and local levels; and (3) strengthened regulatory
and oversight roles for the public administration. This pillar i s important as it drives macroeconomic
performance, the efficient use o f public resources and therefore also the success o f reforms in other areas.
Moreover, progress in this area will be essential as Cape Verde transitions to a MIC and also assumes
greater responsibilities in light of its integration in the WTO and i t s Special Partnership with the EU.
CPS outcome 1.I: Reduced and better managed liabilities

55.
The new PRSC series will continue to support macroeconomic and fiscal stability, a
condition for sustainable growth. The series will support further clearance of past arrears according to
the plan initiated in 2006 which ensures that no new arrears are created. In addition, as Electra remains a
major fiscal risk, a time bound action plan will be articulatedto clear the company’s arrears to suppliers.
This will complement work carried our by the IMF under the PSI, including support with macroeconomic
monitoring. In addition, the Bank can provide TA for contingency planning in light of the country’s
vulnerability to the impacts o f the global crisis. Support would be coordinated with donors in the BSG.
56.
To preserve debt sustainability and strengthen debt management, the Bank and the IMF
will extend their technical assistance on debt management. A joint WB/IMF team undertook a Debt
Management Performance Assessment exercise (DeMPA) and needs assessment in February 2009 and i s
providing TA on the T-bill auction system. A medium term debt management strategy mission will
follow in April 2009. The main goals are to improve the quality and transparency o f public debt statistics;
assess the adequacy of the legal and institutional framework for conducting and recording debt
operations; ensure coordination between Treasury debt operations and the Central Bank’s monetary
operations; perfect the T-bill auction and develop the domestic market for Government securities,
including the choice o f software for the auctioning of Treasury securities, and design and implement
medium term debt strategy.
CPS Outcome 1.2: Strengthened management of public resources at central and local levels

57.

The PRSC series will support the implementation o f State reforms and o f the State
restructuring plan, including greater decentralization, strengthened municipal management and
merit-based civil service reforms. The Authorities have embarked on a government reform designed to
improve good governance. Key elements o f the reform include the rationalization of government
structures, modernization o f the public administration, transparency in the management of public
resources and decentralization for a leaner, more efficient and more effective public sector. The first
phase of implementation has started and i s progressing satisfactorily. By harmonizing ministerial
structures and integrating the various governmental representations at the regional level, the Authorities
now hope to better coordinate their activities and benefit from economies related to the streamlining of
structures. Decentralization o f responsibilities and resources to municipalities i s Cape Verde’s preferred
means of improving service delivery. Implementing a merit-based civil service reform and increasing
mobility within government and outside, and conducting careful analysis of the fiscal impact o f the
decentralization and new career and salary system, will also be important. Support in these areas would
be coordinated with other BSG members.

22

58.
Support for improved fiscal management and the comprehensive Public Financial
Management (PFM) action plan will be provided primarily through the PRSC series. An update o f
the PFM action plan will draw on the 2008 PEFA results as well as the findings of the latest CFAA
evaluation and 2008 PER update, and on work done by IFC’s PEP-Africa in 2007 on drivers o f growth.
The Bank may undertake a targeted PEWCPAWCFAA analysis to underpin the reform program. The
key areas for increased focus include advancing on the public procurement modernization reform and
implementingthe new procurement code; oversight of fiscal risk from public sector entities; ensuring the
effectiveness of audits; strengthening medium term budgeting and planning; advancing with the
framework law on decentralization to ensure increased transparency in the transfer of funds, and
enhancing PFM capacity at decentralized levels. This would be done in partnership with the donors on
the BSG, who are supporting PFM in a coordinated way. For example, AfDB i s leading the work on
budget planning and allocation, while the Spanish cooperation i s supporting the national procurement
system, including the establishment o f the Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (ARAP).
CPS Outcome 1.3: Strengthened regulatory and oversight rolesfor the public administration

59.
The Bank will provide operational support together with the PRSC series, in coordination
with other donors, in order to strengthen technical capacity within the public administration. This
support would include such areas as procurement, internal audit skills in central Government as well as
technical and managerial capacity at the municipal level. A Growth TA and SME Support operation i s
proposed that responds to Government’s request to provide Cape Verde with support to articulate, design
and implement reforms that promote good governance and efficiency.
60.

The Bank will contribute to strengthening a national monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
system as well as statistical information and analysis. The national M&E system i s quite ambitious as
it i s designed to be an integrated national system covering a l l sectors that would enable government-wide
monitoring of outcome indicators for all projects/programs in all sectors. Progress has been made on the
system but it i s not yet fully functional. Given the importance and complexity o f the national M&E
system, the Bank, along with the BSG, will prepare a needs assessment on results-based management and
M&E that should inform a comprehensive capacity building plan. The MCC i s also supporting the
national M&E system. With regard to statistics, the National Statistics Institute (known as N E ) ensures
harmonization, integration and dissemination o f demographic and social statistics, and gathers scattered
sectoral information to provide it in a useful format to public and private agencies. I t oversees the
Statistical Agenda, Cape Verde’s national statistical development plan, which i s progressing slowly. The
Bank and the Swedish cooperation will provide support to INE, in the Bank’s case with a particular
emphasis on ensuring that data are available on key sectors that the Bank i s supporting, such as tourism
and infrastructure.
Strategic Priority Two: Improving Competitiveness and the Investment Climate for Private SectorLed Growth

61.

This strategic priority i s aligned with Pillar III on competitiveness and Pillar IV on
infrastructure of the GPRSP-11, and will focus on two CPS outcomes. These are: (1) an improved
business climate; and (2) improved access to and quality of key economic infrastructure services. The
two GPRSP-I1 pillars and the related CPS outcomes are at the core o f the country’s economic
transformationagenda. Cape Verde’s infrastructureand basic services are also under pressure to meet the
demands and opportunities o f the rapidly growing economy.

23

CPS outcome 2.1: Improved business climate

62.

The Bank will support policy and regulatory reforms to reduce business constraints, via the
PRSC series and the Growth TA and SME Support operation. The Government’s Casu do Cidudco
has been extremely successful in launching four modules: (a) obtaining birth, death and marriage
certificates; (b) creating a company in one day; (c) obtaining a unified automobile document; and (d)
facilitating electronic payments. At the same time, further reforms are required to bring down the cost of
doing business and ensure effective, transparent, participatory and operationally cheap access to services.
These could include Doing Business-related reform as well as trade restrictiveness reforms, such as
streamliningCustoms procedures further, or the careful design o f rationalized and focused tax incentives,
drawing on the conclusions o f the recent Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS). The IFC designed
the Millennium Challenge Corporation’s (MCC’s) Private Sector Development program, which will be
implemented by a public-privateoversight body in Cape Verde and will include components to strengthen
local entrepreneurship, improve access to finance for SMEs, strengthen linkages in the tourism sector, and
address other constraints to domestic investment. IFC will directly implement the credit bureau
component o f this initiative, and will further seek to support local financial institutions expanding their
business lending operations.

63,
Increasing competitiveness in the financial sector, including by strengthening supervision
and regulation of banks, will support the private sector. Based on the findings of the recent Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) exercise, the Bank proposes to support a revision o f the microfinance
law, help strengthen the off-shore banking regime and the Central Bank’s supervisory capacity, and
enhance creditors’ rights to improve access to credit, including potentially by strengthening the real
property registration code and registries. The instruments for this would include the PRSC series, the
Growth TA and SME Support operation, which would also address access to finance issues for SMEs,
and possibly a short term post-FSAP assistance task. Bank support will be complemented by the IMF
PSI’S focus on AMLKFT, for which new legislationhas been adopted.
64.

Cape Verde needs to review and realign its tourism strategy to keep its destination
competitive with other markets and supply a differentiated product. A comprehensive strategic
vision (tourism master plan) i s a critical first step. In addition, it will be important to strengthen
coordination among Government institutions around tourism activities and to adapt the regulatory and
legal framework to attract high quality FDI and enhance local content. Another key concern o f the
Government i s to strengthen linkages between the tourism industry and local communities, so as to
increase domestic value added, create more jobs and extend benefits from this industry beyond the islands
on which tourism i s concentrated at present. The Growth TA and SME Support operation could be used
to provide support in some of the above areas.

65.
Improving land management use i s critical not only for the tourism sector but also to
address rapid urban expansion and environmental challenges. The Bank, along with Austria and
Spain, will support the Government in tackling constraints related to land by addressing land registration,
ensuring effective legal protection of property rights at a reasonable cost (which i s essential for tourism
investments and other FDI), and dealing with rapid urban growth. The implementation o f the new
Cadastre Law and systematic planning on all islands represent decisive steps for ensuring
competitiveness. Additional areas for development include enhancing the effectiveness o f real estate
taxation and completing both municipal planning and island-level plans. This would help to address
population growth, mobility, and urban expansion via improved land management and better planning of
infrastructure. The PRSC series and the Growth TA and SME Support project provide the vehicles for
policy dialogue and technical support on these issues.

24

CPS outcome 2.2: Improved access to and quality of key economic infrastructure services

66.
The CPS will contribute to easing infrastructure bottlenecks in two key areas, namely
energy and water on the one hand, and transportation, with a focus on roads, on the other. The
dedication of the entire IBRD envelope under the CPS to the energy sector i s intended to achieve a
significant breakthrough in the sector. Similarly the assignment o f further resources to the road sector,
building on an earlier operation and its additional financing, i s intended to complete the sustainable
upgrading of the core road network and focus on integration of that network with sea and air transport.
The IFC has previously financed the mobile telecommunications sector, and will seek to expand financing
to this and other infrastructureareas, notably energy, that are being developed by the private sector.
67.
The Government and Electra plan to increase power generation capacity significantly, and
the Bank would support this while also supporting stronger management and regulation of the
sector. The additional generation capacity required presently i s estimated at about 30 megawatts, which
i s equivalent to 35 percent of installed capacity. This i s needed for reliable coverage for households as
well as for the manufacturing and hotel industries, I T services and cold storage facilities. Investment
lending by IBRD will support Electra’s financial recovery and modernization and support its business
plan and investment program, including new investments in renewable energy, notably wind and hydro
power; as well as water and sanitation services. A Partial Risk Guarantee from IBRD would be used to
attract investors to invest in renewable energy, including the ongoing windmill parks project. IFC has
financed an analysis o f potential private wind power projects, and would be able to finance viable projects
emanating from these efforts, provided the sectoral imbalances are also corrected. IFC envisages
potential financing to private power production projects. As the Bank budget support shifts to the
infrastructure and private sector development agenda, the CPS will seek to promote a stronger regulatory
framework for energy and water pricing and related measures. The Bank will continue to support major
reforms through ongoing policy dialogue under the PRSC instrument and TA. The Public-Private
Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) i s supporting the preparation o f energy sector development
policy and technical assistance to the Economic Regulation Agency, ARE, for it to facilitate sustainable
public-private partnerships. Further TA i s being provided to prepare a strategy for Electra’s financial
recovery. The AfDB i s providing complementary assistance through i t s electricity project on Santiago.
68.

I n transport, the Bank’s focus will be on effectively implementing the Additional Financing
for the ongoing road sector support project and preparing a new transp,ortsector operation. The
latter operation will complete the core road network, while the prioritization of additional roads for
investment would be based on (a) potential for enhancing tourism opportunities for the main roads, and
(b) providing access to poor and isolated communities (based on populationdensities) for the rural/ feeder
roads network using a least-cost approach.41The transport operation will also build institutional capacity
for maintenance, and assess the multi-modal transport system and inter-island logistics planning capacity.
With most external trade passing through sea ports, the economy i s critically dependent on intermodal
transport. Coordination between air, sea (ferry) and road transport needs to be assessed to identify the
bottlenecks to be removed in support of tourism and inter-island connectivity and travel. A stronger
capability in supply chain management and transport logistics may help boost manufacturing
competitiveness, both at the level o f the firm and the economy. A logistics study, possibly funded by the
PPIAF, will be prepared to inform future work in this area. In addition, the PRSC series will support
policy reforms that ensure the sustainability of transport sector investments, such as ensuring that the road
maintenance fund i s fully established and adequately financed. The ongoing IDA growth and
competitiveness project will continue providing technical assistance for the privatization o f ENAPOR, the
Port Management Company, and TACV, Cape Verde’s National Airline. Improving port management i s
4 ’ Data from the census and the poverty map would be used to assess where to invest in roads by taking into account not only
population density and poverty, but also the economic and social potential o f various types o f investments.

25

essential to enhance the economic performance of the transport chain which in Cape Verde nearly always
involves maritime transport. The Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) and Luxembourg are
supporting the transport sector as well.

69.
The CPS will support the Authorities in reassessing options in the fisheries sector. The FY07
fisheries sector report noted that the potential o f the fisheries sector i s limited and in most cases resources
have been fully or over exploited. The proposed West Africa regional fisheries project will aim at (a)
strengthening fisheries governance, (b) reducing illegal fishing, and (c) increasing local value added from
maritime resources. The sector report and the planned country strategic investment framework (CSIF)
will contribute to the analytical underpinning o f the country operation. Support on fisheries i s also being
provided by the Japanese Government.
70.
The CPS will ensure that the support for infrastructure takes due care of the environment.
To ensure that investments in infrastructure are consistent with a sustainable natural environment, in
collaboration with other budget support donors, the Bank will support the Authorities in developing a
policy framework for an environmentally sustainable tourism strategy. Assessing transparency in the
pricing, allocation and management o f public land i s also needed to safeguard the environment and fiscal
assets, and could be supported, in conjunction with the tourism strategy, under the Growth TA and SME
Support project. In addition, in collaboration with other development partners, the Bank, through the
TerrAfrica partnership, will support the preparation of a sustainable land and water management CSIF
that will identify priority areas for intervention.
Strategic Priority Three: Strengthened Human Capital and Social Inclusion

71.
This strategic priority i s aligned with Pillar I1 on human capital and Pillar V on social
cohesion o f the GPRSP-11, and will focus on two CPS outcomes. These are: (1) better alignment o f
technical and vocational education and training (TVET) graduates’ skills with labor market needs, and
(2) improved targeting o f public expenditures and specific programs. The two GPRSP-I1 pillars and the
related CPS outcomes are fundamental to reduce unemployment and strengthen social cohesion by
reaching vulnerable groups with effectively designed programs.42
CPS outcome 3.1: Better positioning of the education and TVET sectorsfor labor market needs

72.
I n order to assist Cape Verde in developing a demand-driven TVET system, the Bank will
continue to supervise TVET activities supported by the Dutch Cooperation. The Dutch cooperation
has entered into an agreement with the Bank to monitor a €9 million budget support grant over 200820 11. Activities will aim at developing in-country institutional capacity to steer a broad TVET program,
supplying training opportunities geared towards labor market demand, and ensuring that an employment
observatory i s in place and produces reliable statistics.
73.

The Tertiary Education in Africa Team (TEIA) will support Cape Verde to increase access
and equity at the tertiary education level. TEIA’s support will focus on strategic priority disciplines
for the country’s development and develop short term professional training that meets the labor market’s
needs, while also addressing the sustainable development of the overall sub-sector. The TEIA will
undertake an assessment of the tertiary education sub-sector, focusing on financing and equity aspects and
simulating the costs and sustainability of different policy options, so as to inform a policy dialogue on
developing a sustainable and efficient tertiary education sector in Cape Verde. It will also share
knowledge through Cape Verde’s participation in workshops like the one scheduled for April 2009 on
42 Cape Verde’s objective i s to reduce current unemployment rate o f 18 percent to less than 10 percent in 2012. This will require
the creation o f 12,000 jobs per year in different areas o f economic activity.

26

short-term professional tertiary education with other African countries. The TEIA could also support the
development of a center o f excellence43in a priority sector, such as tourism, if there were a clear vision,
strong buy-in, and solid training experience to draw on for such an institution. This would require IDA
financing and preliminary TA to help the identified institutionto develop a solid business plan.

CPS outcome 3.2: improved targetingfor public expenditures and specific programs

74.
At present, only a minority o f public resources that are intended to reach the vulnerable
population actually reach them, so improved targeting i s e~sential.4~
The Authorities have requested
Bank support to identify ways to better target their programs. Cape Verde i s one of few countries in
Africa where it may make sense to set up a proxy-means testing program, although geographic targeting
using the poverty map that INE and the Bank constructed recently i s also a possibility. The Bank can
support Cape Verde with TA to determine optimal targeting approaches for social programs and subsidies
for poverty reduction, and help to develop practical administrative tools for implementing them.45 The
Bank can also help the Authorities to investigate the feasibility o f implementing a conditional cash
transfer program. Since a poverty map has already been estimated for the country and alternative proxymeans testing strategies have been calibrated in preparing the Poverty Assessment, support for improved
targeting could be provided via the PRSC series. A common targeting system for multiple programs,
ranging from utility subsidies to public works and minimum pensions, would bring down administrative
costs for implementingthe targeting mechanisms in relation to the outlays for the various programs.
75.
An ongoing initial assessment of the labor market could lead to more in-depth and policyfocused advice on specific labor market constraints. An initial assessment of the labor market i s
currently examining the issue of misalignment between recent unemployment and GDP growth rates,
which point to a labor-skills mismatch. It aims to understand labor market dynamics in key sectors o f the
economy, paying special attention to the demand side and drawing on a new enterprise survey. This
work i s also intended to provide the Authorities with the tools to monitor and evaluate the labor market
outcomes of the new labor law. Follow-on work could help the Authorities to address the issue o f
strengthening human capital or other priority areas in relation to labor.
76.
The Bank Group’s support for energy, water, transport and competitiveness will not only
address growth and efficiency issues but also pay attention to the social inclusion o f underserved
groups. For example, the transport sector project would finance rehabilitation o f the rural roads network
to support access to employment and marketing opportunities for rural residents; the proposed energy and
water sector support would address tariff and coverage issues with a view to improving access for
underserved groups; a key objective o f the proposed Growth TA and SME Support project would be to
increase opportunities for SMEs, and the IFC’s PEP-Africa has designed a tourism linkage program to
enhance opportunities for rural areas. One component, a marketing and reservations service for small,
independent lodging operators, i s currently being implemented with 3 5 firms participating. Thus there i s
an explicit aim to draw on the operations in the pipeline to promote social inclusion even as they address
growth and efficiency issues.

77.
The Bank will also finalize the implementation o f two operations in June 2009 with strong
social inclusion dimensions. The first i s the IDA-supportedHTV/AIDS Additional Financing, which has
The 2iE (international institute o f water and environmental engineering) in Burkina Faso i s a good example o f this kind of
support.
44 Source: draft Poverty Assessment for Cape Verde, 2009, based on QUIBB data.
45 The Poverty Assessment currently under implementation will provide an asset-based poverty trend and profile analysis that
compares the 2001 and 2006 surveys; assess qualitative perceptions o f poverty by the population; analyze basic trends in
education, health, and employment indicators; and, drawing on a new 2008 survey, examine trends in monetary poverty and the
links between growth and poverty reduction, with a focus on the impact of the tourism boom.
43

27

focused on outreach to vulnerable populations to increase awareness, as well as on the provision o f antiretroviral treatment for persons living with W/AIDS-Cape Verde’s successful application to the
Global Fund for support will ensure some continuity in that regard. The second i s a JSDF-funded grant
for access to justice for vulnerable women. With a view to promoting social equity more broadly and
gender equity in particular, this project has developed 11 “Legal Centers” on various islands to provide
one-stop legal services including legal advice and rapid peaceful solutions to everyday disputes.

5.3

DELIVERING
THE CPS PROGRAM

78.

The indicative I D A 15 envelope for Cape Verde i s SDR27 million, equivalent to US$40
million, and the first year of IDA 16 (FY12) i s taken to be in line with I D A 15. On this basis, the
overall indicative IDA envelope for the CPS period i s estimated at US$51.5 million.46 If Cape Verde
participates in the Regional Fisheries Project, the country IDA allocation o f US$1.5 million .would
leverage an additional US$3 million from the regional allocation for this project, and an additional
US$1.5 million from the GEF, for a total investment o f US$6 million. There will be some front-loading
or back-loading of the IDA15 envelope across years since new IDA commitments are expected to be
concentrated in FY 10.

79.
Cape Verde will also access IBRD resources during the CPS period. In October 2007 the
Bank established that Cape Verde i s creditworthy for IBRD lending. On this basis, Cape Verde will be a
blend borrower, accessing both IBRD and IDA financing under this CPS.47 The ceiling on IBRD
commitments during the four-year CPS period has been set at US$54 million. Cape Verde intends to
draw on the IBRD financing envelope as follows: (a) a US$41 million energy investment operation; and
(b) a US$11.8 million IBRD guarantee for the wind farm electricity. The IBRD resources will be
contingent upon continued satisfactory performance of economic management indicators
(macroeconomic management, fiscal policy, and debt policy) o f the CPIA. The proposed pipeline i s
presented in Table 3. Since the new IBRD support complements an increased IDA program, the Bank
will be dedicating additional administrativeresources to deliver the expanded program for Cape Verde.
80.
The Bank will concentrate its financial resources in selected areas within the three pillars of
the CPS so as to achieve transformative change. This implies focusing resources in a sector over time
until a transformation point i s reached beyond which the sector i s elevated irreversibly to a higher
functioning level. For example, the full IBRD envelope o f US$52.8 million will be assigned to the
critical energy sector and build on previous assistance in that sector in order to support decisive change.
The PRSC series o f around US$10 million per year over four years will focus on governance and
competitiveness reforms and build on the previous PRSCs and the ongoing Growth and Competitiveness
operation in order to reinforce this priority area. New IDA-and GEF-financed investment projects
totaling US$13 million over the next four years will also address governance and competitiveness
reforms, as well as bolster support through the ongoing Road Sector operation so as to achieve
transformative change via continuing and enhanced support to the transport sector. A fisheries operation,
46 The

actual IDA allocation for Cape Verde may vary annually on the basis of (a) the country’s performance as assessed via the
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment indicators and the performance o f the Bank’s portfolio in Cape Verde; (b) the
country’s performance relative to the performance of other IDA countries; (c) overall resources available to IDA during the
IDA16 replenishment period; (d) changes in the list of active IDA-eligible countries, and (e) lending terms for which Cape Verde
qualifies under the IDA 15 grant eligibility and allocation framework. Any fluctuations in the annual I D A allocations will be
reflected in an adjustment of financing for either budget support or investment operations. Incremental additional resources that
may become available would be used to top up investment operations or, if warranted, to alleviate external shocks.
47 Cape Verde met two o f three criteria for MIC status, namely the cut-off for the country’s income per capita (estimated at
US$2,130 in 2006) and the Human Assets Index (level o f human development), but Cape Verde lags on the third criterion,
namely the Economic Vulnerability Index (EVI).

28

which draws on earlier AAA in the fisheries sector, would strengthen governance, efficiency and
sustainability in the sector as part o f a regional initiative. The proposed program of lending builds on an
existing well-performing portfolio o f three operations totaling US$48.5 million that i s well-aligned with
the CPS objectives. With the IDA and IBRD envelopes already determined, the timing of delivery o f the
Bank support and the mix between budget support and investment operations will be the key tools that the
Bank will have at i t s disposal to adjust to changing economic and social conditions in the country.
Table 3. Indicative IDA and IBRD Financing Envelope
and Program for FY09-12
Source o f Financing and Project name

I
I

US$ million
IDA

I

Planned financing
IDA 15

IDA 16

FY09

FYlO

FYll

FY12

10

10

10

10

- Total 51.5111

PRSC I V - VI1 (annual budget support)

-

Transport Sector Support SIL

5

Growth TA and SME Support Project - SIL

3.5
1.5

Investment operation to be determined

1.5

Regional Fisheries Project*

IBRD -Total 52.8111
Energy Sector Support Operation

41

Energy Sector Partial Risk Guarantee

11.8

GEF - Total 1.5m

1.5

Regional Fisheries Project

8 1,
While the Bank Group’s financial assistance i s designed to be selective, the AAA program i s
designed to be flexible, so as to respond promptly to Government requests for highly technical nonlending support. The Bank will undertake a Poverty Assessment and an FSAP in FY09 and work
towards an initial labor market assessment. In subsequent years, it will prepare one full PER plus just-intime policy notes to address key issues that may arise, for example in relation to the global crisis,
procurement-related reforms or aspects o f the reform agenda in the country’s Economic Transformation
Strategy (see Table 4). Efforts will be made to ensure that findings are internalized and translate into
actions and results by incorporating carefully tailored engagement and dissemination strategies into AAA.

FY09

0

Poverty Assessment
Financial Sector Assessment
(FSW

FYll

FYlO
Initial Labor Market
A~essment
Policy Note

0

PER
Policy Note

FY12
Policy Note
Policy Note

82.
Trust funded activities will be an important part of the Country Partnership Strategy.
There are currently five active trust funds in the portfolio for a total o f just over US$6 million o f which
US$3.7 million remain to be disbursed. They include support to the Supreme Audit Institution; TA for
energy and water; support to public-private infrastructure, and access to legal services, and they are
therefore closely aligned to the strategic objectives o f the Bank’s strategy. Additional support will be
sought from such sources as the Institutional Development Fund, the Public-Private Infrastructure

29

Advisory Facility and the GEF. Resources will be used strategically to enhance Cape Verde’s access to
WBG support and will be brought to bear in particular on: (a) capacity building activities in the area of
debt and asset management; (b) facilitating policy dialogue and capacity building in other areas in which
the Bank does not have a lending operation, for example higher education, or in which there are
insufficient lending resources for capacity building, e.g. FSAP follow-up or tourism. In each case, the
Bank will pay attention to the cost-efficiency of managing the trust funds.

5.4

I F C AND M I G A ACTIVITIES

83.
The International Finance Corporation’s current investment portfolio in Cape Verde i s
limited, with a total of US$8 million in investments in the telecommunications and banking sectors.
Going forward, the IFC Strategy will focus on opportunities to improve financing options for SMEs in
Cape Verde, and public-private infrastructure projects. In SME finance, IFC will expand current trade
finance and credit lines with Caixa Econdmica, to other interested commercial banks. IFC will also
explore the potential for other instruments to support increased access to credit for SMEs through the
banking sector, such as portfolio guarantees. In infrastructure, IFC has been active in financing the
expansion of cellular telephone networks, the main infrastructure sector attracting private investment.
IFC will also seek to provide advisory assistance to the Government in structuring public-private
partnership and concession arrangements in key sectors. IFC’s PEP-Africaprogram, in coordinationwith
IDA, has prepared a series o f studies on the priorities for developing five key sectors for the economic
transformation agenda (SMEs, finance, fisheries, maritime transport and tourism). This work was
undertaken to assist the Government and private sector in designing the private sector component of the
US-financedMCC, which signed a U S $ l 00 million Compact with Cape Verde in 2005.

84.
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) does not currently have any
exposure in Cape Verde. Nevertheless, MIGA i s prepared to provide guarantees for private-sector led
investments in infrastructure and to provide TA and advisory services to Cape Verde to structure publicprivate partnerships that are sustainable.
5.5

PARTNERSHIPS AND HARMONIZATION WITH DONORS

85.
Budget support has catalyzed donor harmonization around key policy measures and results
in Cape Verde. In April 2005, a “Partnership Framework between Budget Support Partners and the
Government o f Cape Verde for the Provision of Budget Support” was signed between the Government,
IDA, the EU and the nether land^.^' Under this Partnership Framework, the Government and donors
agreed to: (a) harmonize indicators and prior actions for budget support; (b) undertake joint reviews of
budget support, and (c) synchronize budget disbursements with the Government’s budget cycle in order to
reduce the transaction costs o f such assistance to the Government. With this agreement, which reflects
Government’s ability to coordinate donors around a key agenda, the Government and partners began to
institutionalize efforts to harmonize budget support for GPRSP implementation. Since its inception, the
Austrian Development Agency, Portugal, the Spanish Agency for International Cooperation, and the
African Development Bank have joined the Partnership Framework (see Table 5). The bi-annual reviews
around a joint, streamlined matrix that forms the basis for discussions and disbursements in the donors’
respective operations have greatly reduced transaction costs for the client. The proposed PRSC-5,
embedded in a three-year matrix that will be agreed with the authorities and donors, i s being identified in
consultationwith various stakeholders under Government’s leadership.

Cape Verde’s major bilateral donors are Austria, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, China, Portugal and the U.S.A. The EU,
ADB, UN, IMF and World Bank are the major multilateralpartners.
48

30

Table 5. Estimated Joint Budget Support for Cape Verde 2008-2011
US$ Million

2008

AfDB

2009

2010

5.0

2.5

2011

Austria

0.5

1.3

2.0

2.0

EU

3.2

6.5

6.5

6.5

The Netherlands

9.8

4.6

4.6

1.3

Portugal

2.0

2.0

2.6

2.6

Spain

4.4

4.8

4.8

4.8

10

10

10

10

World Bank

86.
The Bank’s coordination with donor partners extends beyond the BSG, however overall
donor coordination could be strengthened further. For example, the Bank and the M C C provide
complementary support under the National Road Sector Program. IDA support for privatization i s linked
to infrastructure investments, e.g. the rehabilitation o f the port o f Praia, supported by the M C C and
Portugal, and the Bank supervises the Dutch cooperation’s budget support for education. While it i s more
difficult for IDA to play the platform role it often plays in other countries in the absence o f a local office
presence, the Bank does play a key role in such areas as public finance, roads and energy in ensuring
strategic coherence o f donor support through i t s role in the policy dialogue and technical support. There
i s nonetheless s t i l l considerable scope for strengthening donor coordination under the Government’s
leadership (see Table 6 and the matrix in Appendix 6 on priority areas o f intervention for donor partners).
Table 6. Development Partners and Current Areas o f Intervention
Partner
World Bank

YOof aid
17,9

Portugal

13,5

European Union
The Netherlands
Luxembourg
UN System

12,l
10,o
938
7,6

AfDB
Japan
USA

595
554
42

Germany
Spain
BADEA
France
Austria
China

0,9

Sectors supported
Basic infrastructure; private sector development; energy and water; public
financial management; public finance.
Human capital development and capacity building; territorial development
and recovery; social protection services; physical security.
Infrastructure linked to the health sector; water and sanitation ;
Environment; public finance reform; vocational training.
Health; education and training; roads; water and sanitation
Good governance; water and sanitation; population; decentralization;
education; health; rural development; child protection
Infrastructure; education; rural development; poverty reduction; energy
Fisheries infrastructure; underground water sources
M C A 2005-20 11: transport infrastructure; rural development ; private
sector development
Natural resources; education and training
Decentralization; culture and heritage; public finance
Infrastructure; education; rural development; social protection; private
sector development
Good governance; decentralization; water and sanitation
Decentralization; water and sanitation; rural development; public finance
(as o f 2007)
Infrastructure construction

Source: How to Manage the Transition Together: Report for the Group o f Support for the Transition; Department o f Planning, Ministry
o f Finance and Public Administration, 2006

31

,

VI. COUNTRY MONITORING AND EVALUATING AND RISK MANAGEMENT
MONITORING
AND EVALUATING
THEBANK’SPORTFOLIO

6.1.

87.
The Bank has had a good quality portfolio o f operations in Cape Verde. Four out of the five
projects that exited during FY05-08 had satisfactory outcomes, and all three operations in the portfolio as
o f February 1, 2009, (totaling US$48.5 million) are rated satisfactory, with no flags for problem^.^' The
last independent procurement review rated the three projects currently in the portfolio as moderately
satisfactory on procurement. To improve portfolio management, the Bank intends to conduct
procurement clinics so as to strengthen capacity within the country. Financial management ratings for the
operations are also rated above the line and considered generally satisfactory.
MONITORING
AND EVALUATING
RESULTS

6.2.

88.
The Government i s designing an integrated approach for monitoring and evaluating the
GPRSP-II?’ The approach, which i s s t i l l under development, includes: (a) integrating the budget and
financial management system with the technical aspects o f programs and service delivery; (b) developing
a unified technological platform through Cabo Verde Digital; (c) providing open access to the main data
warehouses on national statistics, policies and projects; (d) refining the indicators, and (e) strengthening
statistics and planning sector units within Ministries. The design i s advancing, although capacity
weaknesses, low levels of communication among stakeholders, and the need for financial resources have
to be addressed to ensure that the M&E system i s fully operational.

89.

The implementation of the Statistical Agenda i s advancing slowly, but a shortage o f
resources means that data are incomplete on key areas o f Bank support and the INE is
underfunded for the 2010 census. INE i s the main provider of data on employment, drawing on regular
employment and household surveys. INE i s also the main source o f data on tourism and i s currently
preparing a survey on tourists’ satisfaction with their visits. Statistics on infrastructure are incomplete
and are not highlighted in the Statistical Agenda, representing a challenge for the Bank. INE i s also
preparing the Population and Housing Census for 2010 with insufficient funding for this critical activity:
the census i s the foundation for all future surveys and for sector indicators, such as on education and
health. Other key activities include implementing the second in-depth household budget and
consumption survey (known as IDRF-2) to update the main poverty indicators.

90.
The Bank and donors will monitor the implementation o f the CPS through joint missions as
well as through separate project supervision missions. The Results Framework will be used to track
intermediate indicators and measure progress toward higher level outcomes (see Appendix 1). The Bank’s
Implementation Supervision Reports are an important element in monitoring and evaluating progress on
the CPS as well. Annual Country Portfolio Performance Reviews will provide a forum for aggregating
indicators and raising issues on results and outcomes with the Authorities.
6.3.

91.

’

MAIN R I S K S AND MITIGATING
MEASURES

There are important risks to achievingthe anticipated results under the CPS. They include:

The operations are: a FY03 Growth and Competitiveness Project (US$14Sm); an FY02 HIV/AIDS Project with additional
financing (US$14m), and an FY05 Road Sector Support Project with additional financing (US%20m).
The National Poverty Committee i s the GPRSP Steering Committee that oversees the process. A Technical Secretariat for
Development Assistance (STAD) under the General Direction o f Planning has day-to-day responsibilities for providing technical
guidance, monitoring performance, and informing internal and external partners o f progress.
49

32

92.
A deepening and extension of the global economic downturn, o r a subsequent return to
higher food and fuel prices. The recent shocks and global economic slowdown pose a significant risk to
economic growth and poverty reduction for Cape Verde. For example, growth estimates for Cape Verde
for 2009 have virtually been halved over the past two months. Given the importance o f tourism receipts,
FDI and remittances flows for Cape Verde’s economic growth, the Authorities will need to further
develop their policy options to respond to the risk o f contagion from the global financial slowdown.
Factors that mitigate the risks related to the global crisis include Cape Verde’s build-up of sizable
international reserves in recent years; i t s standing line o f credit with the Central Bank of Portugal; i t s
continued monitoring under the IMF PSI, its access to budget support from the Budget Support Group of
donors, including the Bank, and the country’s solid track record of proactive economic management and
timely adjustment to shocks. The Bank’s focus on the energy sector i s also intended to address one o f the
major sources o f risk related to contingent liabilities, while post-FSAP support will serve to address risks
o f contagion to the financial sector. Nevertheless the risk remains substantial, and the Bank i s engaged in
enhanced surveillance of key economic indicators-together with the IMF-in light o f the risks o f
contagion. In addition, the upcoming Poverty Assessment will simulate the poverty impact of the shock
across different groups so as to identify further mitigation measures. While a repeat of the sharp rise in
food and fuel prices that occurred in 2008 i s less likely in a deflationary context, it would pose a risk to
Cape Verde as a net importer o f food and fuel if it were to reoccur. Cape Verde was able to address the
shock fairly well in 2008 through i t s grain stocks, tax and safety net policies and other fiscally prudent
measures. However an extended food or fuel price pressure could strain the fiscal situation and delay
further poverty reduction, especially in rural areas. In light of these risks, the Bank intends to prepare a
CPS Progress Report earlier than would normally be scheduled so as to be able to review and adjust its
program as needed, especially if unpredictable negative developments emerge.
93,
Political climate and implementation of reforms. The Government’s commitment to
implementing structural reforms, particularly in infrastructure, i s critical to achieving the CPS outcomes.
With the next Presidential and legislative elections slated for early in 2011 and with a more polarized
political scene since the opposition MpD won a narrow majority o f municipalities in the May 2008
municipal elections, it i s likely that the windows o f opportunity for more difficult institutional reforms,
e.g. in relation to Electra, are either in 2009 or else in the second half o f 2011 and in 2012. Cape Verde’s
two leading parties, the governing PAICV and the MpD, have established a 14-member cross-party
commission to build political consensus around those reforms that require a two-thirds majority in the
National Assembly to become law, such as constitutional amendments, and this commission could also
prove to be instrumental in seeking consensus on implementing key policy reforms and responding
promptly to difficulties emerging from the global crisis. However the political scene could lead to delays
in such key initiatives. The Bank has therefore set realistic outcome indicators in the Results Framework
that take the political calendar and context into consideration.
94.
Contingent liabilities. There are risks of contingent liabilities from a number o f areas, including
from public or semi-public companies not operating efficiently or being affected by the economic
downturn. In addition to the above mitigating measures for exogenous shocks, the CPS provides support
to address these issues head on, including supporting Electra’s recovery and recapitalization,
strengthening ARE and helping to identify sustainable PPPs, so as to reduce these risks to more moderate
levels.
95.
Weak capacity. Weak administrative capacity, the limited number o f technical staff and high
turnover o f senior staff in core ministries could pose a risk to the implementation o f the GPRSP-I1 and
reforms supported by the CPS. To address this risk in the short term, the Budget Support partners are
financing a combination o f capacity-buildingactivities and technical support. Joint supervision missions

33

and close coordination with the Authorities have helped to ensure an adequate use of funds. In the
medium term, the ongoing civil service reform program should moderate the risk by helping to build a
better trained and more stable cadre o f staff under an appropriate pay structure. The Growth TA and SME
Support operation and an IDF to strengthen M&E capacity will complement ongoing actions to
strengthen public sector capacity.

96.
Decline in external concessional support. With Cape Verde’s graduation to MIC status in
January 2008, donors may begin withdrawing concessional aid at a faster pace than foreseen which could
result in reforms slowing down, domestic spending increasing or commercial borrowing rising, both o f
the latter increasing risk o f fiscal slippages. The Government has mitigated this risk by including only
firm agreements rather than notional commitments on support in i t s current budget and medium-term
framework. Through dialogue with development partners and the BSG, the Bank will seek to moderate
this risk further by supporting Cape Verde’s continued access to concessional financing and encouraging
others to do the same.
VIII.

CONCLUDING R E M A R K S

97.

Cape Verde has reached an important juncture in its development and the Bank’s
partnership can make a clear difference. Since October 2007, Cape Verde has graduated to M I C
status, entered a Special Partnership with the EU and joined the WTO. It has established a path o f
peaceful political transitions and prudent economic management and an open economy that have
contributed to sustained high growth rates through 2008, with a major impact in terms of poverty
reduction. Cape Verde has also established a vision for i t s development, which i s one of economic
transformation, grounded in its unique geo-strategic, natural and cultural assets, and has embodied that
vision in its GPRSP. However, as a small archipelago in the Sahel zone with limited mineral resources
and an economy that i s highly dependent on FDI, remittance flows and tourism receipts, Cape Verde i s
vulnerable not only to the severe droughts that have left their mark on i t s history, but also to the food and
f u e l shocks that emerged last year and to the current global economic downturn. Moreover, it s t i l l faces
an important agenda o f structural reforms in key sectors such as energy, transportation and public
administration that call for strong leadership. I t has also made very clear that the economic growth must
be socially inclusive and characterized by solidarity with the country’s most vulnerable population. There
are important risks at this time, even after measures are taken to mitigate them, however there are major
benefits associated with Bank partnership with Cape Verde as the country endeavors to advance on its
economic transformation agenda and weather the volatile global economic context. Successful
implementation of the Bank-supported program, in partnership with other donors, can play a
transformative role in key areas such as energy, roads, the business environment and public
administration, while promoting social inclusion and orienting resources to protect and assist the poor.

34

vl

m

e

e

.

e

.

5

U

ep

.M

U
C
3

i
M

I!

h

b
s

1

m

a

a

cw

0

a

a

00

m

I

I

*

*

'

......

................. ...........................................................

.

...............

8

................................................................

0

. .

......................................................................................................................................................

"

...

2
0

c)

3

B
e
3

U
E

m

z
Y

6CA
8
..............

z

I

i

a
0
U

e

I

z3
v)

Y

k

0

*
l

2

Appendix 2
REPUBLIC OF CAPE VERDE .
2005 CAS COMPLETION REPORT
Country: Cape Verde

Date o f CAS: January 27,2005

Period covered by the CAS Completion Report: July 1,2004 - December 3 1,2008
CAS Completion Report completed by: Joelle Dehasse, Sr. Operations Officer
Date: March 11,2009

INTRODUCTION

1.
This document discusses the results o f The World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for
Cape Verde dated January 27,2005 and covering FY05-08. The report i s based on discussions with Bank
staff and Cape Verde officials involved in or familiar with Bank-financed projects, a review o f various
reports and project documents (aide-mbmoires, Implementation Status Reports (ISR), Implementation
Completion Reports (ICR), Country Policy and Institutional Assessments (CPIA) and field visits.
2.

Cape Verde i s an archipelago o f ten islands located o f f the west coast o f Africa with a population
estimated at 500,000, with almost twice that number living abroad, mostly in Europe and the United
States, and accounting for significant remittance flows to the country (1 1 percent o f GDP in 2006 and 9.2
percent in 2007). Despite i t s small size and geographic challenges, Cape Verde has one o f the most
successful economies in Sub-Saharan Africa. Following a decade o f robust growth, the country graduated
from the UN l i s t o f Least Developed Countries (LDCs) to a low Middle Income Country (MIC) as o f
January 2008.’ The country boasts a track record o f more than ten years o f multi-party democracy,
peaceful political transitions and effective participation o f civil society in the governance process and
macroeconomic stability.

3.
The country’s per capita income (GNI, Atlas method) i s estimated at US$2,250 in 2007, bolstered
by a fast growing services sector (mainly tourism, telecommunications and construction), good
governance and successful public programs that have increased access to education and healthcare,
paving the way for the country to meet all the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Cape Verde has
made significant gains in reducing poverty, which dropped from 49 percent in 1998 to 37 percent in 2002
to 27 percent in 2007.

4.

Despite these gains, as with many island nations, Cape Verde i s highly vulnerable to economic
shocks not only due to i t s small size, but also to i t s location and geographic condition. Scarce natural
resources and non-renewable energy sources, and the Sahelian climate, limit the country’s opportunities
for expansioddiversification o f the production base and exports. Difficult agricultural conditions and the
almost inexistent manufacturing sector have been a major cause o f emigration and poverty.

I In 2000, the UN concluded that Cape Verde would graduate from the Least Developed Country category in January 2008 based
on satisfying two o f three criteria: the country’s income per capita and the Human Assets Index (level o f human development).
However, on the third criterion, Economic Vulnerability Index (EVI), Cape Verde ranks poorly.

5.
Notwithstanding these vulnerabilities, macroeconomic policy helped to mitigate the effects o f
high food and fuel prices in early 2008, and the 2008/09 global financial crisis and recession were
contained.
A.

CAPE VERDE’S LONG-TERM STRATEGIC GOALS

6.

The Government’s long-term strategic goals supported by the Bank’s 2005 CAS were articulated
in the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (GPRSP) prepared in 2004. The GPRSP was based
on earlier development strategies, notably Cape Verde’s National Development Plan (the Plan) and the
Grand Options o f the Plan 2002-2005. These goals were expressed as follows: “to raise Cape Verdeans to
a level o f income and quality o f life that values their human dignity by means o f economic policies that
guarantee sustained development, in a way that i s compatible from a social, regional and intergenerational standpoint, environmentally sustainable, and based on a growth standard built on increasing
productivity gains; overall, a development which minimizes poverty and social exclusion and that may
bring about equity and social justice.”* The Government put the focus o f the GPRSP on accelerating
growth through reforms to make the country more competitive and to promote investments in
infrastructure to attract private investments. Meanwhile, the Government also sought to find responses to
stubborn poverty and growing inequity for those not benefiting from growth, particularly those living in
rural areas or not having skills for the services industry. The strategy focused on five key pillars for
public intervention: (i)
promoting good governance; (ii) improving competitiveness and private sector-led
growth; (iii)fostering human capital development; (iv) strengthening social security and solidarity; and
(v) improving infrastructureand land use management.

7.
As stated in the GPRSP, the first pillar, good governance focuses on four objectives: (i)
reform
o f public administration, (ii)strengthening of the judicial system, (iii)reform of the State’s financial
management system, and (iv) decentralization.
8.
The second pillar, improving competitiveness and private sector-led growth, includes a
number o f objectives and policy priorities, notably: improving labor policies, strengthening the labor
market, and creating jobs; strengthening the role o f the State in the process of privatizations, in particular
with regard to economic regulation and legislation; developing adequate financing mechanisms for a
small economy (notably micro-credit); strengthening the rural public works program (FAIMO) to
continue providing emergency job opportunities, particularly in rural areas; pursuing the sustainable
growth o f agriculture; ensuring food security; strengthening policies regarding the fisheries sector; and
implementinga strategic plan for tourism.

9.

The third pillar, developing human capital, includes the objectives of improving the education
system and professional training; strengthening health systems and improving access o f the poor to health
services; and increasing budget allocations to the health and education sectors.

10.
The fourth pillar, developing infrastructure, promoting land use planning and protecting the
environment, includes putting in place more effective and sustainable transport systems within and
between islands, covering air transport, land transport and maritime transport; strengthening basic
infrastructure services, including energy, water and sanitation; and implementing the Second National
Action Plan for the Environment T I (known as PANA 11).

* Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy; Ministry o f Finance and Public Administration, Republic o f Cape Verde, September
2004.

41

11.
The fifth pillar, improving the effectiveness and sustainability of the social protection system,
seeks improvements in the social security regimes in both the private and public sectors; reforms to
ensure the financial viability o f the public sector’s pension program (to which workers do not contribute);
support for workers that are injured on the job or fall ill;and social security for independent workers.
12.
The Government completed the preparation of its second Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy
(GPRSP-11) in May 2008. The GPRSP-I1 largely retains the same long-term strategic objectives as
previously, though with greater emphasis on investing in infrastructure, including through private
partnerships and human capital to help take advantage o f new opportunitiesand transform the economy.
B. CAS OUTCOMES
I.CAS Objectives

13.
The Bank’s 2005 CAS to support Cape Verde’s GPRSP was discussed at the Board on February
22, 2005. The CAS benefited from close consultations with Government, development partners, civil
society and local communities during the preparation of the GPRSP. The CAS identified two key
challenges for Cape Verde: (i)growing demands on public funds for provision o f non-primary social
services and social safety nets for the poorest; and (ii)building a competitive economy. Lending and nonlending support was planned around three pillars: (1) ensuring sound macroeconomic stability and sound
public finance and budget systems; (2) enhancing the investment climate and increasing competitiveness
through public-private partnerships (PPPs); and (3) implementing social programs to alleviate poverty
and inequity.

14.
During the CAS period, IDA provided new commitments of US$63 million (US$33 million from
IDA 143). The CAS had projected a four-year base case lending program of US$50 million and a
proposed GEF grant of US$5 million. A high-case scenario estimated lending o f US$7 1 million; however
this level of lending exceeded the IDA resources available to the country, even with its strong portfolio
and CPIA performance. Given the limited IDA financing envelope (averaging US$12.5 million a year),
the CAS proposed to shift from providing mainly investment lending to providing a greater share of
financing as programmatic lending, or budget support, to be underpinned by annual public expenditure
reviews. This was successfully implemented and created strong synergies and harmonization o f
Government and budget support donors’ priorities. The Bank also moved forward with most of the
planned lending operations in the CAS, with a multi-sector infrastructure operation dropped and PRSC IV
postponed to FY09 due to insufficientIDA resources. The Bank also did not complete analytical work on
the rural and social sectors, reflecting the shifting priorities during CAS implementation. The Bank’s
CAS also projected to influence results in areas where the Bank did not provide direct support (rural
development, environment). The CAS performance overall i s Satisfactory and benefited from a relatively
good global environment for Cape Verde during most of the period of the CAS and strong Government
leadership.
11. Progress toward CAS Objectives
Pillar 1. Ensure macroeconomic stability and sound public finance and budget systems

15.
This CAS pillar i s aligned with the f i r s t two GPRSP pillars of promoting good governance and
improving competitiveness and private sector-led growth. Under this pillar, the Bank proposed to
contribute to macroeconomic stability, modernizinggovernment and strengthening public finance through

This includes an additional allocation o f $2.6 million equivalent o f IDA resources in FY08.

42

analytical work---including economic monitoring, Public Expenditure Reviews, review o f fiduciary
systems, and an investment climate assessment--andprogrammatic and investment lending.

16.
The CAS proposed a series o f Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs, programmatic loans)
as the main lending vehicle to support improved budgeting and budget systems, focusing on public
expenditure management, civil service reform, decentralization, and judicial reform. The Growth and
Competitiveness Project supports the Government’s efforts to simplify procedures and enhance the
investment climate.

17.
Four PRSCs were implemented from 2005 - 2008, through which the Bank played a key role in
bringing together a Budget Support Group of donors to jointly finance GPRSP policy reforms. In April
2005, the Budget Support Group was launched with the first o f several “Partnership Frameworks”
between donors (European Commission, the Netherlands and World Bank) and Government. By 2007,
the Budget Support partners also includedAustria, Spain and the African Development Bank. At the time
that the CAS was approved, the Government had also entered into a three-year Poverty Reduction and
Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement with the IMF for SDR 8.64 million, approved by the Executive
Board on April 10,2002. In September 2006, the Government entered into an agreement with the IMF on
a medium-term economic program to be supported by a three-year non-disbursing Policy Support
Instrument (PSI). Through the PRSCs, the Bank played a key role in mobilizing a coordinated donor
approach to budget support and was able to support a broad range o f reforms envisaged in the GPRSP.
18.
The key CAS outcomes, as stated in the .CAS results framework, and the progress made toward
those outcomes with Bank support, are listed below:
19.
CAS outcome: Ensure macro stability and maintain debt sustainability: This outcome was
to be achieved by maintaining an average per capita GDP growth of at least 2 percent and keeping the
fiscal deficit low. This outcome was surpassed and performance was highly satisfactory. Cape Verde
continued to pursue sound macroeconomic policies during the CAS period, enabling the country to make
up for slippages at the beginning o f the decade. Real GDP for the period 2005-2008 i s estimated to
average 7.5 percent, peaking at 10.8 percent in 2006 (growth in 2008 i s estimated at 6.0 reflecting the
worldwide slowdown). Real growth per capita has increased on average by over 5 percent, faster than
most small islands and the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. The Government consolidated fiscal reforms
and kept deficits low; however, it s t i l l grappled with a tight budget with little fiscal space and faced
contingent liabilities due to difficulties in the energy sector. A debt sustainability analysis (DSA) prepared
by the IMF and World Bank in June 2005 concluded that Cape Verde’s external debt levels appeared
sustainable but would require a prudent approach to borrowing, consolidating fiscal reforms and
strengthening debt management. A DSA carried out in December 2007 validated these conclusions.
Under the 3-year IMF Policy Support Instrument, concurrent with the CAS period, a ceiling on annual
borrowing and guarantees (in non-concessional terms) was agreed upon to ensure public debt
sustainability.
20.
CAS outcome: Public expenditure management more transparent and oversight institutions
empowered. Although the CAS did not propose specific indicators, this outcome was achieved and
performance i s satisfactory. Public expenditure management has become more transparent as a result of a
number of reforms supported by the Bank:

43

Tax management: A new taxpayer registry and tax identification number, supported by a modern
information technology (IT) system, were successfully put in placeO4Government pursued tariff reforms
initiated in 2004, including the introductiono f the VAT.
0
Budget execution: The 2006 budget law included measures to strengthen fiscal transparency,
including by reflecting petroleum subsidies and providing for the clearance o f 35 percent o f arrears. In
April 2006, oil subsidies were eliminated. An “Integrated Financial Management and Information
System (IFMIS)” i s now connecting all Government ministries, allowing them to monitor their accounts
in real time - a key achievement for the Government.
0
Empowering oversight institutions: Two laws were prepared (an Organic Law of the Inspector
General o f Finances (IGF) approved in 2005 and an Organic Law o f the Court of Auditors (approved by
the Council o f Ministers and submitted to Parliament in 2007). The Independent General Audit Office
(TdC) recruited consultants to enhance i t s capacity and a law to strengthen the TdC was prepared and
approved by the Parliament in October 2007.
0
E-government i s one o f Cape Verde’s most successful public sector reform initiatives o f the past few
years and has significantly increased transparency and efficiency. Through NOSI (the Operational
Nucleus for Information System, or Cabo Verde Digital as it i s commonly known), Government has not
only put in place the IFMIS, but also integrated the Government’s human resources database and payroll
systems; installed financial management systems in the largest municipalities to boost revenues; helped
revamp the tax registry and reengineered various administrative processes to make select services
available electronically through a “one-stop-shop” approach. The Bank has supported NOSI through the
PRSCs as well as the Growth and Competitiveness Project.

21.

CAS outcome: Ensure that public expenditures are allocated and spent according to
GPRSP priorities. This outcome was to be measured by the share o f budget allocated to key social
sectors (health, education), as well as enhanced protection extended to vulnerable groups through
increased share o f programs benefitting them and introduction o f cost recovery in social sectors based on
ability to pay (see also CAS outcomes under Pillar 3 in Table A2-1). This outcome was achieved and i s
satisfactory. Government met its GPRSP budget allocations for health and education for 2005 through
2008, even exceeding these in some instances (see Table A2-1). However, it should be noted that these
achievements were made despite the fact that annual budget laws were not adequately aligned with the
GPRSP or the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). This was in part because the preparation
of the GPRSP and o f the MTEF for 2004-07 was initiated at the same time, and, as a result, the GPRSP
was not based on the MTEF. Cape Verde’s MTEF provides projections for recurrent and investment
budgets by a classification that does not match the administrative classification of the budget nor the
public investment programs. For example, MTEF projections for education and health deviated from
GPRSP goals by 40 percent and 100 percent, re~pectively.~International TA was provided across
ministries to develop a global MTEF and sectoral MTEF during the CAS period.

22.

CAS outcome: Municipalities function in clarified framework matched by adapted
resources. This outcome was partially satisfactory. As discussed in the 2008 PER, there i s s t i l l no clear
framework that delineates the roles and responsibilities of the local and the central governments.
However, a local finances law passed by Parliament in 2005 was successful in increasing central
Government transfers to municipalities from 7 to 10 percent. For some municipalities, particularly the
smallest ones, central Government transfers represent up to 50 percent of their income. To strengthen
their financial management and communication, NOSI installed a Municipal Information System in
twelve municipalities. The PRSCs supported the decentralization agenda to help Government clarify the
responsibilities o f municipalities and funding issues, but without significant progress. Discussions on a
The Tax Directorate (known as DGCI) has concluded the fiscal identification but it now waiting for the implementation by the
NOSI o f the fiscal identification cards.
Enhancing Planningto Increase Efficiency o f Public Spending, Public ExpenditureReview, World Bank, June 2008.

’

44

draft decentralization law were ongoing for several years without resolution due to the absence o f
consensus. The decentralization law was dropped as an action to be completed under the PRSC series.

23.

CAS outcome: Improved ability to manage public sector reform across institutions. N o
indicator was proposed but this outcome was partially achieved and performance i s partially satisfactory.
The Government established the Ministry for the Chairmanship of the Council o f Ministers, State Reform
and Defense, with a specific mandate o f strengthening public sector reform across Government
institutions. The Unit for the Coordination of Reforms (UCRE) was created under this ministry, with
representatives from all sector ministries, to prepare an overall framework for coordinating reform efforts
across institutions. NOSI’s work has also helped improve coordination by integrating administrative and
financial tools, such as with the IFMIS and integrated human resources database and payroll.

24.

One o f the key risk concerns of the CAS was the issue of contingent liabilities, particularly from
loss-making enterprises. In addition to supporting PPPs in an effort to reduce the burden on the State, the
Bank supported Government efforts to better track autonomous institutions and the potential for liabilities
to arise. The Ministry o f Finance created a unit charged with tracking State participation in companies.
Autonomous institutes and ministries were all linked through the integrated online financial management
system (SIGOF), enabling the Budget and Treasury units to better follow budget execution and take
measures to prevent liabilities from being passed on to the central Government. The authorities are also
compiling the consolidated balance sheet of five state-owned enterprises (ASA, TACV, ENAPOR,
Electra and IFH) and detailing their debt by maturity, currency, residency, and state guarantees, which
will be submitted to the Council o f Ministers by March 2009.

25.
CAS outcome: Framework to manage and train civil servants to be better adapted to
modern administration. This outcome was to be measured by the number of public sector managers in
place and the number o f civil servants trained. However, this indicator does not seem consistent with the
more modest outcome o f establishing a framework, which was achieved. Performance i s considered
moderately satisfactory. The establishment o f the human resources database and its integration with
payroll i s considered a major achievement toward civil service reform. The Government i s
deconcentrating access to the database, currently only available at the central level, to five ministries.
The Career and Salary System i s being revised and a report has been prepared proposing options for how
to better manage human resources. A draft Basic Law on Civil Service was approved by the Council of
Ministers in January 2008 following consultations with labor organizations.
Justice sector

26.
As part of efforts to modernize government under this pillar, the Bank also sought to help address
weaknesses in the justice system, a key element o f the GPRSP Pillar 1 to strengthen governance and
Pillar 5 to strengthen social protection. The Bank’s support in this area was largely implemented through
two grants, a US$364,702 IDF grant to strengthen the rule of law which became effective in December
2003, and a US$954,460 JSDF grant to support access to legal services for vulnerable groups including
women, approved in mid-2004. The PRSCs, the Growth and Competitiveness project and the first
GPRSP Trust Fund (prior to the CAS) also supported initiatives in this sector. CAS outcomes, and
progress toward those outcomes, were mixed, and are listed below:
CAS outcome: Improved adherence to and knowledge of the law in law communities. This
27.
outcome was achieved and performance i s satisfactory. There were a number of activities undertaken with
Bank support to strengthen knowledge o f the law, including: training and a study tour for 12 Cape
Verdean judges which instilled greater support for social justice initiatives and led to working groups that
set out to create small claims courts. Twenty-three mediators were trained and accredited on how to

45

apply a mediation law approved in 2004, allowing small conflicts to be mediated rather than languish in
the official justice system. The training also gave mediators the skills needed to run the Casus de Direito
(legal centers) set up to provide legal services to the poor; however, these legal centers were slow in being
established and operational. The Ministry o f Justice compiled all Supreme Court decisions dating back to
1994 on a CD-ROM for distribution to the legal community. The Institute for Women’s Condition (IWC)
received training on advocacy for women’s legal protection and rights, and organized a series of trainingof-trainers events for NGOs that advocate for women. The IWC also trained judges on gender sensitivity.
However, a legal education program that was created specifically to provide sustainable training for
aspiring legal professionals, and which would have made an important contribution to this outcome, was
never launched. (See alsoparagraph 42 on new arbitration law).

28.
The digitalization process and the database o f the Official Gazette are complete. The Imprensa
Nacional (National Printing, INCV) started on August 24, 2006 in an experimental phase, publishing on
the Web the Official Gazette (www.incv.qov.cv). Today it i s possible to access a l l numbers published in
2006 and to search the database. This means that users have access to all legislation published. INCV, in
collaboration with NOSI, developed a project that will expand the aforementioned possibilities to cover
all the published legislation since Independence (1975). This activity was supported by the Growth and
Competitiveness Project.

29.
CAS outcome: Increased free access to justice system by the poor. This outcome was to be
measured by the number o f poor women benefiting from justice services; however, this indicator could
not be measured in part due to the significant delays with activities supporting this objective.
Nonetheless, the outcome was achieved and performance i s moderately satisfactory. The Casus de
Direito, legal centers for the poor with a particular focus on helping women, were a key instrument
proposed by the Bank to support this outcome, supported with JSDF financing, but activities were
significantly delayed initially. However, significant progress was made in 2007 and 2008 All agreements
between municipalities and the 11 proposed legal centers were eventually signed in the first half of 2008,
and 7 o f the legal centers were operational by the second half of 2008. Six o f the centers have been
providing free legal advice to targeted communities in 3 islands, 6 outreach paralegals have been trained,
and 28 community leaders have been trained in basic legal knowledge of domestic violence, family and
labor law. There have been some 40 training sessions for local villages and communities in legal literacy
and 10,000 leaflets with information on the legal centers and their services have been distributed. With
Bank support, the Ministry o f Justice, working with NOSI, created a database to monitor access to justice
for the poor in Cape Verde.
30.
CAS outcome: Improved supply o f professional mechanisms such as mediators. This
outcome was to be measured by the number o f mediators trained and number o f disputes resolved. The
outcome was achieved and performance i s satisfactory. As discussed previously, the Bank supported the
training of mediators (see paragraph 27). Other important results were the promulgation o f a decree-law
on mediation and a law on arbitration. These laws established new alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms (ADR) for legal claims o f private citizens and business entities in Cape Verde and helped to
reduce the burden on the country’s courts. The number o f disputes resolved has not been tracked.
Pillar 2: Support private sector-led growth through enhanced investment climate and increased
competitiveness through public-private partnerships in infrastructure

3 1.

This pillar i s aligned primarily with the GPRSP pillars I1and I V whose objectives are to promote
competitiveness and private sector-led growth, human capital and infrastructure services.

46

32.
In the context o f steadily growing fiscal pressures from various sectors, and faced with the
prospect o f shrinking concessional aid and remittances, Cape Verde’s Government sought to increase
investments from the private sector particularly in infrastructure services, so as to focus expenditures on
health, education and social protection programs. While Cape Verde greatly benefited from the economic
liberalization and divestitures o f the 1990s, implementation in some areas had been slower than expected,
for example in the area o f economic regulation.

33.
The key CAS outcomes, as stated in the CAS results framework, and the progress made toward
those outcomes with Bank support, are listed below:

34.
CAS outcome: Complete the divestiture program by 2005. This outcome was to be
considered achieved if the privatization o f TACV, ENAPOR and EMPROFAC were completed. These
outcomes were not achieved and performance i s not satisfactory. The Government’s divestiture program
initiated in the early 1990s stagnated in the early 2000s. Private participation was introduced in all key
infrastructure sectors, with some exceptions in transport. Under the CAS, the Bank planned for the
Growth and Competitiveness project to finance outstanding divestiture efforts that had been initiated
under the Privatization and Regulatory Capacity Building Project, which closed in 2004.
35.
A management contract for T A C V was initiated on December 5, 2006 and i t s achievements
(increased efficiency and savings, new commercial agreements, control o f overhead costs and sale o f noncore assets) are expected to help attract investors’ interest in the privatization o f the airline. However, the
airline has not been privatized.

36.
ENAPOR was also not privatized. In 2006, the consulting firm o f Booz Allen Hamilton was hired
to provide assistance with the process, but did not complete this work. A new privatization advisor was
recruited in March 2007.
37.
The privatization process o f EMPROFAC was preceded by efforts t o establish a regulator. A
food and pharmaceutical regulating agency (ARFA) was set up in October 2004 and the agency began
operations in September 2005. As o f end 2008, AFRA was working on establishing a sustainable funding
mechanism for itself (levy on sector operators), and on a framework model to launch the privatization o f
EMPROFAC in the first quarter o f 2009.

38.
CAS outcome: Improved interface between public and private sectors. This outcome was t o
be measured by the completion o f an action plan to reduce administrative barriers. This outcome was
achieved and performance i s highly satisfactory. The Government’s efforts to reduce administrative
barriers and improve the investment climate have been boosted by the advances in information
technology and communication, largely made possible by Cab0 Verde Digital (NOSI). Casa do Cidadiio
(the house o f the citizen) i s one o f the many projects Cabo Verde Digital has launched t o improve the
transparency and efficiency o f public services. The first Casa do CidadGo events started t o be available
to the general public in December 2007. The first products available on-line are certificates (birth,
marriage, death, etc.), o f which some 3,000 have been issued. Businesses and individuals are now able to
pay their taxes on-line. The ability to register a business in one day was officially made available on
March 14,2008.
The financial system has been rapidly modernized. Through’the combined efforts o f the
39.
Government, the Central Bank o f Cape Verde, the commercial banks and the Chambers o f Commerce,
substantial strengthening o f the financial system has occurred, available financial products have expanded
and the financial market has significantly deepened. Electronic banking has been quite successful as
demonstrated by the measurable increase in the volume o f transactions through Automatic Teller

47

Machines (ATM), available on all the islands, and Point o f Sale (POS). To date, 62 ATM and 475 Point
of Sale (POS) machines serve more than 88,000 issued electronic debit cards. The period from December
2005-2006 saw an increase in the value o f ATM transactions by 29.3 percent and o f POS transactions by
72 percent.

40.

CAS outcome: Transaction costs are reduced and contribute to improved supply chains.
This outcome was to be considered achieved if at least three value-added services were introduced during
the CAS period. This outcome was achieved and performance i s satisfactory. With the improvements in
information technology used by the civil service, including customs and other departments, many
transaction costs have been reduced, both in financial and administrative terms, contributing to improved
supply chains. Electronic VISA was introduced in Cape Verde in December 2004 and significantly
facilitated the development o f tourism and the increase o f foreign exchange flows into the country. As o f
June 30, 2007, (a) all o f the islands have access to VISA through the ATM or Points o f Sale; (b) there
were more than 135,000 transactions in 2006 and within another six months, more than 250,000
transactions had taken place with transaction value totaling some €25 million (US$32 million equivalent).
All commercial banks issue credit cards.

4 1.

CAS outcome: Property rights are strengthened and legal framework facilitates rapid and
fair dispute resolution: N o indicator was provided for measuring property rights and the Bank’s
involvement in this area was minimal. That said, a key step toward strengthening property rights was the
preparation o f a draft Land Cadastre Law which was finalized in 2007 and sent to the Council o f
Ministers for approval before being submitted to Parliament for enactment. In addition to an extensive
program of topographical naming o f mountains, valleys, rivers, bays, etc., a second program i s focusing
on modernizing registry offices. Beginning in early 2008, a new five-year project will support the
establishment o f land registry offices in at least 17 Cape Verde municipalities. Donor funding of at least
US$2 million will be needed to assist with the hiring and training of staff and the acquisition of relevant
equipment. These activities were indirectly supported by the Growth and Competitiveness Project.

42.
Another achievement i s the enactment o f Cape Verde’s Arbitration Law which went into effect in
August 2005. Numerous arbitrations have since taken place to resolve disputes. Since 2005, contracts
between the Government and private sector typically include a clause that requires arbitration in the event
o f any dispute.
43.
CAS Outcome: Adequately functioning Economic Regulatory Agency (ARE). This outcome
was achieved and performance i s moderately satisfactory because ARE suffered some delays and
difficulties in fulfilling its mandate. In 2003, the Government established the Agdncia de
Regulamentaqtio EconGmica (ARE) to regulate electricity, water, telecommunications, and urban and
maritime passenger transport. ARE replaced a previous multi-sector regulatory agency (ARM) that had
never become fully operational. At the time of CAS preparation, ARE was just becoming functional, with
staff being hired. ARE was staffed and had begun developing tariff and other regulations by late 2005.
Since being established, responsibility for regulating the telecoms sector has been transferred to the
National Agency for Communications (ANAC), an autonomous regulator. In the transport sector, ARE
has developed all regulations required to tender collective urban transportation routes in Praia and
Mindelo. ARE i s responsible for setting and implementingtariffs for petroleum products, electricity and
water but has not always effectively carried out this mandate. In April 2006, the Bank approved a
$400,000 capacity-building grant to build capacity at ARE, but the grant had not been implemented as of
December 2007 and was extended in early 2008 as part of a stepped-up effort by the Bank to help
Government resolve outstanding issues in the sector.

48

44.

CAS outcome: Comprehensive labor code in place. This outcome was to be measured by the
creation o f 2,000 formal sector jobs. This indicator was not tracked; however, a comprehensive labor
code i s in place and this outcome has been achieved with a satisfactory performance. Labor policies had
hampered the Government’s divestiture from formerly state-owned enterprises and parastatals, with high
severance pay regulations and limited portability o f pension benefits. The Government prepared a new
comprehensive labor code to facilitate labor mobility and ensure a clearer link between compensation and
productivity. The Government undertook extensive consultations on the labor law, which Parliament
gave Government the legislative authority to enact. As a result, it was published in October 2007 and
subsequently passed into law in April 2008.

45.

CAS outcome: Increase in public-private partnership investments to enhance
competitiveness and reduce costs. This outcome was to be measured by: (a) improvements in
infrastructure competitiveness indices; (b) a 10 percent improvement in energy and water connections to
customers; and (c) a reduction in cost o f international telecom to US$0.75/minute. The results in energy,
water and telecom were achieved; however, infrastructure competitiveness indices were not available to
measure performance.

46.
The overall performance o f PPPs during the CAS period accounts for the moderately satisfactory
performance, as there were some disappointments. At the time o f CAS preparation, the Government had
completed the divestiture o f a number o f key enterprises, including in the energy, water and
telecommunications sectors. The Bank sought to help ensure adequate functioning and services delivery
o f these PPPs.

47.

Electra was privatized in December 1999, with the sale o f 51 percent o f the share value o f
production assets o f electricity and water to a Portuguesejoint-venture (the Strategic Partners). However,
in July 2006, the Government regained the position o f majority shareholder following protracted and
unsuccessful negotiations on a series o f issues concerning tariffs, Government arrears to Electra, and
delayed investments on the part o f the Strategic Partners. The CAS’ main concern regarding Electra was
to improve efficiencies and services under the PPP, encouraging investments and new operators in
distribution to promote competition. In addition to the PRSCs, the Bank-supported the sector through a
US$17 million Energy and Water Sector Reform and Development project approved in 1999, and twice
extended to close on June 2007. The Bank and other partners made efforts to support the dialogue
between the Government and the Strategic Partners o f Electra, but the PPP was dissolved due to an
impasse resulting from a series o f technical and financial operational issues that resulted in significant
losses for Electra: high electricity and water losses; high operating cost due to high overheads; high
commercial losses due to tariff setting below costs, weak billing collection, and illegal consumption; and
weaknesses in the contractual arrangements (e.g., no basis for tariff setting and adjustments, and for
profitability measurement), as well as lack o f enforcement o f the contractual provisions. The central
Government cleared arrears to Electra in 2006, but municipalities and autonomous institutions s t i l l have
arrears owed to the company. Electra continues to grapple with significant cash-flow problems and
significant operating losses. In September 2007, it required US$6.3 million from Government to cover
the tariff deficit regarding the period May 2006-February 2007.

48.

As for the outcomes o f the Energy and Water Sector Project, some targets were met under the
first o f the two Project Development Objectives: “Improved access to electricity, water and sanitation
services, with optimum use o f renewable resources, and promotion o f private sector participation,”
including: increasing access to electricity from 69 percent to 90 percent in Praia, and from 92 percent to
98 percent in Mindelo; access to water improved from 25 percent to 45 percent in Praia, and from 50
percent to 60 percent in Mindelo; and sanitation from 8 percent to 20 percent in Praia and 20 percent to 30
percent in Mindelo. However, the project did not successfully promote the use o f renewable resources or

49

private sector participation, and it did not achieve its secondary development objective o f increased
operational and end-use efficiency in the power and water sectors, nor did it reach the GEF objective o f
removing the barriers to grid connected wind generation and off-grid PV electric systems despite this
component having been delinked from IDA and extended to December 2008. This component supported
a Wind Farm Project, which in 2006 had experienced procurement problems in a first tender and a nonresponsive bidding process in a second tender. Under the extension, the project sought to support a nonprofit PPP fund, INFRACO, to attract investors. However, because INFRACO used EU procurement
processes to launch the bidding process, the Bank was ultimately unable to participate. The GEF grant
closed as Unsatisfactory in December 2008. According to the final ISR, as o f May 2008, penetration o f
wind power was at 3 percent o f total electricity supply in 2002 and no households have connection to offgrid solar PV systems. This compares to a target of 19 percent wind power penetration and 4,500
households connected.

49.

Telecommunications: This sector has been one o f the most successful in Cape Verde in terms o f
increasing access, reducing costs, improving services and strengthening the strategic, regulatory and legal
environment to allow competition post-privatization, In 2003, there was only one telecommunications
company with a de-facto (even if not de-jure) monopoly on telecommunications services until 2021; the
sector legal framework dated from the mid-1990s; and there was no sector regulator. Cab0 Verde
Telecom (CVT) was privatized in 1996 with Portugal Telecom Znternacional (PTI) winning a competitive
bidding process and signing a 25-year concession agreement. Starting in 2003, the Government launched
wide-ranging policy and legal reforms aimed at fostering competition and strengthening the policy, legal
and regulatory framework for information, communications and technology, and negotiating an
agreement ending the exclusivity of CVT on the international gateway. By 2006, more than 15 distinct
reforms had been undertaken, including: the adoption in 2005 of a new sector strategy to fully liberalize
the telecom sector by January 2007; adoption o f a new sector law, the Electronic Communications law, in
November 2005; adoption of a number o f critical regulations; establishment of ANAC, a new regulatory
agency; awarding a second GSM license to a US-based company; and launching negotiations with CVT
to agree on compensation for terminating its exclusive rights over internationalcalls in January 2007.

50.
A number of reforms supported by the Growth and Competitiveness project were also pertinent to
Government efforts to access the World Trade Organization (WTO), including in the area of supporting
negotiations, customs reforms and intellectual property rights. Although Cape Verde first applied to join
WTO in 1999, negotiations started in 2004 and significant progress was made during the period covered
by the CAS. The European Union and Cape Verde in 2007 concluded bilateral market access negotiations
on Cape Verde’s accession to the WTO. In December 2007, the WTO General Council cleared the path
for Cape Verde’s membership in the WTO by approving a package of agreements which spelled out the
terms o f Cape Verde’s accession. In July 2008, Cape Verde became the 153‘d member o f the WTO.
Within the framework o f economic liberalization, a new customs Code was prepared, in line with the
requirements on valuation o f imports and trade facilitation of the revised Kyoto convention.
5 1.
CAS outcome: Implementation of a comprehensive transport sector reform strategy and
increased public-private partnerships in the sector. This outcome was to be measured by the
introduction o f an institutional and funding mechanism for the road maintenance fund and the
introduction o f private participation in ports and airline services. This outcome was achieved in the road
sector and airline services, but not achieved in ports. Performance i s moderately satisfactory. The
Government sought to attract increased private investments in the transport sector, and the management
contract for TACV was an important step toward private participation in the airline. The Government
prepared a transport sector strategy in July 2007 which was finalized and submitted to the Bank in
January 2008. A second generation Road Maintenance Fund (RMF) was established in June 2005 and
became legally functional in January 2006. The RMF has been managing annual road maintenance
budgets beginning in 2006, based on plans submitted by the Road Agency established in 2003.
50

Legislation was prepared and submitted t o Parliament that would establish a Road Maintenance Levy for
the RMF to directly collect the fuel levy at the pump. However, implementation o f the fuel levy was
delayed due to political opposition and came into effect in early 2009.

52.
Under this pillar, the CAS results framework proposed that Bank interventions would also
influence the following outcomes: the development of smallholder production systems and non-farm
activities including small-scale fishing, cottage industries and tourism, as well as the adequate
implementation of the Environmental Action Plan prepared in 2004. The Bank interventions that
would have influenced these outcomes, namely the Rural Development Assessment and fisheries project
t o be financed by GEF, were either never initiated or completed. As such, the Bank cannot be said to
have contributed to significant progress in these areas, although the Bank did complete a fisheries sector
strategy which proposed options for Government to devise alternative sources o f incomes for those
employed in the sector given the over-exploitation o f fisheries resources. Instead o f preparing a Multisector Private Infrastructure Project that would support infrastructure associated with rural development
and tourism, among other sectors, the Growth and Competitiveness project received additional financing.
Pillar 3. Implement social programs aimed at alleviating poverty and inequality

53.
This pillar i s aligned with the GPRSP Pillar I11 to develop human capital and Pillar I V to
strengthen social protection. In discussing human development and social protection, the CAS pointed to
the need for: (i)increased spending on social programs for the poor; (ii)increasing the quality o f
education and expanding access; (iii)the need for a sustainable social protection system; and (iv) the
efforts to mainstream gender issues. However, improvements in living conditions in Cape Verde
contributed to the increased need for social spending. The 2004 PER showed that a key challenge for
Government during the CAS period would be to maintain expenditures for human capital development as
demand continued to rise in the social sectors, such as: rapidly increasing the rate o f expenditures on
pharmaceuticals; increased demand for services as incomes improve and the population ages; and a
growing deficit at the National Institute for Social Protection (the social security agency).6 Meanwhile,
the PRSC I C R (May 2008) questioned whether the improvements in health, education and social services
during the CAS period had the intended impact on poverty.
Education

54.
Cape Verde has largely achieved the MDG o f assuring universal access to education, with a net
enrollment rate in primary school o f 89 percent and secondary enrollment o f 60 percent in 2007. Primary
completion rates are about 95 percent, literacy rates for adults were at 81 percent, and 97 percent for
youth, in 2007. Analytical work prepared in 2003 and 2004 identified a number o f issues that needed to
be addressed to strengthen services as well as the Government’s ability to keep up with the sector’s needs,
including: too few children benefiting from early childhood education; a high repetition rate across the
whole education system and a lack o f qualified primary education teachers; too few hours spent on
classroom teaching lessons per day; lack o f vocational training and apprenticeship programs to meet the
needs o f the labor market; and wage bill issues (across the entire civil service). Under the GPRSP, the
Government’s vision included measures to improve the quality o f primary education and increase access
to pre-school and tertiary education. In addition, with the ambition o f building a competitive economy
dominated by the services sector, the Government also sought to support professional training program,
with technical and professional streams, to help ensure that those completing their secondary education
and not pursing tertiary education get the skills needed to be competitive in the labor market.
The CAS proposed a Review o f Human Development to underpin support to the sector but this activity was
dropped.

51

55.
Under the CAS, the PRSC series (1-111) was the main Bank instrument to provide support to the
education sector. Policy priorities supported by the PRSC series included: (a) improve the quality and
efficiency of education; (b) expand and diversify general and technical secondary education supply;
expand and better orient professional training service delivery; and (c) restructure higher education.

56.
The key CAS outcomes for education, as stated in the results framework are below. Progress
toward these outcomes with Bank support i s satisfactory:
57.
CAS outcome: Early childhood education services expanded, to be measured by the
percentage o f 3-5 year olds enrolled in pre-primary. Services were expanded to increase enrollment o f 35 year olds from 57 percent in 2003 to 64 percent in 2007. The Government implemented a teacher
training plan that increased the number o f adequately trained teachers from 75 percent in 2003 to 83 in
2006, making it possible for more early childhood development centers to operate.

58.
CAS outcome: Improved quality and efficiency of education, to be measured by repetition and
completion rates and percentage of primary teachers with academic training (no baseline provided): In the
first year of the teacher training plan, 605 primary teachers were trained. The increase in qualified
teachers i s part of the strategy for improving the quality and efficiency o f education by reducing the
repetition rate. The Government launched a construction plan for 9 secondary schools and this helped to
expand access to secondary school to meet growing enrollment. Primary completion rates are about 95
percent. Nonetheless, primary repetition remains high at all levels, at 14 percent for primary in 2007
similar to rates in 2004.

-

59.
CAS outcome: Expanded and diversified general and technical education and professional
training services, to be measured by the number of students completing 8 years o f schooling and the
percentage of poor students benefiting from school welfare programs (no baseline or benchmarks
provided; see Table A2-1 for results measured). A vocational training assessment was completed in 2005
along with a Strategic Action Plan. Technical and professional training became a key priority for the
Government as it sought to upgrade human resources skills and capital to meet the needs o f the booming
services industries. A legal and regulatory framework for vocational training i s being developed. The
Bank’s support did not contribute in any meaningfulway to this objective under the 2005 CAS.
60.
CAS outcome: Consolidated and restructured tertiary education sector, to be measured by
enrollment in professional training and apprenticeship programs (this indicator was not tracked): With
the establishment of the University of Cape Verde in 2005 and the Jean Piaget University o f Cape Verde
in 2001, the country has a public and private university, respectively, which provide tertiary education.
However, it i s unclear that anything further has been done to restructure and consolidate the sector.
Although education was dropped as a sector focus under the 3‘d PRSC (2007), the Bank agreed in 2007 to
supervise activities financed by the Dutch in support of the implementation of Cape Verde’s Strategic
Plan on Technical and Vocational Education and Training. This support, along with a proposed ESW/TA
to boost youth skills and employment, will be key instruments of support to the sector under the new
CAS.
Health

61.
Cape Verde i s on track to achieve the health MDGs. The infant mortality rate was 25 per 1,000
births in 2007, and child mortality was 34 per 1,000 births. The maternal mortality rate was 5 per 1,000
births. However, these good indicators mask significant disparities in services and an unsustainable
health financing framework. Among the main sector issues are:

52

Inequity in health outcomes and access to health services
Human resources issues, including: insufficient medical personnel; poor distribution o f health staff
within and among the islands; a growing number o f public sector doctors working in an unregulated
private sector
0
Health financing issues, including: a weak system for allocating the health budget contributing t o the
inequities mentioned above; high and increasing spending on pharmaceuticals, and increases in demand
as incomes improve and the population ages; and
Constraints due to other sectors, including: inadequate infrastructure services that contribute t o poor
health outcomes (unsafe water, lack o f transport).
0

62.

Health objectives were supported by the PRSC program with the main objective o f reducing
inequities in health outcomes and ensuring financial protection for the poor. The sector objectives were
also supported by the Bank through the IDA-financed H I V / A I D S Project approved in 2002, which
received supplemental financing in 2007 and was extended to close in FY09.

63.
The key CAS outcomes for health, as stated in the results framework, and the progress made
toward those outcomes with Bank support, are listed below.
64.
CAS outcome: Improved access and quality o f health services, more efficient health services
and improved coverage o f priority health programs, to be measured by number o f facilities
implementing integrated management o f childhood infections (IMCI) vaccination coverage, number o f
assisted deliveries, a 10 percent increase in immunization coverage, and ratio o f health personnel per
capita and district. The measurable results were achieved and performance i s satisfactory. Supported by
the PRSC series and other donor budget support, the Ministry o f Health’s approach to improve access to
health services included: building health infrastructure in remote rural areas, deploying trained health
personnel to these areas; and prioritizing the financing and provision o f services for those diseases that
most impact the poor. Considerable progress was made in this area, most notably the allocation o f
sufficient financing from the 2005 and 2006 budget for programs to combat HTV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and
malaria, the expanded program for immunization, and the integrated management o f childhood infection
(IMCI). The Government also identified which facilities to refurbish and better equip as well as where to
build new facilities to improve access to health services and reduce inequities. Based on the demographic
situation, the epidemiologic profile and the referral system, strategic plans are being prepared for the
northern part o f Santiago, urban Praia, and Siio Vicente. There was a significant increase in general
practitioners during the CAS period, (primarily due t o Cuban cooperation) and 27 nurses specialized in
obstetrics in 2006 were trained and dispatched to remote areas. Both schools o f nursing in Praia and Silo
Vicente are training 100 student nurses that will graduate in 2009 and 2010, respectively. The coverage
rate for access to health services has also reached a satisfactory 73 percent level owing to a growing
investment in infrastructure in poor areas.

65.

CAS outcome: Population more knowledgeable and with healthier behaviors, to be measured
by population knowledge o f how to prevent H N / A I D S . This outcome was achieved and performance i s
satisfactory. The IDA multi-sector investment operation to fight I-IIV/AIDS, however, proposed
indicators on behaviors related to HIV/AIDS, and these are the indicators that were tracked. With the
support o f the H I V / A I D S project, the proportion o f municipalities providing voluntary counseling and
testing for HIV/AIDS increased from 0 to 100 percent between 2003 and 2006. In terms o f practicing
safer sex, condom use i s reported to have increased from 18 percent t o 30 percent for females and from 43
percent to 60 percent for men, according to a survey o f men and women between the ages o f 15 to 49
reporting on their last sexual interaction.

’Cape Verde Public Expenditure Review on Health, May 2007, World Bank
53

66.
CAS outcome: Improved financial access and sustainability o f health services, to be
measured by percentage of population covered by health insurance and financial ratios o f health
insurance. This outcome was achieved and performance i s satisfactory. PRSC indicators were not aligned
with the CAS indicators, and rather included controlling the increase o f non-communicable diseases and
introducinghealth prevention and promotion programs, as well as reforming the social security system to
reduce expenditures on health. In 2006, the Government began publishing yearly statistical reports on
key health indicators, completing a crucial step toward a concerted effort to prevent and treat noncommunicable diseases. An analysis of non-communicable diseases by the national statistics agency
(INE) and the World Health Organization was completed in 2007 to provide essential data on trends in
non-communicablediseases and how to respond to them. Meanwhile, reforms were undertaken to expand
the social security system (INPS), including introducinguser fees. Some 14,000 civil servants had health
insurance covered by INPS by the end of the CAS period. The INPS posted a positive balance of CVE36
million in 2006 and CVE27 million in 2007, enabling it to clear its debt to the central budget.
Social Protection

67.

About 173,000 Cape Verdeans live below the poverty line on incomes of about US$450 a year
(2001-2002). Of these, 93,000 live in extreme poverty, on incomes o f less than US$300 a year. Over half
o f those considered extremely poor live on the main island o f Santiago, and two thirds live in rural areas.
Creating a more sustainable social protection system was also a priority for Government given a relatively
high unemployment rate, particularly in rural areas where agricultural opportunities are limited. At the
time of CAS preparation, labor-intensive public works schemes generated very low-paying temporary
jobs in rural areas and had not built the skills needed for the services sectors.

68.
To appreciate the context for the objectives and achievements in the area of social protection
during the CAS period, it i s useful to have a sense o f the framework that exists, which includes the
elements in the following paragraphs.

69.
Temporary employment creation scheme: Created in the 1970s, the Frente a Alta Intensidade de
Mano-de-Obra (FAIMO) was a labor intensive public works scheme which provided temporary
employment, mainly in the form o f civil works projects on roads and for soil conservation, for very low
wages (half the extreme poverty threshold). Over time, this program has become equated with low labor
productivity, limited impact o f investments and little skills accumulation for participants. A key objective
o f the IDA Social Sector Development Project was to help Government restructure FAIMO and create a
more efficient and productive institution, AGECABO, to execute public works. It has since been
superseded by a community-ledsmall works program known as Micro-realizapjes.

70.
Two social security systems are financed with contributions from formal sector workers that
together cover about one quarter o f the labor force and pay pensions to about 6,000 retirees: the Public
Administration (AP) plan, with contributions from some 13,000 civil servants; and the National Institute
for Social Security (INPS) with contributions from about 31,000 private sector employees. In 2001, a
framework law established the principle for integrating the two pension schemes. A final proposal for
integrating the pension programs was translated into a law approved and implemented in 2006. The 2006
PER included a detailed analysis o f the fiscal impact caused by the shifting of public workers into the
contributory scheme managed by INPS. To date more than 11,000 workers have been transferred and/or
integrated into the INPS. The Government implemented important measures to ensure that financial
contributions to the INPS are made on time. However, there are s t i l l a number of issues to be resolved to
better harmonize the pension programs and improve their fiscal situations, and Government i s considering
what reforms need to be undertaken in this respect. The Growth and Competitiveness project financed a

54

study on pension reforms and i s supporting the payment o f liabilities incurred by Government during the
transition period for civil servants transferred to the private pension scheme.

71.

There are two non-contributory plans that provide income support to the poor: the Minimum
Social Pension (PSM), which covers 6,500 elderly, handicapped and others in need o f critical support;
and the Social Solidarity Pension (PSS) available to some 10,000 elderly workers who participated in the
FAIMO for more than 10 years. These programs cost Government just under US$5 million a year and
recent studies show they need t o better target the poorest.

72.

Lastly, there are social assistance programs that cover a variety o f services for vulnerable groups,
including nutrition for poor children and the elderly, training for the disabled and subsidized water and
sewer connections for poor urban households. The main actors include: the Department o f Solidarity at
the Ministry o f Labor and Solidarity with overall coordination and oversight o f the sector; the Cape
Verdean Institute o f Social Action for Education which covers school fees for l o w income students; the
Cape Verdean Institute for Solidarity (ICs) and for Minors (ICM) which run programs for at-risk
children; the National Program to Fight Poverty (PNLP), which i s a community-driven development-type
program; and municipal government programs (day cares and other social services), and programs run by
NGOs, religious groups and local associations. The challenge in this area is to strengthen systems for
monitoring the performance and impact o f these programs. This would include redefining the regulatory
framework for decentralized service delivery and updating the framework agreement for social protection
services between the Ministry o f Labor and municipalities.

73.

The basic issues for social protection concerned increasing efficiency, equity and coverage t o fill
specific gaps. Under the CAS, the Bank proposed to help Government prioritize social sector objectives,
increase the private sector’s contribution, and help create fiscal space for social protection spending. The
PRSC series was designed to support improvements in the coverage, targeting, effectiveness and financial
sustainability o f the social protection system, including social pensions, social assistance, community
development, and targeted programs to increase access t o social services and management o f food crises.
The key CAS outcomes for social protection, as stated in the results framework, and the progress
74.
made toward those outcomes with Bank support, are listed below:

75.
CAS outcome: Improved ability to plan and monitor social assistance services, to be
measured by percentage o f target population with access to services and the number o f decentralized
programs. Achievement o f this outcome i s unclear. Under PRSC-1, the Government completed a Social
Services M a p which identified 609 social service centers, a critical first step to identify gaps and better
target services, rationalize the use o f infrastructure, and improve the planning and monitoring o f
decentralized services. The map i s accessible on the internet and provides complete up-to-date
information on coverage and use o f services. PRSC 2 and 3 dropped some o f the focus on social services
and these were not explicitly tracked. However, according to the PRSC series ICR, all social protection
measures envisioned under the GPRSP were implemented, with the exception o f the establishment o f a
framework for decentralized service delivery.

76.

Improved access by the poor to education, health and nutrition services: The Government
strengthened collaboration with NGOs that provide social services to l o w income and vulnerable groups
at the local level, including through 10 new agreements signed between municipalities and the NGOs.
The Framework L a w on Decentralization would allow further progress in this area by providing the
regulatory framework for decentralized service delivery. As discussed earlier, the law i s being debated in
Parliament. The Ministry o f Labor and Solidarity (MTS) has financed training for NGOs and local
government staff to improve quality o f services. The Government tested targeted subsidies to encourage

55

c

access to education and health by the poor, including for secondary school fees and access to medicine.
On this basis, the MTS increased support for secondary and vocational education for at-risk groups,
reaching 184 students in 2005. With regard to increasing access of at-risk groups to health services, the
Government decided that rather than providing subsidies it would pursue community-based health
insurance as a more effective way o f achieving this objective, following the results and recommendations
o f a study prepared by the International Labor Organization.

77.
CAS outcome: Expanded coverage and better targeting o f the non-contributory pension
schemes, as measured by the percentage o f social pension recipients in the lowest income quintile (no
level proposed for indicator). This outcome i s considered as having been achieved, however, and
performance i s satisfactory. The PSS and PSM have been integrated into one system with a unified MIS
database; new digital ID cards have been issued to beneficiaries and a revised poverty map was used to
allocate additional pensions by municipalities. As a result, the number of beneficiaries increased from
14,446 in 2005 to 18,462 in 2007 and 21,000 in 2008.
78.

Improved outreach and coverage of children at extreme risk, as measured by number o f
children receiving services and staff trained to receive children. Although these indicators were not
explicitly tracked, performance i s considered satisfactory on the basis o f other indicators. The Council o f
Ministers in February 2005 passed a resolution to establish a National Commission for Legal and
InstitutionalReform for Children and Adolescents, setting the stage for a major overhaul o f the legislative
and institutional framework to protect children. The I C M increased supervision of NGOs and local
associations providing services to at-risk children and youth, including updatingdata on service providers
and helping resolve implementation issues. The ICM’s Child Emergency Centers were expanded in 2005
and the institute was renamed the Cape Verdean Institute for Children and Adolescents. Entities for the
defense of children’s rights were established in all municipalities, and the use o f the Cape Verdean
Institute for Minors Child Emergency centers was expanded. In the health sector, there were significant
improvements in the availability of important specialties such as orthopedic surgery and general surgery,
among others, and funding for priority health programs (e.g., tuberculosis, malaria), which fully matched
the augmented funding levels in the GPRSP.

79.
Better prevention and management o f food crises, as measured by the time between crisis and
response. This indicator was not tracked and it i s unclear what performance has been. There was minimal
progress in this area during the PRSC 1 and it was not tracked under PRSC 2 and PRSC 3. However,
actions accomplished under PRSC 1 mainly set the stage for more effective actions to prevent food crises.
A food security survey was carried out and a National Council for Food Security created in August 2005.
These steps were to make it possible to estimate the number o f families and the zones at nutritional risk
and lay the ground for a more coordinated approach, respectively.
111. CAS Contribution to GPRSP Goals and Monitoring

80.
The links between the long-term goals of the GPRSP and the CAS outcomes were clearly spelled
out in the CAS Results Framework. However, as i s often the case, evaluating Bank contribution to
specific long-term country outcomes i s not always possible, and it i s often difficult to isolate the impact
o f World Bank support from that o f other donors also supporting GPRSP implementation. Government
leadership and ownership played a determining role in the success o f reforms and activities for GPRSP
goals; however, Bank readiness to support these efforts are what also made the difference.
81.
The CAS states that monitoring and evaluation o f Bank results would be aligned with that o f the
GPRSP, with the overall objective o f ensuring easy and timely access to relevant data to monitor
progress, evaluate the impact o f the GPRSP and helping define new orientations or make changes based

56

on analysis of current data. To this end, the Government planned to implement an ambitious M&E
system that integrated budget and financial management systems with technical aspects o f program
delivery, while also developing an integrated technological platform for the system, and providing open
access for users to the main data warehouses. The Bank mobilized a GPRSP Trust Fund to also support
this effort.

82.
There were significant delays putting in place the M&E system, although some progress was
registered, including: establishing the Technical Secretariat for Development Assistance (STAD) in
charge o f coordinating M&E activities in early 2007; creating sectoral databases for agriculture and
education; preparing a disaggregated poverty map; undertaking a pilot household survey o f core welfare
indicators (QUIBB) to track poverty, the final results o f which were made available in the fall o f 2008;
and completion o f the first two phases for establishing the national data bank for official statistics. The
Government also prepared an annual progress report in July 2006 and i s finalizing a draft implementation
evaluation o f the GPRSP. Other tools used to monitor GPRSP progress include periodic reporting on the
MDGs; budget monitoring through PERs; sector budget execution and results o f service delivery targets;
and periodic surveys to track poverty and access to services carried out by the National Statistics Institute
(NE).

83.
To encourage Government to make further progress with the M&E framework, several actions
were completed as prior actions for PRSC 3, including: analyzing the data of the QUIBB survey;
completing STAD staffing; and starting implementationo f the training program detailed in the Statistical
Agenda.
IV.

Sustainability

84.
There are strong prospects for sustainability o f IDA support to Cape Verde, given the context o f a
central Government that i s committed and leading visible and meaningful reforms. Capacity i s small and
needs to be increased, and the decentralization agenda i s a priority to strengthen municipalities and local
institutions.
85.
During the CAS period under review, two projects closed: The Social Sector Development
Project and the Energy and Water Sector Project. The SSDP (rated Satisfactory at closing) helped
strengthen institutional capacity at the central level, notably with the National Poverty Alleviation
Program (PNLP), today an autonomous agency under the Ministry o f Labor, Family and Solidarity, which
continues to implement programs financed by IFAD and AfDB. Through AGECABO, the employment
and contracting agency created under the PNLP, and the Delegated Contract Management Agencies
(private local businesses and NGOs), the SSDP successfully replaced the preexisting FAIMO system that
had become unproductive with a new model for creating jobs and alleviating poverty through a more
competitive, private-sector oriented approach, with better pay for workers, while improving access to
basic services through community public works. Seventeen municipalities received training in project
planning and management, and these skills would have contributed to the project’s sustainability.
However, as reflected in the project ICR and comments made by the Borrower, the project did not
provide as much capacity-building and support to municipalities and to the smaller firms and NGOs that
implemented sub-projects as it had set out to do. The project boosted economic activity by supporting
these organizations just as Cape Verde was moving to a market-based economy, but while some
associations managed to find new financing, including from other donors such as the InternationalFund
for Agricultural Development, others were not viable without the project. AGECABO closed i t s doors in
2006, although it had been expected to function without the project, according to the ICR.

57

86.
With regard to the Energy and Water project,’ the investments made to extend infrastructure
services will need to be maintained in both urban and rural areas. Given the technical and financial
difficulties o f these sectors, it i s unclear that the achievements under the project will be sustained.
However, the Bank and other donors can improve the prospect for services to be sustainable through
future support to salvage Electra and restore i t s capacity.
V. Institutional Impact

87.

CAS operations included a number of capacity and institution building activities, and these have
largely been discussed in the above section on CAS outcomes.

VI. Exogenous Factors and Unintended Negative Impact

88.
Exogenous factors that affected CAS outcomes include the high oil prices which hit the energy
sector, the cost of living, and the depreciating dollar, which increased the cost of project activities.
Contrary to a concern expressed in the CAS, the depreciating dollar did not dampen investments, which
increased continually, particularly in tourism and real estate development. CAS implementation did not
have any unintended negative impacts that the country team i s aware of.
C. BANK PERFORMANCE
I. Lending

89.
Bank lending for FY05-09 was US$73 million, compared to a proposed base case o f US$50
million and a high case o f US$71 million for the CAS period. The actual lending amount through FY08,
US$63 million, was determined by the IDA 14 envelope, which was largely front-loaded, but which
benefited from internal reallocation and modest scale-up o f resources (US$5 million) in FY08 due to
Cape Verde’s strong IDA performance and strong CPIA scorecard. The CAS triggers for the base case
included: (a) continued satisfactory macroeconomic performance (PRSC trigger); (b) no more than one
project with IDA commitment considered at risk; and (c) adequate budget allocation to GPRSP sectors;
and (d) avoidance of accumulation of new domestic arrears, especially to suppliers and utilities beyond
0.2 percent o f GDP. The high case triggers included: (a) no part of the portfolio considered at risk; (b)
substantial implementationof priority actions of the CFAA, including presentation to Parliament of the
executed budget o f the previous year no later than six months after the end of the year, and submission to
Parliament of the State’s general accounts for the period 2000-2003; (c) completion o f process to attract
private partners in the transport sector, specifically the airline and the port, and (d) improvement in the
investment climate, as measured by the reduction by half of the average time to establish an enterprise,
using 2002 as a point o f reference.
90.

The high case triggers were partially met: (trigger a) All but one o f the projects met their
development objectives; the energy sector operation was at risk o f not meeting its DO for a period of time
early in the CAS period, then turned around briefly, and ultimately closed Unsatisfactory. The
implementation of CFAA actions were supported by the PRSC series, and the submission to Parliament
o f the State’s general accounts for 1998-2005 were met (trigger b); as of 2007, the previous year’s
accounts were finalized within months following the fiscal year’s closing. In addition, quarterly accounts
are prepared on a timely basis, and have been submitted to Parliament on a regular basis since 2004.
Cape Verde made partial progress in the process to attract private partners in the airline and the port
(trigger c); however, this objective was not fully achieved in the CAS period. The investment climate, as
The ICR for this project will be produced in June 2009, six months after the December 2008 closing o f the GEF grant
component.

58

measured by the reduction by half o f the average time to establish an enterprise (trigger d), was
accomplished with the launching in Sgo Vicente and subsequently Praia o f the "citizen's house'' services
allowing businesses to be establishedregistered in one day.

91.
Despite meeting the high case triggers, disbursements during the CAS period reached only US63
million, due to the limitations in the IDA resources allocated to Cape Verde. However, US$10 million in
budget support disbursed in July 2008 in the new fiscal year (IDA 15 resources). Overall, U S 4 5 million
o f IDA support was disbursed through PRSCs I-IVY or 71 percent o f the total. Investment projects were
delivered as anticipated, with the exception o f a proposed multi-sector private infrastructure project.
Instead the Bank provided supplemental financing for the Growth and Competitiveness Project and the
Road Sector Support Program. The proposed and actual lending programs for the CAS are presented in
Table A2-2.
11. Analytical and Advisory Activities

92.

The Bank largely delivered the AAA program as proposed in the CAS, with the exception o f two
studies. A Rural Development Assessment was initiated but due to quality issues was re-launched in
FY08 and was reoriented to focus on livelihoods and youth but was dropped in light of the priorities
under the new CAS. However, a Fisheries sector review prepared as part o f the work on rural
development was well received and was converted into a stand-alone sector work. A Human
Development Review was planned but not pursued. The AAA was generally well received by
Government and also received a satisfactory assessment by the Bank's Quality Assurances Group (QAG),
which carried out a review o f AAA in FY07. Annual Public Expenditure Reviews provide an important
basis for dialogue with Government and coordinationwith IMF on policy and reform issues as well as for
defining the PRSC program. An integrated CFMCPAR was prepared in FY06 to assess progress in
implementing fiduciary reforms and provided the underpinningfor public financial management reforms.
An Infrastructure Regulation and Competitiveness Diagnostic Report and an Investment Climate
Assessment (ICA) were prepared in 2006 and contributed to the dialogue on growth and improving the
business environment. A Pension Study was prepared under the Growth and Competitiveness Project to
underpin policy recommendations for pension reform. The Poverty Assessment i s being updated and
expected to be finalized in FY09; however a Long-term Growth and Competitiveness Study was not
initiated in FY07, and will instead be replaced under the new CAS with an initial labor market
assessment.

93.
One weakness with AAA dissemination stemmed from Government delays or non-responsiveness
to requests from the Bank for their reaction to studies or for agreement to publish the reports, despite their
expressed satisfactionwith the reports mentioned to Bank staff. The Bank successfully disseminated the
results o f some important AAA through workshops with central and local government as well as civil
society, private sector and development partners. The Government initiated a working group following
the ICA workshop to develop a strategy for implementing the recommendations. That said, the QAG
evaluationrated participation, consultation and dissemination of AAA as moderately satisfactory, and this
i s an area that the Bank should strengthen going forward.
111. Portfolio Assessment

94.
Cape Verde has had the top performingportfolio in the Africa Region, barring the performance o f
the energy and water operation. That said, the portfolio i s quite small, with three investment operations
representing U S 4 8 . 5 million equivalent, of which US$4 million was undisbursed, as of February 20,
2009. All operations are rated satisfactory. There are no problem projects or commitments at risk. Over
the CAS period, the portfolio has included five investment operations: (1) the Growth and

59

Competitiveness Project; (2) the Multi-Sector HIV/AIDS Support Project; (3) the Road Sector Support
Program (RSSP); (4) the Energy and Water Project (IDA and GEF financed); and (5) the Social Sector
Development Project. The RSSP i s the youngest project, having become effective in August 2005 and
closing in 2010. The projects are implemented by Project CoordinationUnits within ministries, with the
exception o f the RSSP implemented by the Ministry o f Infrastructure,Transport and Sea and the PRSCs,
which are coordinated directly by the Ministry of Finance. To create synergies among the different
PCU’s fiduciary teams, they were co-located in one building. However, each PCU eventually maintained
distinct fiduciary staff.

95.

Grant financing was mobilized from several sources and played an important role in ensuring
implementationof many CAS activities. In addition to the GEF grant for Energy and Water, there were
IDF and JSDF grants to strengthen the justice sector; an IDF grant to strengthen the court o f auditors; a
second poverty reduction strategy t r u s t fund grant for public expenditure analysis, M&E, and other
activities; and a PPIAF grant to strengthen capacity at ARE. The implementation o f these grants
contributedto the outcomes discussed earlier.

96.

Changes in Task Team Leaders for two important IDA infrastructure projects and the PRSC I V
weakened Bank performance by creating significant interruptions and delays in the dialogue with Cape
Verdean counterparts and subsequently in project execution. Due to the enormous demands on
Procurement and Financial Management services for the Country Department’s portfolio, and given the
nature of the work, fiduciary assistance for project implementation was often late, though implementing
agencies managed to navigate procurement and FM procedures with TTL support. In addition, the
Country Team often had difficulties obtaining punctual Bank technical expertise for very specific issues
which would have contributed to stronger dialogue with the Authorities.

97.
A CAS Progress Report should have been prepared in FY07. However, with Cape Verde poised
to access IBRD financing in 2008, the Bank decided to move forward with a new CAS instead. The new
CAS i s being finalized in 2009, once the Bank’s dialogue with the Authorities on the new growth agenda
had clarified the priorities for the IDA and IBRD programs. A CAS Progress Report would have
provided an opportunity to revisit the CAS indicators and adjust the strategy as needed.
IV. Country Dialogue and Donor Harmonization

98.

The country dialogue i s boosted by the strong performance o f the Bank portfolio and the
analytical work to support reforms. Cape Verde’s eligibility for access to IBRD resources as o f the new
CAS should also strengthen the dialogue. It i s important to note that the country will continue receiving
concessional support from IDA for the foreseeable future and Cape Verde will be a blend (IDA and
IBRD) borrower under the new CAS for FY09-12. In-country representation would significantly
strengthen country dialogue and should be considered seriously.

99.

Coordination with donors has been significantly enhanced through the work of the joint Budget
Support Group, which has strengthened harmonizationthrough support for a shared policy reform matrix
agreed to with Government. The growth o f the Budget Support Group has helped to increase
coordination and harmonization. The GPRSP has also provided the basis for coordinating donor
investment and budget support. While IDA has been the largest donor financier to Cape Verde recently,
the UN i s responsible for local donor coordination and organizing Round Tables. The Bank i s also a
member o f the Support Group for the Transition, organized by the Ministry of External Cooperation with
UN support to raise awareness o f the implications o f Cape Verde’s graduation to a MIC and to increase
support for its continued access to concessional aid and other programs generally reserved for LDCs,

60

V.

Client Feedback

100. As part o f the preparation o f the CAS CompletionReport, discussions were held with Cape Verde
officials on their views on Bank and project performance. This section presents some o f the feedback
provided during these discussions.

101. There was very positive feedback from the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry o f Economy
regarding the Bank’s decision to channel an increasing amount o f financing through the budget. The
benefits cited included greater flexibility and predictability for Government to channel funds as needed,
for example to meet the rising financing needs in health and pensions, or to finance TA without going
through cumbersome procurement procedures. The PRSC Series, as part of the coordinated and broader
support o f donors, was also instrumental in supporting a l l aspects of public finance and helping to ensure
the sustainability o f the financial systems and reforms established. As expressed by some officials, the
challenge going forward i s to transfer the fiscal discipline introduced at the central level to the
municipalities. The work on PRSCs was also an important catalyst for bringing together the Budget
Support Group and was considered by Government to be more efficient than the project approach.

102. The Bank’s management o f the Cape Verde portfolio from Washington and Dakar was seen as
less efficient than it would otherwise be if there were a local representation, and there was a general
desire for an empowered local office to be established which could help make decisions more rapidly and
facilitate communication.
103. There was a request for the Bank to do more on capacity building by supporting professional
education and SMEs to better prepare the labor market for the opportunities growing in the services
industry, and to be more responsive to Government requests for punctual TA. Bank analytical support
was regarded as very useful and a reference source for Government on many issues, but there was also a
concern expressed that it was somewhat supply driven.
104. For their part, project coordinators generally expressed an appreciation for having the
independence to move more quickly than they believed would be possible within a line ministry.
However, there was also a shared perception that the Bank needed to be more responsive in reacting to
non-objectionrequests.

105. Despite the weak performance rating for the Energy and Water Project, both Government
officials and the project staff said that this had been a very important project for Cape Verde and had been
successful in many ways. However, there was a general frustration with how the project was at times
managed by the Bank, particularly in reference to how some procurement issues were handled which
delayed progress with important components. It was suggested several times that the Bank would need to
remain engaged in the sector given the power sector’s pivotal role in the economy and implications for
the national budget.
106. Some officials felt that the Bank should do more to reach the poorest, that budget support was
invisible to the population, and that the Bank should ensure that the focus on growth and infrastructure,
which the private sector should handle, not come at the expense o f supporting local communities. To
address the needs of poor or working class communities, the Bank should focus i t s support on training for
small businesses (small fishermen, artisans, farmers) that can provide services or goods to the tourism
sector, and increase access to credit. Infrastructure and professional education were cited as the two key
strategic themes for the Government’s transformation strategy to succeed and as areas where the Bank
should be present going forward.

61

C. Conclusions and Lessons Going Forward

107. Overall, progress toward achieving CAS outcomes was satisfactory and the Bank’s
performance was also satisfactory. Overarching (medium-term) objectives of supporting growth and
reducing poverty were achieved, and the Bank executed most of the activities it planned and contributed
to the envisioned outcomes, in line with the GPRSP objectives. The shift to providing a greater share of
IDA resources as budget support was successful, as it bolstered the reform program and strengthened
country dialogue and donor coordination. The portfolio included a good mix o f IDA investment
operations and grant-projects that supported activities to complement the policy reform program
supported by the PRSCs and supported implementation of the GPRSP. The portfolio performance was
satisfactory for most o f the CAS period. However, the AAA program reflected the CAS priorities, though
it wasn’t executed in its entirety. Key lessons for the Bank going forward include the following:
9

Explore options to strengthen the relationship with the client by increasing the Bank’s presence and
visibility in the country. A key theme that has been recurrent in discussions with Cape Verde i s the
desire to have a stronger Bank presence in the country and more supervision missions. This could be
accomplished by establishing a local representation and more frequent missions by the Country
Management Unit.

>

Increase outreach to civil society, including the parliamentarians, the private sector, political leaders,
and opinion leaders (Le., the media) to strengthen dissemination of studies and analytical work; build a
dialogue with non-government actors; and increase awareness of the Bank’s support to Cape Verde.

9 Strengthen focus on reducing inequality between islands and between urban versus rural areas. Pursue
analytical work to strengthen targeting mechanisms, as well as investment or TA support to improve
opportunities, especially for underemployed youth.

9 Given the fundamental need for energy and water services to support the rapid growth in tourism and
other services, as well as to meet the needs of citizens and improve the quality o f l i f e for the poorest,
the Bank should rethink its strategy for supporting the sector under the new CAS, including to help
Government invest in alternative renewable sources of energy.

9 Public-privatepartnerships need national consensus and support to be successful. In the transport and
energy sectors, efforts to establish successful PPPs have been undercut by a lack o f genuine support for
these.

9 The Bank should continue supporting Cape Verde’s reform program through budget support,
including for further strengthening o f the investment climate and infrastructure services, and to support
the use of new IBRD resources to leverage private investments in growth-oriented infrastructure
services that have an impact on poverty. Weak capacity, due to inadequate human resources, remains a
key constraint for Government. The Bank should increase support for capacity-buildingto Government
and ensure that resources are utilized.

9 Some o f the risks anticipated in the CAS were realized and the Bank should reflect on new mitigation
measures. For example, the increase in oil prices (an external shock) exacerbated the financial
difficulties stemming from the delays in setting tariff or energy products and the payment arrears
accumulated by municipalities. This had repercussions on services as well as presenting a contingent
liability for the budget.

9 The Government faced some difficulties preparing the MTEF and delays setting up the M&E system,
both of which were needed for better planning and monitoring of the GPRSP and indirectly CAS
results.
9 Donors, including the Bank, should continue to provide Cape Verde with access to concessional
financing and maintain other special economic arrangements to help the country make a smooth

62

transition to middle-income status and ensure that the development gains are not jeopardized. The Bank
needs t o look at M I C strategies that could be useful for Cape Verde and the experience in other similar
countries, such as the Eastern Caribbean States.

63

Ec:

d

E

.C

/

E

.-

E

xm

8
Q

2

r:
5
0
E
m

5

I

ru
0

Y

0

9

m

9

rn

0

od

h

2
2

9

4

c

d

Y

52

E

Y

k

W
0
0
t-4

b
0
0

t\l

Table A2-3. Non-lending Services and Actual Deliveries

FY
2005

CAS PLAN (2/22/2005)
Product

COMPLETION REPORT (12/31/08)

InfrastructureRegulation and
Competitiveness Diagnostic Report

Deliveredto client in FY06

Public Expenditure Review Update
CFAA ImplementationFollow-up

Completed in FY06
Completed in FY06

Investment Climate Assessment
Pension Study

Completed in FY06
Completed in FY07

Review o f Human Development
Public Expenditure Review Update

Dropped
Completed in FY07

Rural Development Assessment

Not Prepared

Status

2006

2007

Additional ESW completed:
Fisheries Assessment

2008

Poverty Assessment
Public Expenditure Review
Long term Growth and Competitiveness
Study

To be completed in FY09
Completed in FY08
Not prepared

72

Appendix 3

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
CAPE VERDE
Joint World Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Analysis

Prepared by the staffs of the InternationalDevelopment Association and
the International Monetary Fund
Approved by Sudhir Shetty and Carlos Braga (World Bank)
and David Nellor and Philip Gerson (IMF)
November 7,2008
The risk of debt distress in Cape Verde remains low. Nevertheless, medium-term fiscal policy will
reverse the public debt decline of recent years. The total public debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to rise
until 2012 and then decline thereafter-a path opposite that projected in the 2007 DSA. The
temporary rise in external debt will be only partially offset by continued decline in domestic debt.
Despite the rise, debt ratios remain manageable in all scenarios. Foreign direct investment (FDiJ will
finance most of the external current account deficit, which will narrow as Cape Verde transforms
itself into a services exporter. The main risks to the debt outlook are currency exposure and
contingent liabilities. The risk of debt distress remains low under the baseline as well as alternative
scenarios that take those risks into consideration.

1. BACKGROUND5’
1,
This DSA reviews the evolution of Cape Verde’s public debt since the 2007 DSA6’ and
analyzes the projected debt path for the period 2008-28. Using the Fund-World Bank debt
sustainability framework (DSF), it projects the baseline economic scenario and performs stress tests
to assess whether debt distress will stay low. The thresholds for public external debt distress are
those for countries like Cape Verde that have sound policies and institutions (Table 1).61 The
baseline scenario was updated based on discussions with the authorities during the fifth review o f
the Policy Support Instrument (PSI) (September-October 2008). The discussions centered on the
2009 budget and the medium-term fiscal framework the authorities submitted to Parliament in
October 2008 along with the 2009 budget.

59 This analysis includes only central government debt and guarantees; it excludes municipalities and state-owned
enterprises.

6o

I M F Country Report 08/37 and World Bank Report 44350-CV.

Cape Verde’s score on the World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) was upgraded in 2007 from
4.1 to 4.2. Its average score for 2005-07 was 4.13, above the 3.75 floor for strong performers.

2.
Since the last DSA Cape Verde has continued to reduce public debt as a percentage of
GDP and to change its composition (Table 2). Total public debt (domestic plus external) was
reduced by 10 percentage points in 2007. Net domestic debt was pushed down to the original PSI
benchmark o f 20 percent o f GDP two years ahead o f schedule; it i s likely to reach 14 percent o f
GDP by year-end, thanks to expenditure restraint as well as buoyant revenues. The proportion o f
domestic debt in total debt was also reduced, reflecting efforts to reach out to development partners
for concessional financing, making it possible to replace domestic with mostly concessional external
borrowing. All external funds borrowed in 2007 were concessional. Cape Verde's main external
creditors are IDA and the African Development Fund (Table 2). While the credit crunch in Europe i s
making it hard to r o l l over the nonbank private external debt, this totaled only 8 percent o f GDP as
o f the end o f 2007 and i s mainly long-term.
Table 1. Cape Verde: Central Government External Debt Ratios
Baseline Scenario
Thresholds

'

NPV of debt as a percentage of:
GDP
50
Exports
200

Revenues
3 00
Debt service as percentage of:
Exports
25
Revenues

35

2008

2018

2028

25
56

26
42

21
30

99

104

83

5

5

4

8

11

11

Source: Ministry o f Finance; and staff estimates.

' Based on Cape Verde's 2005-07 classification as a strong performer.

* Excluding grants.

3.
The depreciation of the dollar in 2007 and 2008 was favorable to Cape Verde, but it
revealed open currency positions (Tables 2 and 5). The nominal external debt-to-GDP ratio
declined by 5 percentage points despite the fact that the dollar value o f the country's nominal
external debt grew by U S $ 58 million in 2007 (4 percent o f GDP). This i s because the nominal GDP
measured in dollars grew by 20 percent boosted by the appreciation o f the escudo relative t o the
dollar. The open currency exposure to the dollar results from the fact that the external liabilities o f
the Treasury are denominated mainly in US$and SDR (which contains dollars), and the net foreign
assets o f the central bank are mostly in euros. This raises questions about whether the authorities
should swap part o f their foreign reserves in euros for dollars to cover the outstanding open positions
or should prefer that future loans be denominated in euros. The authorities have made commitments
in the PSI and PRSC series to improve debt management, and the Fund and the Bank together will
provide technical assistance (TA) on debt management in addition to the TA Cape Verde receives
from Portugal.

74

Table 2. Cape Verde: Central Government Debt, 2004-08
2004

2005

2006
Actual

2007

2008
Proi.

(Percent o f nominal debt)
Total
Nominal external debt
Multilaterals
Official bilaterals
Commercial
Domestic debt'

100
66
51
13
2

100
64
50
12
2

100
65
51
12
1

100
68
57
10
1

100
74
64
8
1

34

36

35

32

26

(Units indicated)
Total
US$ million
Percent o f GDP
Nominal external debt
U S $ million
Percent o f GDP

842
89

802
81

919
75

959
65

936
52

553
60

513
51

598
50

656
45

694
38

Domestic debt'
US$ million
Percent o f GDP

288
29

289
30

322
25

303
20

243
14

Memorandum item:
GDP (US$ million)

918

1,006

1,203

1,443

1,826

Source: Cape Verdean authorities, staff estimates and projections.
' Net of deposits and obligations with the Trust Fund.

2. MEDIUM-TERMBASELINE SCENARIO
4.
The long-term macroeconomic scenario i s projected to revolve over the next 20 years
around two axes: economic transformation toward a service-based economy, and accumulation o f
international reserves and government deposits at the BCV.
5.
The growth forecast is designed to test the robustness of the conclusions of this DSA.
Because o f the financial and commodity price shocks in 2008, short-term growth was revised
downward and inflation upward compared to the previous DSA (Table 3). For the outer years, the
previous assumptions are maintained: real GDP i s expected to grow by 5 percent in the long term (5
to 20 years), which i s a prudent 2 percentage points below the historical average (1 standard
deviation). Growth will be driven by the transformation into a service-exporting economy, financed
mostly by FDI. Moreover, the projections do not consider the growth-promoting effect o f public
investment in infrastructure.

75

Table 3. Cape Verde: Macroeconomic Baseline Assumptions, 2008-28

5 Years Ahead
2007 DSA
Current DSA

Average
(1998-2007)

6-20 Years Ahead
2007 DSA
Current DSA

7.2
3.1
32
65

7.3
2.3
47
78

6.6
3.4
48
71

5.2
2.0
58
82

5.1
2.0
65
78

Financing needs (percent o f GDP)'
...
Grant element of new external borrowing
...
Public revenue and grants (percent o f GDP)
30
Primary public deficit (percent of GDP)
4.9
Source: National authorities, staff estimates and projections.

-1.0
28
29
1.6

-2.5
16
28
2.7

-2.7
10
28
1.3

-0.4
9
27
0.8

Real GDP growth rate (percent)
Inflation rate (percent)
Exports o f goods and services (percent o f GDP)
Imports o f goods and services (percent o f GDP)

' Current account plus foreign direct investment.
6.
The economic transformation i s marked by an increase in imports and service exports
and by a decrease in reliance on remittances and other current transfers. Cape Verde i s
expected to break i t s past dependence on aid and remittances as it continues t o transform itself into a
self-propelled economy. While the fuel and food shock increased the import bill in 2008, the
restraint in recurrent expenditures created fiscal space that has enabled the government to expand
social transfers to protect
Balance of Payments Source of Financing, 1995-2007
the vulnerable without
1996
2007
putting pressure on the
Tourism
FD,
ODA
balance o f payments. As a
Tourism
4%
12%
Remmancea 2
result, foreign reserves will
stay above 3 months o f
imports and continue to
grow through the forecast
horizon. FDI will drive and
. -.
46%
18%
finance the current account
Source: National authorities
deficit and keep debtThe transformation of the Cape Verdean economy
generating flows close to
100
balance.
The
debtBalance of payments
generating inflows needed
80
,..*----------to finance the current
' Imports of goods
account deficit are likely to
60
and sedces
be largely unaffected if 0
t!
FDI i s below baseline
40
projections owing t o the n
n
20
self stabilizing dynamics o f
the current account relative
0
to FDI (imports would
.*
* . ^ _ _ _ _ _ _ . ^ * - - Current account
decline in tandem with FDI
thanks to i t s high import
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028
content).
Despite a
possible
deceleration
caused by global financial turmoil, the prospects for FDI inflows in the medium term continue to be
bright. N e w commitments approved by the Investment Promoting Agency support the expectation
that the private investments will materialize.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ c _ _ - - - - - - - - -

'\

-

I
I

"

76

7.
The baseline scenario projects that international reserves will continue to accumulate,
as will government deposits at the BCV. The prudent fiscal policy implemented in the PSI i s
assumed to continue through the forecast horizon, with foreign reserves building up. This
assumption i s based on two facts:
a. In October 2008 the authorities submitted to Parliament a medium-term fiscal framework for
2009-20 11 that indicates a prudent fiscal policy. Although the policy reverses the recent
decline in public debt, it preserves a stable debt path that allows for public investments in
infrastructure and social transfers.
b. The authorities announced in the Letter o f Intent for the 5’ PSI review that they intend to
continue with a PSI for at least four more years, until 2013 (a I-year extension o f the current
PSI followed by a request for a new 3-year PSI).

Based on these facts, net domestic borrowing i s projected to be contained in the next 20 years,
allowing net domestic debt62to land softly at about 11 percent o f GDP. This fiscal restraint i s needed
to accomplish the authorities’ goal o f increasing reserve coverage by 0.1 month o f prospective
imports each year, reaching 5.7 months by 2028 (equivalent to 41 percent o f GDP). Financing the
reserve accumulation requires that the Treasury make annual deposits o f about 1.2 percent o f GDP at
the BCV. Using the balance sheet approach, this result assumes that the authorities’ efforts to develop
the domestic securities market will allow the domestic private sector to absorb about 19 percent o f
GDP in Treasury securities by 2028 (Table 4).

45
40

,

GDP

The accumulation of net foreign assets (NFA) and Treasury deposits
I

alance sheet of the Bank of Cape Verde (projections)

35

Treasury

Treasurv
SltS

30

25

20
15

10

5
0
2008 2008
AssetsLiabilities

2013
2013
AssetsLiabilibes

2018 2018
Assets Liabilitres

2023
2023
AssetsLiabilities

2028
2028
AssetsLiabilibes

8.
The baseline scenario assumes a faster rise than the previous DSA in the share o f
nonconcessional external borrowing. While Cape Verde will continue to have access to
concessional loans from I D A and others,63this DSA assumes that Cape Verde will increasingly take
out nonconcessional loans to finance growth-enhancing public investments. It i s assumed that the
average grant element o f all external borrowing will decline to less than 10 percent by 2028. This
62
63

N e t of government deposits.
Cape Verde i s a “blend country” as it i s eligible to IBRD and IDA funds (under the “small island exception”).

77

assumption i s justified by the recent graduation o f Cape Verde from the U.N.’s least-developed
country category and nonconcessional loans envisaged with the European Investment Bank (EIB),
the IBRD, and the OPEC Fund. This assumption i s useful for probing the resilience o f the debt path
to less favorable borrowingterms.64To further test resilience in stress scenarios, the grant element o f
marginal debt65i s negative because it i s assumed that under stress conditions the country would be
charged a risk premium o f 100 basis points above the market rate.66
Table 4. Balance Sheet Approach: IntersectoralPositions with the Treasury, Selected Items
(in percentage of GDP)
Treasury

Bank o f Cape Verde
2008

Assets
Deposits at the BCV
Deposits in banks

7
5
2

Liabilities”
With the BCV
With banks
With non-banks

-20
-3
-11

Net domestic debt

-14

-7

Domestic Banking Sector
2008
Assets
Net Foreign Assets
Reserve money and cash
Treasury securities
BCV bills (sterilization)
Private credit
Other items (net) and TCMF

71
2
12
11
4
46
-4

Liabilities
Deposits
Deposits of the Treasury

-71
-69
-2

2028

2008

2028

31
22
3
7

43
41
0
1

-31
-19
-4
-5
-4

-43
-23
-4
-15
-1

Domestic non-bankingsector
2008

2028

...

...

7

19
84
8

15 Assets
15
Net Foreign Assets
0
Claims on the Treasury
Other items (net) and TCMF
-26 Liabilities
0
Money base
-6
BCV bills (sterilization)
-19
Deposits ofthe Treasury
Equity capital
-11

2028

85 Assets
0
Treasury
15
Bank deposits
6
Cash
4
60
-1
-85 Liabilities
-84
Bankloans
0

69
7

...
-46

...
-60

Source: IMF and IDA staffs’ projections.

I/Excludes TCMF.

3. EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
BASELINE SCENARIO

9.
Although the recent decline in external debt will be temporarily reversed because
borrowing to finance public investments will accelerate, it will remain below the threshold. In
the previous DSA, external debt was expected to decline continuously. The reason for the difference
i s the new funds Cape Verde recently secured for public investments, especially from the EIB and
the IBRD. The finding that this temporary rise in external borrowing will not jeopardize debt
sustainability repeats the finding of the 2007 DSA that a 5-year scaling-up o f nonconcessional
borrowing i s consistent with debt sustainability. The average grant element o f the new borrowing
The Fund and the Bank will provide TA to Cape Verde on debt management to enable the authorities to ensure that hture
nonconcessional borrowing i s consistent with debt sustainability, especially because the nonconcessional borrowing will
double the external interest bill through 2028.
65 “Marginal debt” i s debt taken to cover the gap created by the shock simulated in the stress scenarios.
64

66

CIRR (Commercial Interest Reference Rate).

78

will be especially l o w during 2009-2011 when the EIB loan will be disbursed. The debt service
ratios will rise gently but stay below the stress thresholds. This rise in debt service indicators results
from the decline in concessional financing and the assumed shortening o f amortization periods.
Because in this DSA the grant element o f new borrowing i s projected to decline faster than in the
previous one, the rise in debt service ratios will be frontloaded rather than backloaded, as it was in
the previous DSA.

ALTERNATIVE AND STRESS SCENARIOS
10.
The risk o f external debt distress i s low even with depreciation and an abrupt
worsening of borrowing terms. The debt ratios remain far below their thresholds in all alternative
and stress scenarios, including the scenario where all new borrowing i s 200 basis points above the
baseline rates (Figure 1 and A2 Table 6). This finding reinforces the conclusion that
nonconcessional borrowing i s unlikely to jeopardize debt sustainability. The extreme scenario i s a
currency depreciation, which highlights the need to hedge open currency positions to support the
peg. This result i s a corollary to the cautionary note about the country’s currency exposure (7 3).67In
the historical scenario, the external debt ratio rises for a longer period o f time because FDI i s less
than in the baseline, but it also declines faster in the outer years because the historical scenario
implies faster growth and a smaller external deficit. The historical scenario should be interpreted
with caution because it does not take into account that in a highly open economy like Cape Verde
the current account self-stabilizes to some extent to fluctuations o f FDI and growth.

4. TOTAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
BASELINE SCENARIO

11.
The trajectory o f total public debt contrasts with the previous DSA because it reverses
the decline observed in recent years. In the baseline scenario, the NPV o f total public debt as a
percentage o f GDP i s expected to rise until 2013 and decline thereafter. In the previous DSA it was
expected t o decline in the short term and stabilize in the outer years. The rising trajectory i s expected
in spite o f the faster decline in domestic debt because external borrowing i s expected to be larger
than in the previous DSA in order t o finance public investment in infrastructure. Yet, public debt i s
sustainable because the baseline scenario maintains the assumption o f the previous DSA that the
fiscal policy pursued in the PSI and PRSC series to preserve sustainability will continue through
2028. In particular, the government i s expected to hold domestic debt at about 11 percent o f GDP,
which will require it to decelerate public investment over time t o make space to pay the interest on
current nonconcessional borrowing. The expectation i s supported by the medium-term fiscal
framework the authorities submitted t o Parliament in October 2008 and by the depth o f their
commitment to sound policies. Sales o f coastal land to tourism developers will also enhance fiscal
performance. Therefore, we find that debt i s sustainable in the baseline scenario.
ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS AND STRESS TESTS

12.
Although the macroframework i s robust to alternative assumptions and shocks, the
DSA highlights the importance o f fiscal discipline. The alternative scenarios tested are68(i)
real
GDP and primary balance at historical averages; (ii)
primary balance unchanged from 2008; and (iii)

‘’The hump-shaped path for the historical scenario (Figure 1, red dotted line) was preserved for completeness
o f this DSA. However, it i s not informative because the baseline assumptions on the current account and GDP
powth are more pessimistic than the historical scenario.
Table 8, alternative scenarios A 1-3.

79

permanently lower GDP growth.69 All debt ratios remain within sustainable levels under all the
alternative scenarios. In the extreme stress test for the debt-to-GDP ratio, the annual fiscal deficit i s
10 percent o f GDP for 2009-2010, which i s 7 percent o f GDP larger than the baseline primary
balance. This simulates a situation where, for example, hypothetical contingent liabilities equivalent
to 7 percent o f GDP materialize in two consecutive years. For the debt service ratio, the extreme
stress i s a 30 percent depreciation o f the escudo. All debt ratios remain manageable during the
forecast horizon under all stress tests.

13,
While conclusive information i s not yet available, contingent liabilities arising from
state-owned enterprises may be a risk for the debt outlook. This risk was taken in consideration
in the risk assessment o f this D S A under the extreme stress test for the debt-to-GDP ratio. This test
shows that all debt ratios remain manageable even if contingent liabilities amounting to 7 percent o f
GDP materialize in two consecutive years. There are explicit and implicit risks: the explicit
guarantees” provided to state-owned enterprises represent a fiscal risk o f 4.5 percent o f GDP at the
end o f 2008. The implicit fiscal risks are currently being assessed by the government, especially the
amounts needed to recapitalize some state-owned enterprises. For example, the electricity and water
supplier, Electra, had losses equivalent t o 1.3 percent o f GDP in 2007, which erased about half o f i t s
net worth, and it may suffer further losses in 2008 and the following years until the more efficient
generators now under construction start operating. The government i s taking action supported by the
PSI to assess these fiscal risks by compiling an aggregate balance sheet and the net gains or losses o f
the largest state-owned corporations; it will report the fiscal risks to the Council o f Ministers early in
2009. This should encourage prompt action to address the risks, such as allowing the private sector
to participate in infusing capital into state-controlled enterprises.

5. CONCLUSIONS
14.
The DSA concludes that the risk of debt distress i s low and highlights Cape Verde’s
strengths as well as vulnerabilities. Even with extreme shocks, public debt i s on a sustainable path,
given continued fiscal discipline and the economic transformation caused by expansion o f service
exports and FDI. While the decline in public debt observed in recent years i s being reversed, the
D S A shows that using nonconcessional funds to expand public investment will not jeopardize debt
sustainability as long as the expansion i s temporary and recurrent expenditures remain controlled.
This conclusion holds even if the expansion o f public investments in infrastructure does not generate
the expected growth returns, because no growth-enhancing effect o f infrastructure i s assumed. It is,
however, critical that Cape Verde strengthen i t s debt management. In particular, it needs to conduct
DSAs regularly to set a borrowing envelope for the next year’s budget and an MTFF consistent with
debt sustainability. T w o important vulnerabilities identified in the D S A also need t o be addressed:
the public sector’s unhedged currency exposures and the contingent liabilities for state-owned
enterprises. The authorities are preparing to address these vulnerabilities as they firm up their debt
management.

69

Assumes that real GDP growth i s at the baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the length o f the
porojection period.
Domestic debt issued by state owned enterprises.

80

81
3

00

0 vi m N O5 N

6 ri d

2 :

m

2 0; m a:

-

'0
vi '1 01
0 0'0 N N

*

w w
e -

82
Table 6 Cape Verde Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators o f Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2008-2028

(In percent)
Projections
2011
2012

2013

2018

2028

28

28

26

21

28
32

29
33

30
33

32
34

23
34

28
38
33
21
26
39

29
38
34
23
27
40

29
36
34
24
28
40

29
34
34
24
28
40

27
27
31
25
28
36

22
21
26
21
23
30

60

58

58

57

55

42

30

56
56

58
65

56
65

57
66

59
67

60
66

53
55

32
47

56
56
56
56
56
56

60
72
60
55
54
60

58
98
58
45
52
58

58
92
58
47
54
58

57
87
57
48
54

55

57

55

42
53
42
41
44
42

30
36
30
30
31
30

99

109

112

117

117

115

104

83

99
99

105
118

108
126

II 4
133

120
136

124
137

1.30
136

89
132

99
99
99
99
99
99

Ill
122
119

116
157
136
86
I04
I58

121
I55
142
94
112
165

121
149
142
98
II 5
165

119
141
140
IO0
116
162

107
109
126
100
112
146

86
83
101
83
91
117

2008

2009

2010

25

27

28

28

25
25

26
29

26
31

25
25
25
25
25
25

27
30
30
25
25
38

56

PV of debt-to GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A I Key vanables at their histoncal averages in 2008-2028 I/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms ~n2008-2028 2

8. Bound Tests
81. Real GDP growth at histoncal average minus one standard deviauon in 2009-2010
82. Export value growth a histoncal averaae minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 31
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at histoncal average minus one standard deviauon in 2009-2010
64 Net nondebt creaung flaws at historical average minus one standard deviauon m 2009-2010 41
85. Combinauon of B 1.64 using one-half standard deviabon shocks
66. Onetime 30 percent nominal depreciauon relative to the baseline in 2009 51

PV o f debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternrtive Scenarios
A I . Key vanables at their histoncal avenges in 2008-2028 11
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
B. Bound Tests
B I . Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at histoncal average minus one standard deviauon in 2009-2010 31
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at histoncal average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
84. Net nondebt creating flows at histoncal average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 4/
B5 Combinabon of BI-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
86 One-time 30 percent nominal depreciabon relative to the bareline in 2009 51

81

55
48
54

PV of debt-to-revenue ratio (excluding grants)
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A I Key vanables at their histoncal averages in 2008-2028 I/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms I"2008-2028 2

B. Bound Teats
B I Real GDP growth at histoncal average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at histoncal average minus one standard deviauon in 2009-2010 31
83. US dollar GDP deflator at histoncal average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
84. Net nondebt creating flows at histoncalaverage minus one standard deviauon in 2009-2010 41
B5. Combination o f 81-84 using one-half standard deviabon shocks
B6.One-time 30 percent nominal deprectaban nlauve to the bzseline 8" 2009 5/

100
101
154

82

83
Table 6 Cape Verde: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators o f Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2008-2028 (continued)
(In percent)
2008

Projections
2011
2012

2009

2010

2013

2018

2028

5

4

4

4

4

4

5

4

5
5

4
4

4
4

3
4

4
4

5
4

6
3

6
3

5
5
5
5
5
5

4
5
4
4
4
4

4
6
4
3
3
4

4
9
4
2
2
4

4
8
4
2
3
4

4
8
4
3
3
4

5
1
5
4
4
5

4
5
4
4
4
4

8

8

8

1

8

9

11

I1

8
8

8
8

7
8

1
8

8
8

10
8

16
1

16
1

8
8
8
8
8
8

8
8
9
8
8
II

8
10
9
6
6
II

8
14
9
3
5
II

8
14
IO
4
6
II

9
I5

13

12
15
14
9
11
16

12
II
14
II
I2
16

-4

-4

4

4

-4

4

-4

4

Debt serviceteexports ratio
Bmseline
A. Alternative Scenario8
A I . Key vanables at their historical averqes in 2008-2028 11
A2 New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
B. Bound Tests

81. Real GDP growth at histoncal average minus one standard deviauon in 2009-2010
8 2 Export value growh at histoncal average minus one standard deviationin 2009.20 10 31
8 3 US dollar GDP deflator ai histoncal average minus one standard deviauon in 2009-2010
8 4 Net nondebt creating flows at histoncal average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 41
85 Combmauon o f 8 1-64 using one-halfstandard deviation shocks
86. One-ume 30 percent nominal depreciaaonrelative to the baseline in 2009 51

Debt serviceto-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1 Key vanables at their himncal averages in 2008-2028 I/
A2 New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2

B. Bound Tests
B I . Real GDP gmwh at histoncal average minus one standard deviauon in 2009-2010
82. Export value growth at histoncal average minus one standard deviauon in 2009-2010 31
8 3 US dollar GDP deflator at histoncal average minus one standard deviationin 2009-2010
84. Net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviationin 2009-2010 41
85. Combination o f B 1-64 using one-halfstandard deviahon shocks
B6.One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 51

II
6

7

Memorandum r i m :

Grant element assumed on residual financing (I e , financing required above baseline)61
Source. Staff projectionsand simulations

I/Vanables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S dollar terms), non-interestcurrent account in pement of GDP, and nondebt creaung flows
U Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing IS by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline..while grace and maturity periods are the same as m the baseline.
31 Exporn values are assumed to remam permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share o f GDP i s assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly assummg an
offsetting adjustmentin import levels.)
41 Includes official and pnvate transfers and FDI.
51 Depreciation i s defined as pementagedecline in dollarflocal currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
61 Negative numbers indicate interest rates higher the market rates Applies to all N e s s scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financmg) in which the terms on a11 new financing are as specified in
fwmote 2.

83

84
Figure 1. Cape Verde: Indicators o f Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
under Alternatives Scenarios, 2007-2028 1/

a. Debt Accumulation

b.PV o f debt-to GDP ratio

, 20
50

m

m

m

m

m

m

1

1

1

1

-

Threshold: 50
40

30
.~ .......................................................................................................................
'%,,

...........................

20
10

hRat?%ebt
I

2023

Accf%!on

2028

0

2012

element o f new borrowtng (% nght scale)

-Grant
I

2017

2022

2027

Grants and implicit grants (% of GDP)

d. PV o f debt-to-revenue ratio (excluding grants)
175

7

I

Threshold: 300

Threshold: 200
100

100 -

50-

25 -

71::
75

I

04

2012

2017

2022

,I

1

-1

,

,

,

0

2027

2012

2017

2022

2027

f.Debt service-to-revenue ratio

25

Threshold: 35

Threshold: 25
20

-

&?

..,,
...............

...................

...............

4.'

..............................................

.................

04

2012
-Baseline

2017

-

I
2022
2027
Historical scenario

04

2012

2017

Most extreme shock l/

2022

2027

2007 DSA

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
l / The most extreme stress test i s the test that yields the highest ratio in 201 8. In figure b. it corresponds to a depreciation shock; in
c. to a borrowingcost shock; in d. to a depreciation shock; in e. to a export shock; and in picture f. to a depreciation shock.

84

-

m m
drd

:I

vi

O P C

P O

n o

m m m

i i
:d

O

c.

f

H

~

W

~

V

I

~

W

Oo W
o

d d d ~ o P ~ o - 0
7
N

'

0

o o o y
0

0

0

~

F
W,

: h

fi

:s
P P , m m
- w N O

F

: o o q

m o p

::

r
5

F
5
P

N - m m

E

W

P

-g w - ? n- s o z
0 P m

2

N

P 0, N,

N

c

N

m

-

P

P

O

,

~ - n q a o'

Table 8. Cape Verde: Sensitivity Analysis for K e y Indicators o f Public Debt 2008-2028

2008

2009

2010

Projections
2011 2012

2013

2018

2028

P V of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

38

39

39

40

40

40

37

32

38
38
38

39
34
39

42
31
40

45
29
42

46
26
43

47
22
43

57
14
46

77
4
63

38
38
38
38
38

40
46
43
49
39

42
53
48
49
50

44
54
49
49
50

45
53
49
49
49

45
52
49
48
47

46
47
46
42

48
40
45
45
34

131

130

140

152

150

148

137

120

128
128
128

132
115
132

148
111
143

168
110
158

169
95
157

173
83
159

212
51
170

293
13
236

128
128
128
129
128

133
153
143
164
130

149
190
171
173
176

165
203
186
185
187

165
196
182
180
180

166
192
180
177
175

170
176
175
170
155

179
152
173
169
I28

16

14

13

14

14

IS

18

20

16
14
1 6 1 4
16
14

14
8
14

16
7
14

18
6
15

19

32

3

0

16

23

59
0
44

16
16
16

14
21
18
17
13

15
26
21
18
14

16

21
19
19
14

17
23
21
20
15

24
28
26
28
18

33
28
32
40
20

A. Alternative scenarios
A I . Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A 2 Primary balance is unchanged from 2008
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth I/
B. Bound tests
B I Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B 2 Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
63. Combination ofB1-BZ using one half standard deviation shocks
B 4 One-time 30 percent real depreciation i n 2009
B5 I O percent o f GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2009

. 47

P V of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A I Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2 Primary balance i s unchanged from 2008
A3 Permanently lower GDP growth I/
B. Bound tests
B I Real GDP growih is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B2. Primary balance i s at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B3. Combination o f B I - B 2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation i n 2009
B5. 10 percent o f GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2009
Debt Serviceto-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A I Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2 Primary balance is unchanged from 2008
A3 Permanently lower GDP growth I1
B. Bound tests
B1
BZ
83
B4
BS

Real GDP growth i s at histoncal average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
Combination o f B I - B Z using one half standard deviation shocks
One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2009
10 percent o f GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2009

16

16

14
14
14
16
14

Sources Country authorities, and staff estimates and projections
I/Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the length o f the projection period
21 Revenues are defined inclusive of grants

86

Figure 2. Cape Verde: Indicators o f Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2007-2028 1/

-

- - - m m a y balance at 2008 level

Baseline

60

50

40

30

20

-..---

IO

------ -- --

-- -- ---_
--- - - - _

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028

250

PV o f Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

.^

0

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

.---

- L

I

I

1

1

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 20'17 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test i s the test that yields the highest ratio in 2018.
21 Revenues are defined inclusive o f grants.

87

Appendix 4
Constraints Reported by Enterprises - Cape Verde and ICA Comparator Countries

Electricity
Access to Financing

Tax Rates

Cape
Verde
(2005)

Senegal
(2003)

South
Africa
(2003)

Mauritius
(2005)

Philippines
(2003)

Indonesia
(2003)

Maldives
(2005)

Guyana
(2004)

Dominican
Republic
(2005)

63.2%

34.7%

9.2%

12.6%

33.4%

22.4%

19.6%

41.0%

84.4%

49.3%

61.5%

12.8%

32.6%

13.5%

17.7%

72.3%

30.7%

35.6%

47.3%

52.1%

19.0%

28.4%

30.4%

29.4%

32.6%

16.7%

50.6%

45.6%

73.8%

16.3%

48.1%

23.0%

28.8%

67.4%

55.8%

50.0%

36.6%

51.0%

15.8%

38.5%

24.3%

17.3%

14.9%

12.5%

51.7%

2.7%

39.3%

16.6%

23.2%

21.7%

16.0%

6.1%

18.4%

17.8%

22.3%

34.7%

10.4%

14.9%

18.3%

16.7%

17.6%

16.7%

21.7%

21.8%

51.1%

10.4%

21.7%

25.1%

29.4%

5.0%

8.7%

27.8%

20.5%

18.6%

29.3%

25.4%

26.5%

22.3%

35.4%

30.1%

60.0%

16.7%

8.2%

3.4%

46.4%

13.5%

20.7%

2.0%

6.1%

10.6%

16.7%

14.0%

33.3%

26.9%

24.7%

26.0%

24.0%

10.6%

16.1%

16.0%

13.5%

8.7%

23.0%

24.9%

42.6%

8.1%

3 1.7%

15.2%

45.8%

16.3%

37.8%

35.2%

41.9%

40.0%

17.8%

75.0%

11.5%

31.2%

33.6%

38.5%

38.4%

50.2%

10.2%

44.2%

60.0%

9.0%

3.5%

3.6%

5.5%

11.3%

9.1%

3.9%

24.7%

2.8%

7.2%

32.0%

3.3%

21.9%

14.8%

13.1%

64.0%

27.8%

10.6%

Cost o f Financing
Informal Sector
Competition
Trade Regulation

Transportation
Tax Administration

Crime, theft disorder
Business Licensing

Labour Regulation
Legal System
Corruption
Macroeconomic
Instability
Telecommunications
Access to Land
Worker Skills and
Education

4.5%
I

20.8%
I

11.9%

42.1%

35.4%
I

.--

I

I

19.1%
I

40.4%

25.0%
I

I

35.6%
I

I

Source: IFC, Cape Verde Investment Climate Assessment, 2006

88

Appendix 5
Poverty Map

1.
A poverty map has been prepared by combining the data from the IDRF survey administered
in 2000/0 1 and the Population and Housing Census conducted in 2000. The Census database includes
data on 424,600 individuals and 92,200 households. The country i s divided into four administrative
levels. First, the nine Ilha (island) are the most aggregated level and are the basis for the IDRF
sample design. The second level consists o f 17 Concelhos (Departments) and this i s followed at a
third level by the 3 1 Freguesis (communes). A fourth, neighborhood level, was investigated but the
population i s too small to yield precise enough poverty estimates. There are 401 entities at that level.
Based on experience in other countries, around 1000 households per administrative unit are needed to
obtain poverty statistics with a decent level o f precision. Only a handful o f Freguesi have more than
1000 households.

Administrative
Units

Ilha
Conselho
Freguesi

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics on Cape Verde’s Administrative Structure
# of
Number o f Households
Number o f Individuals
Units
Median
Minimum Maximum
Median
Minimum
Maximum
9
17
31

3,587
3,587
1,630

1,044
1,044
155
Source: Authors’ calculation based on’ the Census 2000
.

48,518
23,097
21,655

14,375
15,764
8,229

4,001
4,001
615

230,443
102,503
94,9 18

2.
The poverty estimates by strata obtained in the census-based poverty map are similar to those
obtained in the survey. Table 2 presents estimated aggregate poverty measures in the Census and
compares them with actual figures from the survey. For each stratum and poverty indicator, the
equality o f IDRF-based and Census-based indicators cannot be rejected (at the 95 percent confidence
level).
Table 2: Poverty Rates based on IDRF (actual) and Census 2003 (predicted), by strata
Headcount Index
Poverty Gap
Squared Poverty Gap
IDRF
Census
IDRF
Census
IDRF
Census
(Actual)
(Predicted)
(Actual)
(Predicted)
(Actual)
(Predicted)
Santiago Urban
0.22 1
0.222
0.065
0.081
0.028
0.042
(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.024)
0.207
0.106
0.108
0.522
0.205
Santiago Rural
0.522
(0.02 7)
(0.024)
(0.016)
(0.01 4)
(0.01 I)
(0.01 0)
0.05 1
0.266
0.069
0.099
0.029
SV & S L Urban
0.228
(0.028)
(0.012)
(0.01 0)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Other Urban
0.346
0.317
0.126
0.118
0.060
0.060
(0.033)
(0.030)
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.01I)
(0.065)
Other Rural
0.485
0.409
0.189
0.193
0.094
0.101
(0.02 7)
(0.026)
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.009)
(0.009)
Sources: Authors’ calculation based on IDRF 2000/01 and Census 2002. Robust standard errors are in

parentheses.

3.
Poverty measures for each o f the 9 Islands, 17 Concelhos and 31 Freguesis have been
computed. The estimates and standard errors are available in the Cape Verde poverty assessment. In
most cases, standard errors are small so that predicted poverty measures are reliable. The Freguesis
results for the poverty headcount are visualized in Figure 1. While the central part o f the Capital
(Praia) has the lowest poverty rate, i t s island (Santiago) has the poorest Freguesis. Sal, Boa Vista and

89

SBo Vicente islands have the least poor Freguesis while the rest o f the country has poverty headcounts
closer to the national average.

la, u

Q

Sal

D

Boa Vista

Sources: Authors’ calculation based o n IDRF 2000/01 and Census 2000

90

Appendix 7
Consultations on the Country Partnership Strategy

1.
The Bank carried out two joint preliminary consultation meetings, in February and M a y
o f 2008 respectively, with government, development partners, associations and private sector
leaders in preparation o f this joint Country Partnership Strategy. The Bank carried out a special
consultation meeting in September, 2008, to obtain preliminary feedback from the stakeholders
on the current Strategy.

2.
A comprehensive, broad consultation was held in the capital city o f Praia from January
28 to January 30, 2009, in partnership and with the full support o f Dr. Manuel Pinheiro, General
Planning Director o f the Ministry o f Finance, who made this joint consultation process on the
CPS possible and to whom the Bank team i s very grateful. The Bank would also like to express
its appreciation to all the participants for their valuable insights and suggestions for the CPS.

3.

The January 2009 Consultation was comprised o f four meetings with the following groups o f
stakeholders and partners: public servants, civil society, academia, private sector and members of the
international cooperation community, including donors, lenders and representatives from State
Embassies. Consultation meetings were attended by around 105 participants and organized into four
sessions, distributed as follows: a) January 28, afternoon, public servants and special guests: 53, b)
January 29, morning and afternoon, two sessions with civil society, academia and private sector: 28
attendees, and, January 30, one morning session with the international community, with 24 attendees
including the Ambassadors o f China, France and the United States. Meetings were held at the Ministry of
Finance (day one), Instituto Nacional de Economia e Negdcios (day two) and at the United Nations House
(day three). All meetings were opened by Dr. Manuel Pinheiro, followed by a powerpoint presentation by
the Bank‘s coordinator for the consultations, Ms. Zezk Weiss, contributions by the participants and a joint
closing by Dr. Pinheiro and Ms. Weiss.

4.
Overall, all groups welcomed the Consultations initiative, congratulated the Bank and the
Government for the effort, and pointed out that this was the first time that a larger group of members o f
Cape Verde’s society were invited to comment on a document such as the CPS, and that this process
should be continued. The Consultations confirmed that the Authorities, the development partners and the
representatives from civil society organizations all agree on the comparative advantage o f the Bank’s
support to the Economic Transformation Agenda, notably by supporting reforms and investments towards
enhancing infrastructureservices and fostering private sector development in Cape Verde. In addition, the
Bank i s seen as being well positioned to help the country identify new sources and develop the required
financial mechanisms to attract private investors and to promote partnership with international
cooperation. The consultations also highlighted the importance o f ensuring donor complementarity,
particularly to ensure that there i s continued support from other partners for the social areas and sectors
from which the Bank, in agreement with the Cape Verdean Government, i s withdrawing i t s direct support.
5.
More specifically, the four sessions of the January 2009 Consultation process provided the Bank
and Government with the following general contributions.and suggestions to enhance the quality o f the
CPS:
Environmental Vulnerability: The CPS document barely touches on environmental issues. Given
that Bank support i s moving towards Energy, State Machine Strengthening and Infrastructure, a
deeper insight into the environment could help provide the current line of support with a more

92

sustainable range o f programs and action plans. There were strong suggestions, particularly at the
partners’ meeting, that the CPS should include the environment as a transversal point which could
be incorporated throughout the whole document.
Infrastructure, Energy and Roads: It was suggested that a new paragraph between actual
paragraphs 65 and 66 could be included, and to read as follows: “In spite of the impressive
modernization o f Cape Verde roads network, there are still roads to be rehabilitated or upgraded, as
a response to the two remaining main problems: a) roads that are important as pre-conditions for
economic development such as for enhancing tourism opportunities, and, b) rural roads currently in
bad shape and which are of utmost importance for poverty alleviation and therefore roads which are
socially justifiable, since the Government defined these two situations as criteria for prioritizing
new road works in the Country.
Development and Social Solidarity: Cape Verde’s civil society strongly recommends that
throughout the CPS all mentions of social solidarity should be complemented by the inclusion o f
the Development word, since both the Cape Verdean Government and the society that it represents
are keen to moving beyond social solidarity, which i s important but needs to be upgraded to a more
dynamic approach, which includes social inclusion and social cohesion as undistinguished parts o f
the social development sought by Cape Verde.
Competitiveness: Document needs further work on the business environment. Document needs to
bring more clarity in regard to the Bank’s support for improving conditions for private sector
interventions.Particularly, it needs to more detailed in relation to the specific support that i s to be
provided to small, medium and large enterprises. Likewise, given the current world economic crisis
and i t s impact on Cape Verde, both tourism and remittance projectionsneed to be revised.
Fisheries Sector: Needs a more integrated approach which would include: (a) infrastructure; (b)
research; (c) capacity building; (d) repairing o f current nets, including the establishment of small
offices in the islands for repairing small boats, and, (e) investment on development patterns for
product quality.
Tourism: no attention i s given to community alternatives, particularly to job creation in the
craftshmall business areas.
Housing: a Government priority which i s barely mentioned by the CPS.
Job Creation: CPS needs a more detailed definition o f the nature and areas o f support that will
come from the Bank.
Societal Organization: Within the framework o f support to State reforms, it i s essential that the
CPS creates a space for the development of a societal organization study and program, so that the
relations between the State Government and its municipalities, its civil society, and i t s partners can
be further development with clear rules which will allow all to minimize partnership challenges and
maximize partnership opportunities.
Recommendations: Together with general comments on the CPS document, several specific
recommendationswere also provided at the meetings:
An urgent study needs to be done on Societal Organization.
Minor, rural and socially justifiable roads should be included in the road package.
Energy support needs to be broadened to include studies and programs on other sources of
alternative energy, and to incorporate attention to environmental issues in all activities.
Document Data and Statistics: Need to be revised, particularly in regard to partners‘ contributions
to the country. The Embassy o f Spain has an updated table on the subject, which can be requested.
Feedback and Follow-Up on the Consultation: All four groups consulted were interested and
requested that feedback be provided to their contributions. They emphasized the need for further

93

dialogues in order to provide both the Bank with stronger support through the implementation of
the CPS.
Finance, through this CPS, at least one complete integrated fishing system.
Monitoring, Evaluation and Dissemination: Mechanisms and strategies should be further developed
and included as part o f the CPS document.

94

Appendix 8
Millennium Development Goals
Millennium Development Goals
,

I

1

1

55
51

Employment to population ratio, ages 15-24, total (%)
Income share held b y lowest 20%
Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age (% o f children under 5)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (YOo f population)
Prevalence o f undernourishment (% o f uouulation)

1990

I

1995

2WJ

I

2UU7

I

Goal 1: Eradicate extreme aovertv and huneer
Employment to population ratio, 15+, total (%)

54
48

51
42
4.4

.I

I

..I

..I

49
37

..I

..I

Vulnerable employment, total (YOo f total employment)
Goal 2: Achieve universal orimarv education
Literacy rate, youth female (YOo f females ages 15-24)

86
90

Literacy rate, youth male (“A o f males ages 15-24)
Persistence to last grade o f urimarv. total (% o f cohort)
Primary completion rate, total (% o f relevant age group)

51

I

Proportion o f seats held by women in national parliament (%)
Ratio o f female to male enrollments in tertiarv education
Ratio o f female to male primary enrollment
Ratio o f female to male secondarv enrollment

12
94

Ratio o f young literate females to males (“?ages 15-24)
Share o f women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% o f total nonagricultural
Employment)

96

Immunization, measles (YOo f children ages 12-23 months)

79
45
60

Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)
Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000)

Births attended by skilled health staff (% o f total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% o f women ages 15-49)
Maternal mortalitv ratio (modeled estimate. uer 100.000 live births)

I

I
11 1
..

Total enrolled, primary (“A net)

I

..
64

I

1
1

.. I

..
..
..

89
92
91

11

1

100
97

I

1

104

I

38.9

66
37
50

80
31
42

54

..

I

I

..

..

Pregnant women receiving prenatal care (%)

90
102
98

I

I

I

I

15
109
95
115

65
25
34

I

..

.. I

210

89
53
99

I

1

Children with fever receiving anti malarial drugs (“ho f children under age 5 with fever)
Condom use, population ages 15-24, female (% o f females ages 15-24)
Condom use, population ages 15-24, male (YOo f males ages 15-24)
Incidence o f tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)

162

164

166

168

Prevalence o f HIV. female (% ages 15-24)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (YO)

..

1

41

1

33

95

I

Nationally protected areas (% o f total land area)
Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development

A i d per capita (current US$)
Debt service (PPG and IMF only, % o f exports o f G&S, excl. workers' remittances)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)

Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)
GNI, Atlas method (current US$)(billions)
Gross capital formation (% o f GDP)
L i f e expectancy at birth, total (years)
Literacy rate, adult total (YOo f people ages 15 and above)
Population, total (millions)

1

296
8.9
0.0
0.0
2.3

I

I

289
10.3
0.2
0.0
5.4

I

I

208
10.5
1.8
4.4
12.1

5.4
940

4.5
1,150

3.9
1,280

0.3
22.9
65
63
0.4

0.5
42.4
67

0.6
19.7
69

I

0.4

I

0.5

I

1

267
5.6
7.0
27.9
13.8
3.4
2,430
1.3
40.6
71

I

0.5

96

Cape Verde a t a glance
Key Development Indicators

2/24/09

Cape
Verde

Sub
Sahalan
Africa

LWW
middle
income

0.47
4.0
2.3
58

80 0
24,242
2.4
36

3,437
35,510
1.o
42

7579

1 .2
2,250
2,940

76 2
95 2
1,870

6,485
1,887
4,544

3034

6.9
5 .O

6.2
3.7

9.7
8.6

50
72
50
94.
27

69
41
25

88
76
108
103

69
50
99
88

93
85
112
109

80

58
31

88
54

Aaedistribution. 2007

(200 7)

Female

Mde

Populatan, mic!-)ear (millons)
Surfacearea (thousand sq km)
Populatongrowth (Yo)
M a n populatJon (oh oftotal powlaton)
GNI (Atlas method US$ billions)
GNI per capita (AMs method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, intetnabonal $)
GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

5 &E4
4 5-49

1619
04

20

10

10

0

20

percmt

(most recent estimade, 2000-2007)

Poverty headcountratioat$l 25 aday(PPP, %)
Povertyheadcountratioat$2 00 aday(PPP, %)
bfe expectancy at brth (years)
Infant mrtaity (pec 1,OOO Irve births)
Child malnutntron (% ofchldren under 5)

71
25

Adult literacy male (% of ages 15 and dder)
AdultIi!eracy,femle (“h ofages15andolder)
Gross pnmaty enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross pnmaty enrollment,female (% of agegroup)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access toimproved sanitatonfaclities (% of population)

I*%

Under4 mortality rate(per 1 ,OW)

180
150
140
120
1W

so
60
40
20
0

I
Net Aid Flows
(US$ mllions)
Net O W and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2006):
Portugal
Luxemburg
Netheflands

Aid (%of GNI)
Aid per capta (US$)

1 980

1990

2000

62

105

94

138

12

16
0
10

23
8
6

47
14
12

41.3
214

30.9
296

18.1
20 8

12.6
267

0.0
2.3

4.2
-1.2

4.4
2.8

70.0

119.7
100

80.4
98

1995

1990

OCape Verde

2wO

2LE

DSub-Sabmn Afrca

2007”
~~~~~~

Growth of GDP andGDP per capita (%)

V

Long-Term Economic Trends

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms oftradeindex (2000 = 100)

40.2

W

95

90

Consumerprices (annual % change)
GDPimplicl deflator (annual %change)

+GDP

05

-

GDP per capih

1980-80 1990-2000
2000-07
(a \R m ge ann ual growth %)

Population,mid-year (milions)
GDP (US$ millions)

0.3
119

0.4
33 9

0.5
531

0.5
1,449

2.1

2.4
6.0

2.3
5.4

Agriculture
Industry
Manufaduring
Se Nices

8.8
14.6

8.0

76.6

(% of GDP)
14.4
12.0
21 .4
17.9
9.3
8.2
47.5
64.3

17.4
7.0
76.0

13.7
13.8
-8.2
8.1

4.0
5.1
3.8
6.7

0. 6
8.4
6. 5
4.0

Househdd final consumption expenditure
General gov‘tfnal consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

84.9
7.6
53.3

93.4
14.7
22.9

92.9
21.3
19.7

99.0
21.9
47.0

3.6
1.6
-7.4

7.4
7.2
02

5.3
-2. 0
8. 6

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and sewices
Gross savings

36.1
81.9
30.6

12.7
43.7
17.6

27.5
61.4
9.1

19.0
60.0
26.1

-0.9
-2 2

14.6
8.5

15. 8
IO. 1

Note: Figures in i t a k s are for )ears other than thosespecifed. 2007 dataare prelinimry. .. irdicates data are not available
a. Aiddata arefor2006.

Cape Verde
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2007
Gmemance indcators, 2000 and 2007

(US$ milions)
Total merchandise exmlts (fob)
Total merchandise inpolts (ci9
Net trade in goods and services

38
2 30
-1 84

78
757
-414

Voiceand acmunbbilty

Current a m u n t balance
asa%ofGDP

-60
-11.4

-132
-8.1

Reguktory quaity

Workers' rem itta n c s and
compensation ofempb)ees(recepts)

07

245

Reserves, hclfding @d

20

354

Poltcal sbbllty

Ruleof lw

Contol of mrmptlcn
0

2007
02000

Central Government Finance

( X of GDP)
Current revenue (includhggrants)
Tax revenue
Current evenditure

20.8
18.5
34.2

30.3
22.8
18.1

Overall sur@usldeficit

-25.8

-0.7

HighestmrgnaltaxIate(%)
Individual
Corpciate

25

75

100

Corntry's percentile rank(0-100)
t@w vaws hpy beta r & p

s o u r n Kaufmam-Krasy-Msstrazl W M Bank

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

Paied roads (% of total)
FKed lineand mbik phOne
subscribem @er100 people)
Hbhtechnobgyexports
(%of manufactured exports)

69.0

2007

17

35

0.8

0.0

10

10

..

592

External Debt and Resource F l o w
Environment
(US$ milions)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDFU)

32 8
16

682
4

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debtservice(%ofexports)

59.6
17. 4

47.2
4.7

44
0

132

-

Foteign direct investment (net inflows)
Poltfolioequity (netinfbws)

-

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forestarea (% oflandarea)
Nationaitj protected areas (%of land area)
Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
FreshwatervAthdrawai (% of internal resources)
C 0 2 emissions per capita (mt)

7.3
0.40

0.55

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interestpayments

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debtoutstanding anddisbursed
Disbursements
Total debtsewice

88
10
1

109
0
2

0
0
0

5

1

1

2
0

0
0

GDP per unitof energy use
(2005PPP$perkgofcilequkaknt)
:omposttion oftotal exbmaldebt, 2007
Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivaknt)

(US$ mllions)

v

IMF. 10

atwrnu
I6m3
108
l8.

I S mllons

Private Sector Development
Time required tostalt a business (days)
Costtostarta busness(%ofGNIpercapita)
Time required toreaisterDroDertv(davs)

Rankedas amajor constrahtto business
(%of managers surveyed who agreed)
Electricity
Access tdcost offnancing

2000

-

2008

-

52
35.7
73

2000

2007

..
..

35.7
16.3

Stock marketcapitaliation (%of GDP)
Rankcapital to asset ratio (%)

IFC (tiscal ye atj
Total disbursed and outstanding pomoio
of vhich IFC o w account
Disbursements for IFC OwnaccOunt
Portfdiosalas, prepapents and
repayments for IFC M account
MlGA
G mss exposure
New guarantee3

Note: Figures in itaics are for p a r s other than those specibd. 2007 data are prelininaiy
-indicatesobservation is not appicabk.

.. hdicatesdataarenotavailable.

DevelopmentEconomics, Devebpment DataGroup(DECDG).

5
0

2/24/09

Millennium Development Goals

Cape Verde

with selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate c/o.se& to date shown, +I2 pars)

Goal 1: halvethe raw fw extreme pcwetty and malnutrition

1990

1995

2000

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share ofincome or consumptiontothepoorestqunitile(%)
Prevalence of mahutritkn (%of children under 5)

2 007

4.4

Goal 2: ensurethat children are able to complete primaryschooling
Prinary sctwl enrdtnent (net, %)
Prmary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment(gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

51
21

s4'

102
63

92
80

60
45

50
37

42
31

34
25

79

80

80

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.6

2.3

5.4
0.0
0.2
0.4

12.1
4.4
1.8
5.5

13.8
27.9
7.0
13.0

Goal 3: eliminate gender dsparity in education and e m p o w r w o m e n
Ratioof girts to boy in pimary and secondary education (%)
Women empbyed in the nonagricultural sector (% of magriwltural employment)
Proportion ofseats held bywornen h national parliament (%)

Goal 4: reduceunder4 mortality bytwo-thirds
Under4 rnortalityiate(per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1 ,OW live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of oneyear d d s inmunized, %)

Goal 5: reducematernal mortality bythreeSourths
Maternal mortaiitv ratio (modeled estimate. oer 100.000 live biths)
Births attended b;skill& health staff ("IO of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (YOof w m e n ages 1549)

Goal 6: haltand begin t o reverse thespread of HVlAlDS and d h e r majordiseases
Prevalence of HIV WOof DoDulation aQes 15-49)
Incidenceof tuberc*llosis'@er lOO,W6 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

Goal 7: halvethe proportion d peoplewlthorrt sustrinableaccess to basic needs
Access to an mproved water soum (% of population)
Access to improvedsanitation facilties (% ofpoyxllation)
Forest area (YOoftotal land area)
Nationaly protected areas (% of total land area)
C02 emissions (metric tons percapita)
GDP perunitofenergyuse(constant2005 PPP $per kgofoil equivalent)

Goal 8: develop a global partnership fordevelopment
Telephone mahlhes (per 100 people)
Mobie phone subscrbers@er 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

0.0
0.0

Education indcatws (%)

Measles imm tnbation ?YO o f I-year olds)

51

la,

I

I
la 1

ICT indicators (per IW people)

n

0 1
2wo

2CCQ

2034

2036
1990

-0-Piimty

1885

2
m

2005

2030

2m

2034

2M)5

net emolmnt ratio (..)

+Ratioof
gilsto boysin Firnay&
semnjarv educatim (..)

O C a p V a d (..)

Note: Figuresinitaicsareforparsother thanthosespecikd.
Development Economics, Devebpment EataGroup (DECDG).

OSubSaharanAfrica

.. indkatesdataare

notavailable.

OFixed + rmble subsabers
lnternetusas

2/24/09

-

CPS Annex B2 Cape Verde
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Q3IQ9l2QQ9

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent o f Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2006

2007

2008

2009

5
4.6
20.0
32.8
20.0
32.8
30.0

6
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
57.0

4
7.9
0.0
8.8
0.0
8.8
55.6

3
5.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
52.8

No
3 64
73

No
330
55

No
377
94

No
168
42

Last Five
Memorandum Item

Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
d.
e.

*

Since F Y 80

18
192.9
5.6
4.7

FYs
5
64.3
20.0
14.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age o f projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursedbalance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning o f the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception o f Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

100

Cape Verde
CPS Annex B3: IBRD/IDA Program Summary
(As o f 03/09/2009)
Proposed IBRDADA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal
year

Strategic Rewards
(H/WL) *

Implementation
Risks (H/WL) *

H

L

Project ID

U~wV

2009

PRSC 4 (IDA)
Sub-total

10.0
10.0

2010

PRSC 5 (IDA)
Transport Sector S I L (IDA)
Growth TA and SME Support (IDA)
West Afiica Regional Fisheries Project
(IDA)**
Energy Sector (IBRD)
Guarantee - Renewable Energy (IBRD)
Sub-total

10.0
5.0
3.5

M
M
H

1.5

M

41.8
11.0
72.8

H
M

201 1

PRSC 6 (IDA)
Sub-total

10.0
10.0

H

M

2012

PRSC 7 (IDA)
Investment Project to be identified (IDA)
Sub-total

10.0
1.5
11.5

H
H

M
M

TOTAL

104.3

*H = High ;A4 = Medium ;L = Low

101

CPS Annex B3 for Cape Verde
Cape Verde- IFC Investment Operations Program, FY05-09
(As of 03/09/2009)
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009*

0

0

0

5.89

0

Finance

0

0

0

0

0

Telecommunications

0

0

0

100

0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

67.5

0

32.5
100

0
0

Commitments CUS%m)

Gross
Net**
Net Commitments bv Sector WO)

Net Commitments bv Investment Instrument

Loan
Quasi loan
Total

** IFC's Own Account only

102

Cape Verde
CPS Annex B4: Summary o f Non-lending Services
(As o f 03/09/2009)

Product

Completion
FY

(us%ooo)

FY Cost

2008

65

2008

203

2009

90

2009

00

2009

00

Objective

Audience

Recent completions

PRSP Progress Report and
General Economic Work*
PER Update

Underway
Country Partnership Strategy

Full GPRSP and General
Economic Work*
Poverty Assessment Update
FinancialSector Assessment
Program
Initial Assessment o f Labor
Markets (formerly Skills
Development Study)
Planned
GPRSP Progress Report and
General Economic Work*
Other Sector Work (to be
identified)
PER

Bank, Government, Donors,
Public dissemination
Bank, Government, Donors,
Public dissemination

Knowledge generation, problem
solving
Knowledge generation, public
debate, problem solving

Bank, Government, Donors,
Public dissemination
Bank, Government, Donors,
Public dissemination
Bank, Government, Donors,
Public dissemination
Bank, Government

2010

78

Bank, Government, Donors,
Public dissemination

Knowledge generation, public
debate, problem solving
Knowledge generation, public
debate, problem solving
Knowledge generation, public
debate, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem
solving
Knowledge generation, public
debate, problem solving

yearly

65 per
Year
100 per
Year
100

Bank, Government, Donors,
Public dissemination
Bank, Government, Donors,
Public dissemination
Bank, Government, Donors,
Public dissemination

Knowledge generation, problem
solving
Knowledge generation, public
debate, problem solving
Knowledge generation,public
debate, problem solving

2009

2010-12
201 1

**Note, while GPRSP work is for public dissemination, portions ofgeneral economic work are for the Bank.

103

Cape Verde - CPS Annex B5: Social Indicators
Latest sing le year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual aerage for period)
Urban population (%of population)
Total fertility rate (births perwoman)

Same regionlincome group
Sub
Saharan
Africa

LowermlddleIncome

1980-85

1990-95

2001-07

0.3
2.0
31.5

0.4
2.4
48.8

0.5
2.3
58.0

799.8
2.5
35.9
5.2

3,437.1
1.1
41.7
2.3

1,170
108

2,250
111

952
137

1,887
144

2.6
4.2

2.0
4.7

70
72
67

90
91
90

58
81
46

88
96
83

72
73
27

77
75
25

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)

87

.

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% o f income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% ofincome or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expendlture
Health (% of GDP)
Education (%of GNl)
Net primaryschool enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Uban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 monBs)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by sldlled health staff (%)

4.4
55.6

79
86
73

80
86
73

63

67

71

51
50
52

69
67
71

53
70

37
50

25
34

94
157

41
54

421
391
900
45

202
128
300
69

02/26/09
CAS Annex 85. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shorn. Net enrollment rate: break in series betwaen 1997 and 1998 due to
change tom ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

104

Cape Verde - CPS Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
~~

~~

~~~~

Indicator
National accounts (as YOo f GDP)
Gross domestic product'
Agriculture
Industry
Services

~~~~

2004

Actual
2005
2006

2007

Estimate
2008

2009

Projected
2010
2011

2012

100
10
15
15

100
9
16
75

100
8
16
16

100
8
17
16

100
8
17
76

100
I
17
76

100
I
18
15

100
7
18
15

100
7
19
15

105
39
4
35

91
41
6
35

85
43
6
38

99
41
5
34

95
44
7
32

95
42
8
32

92
41
8
32

91
41
9
32

91
40
9
32

EXPOITS

(GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)

14
59

16
54

18
56

19
60

19
58

20
60

20
59

21
60

21
61

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'

-5
22

3
29

5
38

1
38

5
31

5
21

8
27

9
28

9
28

918

1006

1203

1449

1509

1511

1686

..,

...

1630

1980

2130

2250

2380

2530

6.5
9.1

10.8
0.8

6.9
3.7

6.0
-0.1

3.5
0.9

5.0

6.6

6.3

8.8
3.1
3.1

5.0
4.4
4.2

4.0
2.6
3.4

1.6
3.3
3.5

3.0
3.5
3.2

4.5

4.3

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 80 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
4.3
Gross Domestic Income
-15.6

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 80 prices)
9.3
Gross domestic product at market prices
-3.0
-2.1
-1.9
Total consumption
-2.4
Private consumption
-2.2
Balance o f Payments (US$ millions)
~ x p 0 1 - t(GNFS)~
~
Merchandise F O B

Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise F O B
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. enors & ornrnissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance ("?o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR80 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

295
57
643
436
-348
233
-133

361
89
641
43 8
-280
219
-34

500
99
806
518
-306
291
-60

623
18
1038
151
-415
309
-132

698.6
92.7

635.8
74.0

737.9
84.1

860.1
91.6

992.8
97.6

1170.6
835.3
-472.1
279.4
-1 92.7

1179.8
838.6
-544.0
309.7
-234.3

1248.2
882.7
-510.3
282.7
-227.6

1381.8
982.2
-521.6
310.8
-210.9

1560.3
1112.7
-567.5
350.0
-217.5

20

15

114

132

150.0

135.7

147.6

170.6

189.4

16

24

51

IO

47.1

86.3

69.0

83.2

89.2

-30

-33

-60

-9 1

27.9

-1.0

25.2

63.7

74.6

-31.9

-21.8

-25.4

-28.6

-25.0

-21.2

-24.4

-24.6

-24.5

105

-

Cape Verde CPS Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators (continued)

Indicator

2004

Public finance (as YOo f GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
32.3
Current expenditures
22.1
Current account surplus (f) or deficit (-)
10.2
Capital expenditure
10.9
Foreign financing
10.3
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth o f M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (YO)
Price indices (YR96 = 100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)'

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

73.8
10.5

Actual
2005
2006

2007

Estimate
2008

2009

Projected
2010
2011

2012

30.0
21.2
8.8
12.4
10.3

29.4
17.9
11.5
11.8
10.6

30.1
19.1
11.0
10.5
8.2

30.3
17.7
12.6
12.6
9.0

30.9
19.8
11.1
15.1
10.1

30.0
20.4
9.6
14.7
8.9

28.8
19.0
9.8
14.4
7.7

28.5
20.4
8.1
14.3
7.9

77.6
15.5

77.0
18.0

76.4
10.8

79.1
7.9

78.8
9.2

79.2
7.8

79.4
8.4

79.6
11.3

4.2

-4.5

44.6

87.1

66.7

94.2

84.6

108.2
180.0
60.1
105.4

141.9
180.0
78.8
108.2

141.3
220.0
64.2
111.1

106.3
270.0
39.4
114.1

106.5
260.0
41.0

108.1
290.0
37.3

110.5
320.0
34.5

110.0
360.0
30.6

120.0
400.0
30.0

-1.9
-1.1

0.4
2.8

4.8
6.8

4.4
2.8

6.8
7.4

3.6

2.7

2.0

2.0

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use o f IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

106

-

Cape Verde CPS Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

2004

Actual
2005
2006

504

541

16

7

Est imated
2008
2009

2007

Projected
2011

2010

2012

568

617

681

789

867

960

1061

6

6

8

11

16

20

24

82.3
52.5
5.1

119.5
51.5
6.1

130.7
51.3
5.5

51.5
5.0

50.7
5.3

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)"
Net disbursements (US$m)a

Total debt service (TDS)
(US

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGS~

TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS

121.6
54.5
3.8

104.4
54.2
5.6

87.6
72.6
5.7

83.6
62.8
4.7

0.0
81.5

0.0
70.4

0 .o
91.5

0.0
92.2

0.0
0

0.0
0

0 .o
0

0.0
0

0

0
214

0

0
109

ConcessionaYTDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%))"
IBRD DSlXGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
O f which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share o f IBRD portfolio (%)

D
I A TDO (US$mld

196

106

IFC (USSm)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net short-

term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value ofguarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types ofboth loan and equity instruments.

107

3

0
N

z

i%
E
e

8

P

2

E

2
rd

a

E
c

8

P

2

c

ez

8

ru

ru

5
0

3

5

0

25°W

RIBEIRA
GRANDE

PORTO
NOVO

23°W
This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Ribeira Grande
Vila das Pombas

PAÚL

Ribeira da Cruz

17°N

24°W

Santo Antão

Lajes
(1803 m)

17°N

Porto Novo

SÃO VINCENTE

Mindelo
São Pedro

São Vicente

Calhau
Madeiral

Santa Luzia

WIND

WA R

SÃO NICOLAU

Ilhéu Branco
Ilhéu Raso

Riberia Brava
Preguica

Tarrafal

São Nicolau

AT L A N T I C

D IS
LAN
DS

Espargos

Sal

SAL
Santa Maria

Sal-Rei

OCEAN

Norte
Norte

BOA VISTA

Boa Vista

Povocã
Povoc
Povocão
ão Velha
Velha
16°N

16°N

CAPE
VERDE

NDS
A
L
S
I
R D TARRAFAL São Tiago
A
W
SANTA
CRUZ
LEE
SANTA

CAP E V E RDE

Tarrafal

CATARINA

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
NATIONAL CAPITAL

Mosteiros

Ilhéus Do
Rombo

RIVERS

Brava
BRAVA

COUNTY (CONCELHO) BOUNDARIES
25°W

Furna

MAIO

Vila do Maio

Santa Catarina
Igreja

MOSTEIROS

Mt. Fogo
(2,829 m)
São
Filipe

SÃO FILIPE

Fogo

24°W

São
S
ão Domingo

PRAIA

15°N

SÃO
PRAIA DOMINGOS

0

0
23°W

10

20

10

30 Kilometers

20

30 Miles

IBRD 33383

DECEMBER 2004

MAIN ROADS

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

Santa Cruz

Maio

