Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No: 48404-CG

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF CONGO
FOR THE PERIOD FY10-FY12

M a y 13,2009

Central Africa Country Cluster 2 (AFCC2)
Africa Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

LAST INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE: July 31,2007 (Report No: 39180)
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS (Exchange Rate Effective 5/8/2009)
U S $ 1.00

=

493.90 FCFA (Francs)

FISCAL YEAR:
January 1 - December 3 1
ABREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AfDB
AFD
AFRISTAT
BEAC
CEMAC
CFCO
COMEG
CORAF
CPS
DSA
EITI
EU
FCFA
FY
GDP
GNI
GSM
HIPC
HIV/AIDS
IBRD
IDA
IFC
IMF
ISN
MICA
MTEF
MSME
OHADA
PER
PRGF
PRSP
PV
SDR
SNPC

African Development Bank
Agence Franqaise de Developpent (French DevelopmentAgency)
Economic and statistical Observatory of Sub-Saharan Africa
Banque des Etats de I’Afrique Centrale (Bank for Central African States)
Communaute Economiqueet Monetaire de I’Afrique Centrale (Central African Economic and Monetary
Community)
Chemin de Fer Congo Ocean (Congolese Railway)
Congolaise de Mtdicaments Essentiels Gkntriques (Congolese Agency for Essential Generic Medicines)
Congolaise de RaBnage (Congolese Oil Refinery)
Country Partnership Strategy
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
European Union
Central African Franc
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Gross National Income
Global System for Mobile communications
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
International Bank for Reconstructionand Development
International DevelopmentAgency
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Interim Strategy Note
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Organisation pour I’Harmonisationen Afrique du Droit des Affaires (Organization for Harmonization of
Business Law in Africa)
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Present Value
Special Drawing Rights
Societe Nationale des Petroles du Congo (Congolese National Oil Company)

Vice President: Obiageli K. Ezekwesili
Country Director: Marie-Francoise Marie-Nelly
Task Team Leader: Eustacius Betubiza
Co-Team Leader: Midou Ibrahima
The core team was composed of: Eustacius Betubiza, Midou Ibrahima, Peter Siegenthaler, Jerome Chevallier, and Janette
U1hmann.
Substantive inputs were received from: Monthe Bienvenu Biyoudi, Eric Bell, Iradj Alikhani, Franck Bousquet, Alassane
Sow, Remi Kini, Eleodoro Mayorga Alba, Tony Verheijen, Giuseppe Topa, Marcel0 Becerra, Khama Rogo, Mahamat
Louani, Alain Labeau, Vivien Foster, Cecilia Briceno-Garmendia,Yann Burtin, Jerome Bezzina, Sarah Michael,
Christophe Rockmore, Thomas Ramin, and Marie-Chantal Uwanyiligira. Support was provided by Linda Patnelli,
Natalie Ford, and Elisabeth Small.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REPUBLIC OF CONGO
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i

I.

INTRODUCTION

1

11.

COUNTRY CONTEXT
A. Political Context
B. Poverty Profile and Progress toward Millennium Development Goals
C. Economic Context

1
1
2
3

111.

COUNTRY CHALLENGES AND STRATEGIC PRIORITIES
A. Main Challenges and Opportunities
B. Government’s Strategic Priorities and Programs

8
8
15

IV.

WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
A. Performance of the FY07-FY09 Interim Strategy Note and Lessons Learned
B. Proposed Country Partnership Strategy
C. Partnerships

17
17
19
28

V.

MANAGING RISKS

29

Tables
Table 1: Progress
Towards Millennium Development Goals..........................................................
,...............2
Table 2: Main Macroeconomic Indicators ......................................................................................................
4
Table 3: CEMAC Convergence Criteria Status of Congo ............................................................................ 5
Table 4: Share of Main Sectors in Nominal GDP ........................................................................................... 6
Table 5: Ongoing Operations ................................................................................................................. .......26
Table 6: Proposed New Activities for FY 10 FY 12 .....................................................................................
27
Table 7: InternationalDevelopment Partners Ongoing and Planned Activities .......................................... 28

-

-

-

Figure
Figure 1: Oil Production and Revenue Projections for Congo ...................................

.....................................

9

Boxes
Box 1: CEMAC Convergence Criteria....................................................................................................... ..... 5
Box 2: Congo’s Oil Sector ...................................................................................................................
...........6
Box 3: Congo’s Forests and Environment..................................................................................................... 12
Box 4: Governance Issues .............................................................................................................................
14
17
Box 5: HIPC Completion Point Status ..........................................................................................................
Box 6: Consultations for the Country Partnership Strategy .......................................................................... 21
Annexes
Annex 1 : Results Framework for the Congo CPS (FY 10 - FY 12) ............,...,...........................,.................3 1
Annex 2: Debt Sustainability Analysis for Congo .....................................................................................
37
Annex 3: Performance Assessment of Interim Strategy Note (FY07 - FY09) ............................................ 39
Annex 4: Description of Country Assistance Strategies for Congo’s Principal Partners....................... .......43
Annex 5: Country at a Glance ................................................................................................................... ...45
Annex 6: Millennium Development Goals..... .............................................................................................47
Annex 7: Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ......................................... 48
Annex 8: IBRD/IDA Program Summary ..................................................................................................... 49
Annex 9: Doing Business Indicators........................................................................................................... 50
M a p o f the Republic o f Congo No. IBRD 33390

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.
Since the ceasefire in 2000 and adoption o f a new Constitution in 2002, the Republic of
Congo has been largely at peace. Although the political environment remains fragile, the country has
made substantial progress in rebuilding the state and consolidating peace. Congo i s now in the midst
o f its second election cycle since the end o f war, with legislative elections held in mid-2007, and the
next presidential election scheduled for July 2009. With full restoration o f peace, Congo has the
potential for building a strong and robust economy and attaining a high standard o f living for its
people: it has a relatively small population o f 3.8 million, a significant endowment o f oil, natural
forests, arable land, a biodiversity o f global importance, minerals, and a strategic location in Central
Africa with a deep-sea port at Pointe-Noire that can serve as a gateway to the sub-region.

ii.
Since the return to peace, most social indicators have improved, but they are still below
those of countries with comparable per capita income. The incidence o f monetary poverty, which
had risen from 40 percent in 1990 to 70 percent in 1997, had fallen back to 50 percent by 2005.
Meeting the Millennium Development Goals remains a challenge, particularly in the health sector.
iii.
Congo has made significant progress on macroeconomic stabilization and “first
generation” structural reforms since the end of the civil strife. GDP at constant prices nearly
doubled from 2002 to 2008, while inflation has remained broadly under control. However, economic
performance has been strongly affected by swings in oil prices and production levels, particularly in
the past two years. Fiscal performance strengthened markedly during 2008, enabling the start o f a new
three-year PRGF program supported by the IMF in December 2008.
iv. The global financial crisis poses a serious threat to economic stability and growth in Congo,
but it i s also an opportunity, as it gives more urgency to implementing the reform agenda. The
effects o f the crisis have mainly been transmitted through the sharp decline in oil prices and demand
for wood exports since mid-2008. This has strongly affected the economy and the fiscal situation. The
large fiscal and foreign exchange cushion built up during the recent oil price boom and the projected
strong expansion in oil production in 2009 should help Congo weather the immediate effects o f the
crisis. A prolonged slump in oil prices and demand for export products, as well as a contraction of
foreign direct investment, could however turn into a serious threat to economic stability.
V.
The oil sector provides much needed resources for public investments, yet its
overbearing dominance in the economy is a major challenge for economic management and
diversification. The key policy challenge for Congo is, therefore, to use its oil wealth to build a more
diversified and competitive economy and thereby reduce poverty and improve social outcomes. Congo
should exploit i t s comparative advantages related to its natural resource endowment, geographic
position and climatic conditions to promote non-oil growth. The Government o f Congo i s keen on (i)
playing an increased role in regional transit, (ii)
improving the productivity o f a weak and backward
agriculture sector, (iii)promoting the smart exploitation o f its large forestry resources, and (iv)
developing its mining sector.

vi.
To achieve its economic potential, the Government plans to address its huge
infrastructure gap, improve a poor investment climate, promote efficiency in the use of public
resources, and strengthen human capital and public institutions. After an extensive consultation
process, Congo’s first full PRSP was adopted in April 2008. The PRSP has five pillars: (i)
improving
governance and consolidating peace and security; (ii)promoting growth and macroeconomic stability;
(iii)enhancing access to basic social services; (iv) improving the social environment and integration
o f vulnerable groups; and (v) combating HIV/AIDS. The Bank has been supporting this process
through the Interim Strategy Note (ISN) which was reviewed by the Board in July 2007.

1

vii.
The ISN was designed to enhance governance and create the foundations for equitable
growth. The ISN suggested three strategic entry points: the HIPC process with triggers for
Completion Point covering key governance issues; the PRSP process to build up a consensus on
economic policies; and the strengthening o f key human development and poverty alleviation programs
in urban and rural areas.
Most of the 12 I S N outcomes have not been fully achieved. These outcomes were far too
viii.
many in view o f IDA’S small resource envelope for Congo, and were not realistic. The lessons learned
from I S N implementation have been taken into account in designing the Country Partnership Strategy.
ix.
I n line with PRSP priorities and after extensive consultations with stakeholders, the
Bank’s support to the Government‘s efforts will be organized around two main priority areas,
diversification and growth, and (ii)
poverty reduction through improved basic
namely support to: (i)
service delivery. To ensure effective implementation in both priority areas, the CPS will also support
governance and institutional building as a cross-cutting theme. The new role o f the Bank in Congo i s
to be a catalyst for change. I t will use i t s limited resources to help Congo use its significant revenues
for economic reform and poverty alleviation, in close coordination with other partners.
The CPS will contribute to PRSP implementation through seven specific outcomes: (i)
more effective management o f oil revenues and public expenditure; (ii)enhanced agricultural
productivity and marketing; (iii)better tools for improved forestry management; (iv) a foundation for
MSME growth; (v) improved infrastructure service delivery; (vi) a foundation for increasing Congo’s
market share in regional transit services; and (vii) improved basic services.
X.

The Bank will support the government through careful management of its existing
xi.
portfolio o f five projects (three o f which will receive additional financing, viz. the education,
HIV/AIDS, and governance projects), new financing for four projects, and analytical work and
an economic diversification support project to
policy dialogue. The new projects proposed include: (i)
stimulate broad-based growth; (ii)a regional telecommunications project to enhance Congo’s transit
role in the region, and extend the usageheduce prices o f broadband network services; (iii)an urban
and water services project to improve services to poor neighborhoods; and (iv) a forestry project to
support ongoing sectoral reforms. In view o f limited IDA resources, the Government has agreed, in
principle, to finance a large share o f project costs. Advisory services will focus on HIPC completion, a
Public Expenditure Review, support to oil revenue management, an analysis o f the l i n k s between
growth and employment, assistance to Congo to join carbon markets, and statistical capacity building.
The program has been developed in close coordination with Congo’s key partners, both
xii.
external (AFD, AfDB, EU, IMF) and internal (IFC). Activities. supported by the program will
complement those already initiated by these institutions or planned under their assistance programs as
shown in the results matrix in Annex 1. The country programs o f the first three institutions were
approved in 2008, and it i s envisaged that a joint CPS could be formulated in 2012.
xiii.
CPS implementation will face significant risks. The contagion effects from the global
economic crisis could become more serious, especially if a prolonged global recession would force
severe cuts in public spending and lead to fiscal slippages. The country could fall back into conflict if
forthcoming elections are poorly managed. The governance agenda, including procurement reform,
may be delayed. Strong pressures from the unions may lead the Government to postpone putting key
infrastructure enterprises under private management. Over the past year, the dialogue with the
Government has considerably improved and recent progress in meeting the HIPC Completion Point
triggers i s an indication o f increased ownership o f reforms. The Bank will carefblly monitor the
situation and provide support to reformers when needed.

..

11

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF CONGO

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
In 2000, Congo emerged from a brutal civil conflict, and in 2002, the Bank reengaged in
the country. A Transitional Support Strategy for FY03-FY06 was reviewed by the Executive
Directors in August 2003 and an Interim Strategy Note FY07-FY09 in July 2007. It was designed
to serve as a bridge between the transitional strategy and completion o f the full Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). I t s objective was to scale up the governance focus and create
the foundations for equitable growth. This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) i s based on the
full PRSP, which was approved by the Government in April 2008. This CPS was designed in
close coordination with all stakeholders, including the IFC, and provides a framework for Bank
support for F Y 1O-FY 12.

11. COUNTRY CONTEXT

A.

POLITICALCONTEXT

2.
The Republic o f Congo has the potential for building a strong and robust economy
as a gateway to the sub-region, and attaining a high standard of living for its people: a
relatively small population o f 3.8 million (of which over half lives in urban areas), a significant
endowment o f oil, natural forests, arable land, a biodiversity o f global importance, minerals, and
a strategic location in Central Africa with a deep-sea port at Pointe-Noire. However, economic
growth was severely hampered by heavy state intervention in the economy in the 1970s and
1980s and recurrent conflicts in the 1990s, which ravaged the infrastructure and destroyed public
institutions.
3.
Since the ceasefire in 2000 and adoption of the new Constitution in 2002, the
country has been largely at peace. Although the political environment remains fragile, the
country has made substantial progress in rebuilding the state and consolidating peace. Congo i s
now in the midst o f i t s second election cycle since the end o f war: legislative elections were held
in mid-2007, and the next presidential election i s scheduled for July 2009. In June 2008, the
government reached a political settlement with Pastor Ntoumi - the leader o f a rebel movement
(known as the Ninjas) in the Pool region, the only remaining belligerent element in the country's
civil war. The disarmament o f his estimated 5,000 followers started in February 2009, and so far,
2,800 weapons have been collected. Prospects for full restoration o f peace offer Congo a unique
opportunity for focusing its full attention on strengthening its s t i l l fledgling institutions, and
stimulating robust economic growth in order to combat poverty and inequality.
4.
This institution building and economic renaissance process will be greatly facilitated
by stronger regional integration. Congo i s a member o f several regional bodies, such as: the
Organization for Harmonization o f Businnes L a w in Africa (Organisation pour I 'Harmonisation
en Afiique du Droit des Affaires - OHADA), which aims at harmonizing commercial law in
Francophone Africa; the Economic Community for Central African States (Communaute'
Economique des Etats de IYfiique Centrale, CEEAC), which fosters trade and economic
cooperation among the Central African member states; and the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community (Communaute' Economique et Mone'taire de IYfiique Centrale, CEMAC),
which maintains monetary and exchange rate policies among i t s six members'. As discussed later,
full implementation o f the commitments under these institutions would go a long way in
CEMAC members are Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and
Republic o f Congo

1

facilitating Congo’s recovery and in positioning itself to more effectively tap into the many
opportunities made possible by regional integration.

B.
POVERTY PROFILE AND PROGRESS TOWARD MILLENNIUM
DEVELOPMENT
GOALS

75% (estimated)

to safe water.

38% (2008)

Low

This i s based on data from the 2005 household survey. New survey results are expected in 2010.

2

C.

ECONOMICCONTEXT

i) Recent Economic Developments and Medium Term Prospects

7.
Congo has made significant progress on economic stabilization and “first
generation” structural reforms since the end o f civil strife in 2000. GDP at constant prices
nearly doubled from 2002 (US$735 million) to 2008 (US$1,425 million), while inflation has
remained broadly under control. The international environment was certainly favorable, as the
surge in world o i l prices helped Congo improve i t s fiscal and external positions. Nonetheless,
strengthened macroeconomic policies, most notably on fiscal discipline and debt management
also played a key role in Congo’s economic recovery. Basic institutions for economic
management carry out their roles reasonably well, even though they are s t i l l hampered by low
capacity.
Economic performance has been strongly affected by swings in production levels
8.
and oil prices, exacerbated by the onset o f the global financial crisis in recent months. As
table 2 shows, GDP contracted in 2007 by 1.6 percent in real terms, mostly due to an accident on
a major o i l platform, which led to a sharp drop in o i l production. This illustrates the dominant
role o f oil in the economy. O i l production recovered strongly in 2008, but this was partially offset
by the onset o f the global financial crisis in the second part o f the year. Real GDP growth in 2008
was 5.6 percent.

9.
Economic growth i s expected to accelerate in 2009 and 2010, before sharply
dropping in 2011. This growth i s largely driven by o i l production. Current projections foresee a
strong increase in o i l output in the next two years, thanks to new concessions coming on stream.
This would lead to a peak in o i l production in 2010, followed by a gradual decline in subsequent
years as o i l wells start gradually drying up (see Figure 1 be lo^)^. This o i l production trajectory
would propel real GDP growth to a projected 9.5 percent in 2009 and 11.9 percent in 2010,
followed by a fall to 1.1 percent in 20 11, in tandem with the projected decline in o i l output4. Nonoil GDP growth has seen a decline since mid-2008 due to the impact o f the global financial crisis
on some export-related sectors (especially timber). This impact i s expected to worsen in 2009,
with non-oil growth projected at 3.5 percent against 5.4 percent in 2008, before it would
gradually recover in 20 10 and 20 11. Inflation remained subdued in recent years, but accelerated
to 5.3 percent in 2008, mainly due to food and energy price hikes early in the year. It i s projected
to stay at around 3 - 4 percent in coming years, as demand i s expected to remain l o w because o f
the crisis.

10.
The strengthening o f Congo’s external position over the past years has helped build
a solid cushion of international reserves. Driven by higher o i l export earnings, Congo’s current
account deficit over recent years has declined to 6.6 percent o f non-oil GDP in 2008. The capital
and financial balance also improved due to higher net direct and short term investments (mostly
related to the o i l sector). As a result, the overall balance o f payments registered a surplus o f 21.8
percent o f GDP in 2008 and gross international reserves grew to a very comfortable level o f 14.1
months o f imports. This “cushion” i s critical in the face o f the currently low o i l prices and the
impact of the global crisis on the external position in the months ahead. Indeed, the current
account balance i s projected to fall considerably to -18.9 percent o f GDP in 2009, due to the
slow-down in o i l prices and the fall in international demand for other export goods, in particular

~~

This trajectory i s based on conservative projections and could change if new significant commercially
viable reserves are found and brought into production.
This projecteddecline in growth precedes the recent arrival o f the global financial crisis, although the
crisis could aggravate it, if it undermines fbture exploration.

3

timber. As net capital inflows are also projected to decrease, the overall balance o f payments i s
projected to turn into a deficit o f 3.6 percent o f GDP in 2009.
Table 2: Main Macroeconomic Indicators
Real GDP Growth (YO)
Real non-oil GDP Growth (%)
Inflation (CPI average)
Gross investment (% of GDP)
Private investment (% of GDP)
Real effective exch. rate (change in %)
(as % of non-oil GDP)
Total Revenue
Non-Oil revenue
Total expenditure
NOPD
Overall balance
Ext. current acct. balance (% of GDP)
Gross international reserves (months
of imports)
Debt-to-GDP ratio (%)

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009*

2010*

2011*

2012*

3.5
5.0
3.7
22.5
5.6
4.5

7.8
5.4
2.5
22.5
5.0
-OB

6.2
5.9
4.7
23.4
4.6

-1.6
6.6
2.6
27
5.7
3.1

5.6
5.4
5.3
22
4.8
O5

9.5
3.5
3.9
33.7
7.0
0.9

11.9
6.0
3.5
27
5.8

1.1
7.5
3.0
27.4
5.9
1.5

1.8
7.5
3.0
28.4
6.3

69.9
19.5
61.6
-25.9
8.4

108.2
19.1
67.4
-29.6
40.8

141.5
20.5
88.8
-51.3
52.7

113.5
20.1
86.3
-55.7
27.1

160.4
22.3
80.1
-44.7
80.3

69.4
23.2
73.9
-38.3
-4.5

120.8
23.5
66.9
-34.2
53.9

114.6
25.1
63.9
-30.2
50.7

105.8
28.1
60.7
-26.9
45.1

8.6
1.4

3.2
7.2

-4.9
10.6

-26.0
9.3

-6.6
14.1

-18.9
14.1

6.7
19.4

5.2
25.2

2.1
30.9

198.7

108.3

81.6

112.7

58.1

70.5

53.8

53.7

54.2

(*) Projections as of March 2009
Source: IMF and Congolese authorities, Bank staff calculations.

11.
Fiscal performance strengthened markedly in 2008, enabling the start o f a new
three-year PRGF program supported by the IMF in October 2008. Adhering to an effective
fiscal policy i s particularly critical, given that monetary and exchange rate policies are set by the
regional monetary body (CEMAC). In this regard, Congo has met all but one o f CEMAC’s
convergence criteria in the latest assessment by the Convergence Committee (see Box 1). The
2008 fiscal targets o f the PRGF were respected and a substantial reduction in the non-oil primary
balance achieved. Particularly encouraging was the continued improvement in performance o f
non-oil revenue collection and the prudent approach to increasing spending in spite o f the o i l
revenue windfall registered in the first half o f the year. In reaction to the fall in o i l prices starting
late 2008, the Government adopted a prudent fiscal stance in the 2009 budget. A considerable
reduction in current spending i s envisaged, while maintaining the planned cautious expansion in
public investment. The latter i s aimed at offsetting the impact o f the international financial crisis
on the economy. Spending control i s also in conformity with the need for long term adjustment o f
the high non-oil primary deficit (45 percent o f non-oil GDP in 2008), which i s not sustainable,
especially given that o i l production i s projected to decline gradually from 201 1 onwards.
12.
Congo’s external debt situation has improved significantly since 2006, and will do so
further once the HIPC Completion Point i s reached. Since the Decision Point in March 2006,
Congo’s net public debt has declined significantly, from total-debt-to-GDP o f 199 percent at end2004 to 58 percent at end-2008. This i s mainly due to interim debt relief granted in the context o f
the HIPC process, most notably through two substantial agreements with the London Club o f
private creditors in November 2007 (cancellation o f US$l.6 billion in outstanding debt) and with
the Paris Club in December 2008 (cancellation o f US$805 million and rescheduling o f US$l55
million). In spite o f these significant improvements in debt ratios, the most recent Debt

4

Sustainability Analysis (DSA)’ conducted by Bank and Fund concludes that Congo’s gross
external debt i s at high risk o f distress. This assessment reflects mainly Congo’s vulnerability to
Completion Point before end-2009 if
movements in o i l prices. Congo could reach the I-IPC
reform progress i s sustained, especially on public investment management, procurement,
governance, and o i l sector.
Box 1: CEMAC Convergence Criteria

As a member of the regional monetary union, Congo i s committed to respecting the CEMAC Convergence
Criteria. These Criteria have been updated in 2002. They are monitored through a regular multilateral
surveillance process by a Convergence Committee, composed of representatives of the West Afiican
Economic and Monetary Union, the CEMAC, the Union of the Comoros, and France. The Committee
provides concrete recommendations to member states on strengthening policies with a view to meeting all
criteria. The latest assessment o f the Committee of April 2008 concluded that Congo had met all targets for
the primary indicators, with the exception o f the debt target (see table below). In regional comparison, only
Benin and Cameroon had met all targets in 2007. Congo’s situation i s not expected to have changed
radically since the April 2008 assessment, as the presentation of latest data related to the indicators reveals.

-

Table 3: CEMAC Convergence Criteria Status of Congo

’From Report by the Convergence Committee to CEMAC Ministers (April 2008)
As per latest data from authorities, Fund and Bank Staff calculations
. This is based on moving averages of oil revenues.

’

ii)Real Sector Development - the Dominance of Oil

13.
Congo’s economy has experienced positive growth since the end o f the civil war.
Real GDP growth in 2001-2008 averaged 3.8 percent and particularly encouraging was the strong
non-oil growth, which averaged 7.6 percent over the same period. This record needs to be
qualified, though, by the fact that most economic activities were at a low point at the end o f the
civil war. O i l production, in contrast, slightly contracted during the period (-0.9 percent), largely
due to a significant drop in production in 2007 (-17.2 percent).
14.
Thanks to the increase in oil prices over the past years, however, the oil sector
expanded significantly in nominal terms, increasing further its share in overall output. The
share o f o i l in nominal GDP has grown from 59 percent in 2001 to 69 percent in 2008. As shown
in Table 4, the weight o f non-oil sectors in the economy i s small; the second largest sector
(services) only amounted to 21 percent o f nominal GDP in 2008. The weight o f non-oil sectors
has decreased over the past years, due to unfavorable relative price and exchange rate
developments, and key growth constraints related to infrastructure and an unfavorable business
5

See Annex 2 for a recent update of the external DSA. A full DSA will be prepared in the second semester
o f 2009.

.

5

climate. These numbers are likely t o underestimate the dominance o f oil, as a substantial part o f
economic activities in non-oil sectors depends directly or indirectly o n o i l production in the form
o f services consumed by o i l companies or public contracts financed by o i l revenues (see Box 2
for details o n the 6 i l sector).
Table 4: Share of Main Sectors in Nominal GDP
(Percent)
Average
1999-2002

Oil
Services
Other

Average
2003-2006

59
61
26
24
16
14
Source: Congolese authorities, Bank calculations

Average
2006-2008
66
21
13

Box 2: Congo’s Oil Sector

Oil production started in 1957, and during the 1980s and 199Os, Congo’s crude production quadrupled,
from 65,000 barrels per day in 1980 to an average o f 280,000 barrels per day in 2000, mostly from offshore
fields. Following a decline in the early 2000s, production increased from 227,400 barrels per day in 2004 to
288,000 barrels per day in 2008, thanks to new investment and increased oil recovery from mature fields,
making Congo the 4” largest oil producer in Sub-Saharan Africa. However, if no new major discoveries are
made, oil production i s projected to gradually decline after 2010.
Oil prices rose from an annual average o f US$17 per barrel during 1975-79 to about US$33 per barrel in
the first half o f the 1980s. In 1981, the Government adopted an ambitious five-year development plan.
Public investment increased by an annual average o f 15 percent between the second half o f the 1970s and
the first half o f the 1980s. During that period, the Government mortgaged a substantial portion o f i t s oil
earnings through oil-backed loans that contributed to a growing debt burden and chronic revenue shortfalls.
The oil bonanza came to an end in the second half o f the 198Os, however, when oil prices declined to an
annual average o f about US$18.50 per barrel during 1985-89. Limited adjustment led to a long-term
economic crisis, which contributed significantly to the internal conflicts o f the late 1990s.
Today, most oil production i s carried out under production sharing agreements. Major external partners are
Total, EN1 and Chevron. The Socie‘te‘Nationale des Petroles du Congo (SNPC), the national oil company,
i s the Government’s counterpart to international companies in these agreements. In September 2008, SNPC
started oil exploitation on its own on a small onshore well.
SNPC’s oil commercialization and accounting practices are not yet up to international standards, resulting
in Government achieving oil revenue levels well below their potential. A key factor was the fear o f seizure
o f oil deliveries by “vulture funds”. This problem was solved by a settlement reached in 2008. Capacity
building efforts on improving effectiveness and transparency at SNPC in commercialization and accounting
are underway, supported by the HIPC process. Receipts o f Government oil sales by SNPC and private
operators are transferred into the treasury account at the BEAC. These transfers are certified each quarter
by KPMG, and published on the internet. The division o f oil revenues into budget spending and saving in
Congo’s oil stabilization account at the BEAC i s largely determined by fiscal targets, which are derived
from a Permanent-Income model that provides a path towards long-term fiscal sustainability. This path
demands a sharp adjustment over the next years, given the currently high levels o f the non-oil primary
deficit. Since 2003, Congo’s overall fiscal balance has been in surplus, enabling the Government to set
aside substantial amounts into the stabilization account.
CORAF, a state-owned refinery, has been in operation for the past thirty years. I t caters to a narrow
domestic market (about 7 barrels per day) and has performed poorly for most o f i t s existence. Large
subsidies kept the refinery alive and the prices for domestic consumers low. In 2005, an action plan to
reduce the unit cost from US$8 per barrel to at most US$5 per barrel was adopted, and i s currently under
implementation. With the sharp increase in oil prices, CORAF was able to make a profit in 2008. With
further improved performance and improved transport infrastructure, it could supply the regional market.

6

15.
The oil sector provides much needed resources for public investments yet its
overbearing dominance in the economy i s a major challenge for economic management. The
o i l sector not only makes up the lion’s share in production, but has also contributed 93 percent to
exports and 84 percent to government revenues on average from 2005 to 2008. Oil revenues bring
the benefit o f relatively large resources for financing public spending (the allocation o f about
US$1 billion to the investment budget per year i s large relative to the size o f Congo’s economy).
However, this dependence on o i l revenues poses challenges due to the volatile and finite
character o f the resource (see below).

16.
M o r e generally, the reliance on the oil sector i s problematic for the Congolese
economy, as this sector has a limited capacity to generate employment, and poses an
inherent obstacle for improving competitiveness. The prominence o f the o i l sector, in
particular during the recent o i l price boom, has diverted productive resources from traditional,
more labor-intensive exports towards o i l extraction and related activities. The significant
appreciation o f the real effective exchange rate (about 20 percent between 2001 and 2007
according to the IMF) has led to erosion in competitiveness.
iii)Impact o f the Global Financial Crisis
17.
The global financial crisis poses a serious threat to economic stability and growth in
Congo, but it i s also an opportunity, as it gives more urgency to implementing the reform
agenda. An early assessment has revealed that Congo i s vulnerable to the effects o f the global
financial crisis mainly through the following potential transmission channels:

The steep fall in prices for its main commodity exports (oil and timber) and the fall in
demand for Congolese timber (projected at -50 percent for 2009), which have a substantial
negative impact on the current account (the severe impact on the timber industry has already
led to a significant reduction in employment in this labor-intensive industry that i s the
mainstay o f several towns in the north o f the country);
The sharp drop in fiscal revenues due mainly to the fall in o i l prices, which - if prices are to
stay at their current low levels - will lead to a 50 percent reduction in o i l revenue in 2009
compared to 2008;
The negative demand effect on the economy if public expenditure levels have to be reduced
in case the o i l price shock becomes more severe or prolonged;
The drop in Foreign Direct Investment, which could experience a major reduction in the
medium term, if o i l companies reduce their investments related directly or indirectly to
extraction;
The risk o f contagion o f the local financial sector, which i s considered relatively small at this
point, as Congo’s financial sector i s underdeveloped and not well integrated into the global
markets.
18.
Although large oil savings and balance of payment surpluses accumulated over the
past years provide Congo with room for maneuver to face the crisis, a deterioration o f the
situation or a delay in recovery could result in a difficult economic situation. The authorities
have taken on a relatively prudent fiscal stance for 2009, which aims at reducing current
spending, while maintaining the planned expansion o f public investment. This should, together
with the cushion o f the o i l savings and accumulated foreign reserves, protect the country from a
precarious fiscal and external situation for the moment. However, if any or several o f the effects
o f the crisis described above become more severe or if the o i l prices and demand for other export
goods fail to recover within the next few months, Congo might face a dire fiscal and external
situation and serious reversal o f its path to economic expansion,

7

19.
Responding to the crisis will require further progress on maintaining fiscal
discipline and increasing spending efficiency, as well as accelerating structural reforms. To
avoid jeopardizing much needed public investments in critical infrastructure, controlling spending
(particularly in the current budget) by reducing nonessential spending items will become even
more urgent. The same applies to following through with structural reforms, particularly those
aimed at promoting diversification. In this sense, the crisis i s also an opportunity, as it gives more
urgency and facilitates political consensus on implementing the reform agenda.

In.COUNTRY CHALLENGES AND STRATEGIC PRIORITIES
A.

MAINCHALLENGES
AND OPPORTUNITIES

20.

The key policy challenge for Congo i s to use its oil wealth to build a more diversified
and competitive economy and, thereby, reduce poverty and improve social policy outcomes.
I n order to take advantage o f this opportunity, the difficult economic and governance challenges
that come with the economy’s strong dependence on oil will have to be addressed, including
strengthening i t s capacity in budget and public financial management. Beyond this, however, i s
the imperative to diversify the economy progressively away from oil by developing Congo’s nonoil economy in order to generate stable income and employment opportunities and add value to
the country’s other resources. Finally, there will be a need to improve basic service delivery and
strengthening public institutions, not just as a pre-requisite for sustained growth, but also to make
sure that the growth outcomes are well distributed among the Congolese people in order to help
reduce poverty and inequality.

i)Enhancing Transparency and Effectiveness in Oil Revenue Management
21.

Sound policies and practices in managing the different steps in the oil value chain
are critical for seizing the opportunity offered by Congo’s oil wealth. This includes
maximizing oil revenues through favorable contractual agreements with oil companies,
improving oil revenue projections, maintaining prudent levels o f spending in view o f long term
fiscal sustainability, and smoothing the impact o f oil price volatility. Consolidating ongoing
efforts on increasing transparency and effectiveness in the management o f the national oil
company (SNPC) and in i t s financial relations with oil producers and the treasury i s important in
order to reduce arbitrary and ineffective decision making in the management o f this critical
resource.

22.
The finite character of Congo’s oil poses difficult challenges for oil revenue and
fiscal management policies. According to the latest projections based on proven reserves, Congo
will still benefit from very substantial oil revenues for the next two years but will have to adapt to
a gradual decline in these revenues from 2011 onwards6. Figure 1 depicts the projected oil
production profile and level o f oil revenue over the next years. Even assuming a slow recovery o f
oil prices over the coming years from their current low level, oil revenues will provide very
substantial amounts o f resources for the country to invest in enhancing its infrastructure. On
average, from 2009 to 2014, annual oil revenues are projected at FCFA 3,385 billion (about
US$6.8 billion). This will allow the Government to continue i t s current public investment outlays
o f about FCFA 600 billion (US$1.2 billion) per year, which i s huge given the size of the
Congolese economy.

As indicated earlier, this trajectory could change if new significant commercially viable reserves are
found and brought into production.

8

23.
Managing volatility of oil prices i s another critical challenge, as the recent
experience with the steep fall in prices in the second half o f 2008 has clearly illustrated. As
more than 80 percent o f government revenues stem from oil revenues, oil price volatility makes it
difficult for the authorities to maintain continuity in levels o f public spending. Currently, Congo
i s managing this volatility through a stabilization fund held at the BEAC, coupled with the use of
an oil reference price for budgeting. Due to the positive price trends over the past years, Congo
has been able to feed the stabilization fund with considerable amounts o f oil revenue savings. In
2009, the government i s considering using some o f these reserves, in case the oil price falls below
the reference point adopted in the budget (US$43 per barrel for Congolese oil). While the current
approach to stabilization i s generally functioning, it could be rendered more transparent and
predictable, including by institutionalizing it through a legal framework.

24.

Congo has come some way in improving effectiveness and efficiency in oil sector
management, but critical reforms are still outstanding. In terms o f transparency, main
achievements include the certification o f oil receipts by external auditors and their publication on
the internet on a quarterly basis. In 2008, Congo reached candidate status in the EITI process.
Structural reforms underway include oil marketing and accounting practices o f the national oil
company (SNPC), and the upgrading o f the national refinery in Pointe-Noire. These reform
efforts will have to be consolidated and complemented by actions aimed at clarifying and making
more transparent the fiscal relationship between the national oil company and the budget,
institutionalizing fiscal rules and savings-versus-spending policies, and improving management
o f oil revenue surpluses at the BEAC.
Figure 1: Oil Production and Revenue Projections for Congo

I1

140

2500

........................................................
Source: IMF, Congolese authorities, Staff calculations

I

...............................................................................................................................................................

ii)Strengthening Capacity in Budget and Public Financial Management
25.
A comprehensive public financial management action plan i s under implementation
since March 2008, aiming at addressing weak capacity and he lack o f openness of budgetary
and public financial management institutions in Congo. The action plan provides a framework
to advance on reforms aimed at improving the quality o f programming and executing budgetary

9

resources, which i s critical for the effective use of the oil wealth. Given the substantial resources
available for public investments, enhancing capacity in managing projects financed by the budget
i s of particular importance. But the quality o f budget and public financial management does not
only depend on strengthening government institutions, but also on facilitating public access to
essential budget information and increasing the capacity of non-governmental actors to
understand this information.

26.

Advancing on public financial management and budget management reforms will
require to focus efforts on a few priority measures, most of them already underway. These
measures are related to the different dimensions of the budget management chain:

Budget preparation. With the PRSP, there i s now a solid general strategic framework for
the preparation of the budget. However, more detailed guidance on allocating budget
resources i s required through well developed sector strategies. Efforts are underway to
elaborate such strategies, which today only exist in a few sectors (health, education and
transport). The introduction o f a three-year rolling Medium Term Expenditure
Framework (MTEF) i s a critical step for translating PRSP priorities into the budget and
ensuring consistency with available resources. The MTEF reform has started and key
elements (macroeconomic framework, central MTEF and 2-3 sector MTEFs) should be in
place for the preparation of the 20 10 budget.
Budget execution. Monitoring and control systems on budget execution remain
inadequate. A particularly serious challenge i s the reform o f budget execution
procedures, including internal controls, which are overly complex and cumbersome and
give rise to substantial fiduciary risks. Theses weaknesses encourage recourse to
emergency spending procedures (“payment par anticipation”). Although they have
become less frequent, they are s t i l l used, especially in the context of public works.
Implementing the Government’s reform plan for computerizing and simplifying budget
execution procedures i s therefore a high priority.
Public investment management. Programming and execution of public investment has
been hampered by limitations on strategic planning, especially regarding prioritization o f
infrastructure projects, and clarification of institutional roles in selecting, preparing,
appraising, and monitoring projects. A public investment management action plan was
adopted in early 2009 to address this challenge.
Procurement. A new procurement code i s near adoption. This code and the institutional
changes that i t s application will require are critical to redress current procurement
practices, which are marked by a lack of competition, transparency and poor contract
management,
External controls. Efforts to introduce “checks and balances” on budgetary management
since the end of the civil war need to be consolidated. Priorities in this regard are
measures to: (i)improve the quality and availability of Government accounts; (ii)
strengthen the Court o f Accounts (Cow des Comptes) which was created in 2005; and
(iii)to bring the preparation o f budget reporting laws (lois de rkglement) and their
examination by the Court of Accounts up to date.
Reporting on budget results. There have been important efforts to improve the quality and
availability of reports on budget results to parliament and the public. Basic budget data i s
made available to the public, including by posting reports on the Government’s website,
albeit with interruptions and delays. Discussions at the Parliament on the budget are
broadcast on national television.

10

iii)Potential Sectors for Non-Oil Growth
27.
Congo should exploit its comparative advantages related to its geographic position
and natural resource endowment to promote non-oil growth. A priori, sectors with strong
growth potential include transport services, agribusiness, forestry and mining.
TranspodTransit services. Thanks to i t s deep sea port in Pointe-Noire, the only one in
the sub-region, Congo has a great potential to play a major transit role for the Congo
River Basin countries. The development o f the transport infrastructure has great potential
to boost the local economy and intra-regional trade. This will accrue direct benefits
associated with construction activities, port services, and transport services like the
trucking industry, etc., as well as indirect benefits in the form o f lower transport costs and
productivity gains, and improved access to domestic and regional markets.
Agriculture. Congo has a considerable potential for agricultural production, but currently
the output from the sector covers less than 30 percent o f the country's food needs, with
the rest imported. Once cross-border connections are improved and trade barriers
lowered, huge potential markets for Congolese agricultural products would be reachable,
including the 10 million strong Kinshasa market, which i s only a short distance away
across the river from Brazzaville. Yet, out o f 10 million hectares o f arable land, only 2
percent i s currently exploited.
Forestry. Covering over 65% o f the Congo's land area, forests are key to the social and
economic life o f the country and a strategic asset to the global environment. Forest
management practices and degradation trends vary profoundly between the north o f the
country where forests are better managed and preserved, and the south where population
density i s higher, law enforcement weaker and degradation more pronounced. More than
12% o f Congo's land area has been set aside as biodiversity reserve and national parks,
and progressive forest management rules and monitoring systems are increasingly
adopted. Progress i s also being made in recognizing and strengthening traditional rights
o f forest communities and indigenous populations. Between 2000 and 2005, industrial
forest output doubled, and local processing increased significantly. The international
financial crisis hit the Congolese forest sector earlier and more heavily than any other
country in the sub-region: several companies have halted production and a few have
closed. Nonetheless, mid and long term prospects for the forest industry remain strong
while additional forest-based sources o f income are emerging through tourism and global
trade o f environmental services (see Box 3).
Mining. There are strong indications o f deposits o f magnesium, gold, diamonds, potash
and iron, but exploration has been extremely limited so far. Negotiations with investors
for concessions are at different stages. A mining code was enacted in 2005, but
implementing decrees have not yet been issued.

11

Box 3: Congo’s Forests and Environment

Forests are important to the Congolese economy, and to the global environment. They account for 10% of
non-oil GDP, 12,000 jobs, US$200 million of exports, and US$40 million in fiscal revenues. Additional
contributions to the national economy, not captured by statistics, include bush-meat (critical to the nutrition
o f the rural poor) and wood for domestic energy and building materials. Industrial output doubled between
2000 and 2005 along with the local processing capacity currently estimated at over 60% of production
(although production has recently slowed down due to the current global economic crisis). Congo i s
positioning i t s e l f as a potential provider of environmental services to the emerging global markets and i s
giving more prominence to its national parks as an international tourist attraction.
Convinced that if well managed forests can help diversify the economy and contribute to sustainable
growth, the Government demonstrated leadership in completing a comprehensive forest and environmental
sector study in collaboration with a wide range of national and international constituencies and the World
Bank. This study provided a candid analysis of challenges and opportunities, and served to indentify the
forest and environment policy measures to be met in the fiamework o f the HIPC Completion Point.
Whereas good progress has been made on the policy fiont, the study concluded that many issues must be
tackled to secure sustainability of the forest resource base, and set the stage for continued economic
growth. The following needs were highlighted among others: strengthening institutional capacity; adopting
and enforcing environmental safeguards; creating incentives to ensure that a more balanced mix of forest
tree species are utilized and local transformation and value addition are increased; improving governance
and enforcement of forest laws and regulation; correcting unresponsive taxation policies; stepping up
policies and programs that support rural and indigenous populations in living in forest areas; improving
management and promoting tourism in natural parks and creating capacity in the new areas of forest carbon
trade.
The experience o f recent years has demonstrated that policy reforms alone are not sufficient to realize the
potential o f forests and that these must be accompanied by specific investments and work programs in the
field. With this in mind the Government has requested the World Bank to complement the support it i s
already receiving from the EU, France and the African Development Bank and finance a comprehensive
program o f investment and innovation in the field of forests and the environment.

iv) Addressing Main Structural and Sectoral Constraints to Non-Oil Growth

28.
Stimulating growth in the above sectors will require, among other things, tackling
impediments to the promotion o f Congo’s potential as a transport hub, enhancing i t s investment
and business climate, promoting efficiency in the use o f i t s public resources, improving i t s human
capital, and strengthening i t s public institutions.

a) Promoting Congo’s Potential as a Transport Hub/Fostering Regional Integration

29.
Implementing Regional Initiatives. Regaining the country’s critical role as a gateway
to the world for its landlocked or quasi-landlocked (e.g. Democratic Republic of Congo)
neighbors will require vigorous implementation o f various regional initiatives. Although
Congo’s trade with neighboring countries i s s t i l l a tiny share o f i t s total external trade, there i s
potential for growth, especially in agricultural products. As a small country close to some o f the
sub-region’s big markets, Congo stands to benefit from greater regional integration by exporting
or providing services .(such as transit services) to these markets. However, taking advantage o f
these market opportunities requires the Government to implement i t s regional commitments
under the various regional institutions such as OHADA, CEEAC, and CEMAC. This would also
facilitate Congo’s role as a transit country.

12

30.
Developing key transport corridors. Regaining its historical transit role will also
require improving transport infrastructure and transport services, especially on key
transport corridors. The poor state o f Congo’s transport infrastructure makes it unable to
support the needed economic diversification into such areas as transit services, forestry,
agriculture and mining, or extend quality basic services to i t s population. The reach o f the rail and
road network i s limited, and i t s condition poor, with insuficient maintenance carried out. The
once thriving river transport up the Congo River from Brazzaville to Bangui has been reduced to
minimum capacity due to silting o f the river and limited port and transport capacity. Lack o f a
bridge between Brazzaville and Kinshasa remains a bottleneck to increased trade between the two
neighboring countries.
31.
The main transport corridors are: the Point-Noire - Brazzaville rail and road
corridor, the Brazzaville - Sangha northern river corridor, and the Brazzaville - Kinshasa
cross-river corridor. Major investments in the port o f Point-Noire are underway, as well as
concessioning arrangements for the railway line between Pointe-Noire and Brazzaville, and
construction o f the accompanying road link. Investment options and development plans are either
yet to be developed or are s t i l l under discussion for the Brazzaville port, the Brazzaville-Kinshasa
cross-river stretch, and the Brazzaville-Sangha river corridor. Apart from physical infrastructure,
promoting transit services will also entail improving customs procedures to make them more
efficient, establishing an appropriate regulatory framework, instituting revenue sharing
mechanisms with neighboring countries’, and improving transport infrastructure maintenance,
including transforming the current Road Maintenance Fund into a second generation road fund.

32.
Improving Telecommunication Infrastructure. Similarly, good telecommunication
infrastructure i s needed for robust economic growth and regional integration. The quality o f
Congo’s fixed line telecommunication network and the provision o f basic voice telephony
services are poor. Severe funding shortages have rendered the principal operator unable to
perform the needed repairs to the network which was severely damaged during the civil
disturbances o f the 1990s. While wireless penetration has surpassed fixed line teledensity since
1999, and the three GSM-based mobile operators have currently more than 2 millions active
subscribers (as o f October 2008), the absence o f modern backbone infrastructure at the national
level i s a major limiting factor. Most telecommunication operators do not have broadband
terrestrial networks and rely on expensive and poor quality satellite connectivity to link cities at
the national level. InternationaVregional connectivity i s also poor.

b) Enhancing the Investment and Business Climate/Promoting MSMEs
33.
The very low rank o f Congo in the Doing Business Ratings (178 out o f 181 countries
in 2009) underscores Congo’s highly uncompetitive business environment. The country
performs poorly in all assessed categories, especially on taxes, labor laws and regulations,
property registration, contract enforcement, and trading across borders. In addition, the country i s
characterized by a very small private sector, a legacy o f its Marxist past that favored civil-service
aspirations (‘tfonctionariat’) over entrepreneurship (“entrepreunariat”), as well as an
underdeveloped financial sector, which provides very limited credit to the economy. Solving
these issues i s critical to the emergence o f a robust private sector’. Experience elsewhere in the
region has shown that significant and rapid improvements are possible in these areas.

~~

’For instance, such revenue sharing might need to be explored t o make the port o f Pointe-Noire attractive

for third countries.
A recent business climate assessment supported by the Bank revealed deficient infrastructure, lack o f
access t o finance, red tape (high costs and time required for licenses and business registration), governance
issues, and lack o f skilled workers as m a i n constraints to private sector development.
8

13

e) Improving Standards of Governance and Transparency

34.
Governance and transparency issues constitute the backbone of the H I P C agenda, a
reflection of the perceived weaknesses in the governance system o f the Republic of Congo.
Whereas some progress was made during the I S N period on transparency issues in the extractive
industries as discussed in paragraph 23 above, serious issues remain on many aspects o f
governance. The governance diagnostic study, which was adopted by the Government in March
2009 highlights, among other things, corruption in revenue collection, in the police force, and in
the health and education sectors (see Box 4 on proposed mitigation measures). A range of
measures have been taken by Government, both on the supply side and on the demand side of
governance. Full implementation o f these measures should go a long way in tackling the
country’s governance challenges.
Box 4: Governance Issues
Weaknesses in the governance system o f the Republic of Congo continue to pose significant risks to progress on
the country’s development agenda. The diagnostic study on governance and anti-corruption, which was carried
out during 2008 (finalized in March 2009) and endorsed by government, highlights a deterioration in the quality
of service delivery and increased levels o f Corruption in key sectors, compared to the 2003 study financed by
United Nations DevelopmentProgram. Perceived levels of corruption and weak governance in the most affected
institutions (customs, police and tax authorities) have increased significantly over the said period, while the
situation in institutions that were hitherto perceived to have the least problems (such as local governments) also
deteriorated. Corruption was also reported in service delivery institutions, such as schools and hospitals. Despite
some recent progress, there s t i l l are some governance issues in key public sector enterprises, such as the SNPC.
The Government has recently launched a series of initiatives to address the issues cited above. The reinforcement
o f the National Anti-Corruption Commission and the creation of the independent ‘Observatoire Lutte contre la
Corruption ’ , anchored in civil society, have given increased visibility to the issue o f corruption and governance.
The finalization, in March 2009, o f the draft national Governance and Anti-Corruption Action Plan, and the anticorruption law, are hrther important achievements for these institutions. Both documents are now awaiting
approval by the Government and, in the latter case, Parliament as well. The Governance and Anti-Corruption
Action Plan, in particular, sets out a series of concrete and measurable actions, and provides a platform for
moving forward on this important agenda. The adoption and implementation of action plans on public financial
management and public investment management, and the impending reform plan on oil commercialization
practices, should bring more transparency to public management processes. Finally, important sector initiatives,
such as the establishment o f national EITI structures for the oil sector, the integration o f international
independent observers into forest control operations, and the publication of the Congo Forest Atlas (via internet)
have also been initiated.
While the creation o f institutions and the design and implementationof legislation and action plans can only be a
first step towards addressing deep-seated governance issues, the renewed commitment by the government to take
decisive action i s equally important. This i s a long term process and results cannot be expected overnight.
Continued support from development partners on all aspects o f governance i s crucial for full implementation of
this agenda. The CPS, therefore, commits the Bank to continued engagement with government to ensure that the
issues highlighted in the 2009 diagnostic will be addressed in a way as to enhance the quality o f public services.

d) Improving Human Capital and Strengthening Public Institutions

35.
Education. The many years o f civil conflict ravaged Congo’s education system, and
severely eroded the country’s skills base. However, efforts over the past years have led to some
gains in enrolment and completion levels, which had suffered during the war. Completion rates
for primary education reached 73 percent in 2007, compared to 62 percent in 2003. For further
gains, key structural issues will have to be addressed, such as inadequate and in some cases
unqualified teaching s t a f f (commonly referred to as “be‘ne‘volesyy),especially in remote,
underserved areas (redeployment of teachers on government payroll to remote and underserved
communities remains a challenge); poor quality of education and uneven access, especially by the
poor who cannot raise the required fees; inadequate funding, etc. Schooling for minorities, such

14

as the pygmies, remains also a challenge. In addition, the new economic direction that the country
i s charting out will require suitably adapted skills, especially at the tertiary level. Yet, the
allocation o f resources among the education sub-sectors i s not well aligned with the country’s
strategic priorities. T o meet this challenge, the Government has adopted a strategy that aims at
improving quality and access by strengthening the education sector’s institutional capacity and
improving school infrastructure and supplies.

3 6.
Health. The health care system, whose outcomes remain disproportionately inferior
to the country’s resources, faces similar challenges, namely: insufficient human resources,
poor infrastructure and lack o f basic maintenance, deficiencies in the distribution o f medicines to
health centers which leads to frequent shortages, limited access o f vulnerable groups to quality
services especially in remote areas, critical hygiene and sanitation conditions o f the population,
and weak monitoring and evaluation. Reproductive health in Congo i s poor as reflected in the
high maternal mortality ratio, (estimated at 740 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births in 2007).
The main causes o f maternal deaths are: induced abortions (41%), bleeding during delivery
(40%), post-abortion infection ( 18.8%), post-partum hemorrhage ( 12.7%), hypertensioneclampsia (1 1%) and, dystocia with their untoward consequences (including uterine rupture,
vesico-vaginal fistulas, ascending infections), I-IIV/AIDS
(6%), malaria and other (20%). Infant
mortality increased from 67 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1990, to 79 in 2007. Similarly, underfive mortality increased from 103 to 126 per 1,000 live births over the same period. The leading
causes o f child mortality have remained unchanged for years, namely: malaria (31%), diarrhea
(26%), acute respiratory infections (14%), non-malarial anemia (6%), and AIDS (7%). As a
result, Congo i s unlikely to reach the targets o f the Millennium Development Goals. The
Government’s National Plan for Sanitary Development (2007 - 201 1) provides a sound platform
for the authorities and their partners to tackle these challenges in a coordinated fashion.
37.
Public Institutions. As a post-conflict country, Congo continues to suffer from weak
public institutions and lack o f capacity. Given the country’s ambitions to transform its
economy, the development o f a modem and efficient public sector i s critical, particularly in the
area governance as stated earlier.

38.
These institutional weaknesses are also present among public utilities, e.g. for water
and electricity. The water utility i s in dire need o f reform. I t s distribution network has been
severely underfunded over the past decades and requires immediate attention. Yet, this i s a
critical sector for reducing poverty and attaining millennium development goals. Only 45 percent
o f the country’s urban population and 12 percent o f i t s rural population have access to reliable and
potable water. Similarly, the electricity sector i s beset by weak planning and poor managerial and
financial performance, which has led to delays in needed investments. As a consequence,
electricity supply to urban areas i s insufficient and highly unreliable, with access to electricity in
rural areas being extremely limited.

B.

GOVERNMENT’S
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES AND PROGRAMS

39.
I n April 2008, the Government adopted Congo’s full PRSP, after an extensive
consultation process and validation by civil society and Parliament. The overall vision o f the
PRSP i s to build a diversified economy, primarily building on i t s strengths by developing transit
services to neighboring countries and promoting deeper regional integration, and to reduce
poverty by a half by 2015. The five pillars o f the PRSP, which are consistent with the main
challenges identified in the poverty diagnostic, are: (i)improving governance and consolidating
enhancing access to
peace and security; (ii)promoting growth and macroeconomic stability; (iii)

15

basic social services; (iv) improving the social environment and integration o f vulnerable groups;
and (v) combating HIV/AIDS.
40.
While the PRSP provides a sound basis for reform efforts, it needs to be rendered
more operational. This will require developing detailed sector strategies with detailed cost
estimates, a solid Monitoring & Evaluation framework, and an MTEF to ensure that PRSP
priorities are translated into budgetary allocations. Sector-wide strategies exist only in a few
sectors so far (education, health, and transport). It i s envisaged to move towards developing
program budgets (sector MTEFs) in these “pioneer sectors”, while gradually developing
strategies in other priority sectors. The preparation o f an overall MTEF i s already underway. The
strategies and the PRSP will have to be refined through enhancing the poverty diagnosis, in
particular with respect to assessing the impact o f Government policies on the poor. Results from a
new household expenditure survey are expected in 2010. The new data will be more robust than
the 2005 data, thus helping to get a better understanding o f the composition and distribution o f
vulnerable groups in Congo across gender, ethnicity, geography, etc. This i s essential for better
targeting o f Government policies and programs.
Over the past year, the Government has made progress in the implementation o f its
41.
PRSP. On the governance and peace consolidation agenda, it has reached an agreement with the
last group o f rebels and initiated the demobilization o f former combatants, paving the way for a
resumption o f economic activities in the Pool area near Brazzaville. It has adopted an action plan
for improving public financial management and started to implement it. It established an AntiCorruption Observatory and taken steps to meet the floating Completion Point triggers for the
enhanced HIPC initiative (see Box 5).

42.
Under the second pillar, promoting growth and macroeconomic stability, the
Government has taken a number o f initiatives. With assistance from external partners, it has
launched a major infrastructure building program to alleviate severe constraints to economic
growth. I n the power sector, a new 450 megawatt gas-fired power plant in Pointe-Noire i s under
construction by EN1 Petroleum, for a total estimated cost o f US$400 million; a 120 megawatt
hydro power plant i s under construction at Imboulou on the Lefini River, with support from
China; and a 32.5 megawatt thermal plant in Brazzaville has been completed. In the transport
sector, the construction of the 600 km road between Pointe-Noire and Brazzaville i s underway
with assistance from China. Consultants have been hired to search for a concessionaire for CFCO,
the state-owned railway company. The container port o f Pointe-Noire has been put under private
management and an agreement has been reached with the French Agency for Development
(Agence Frunqaise de De‘veloppernent - A F D ) , the European Investment Bank, and the Bank for
Central African States (Bunque des Etuts de 1’Afrique Centrule - BEAC) for the financing o f the
modernization program for the port. In order to maximize and sustain the benefits from these
investments, it i s critical to focus on improving services and ensuring effective management,
especially maintenance.
The Government i s taking steps to improve the business climate, including ensuring
43,
effective implementation o f OHADA business laws, which are common to Francophone
countries, creating a one-stop window for establishing a business and bringing the custom code
into line with international standards. It i s working on the preparation o f a rural development
strategy. Much more remains to be done, however, to remove obstacles to private sector
investment, which are s t i l l formidable. This includes implementing existing commitments (such
as those under OHADA) and making institutions (such as the one-stop shop) more fully
operational.
Progress i s also being made under the two pillars involving the delivery o f basic
44.
services to the population and the fight against HIV/AIDS. Education indicators are

16

improving with help from donors, including the Bank. The three ministers in charge o f education
have agreed o n the broad outline o f a sector strategy, aimed at, inter alia, achieving the
Millennium Development Goals for the sector in 2015. In the health sector, the launch o f the
Bank funded Health Project took place in April 2009. Good progress has been made in the
H I V / A I D S project supported by the Bank. A water production plant i s under construction near
Brazzaville with China’s assistance to improve access o f l o w income neighborhoods to water

supply*
Box 5: HIPC Completion Point Status

Congo reached the HIPC Decision Point in March 2006. Total estimated HIPC relief i s US$ 1,679 million
(end-2004 Net Present Value terms). Congo has already benefited substantially from interim debt relief
granted under the HIPC process, most notably through two substantial agreements with the London Club o f
private creditors in November 2007 (cancellation o f US$l.6 billion in outstanding debt) and with Paris
Club in December 2008 (cancellation o f US$805 million and rescheduling o f US$l55 million).
Since the creation o f a new coordination structure in November 2007, significant progress was made on
several triggers (adoption o f the PRSP, the return to macroeconomic stability, gradual increase in pro-poor
orientation o f the budget, and implementation o f structural reforms in telecom, forestry and education).
Congo i s expected to reach the HIPC Completion Point in late 2009 if progress i s made on the remaining
agenda:

Procurement Reform: After a long impasse, progress has recently been made on drafting a Procurement
Code and related texts in line with international good practice, which are expected to be adopted soon.
Relevant institutions must now be established. It i s expected that implementation - which i s necessary to
satisfy the trigger - can only begin around November 2009.
Oil sector: The 2005 audit report revealed a number o f important shortcomings in the presentation o f SNPC
accounts. Final reports on both the 2006 and 2007 audits are expected in June 2009 and will determine
whether this trigger can be met without the preparation o f an audit report for 2008. An agreement on the
contents o f the oil marketing reform plan i s within reach after months o f intensive dialogue between the
authorities and the Bank and the IMF. This plan should introduce measures to bring marketing practices to
minimum standards o f transparency and effectiveness.
Governance: An agreement in principle on both the anti-corruption and governance action plan and the
anti-corruption law has been reached. Both documents are likely to be adopted by Government soon, and
the Law would then be sent to Parliament for adoption.
Public Investment Management: A sound Action Plan on Public Investment Management was adopted in
January 2009 and a set o f indicators to monitor implementation was elaborated with support o f the Bank.
The plan focuses in particular on enhancing the process o f preparing, appraising and selecting new projects,
as well as improving effectiveness and transparency in executing the public investment budget.

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

A.
PERFORMANCE OF THE FY07-FY09 INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE
AND LESSONS
LEARNED
45.
The FY07-09 Interim Strategy Note, which was reviewed by the Board in July 2007,
focused on two priority areas: (i) scaling up the governance agenda, and (ii) creating a
foundation for equitable growth. The Bank’s support to the governance agenda included
strengthening public financial and investment management, public procurement, and o i l sector
management, as w e l l as the demand side o f governance (e.g. setting up an anti-corruption

17

observatory). The Bank’s support to the growth agenda included assisting Government in
elaborating its PRSP, providing analytical inputs, and implementing the ongoing portfolio. An
effort was made to engage in a more substantial dialogue on growth, through a high-level
government seminar held in June 2008, and the subsequent initiation of analytical work on: the
corridor approach to spatial infrastructure development; private sector constraints and
opportunities; and public expenditure.

46.
The outcome indicators in the ISN were not realistic in view o f the short period
covered by the I S N and IDA’S limited resources for Congo. Annex 3 provides a detailed
assessment of progress against these indicators. The I S N set forth 12 outcomes on transparency
and public finance management, basic social services, and rural growth. Most of these outcomes
are unlikely to be achieved by the end of the ISN period in June 2009. In the governance area, it
takes time to change deeply entrenched habits. Progress i s being made, but all major activities
under the action plan supported by the ongoing Transparency and Governance Capacity Building
Project are facing delays. In the social sectors, the outcome indicators, as selected in the ISN,
were not consistent with the result frameworks for the ongoing projects. In the rural growth area,
implementation of the Bank-supported project was delayed. In any event, it would have been
impossible for the project to deliver results as expected within the I S N timeframe.

47.
I S N implementation provides important lessons for the preparation o f the CPS.
These lessons focus in particular on how to make a difference in spite of a limited IDA financing
envelope, and how to engage most effectively in a difficult governance environment.
0

Realistic expectations. Expectations o f impact o f Bank support should be commensurate
with the limited amount of assistance provided. Significant time i s required for reaching a
consensus on sensitive reforms after decades of economic mismanagement and internal
conflicts, and the weak capacity in government administration.

0

Strategic use o f Bank resources. IDA’S envelope of about US$20 million per year pales
in comparison to Government’s investment budget o f about US$1 billion per year. In
order to have a real impact on growth, poverty and social outcomes, Bank support will
need to be used in a more strategic manner whereby lending and non-lending activities
will particularly have to focus on spurring efficiency in, and more strategic choice of,
largely Government financed programs. Similarly, IDA’S limited funds will have to be
leveraged with significant co-financing from the Government. Finally, in light o f IDA’S
limited administrative budget for activities in Congo, some of the Bank’s support could
be provided (at least partially) in the form offee-based sewices for selected activities.

0

Tackle governance from different angles. The Bank should complement i t s direct support
to governance reforms with a more substantive engagement on helping accelerate growth,
which i s a critical concern of the Government. As the positive response o f the
Government to the high-level seminar on growth and the policy dialogue on transport
corridors have shown, this i s important to demonstrate to the authorities the value-added
of engaging with the Bank. A second and related lesson was that it would be more
effective to treat governance as a cross-cutting issue. Enhancing transparency and
governance standards should not be treated in isolation, but as critical factors in
improving effectiveness in service delivery or infrastructure upgrading. Finally, the I S N
experience showed that there i s a need to engage not only with the Government, but also
with the demand-side of governance to bring about lasting change in these areas. This i s
particularly true in Congo’s post-conflict context, where formal and informal institutions
in- and outside of government are s t i l l weak in capacity. The positive effect of Bank
support to publication of oil revenue data or the creation of an Anti-corruption
Observatory are a case in point.

18

B.

PROPOSED
COUNTRYPARTNERSHIP
STRATEGY

i) CPS Objective and Strategic Approach
48.
The main objective of this results-based CPS i s to make a critical contribution to
promoting broad-based economic growth and improving social outcomes. The proposed CPS
i s fully in line with PRSP priorities, especially those in pillars 2 (promoting growth and
macroeconomic stability) and 3 (enhancing access to basic social services). The selection of the
principal themes, the expected outcomes, and the lending and non-lending program o f the CPS
were all guided by intensive consultations with main stakeholders and by the lessons learned in
implementing the ISN.
49.
The underlying approach of the strategy i s to provide critical support to Congo for
getting the highest possible benefit from its current efforts to improve the reach and quality
o f its infrastructure and basic services. The CPS recognizes IDA’s limited funding envelope in
comparison to the relatively large resources available to the Government to implement i t s priority
programs. Therefore, it focuses on helping the Government improve prioritization and effective
implementation, as well as subsequent management, o f i t s ambitious infrastructure investment
program, and supports i t s efforts to enhance basic service delivery. Besides playing this strategic
role, the Bank will seek to leverage i t s small envelope in each new project with significant
amounts from the Government in order to obtain the desired critical mass. This i s consistent with
the Bank’s evolving role, from that o f “financier”, to that o f “catalyst” for change.
50.
I n addition, a particular emphasis will be put on building coalitions with other
partners for advancing critical sectoral and cross-sectoral reforms. In order to improve aid
efficiency, new financing under the CPS will be structured so as to be complementary and
synergistic to that provided by other development partners. For this purpose, these partners have
been very closely consulted during CPS preparation.
5 1.
Within the World Bank Group, this strategy was prepared in close collaboration
with IFC. Although the IFC i s only now beginning to reengage in the country (and thus ajoint
Strategy wasn’t possible at this time), areas o f potential synergy were identified during the CPS’
preparation. These include Small and Medium Enterprise Development, and Agribusiness
Development (see Annex 4 for more on IFC’s areas on interest). This ongoing collaboration will
be intensified during the implementation phase o f the CPS over these and other areas to maximize
synergy.

52.
Finally, the proposed CPS program has been designed with a view to helping
mitigate the effects o f the global financial crisis on the Congolese economy. IDA’s limited
funding envelope for Congo o f approximately US$20 million per year would not allow for
providing significant amounts o f resources for financing fiscal gaps or stimulus programs in the
event of a deeper and more protracted global financial crisis. Fortunately, in recent years, Congo
has accumulated significant reserves in its stabilization account from oil revenues. In addition, on
average, from 2009 to 2014, annual oil revenues are conservatively projected at FCFA 3,385
billion (about US$6.8 billion) although these might decline should the global economic situation
worsen. As indicated earlier, this should allow the Government to continue i t s current public
investment outlays o f about FCFA 600 billion (US$1.2 billion) per year. In view o f the above, the
CPS’ strategic approach to mitigating the risks o f an aggravation o f the effects o f the global crisis
on the Congolese economy i s to support the Government in effectively managing i t s own
resources by strengthening fiscal management as well as increasing spending efficiency. At the
same time, the CPS program would help the Government respond to the ever more pressing need
for accelerating structural reforms, particularly those aimed at unshackling the Congolese

19

economy from heavy dependence on oil by promoting a robust, highly diversified economy that
i s more resilient to such external shocks.

ii)Main Themes o f the CPS
53.
The Bank’s support to the Government’s efforts will be organized around two main
pillars. These are: (i)support to diversification and growth and (ii)poverty reduction through
improved basic service delivery. To ensure effective implementation in both priority areas, the
CPS will also support governance and institutional capacity building as a cross-cutting theme.
These themes were arrived at after a series of extensive consultations with the Congolese civil
society, private sector, Parliament, Government (both local and national), and Congo’s
international development partners (see Box 6 on Consultations).
0

Diversifvim the economy to suur broad-based mowth. This will include supporting the
country’s reform efforts in three key areas: (i)
more effectively managing oil revenues in
the face o f high price volatility and possible decline o f reserves in the long-term, and
using these resources to promote the diversification agenda and improve the services
provided by key infrastructure; (ii)adopting and initiating implementation o f a strategy
for developing growth corridors that would improve exploitation o f natural resources,
linking production with markets, and regional integration - including restoring Congo’s
traditional transit services industry; and (iii)
developing, and implementing a strategy for
removing key obstacles to private sector development, and for promoting small and
medium-term enterprises (including agro-business).

0

Improving public service delivery for the people o f Congo. particularly the most
vulnerable ~TOUDS. This entails improving basic services, especially health and education,
through well focused programs and their efficient implementation.

54.
Support in these two areas will be complemented by continued focus on improving
governance and strengthening institutional capacity. Support to different aspects o f ongoing
reforms on strengthening transparency, accountability and institutional capacity in the
management o f public resources remains a major priority for the Bank. The Bank will play a
critical role in facilitating the implementation o f recently adopted new legislation and action plans
to address weaknesses in the governance system, including on oil marketing, governance and
anti-corruption, public investment management and procurement. In dealing with these issues, the
Bank will continue to support both the supply side and the demand side o f governance.

55.
Improving governance and institutional capacity will not be treated in isolation, but
rather, it will be mainstreamed into sectoral interventions. Consequently, all existing projects
will be reviewed, and if necessary retrofitted, in order to ensure that relevant governance issues
are adequately addressed. Similarly, all new activities will incorporate relevant governance issues
as well. In addition, this governance agenda will be firmly anchored in a thorough political
economy analysis to be conducted during the preparation o f each operation.

20

Box 6: Consultations for the Country Partnership Strategy

Extensive consultations with all stakeholders took place for the preparation of the CPS in three steps. First,
a high-level government seminar was held in June 2008 on growth, in which the contours o f future Bank
support were traced out, and major analytical work was initiated on the corridor approach to spatial
infrastructure development, the assessment of private sector constraints and opportunities, and initiation of
the Public Expenditure Review.
In December 2008, the Bank team organized meetings with cabinet members, technical committees, both
houses of Parliament, the private sector, farmer organizations, civil society organizations, academia and
external partners. Meetings took place in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire. During these discussions the Bank
team tested the new approach proposed in this CPS, namely the change o f the Bank role fiom a financier to
a catalyst for change. The main themes o f the CPS were extensively discussed.
In April 2009 another round of consultations took place. The objective of these consultations was to reach a
consensus with the Bank’s partners (government, private sector, civil society organizations, academia and
external partners) on the results matrix and proposed instruments. A l l interlocutors welcomed the proposed

activities and outcomes. They reviewed carefully the outcome and output indicators and found them to be
both ambitious and realistic. They agreed that if these indicators were met, Congo would move decisively
on the path to sustainable and well diversified growth.

iii)Outcomes and Instruments
56.
The Bank’s support to the above themes would result in a series of efficiency and
growth outcomes. Under the economic diversification and growth agenda: (i)the management
o f oil revenue and public expenditure would be made more effective; (ii)the production and
productivity o f commercial agriculture would be enhanced; (iii)tools for improved forestry
management would be put in place; (iv) the foundation for the growth o f micro, small, and
medium enterprises would be laid; (v) the services from Government’s ongoing or planned
infrastructure program would improve; and (vi) Congo would lay the foundation for increasing i t s
market share in regional transit services. Under the basic service delivery agenda, the principal
outcome would be the improvement in these services, especially emanating from increased
efficiency and transparency o f public spending. The following i s a presentation o f these expected
outcomes together with the proposed corresponding CPS interventions (projects, analytical and
advisory services) that are needed for attaining these results.
CPS outcome 1.1: The management of oil revenue andpublic expenditure is more effective

57.
Support for improvements in oil revenue and public expenditure management will
be provided through multiple channels, including the ongoing Transparency and
Governance Capacity Building Project and its proposed follow-up operation, the ongoing
Public Expenditure Review (PER), and analytical and advisory work on oil revenue
management. Initial progress made on o i l revenue and public expenditure management during
the ISN period will be consolidated and amplified during the CPS period. The findings o f the
ongoing PER and the planned O i l Revenue Management Review will strengthen the analytical
foundation for improving the mobilization and use o f o i l revenues. Based on these findings, the
Bank, in close collaboration with the IMF, will help the Government revise i t s fiscal strategy with
a view to addressing volatility and long term decline o f o i l revenues, as well as enhance spending
efficiency. These findings will also influence the preparation o f the MTEF. The Bank’s ongoing
capacity building support will continue and, together with technical assistance from the AFDB
and the EU, should play an instrumental role in advancing public financial management and
budget management reforms, especially with respect to: (i)implementing the new procurement

21

system, (ii)
preparing MTEFs at the central level and in key sectors; (iii)implementing the action
plan for public investment management; and (iv) implementing a new automated and simplified
system o f expenditure management. Progress will be measured through: the reduction o f the nonoil primary deficit as a share o f non-oil GDP, which will record progress made by the
Government in reducing the budget’s dependency on oil revenues; the progressive shift from
direct contracting to competitive procurement; and the increased use o f regular budget procedures
supported by a new automated and simplified expenditure chain.

CPS Outcome 1.2: Agricultural production and productivity in high potential zones is
enhanced
58.
The ongoing Agricultural Development and Rural Roads Rehabilitation Project i s
the main instrument for achieving this outcome. The Bank’s support in the agriculture sector
targets both small holder farming and small-medium scale agro-industries. Support to smallholders aims at: (i)improving domestic agricultural marketing (made possible, in part, by the
planned rural road rehabilitation); (ii)promoting on-farm and off-farm activities (through the
provision o f improved technology and delivery o f extension services); and (iii)strengthening
farmers’ organizations to facilitate forward and backward linkages with agro-industries. For agroindustries, the support aims at improving the incentive framework for private investments in onfarm and off-farm activities. In addition, the Bank will assist the government in: (i)
formulating a
national investment program covering extension and adaptive research, agricultural marketing,
on-farm and off-farm investments, and support to farmers’ organizations; (ii)implementing
extensive consultation process with potential investors in ago-industries, with a view to
identifying and implementing a menu o f priority measures to address bottlenecks against the
development o f ago-industries; and (iii)developing an MTEF for agriculture covering activities
underpinned by the strategic elements referred to above. These efforts will be closely coordinated
with the two agricultural projects funded by the International Fund for Agricultural Development.
Progress will be monitored through, among other things: the reduction in rural transportation
costs and the increase in average yields for key products in target areas.
CPS Outcome 1.3: Toolsfor improvedforestry management put in place
59.
This outcome will be made possible by the ongoing dialogue on forestry reforms in
the context of HIPC, which will be consolidated under the proposed Forestry and
Environment Project. Congo has made some progress in this sphere, including the integration o f
international independent observers into forest control operations, and the publication o f the
Congo Forest Atlas on the internet. Major reforms are under preparation, including: preparing
new gazetting and degazetting regulations that take into account forest and indigenous people
rights; a new forest concession award regulation; a new forest taxation system and a collaborative
recovery system between Ministry o f Forests and Environment; a new Environmental Impact
Assessment regulation; and a reorganization o f key monitoring, law enforcement, and
participatory management functions in Ministries in charge o f Forests and the Environment.
Progress will measured by the adoption and implementation o f these texts. In addition, Congo has
recently been selected to be part o f the Readiness Mechanism o f the Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility. The mechanism helps tropical countries develop a strategy to reduce deforestation and
forest degradation and prepare themselves for a potential market instrument o f positive incentives
stipulated under the program. Congo expects to receive a preparatory grant o f US$200,000 from
the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility to develop a Readiness Plan and an additional grant o f up
to US$3.4 million to execute the plan once approved.

22

CPS Outcome 1.4: Thefoundation for the growth of micro, small, and medium enterprises is
laid
60.
This outcome will be achieved through the proposed Economic Diversification
Support Project, working very closely with IFC, EU, IMF, the Public-Private Infrastructure
Advisory Facility, and other partners. Based on the findings o f the recently completed
investment climate survey, this project will support a number o f priority actions aimed at
improving MSME access to financial and non-financial services, as well as improving the
investment climate in such areas as business registration, taxation, public-private partnership
frameworks, and public-private sector dialogue. This will be complemented by IFC’s plans to
improve access o f small and medium entrepreneurs to credit, and those o f the recently approved
regional financial sector project to strengthen the financial sector in CEMAC member countries,
which should create a favorable environment for enhanced credit to the private sector.
Implementation o f these activities will be closely coordinated with the I M F (tax reform) and the
EU (economic governance). The analytical work on Growth and Employment which i s proposed
under the CPS will complement this effort, especially by helping the Government devise a growth
strategy that leads to the creation o f substantial employment in the formal non-oil sectors.
Progress toward achieving this outcome will be monitored through, among other things: the time
required for registering a business, banks’ compliance with regionally agreed financial norms,
and the effective tax rate for MSMEs.
Outcome 1.5: The services from Government’s ongoing/planned infrastructure program are
improved

61.
This will be achieved through management and regulatory reform programs
supported under various projects. Reforms in the energy sector and improvements in the
planning and management o f transport infrastructure will be supported by the proposed Economic
Diversification Support Project; reforms in the water sector by the proposed Urban and Water
Project; and reforms in the telecommunications sector by proposed Regional Telecommunications
Project. Progress toward achieving this outcome will be monitored through improvements in,
among other things: the telecommunication sector regulatory framework, the management o f the
electric power utility, and annual road maintenance.
Outcome 1.6: Congo lays the foundation for increasing its market shale in regional transit
services

62.
The main vehicle for achieving this outcome i s the proposed Economic
Diversification Support Project, in conjunction with other partners. The proposed project,
which will focus on investment planning for, and improvements in service delivery along, the
principal transport corridors, will complement the ongoing and planned investments financed by
the French Development Agency (AFD), the European Investment Bank, the Development Bank
for Central African States, the Chinese Government, and the Government’s own resources in
strategic areas like the port o f Pointe-Noire and road infrastructure. The project will also help
Government manage the concession o f the Pointe-Noire - Brazzaville railway (CFCO), once this
concession i s put in place with the ongoing support from the EU. I t will work closely with the
AfDB, the EU and AFD on laying the foundation for enhancing trade between Brazzaville and
Kinshasa and up river from Brazzaville. The ongoing Bank-financed Transport Corridor Study i s
expected to provide a road map for enhancing Congo’s transit role. Whereas the results from
these actions are long term, and depend upon several other factors (such as the pace o f
investments underway), measures o f progress during the CPS period will include adoption o f the
various strategies and regulations, and investment programs emanating from this analysis.

23

Outcome 2.1: The delivery of basic services is improved

63.

This outcome i s expected to be achieved with the support from ongoing operations
andlor additional financing in education, health, and HIVIAIDS, a new urban and water
project, and the public expenditure review. The education project will finance enhancement o f
the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Education, rehabilitation of school infrastructure,
improvement of education quality (such as teacher training, scholastic materials, and curriculum
improvement), and delivery of formal and non-formal education services to out-of-school youth
and pygmies. The objectives of the Health Project are to strengthen Congo’s health system in
order to combat more effectively major communicable diseases and improve access to quality
services for women, children and other vulnerable groups through strengthening the
organizational, managerial and fiduciary capabilities of the Ministry of Health, rehabilitatingand
equipping health care facilities, and improving access to quality essential health care services.
Maternal and child health outcomes and malaria will receive special attention in this project. This
will be carried out in partnership with the United Nations Fund for Population Activities which i s
supporting the implementation of the national road map to accelerate the reduction of maternal,
neonatal and infant morbidity and mortality through capacity building of health centers and
communities in order to ensure the availability of family planning services. The HN/AIDS will,
inter alia: (a) improve diagnosis and treatment; (b) promote condom use and voluntary testing,
(c) disseminate information for behavior change; (d) improve the quality of blood transfusion; (d)
improve counseling; (e) help the adoption o f a legal framework for protecting victims of
HN/AIDS and sexual violence; and ( f ) improve bio-medical waste management. The Urban and
Water Infrastructure Project will improve the management of the water utility and the delivery of
basic urban infrastructure services. Providing reliable and clean water will help improve health
outcomes, as well as address a major constraint to private sector development. The proposed
MTEF for Health and Education (to be made possible by the ongoing public expenditure review),
and the proposed performance-based system for human resources management in the two sectors
i s expected to increase the quality and efficiency of public expenditure in these sectors. Progress
toward achieving this outcome will be monitored through such indicators as improvements in the
completion rate and the girl-boy ratio, a reduction in the under-five mortality rate, and the
containment o f the spread of HN/AIDS, especially among the youths, sexually active population
segments, and from mother to child.
iv) Results-Based Monitoring & Evaluation

64.
A major challenge for Congo i s to ensure that its policies and budget allocations are
informed by a sound monitoring and evaluation system that promotes public accountability.
Capacity in results-based monitoring and evaluation, and information management i s limited.
Monitoring and evaluation i s currently narrowly focused on administrative process of
expenditures and activities rather than on outcomes, impacts, and goals. Although the PRSP was
based on a sound poverty diagnosis, underlying data i s still weak and requires updating.
Institutional capacity i s weak and respective roles of different institutions in monitoring and
evaluation unclear, such as between the National Center for Statistics and Economic Analysis and
the proposed poverty observatory, or between central bodies and Studies and Planning
Directorates in sector ministries.
65.
The PRSP provides a good opportunity to strengthen monitoring and evaluation
capacity and to develop a comprehensive yet simple mechanism to monitor and evaluate
government action. As part o f PRSP preparation, a serious effort was made to put in place an
institutional structure for measuring PRSP implementation in a coordinated way across
government. Going ahead, this structure will have to be progressively strengthened, with a view
to producing reliable findings on how public actions (public spending in particular) relate to

24

tangible results on the ground. In this regard, the Bank i s supporting the Government in the
following priority actions to enhance monitoring and evaluation:
Updating and enhancing the quality o f poverty and social data by completing the census
and a new series o f (improved) household and specialized surveys (on which the
Government i s supported by AfDB, AFRISTAT, and the World Bank);
Improving coordination on monitoring and evaluating PRSP implementation, in
particular by enhancing participation o f sector ministries and clarification o f the roles o f
institutions involved in data collection and analysis;
0

Strengthening the PRSP's results framework, by narrowing i t s scope to essential
indicators, and better defining them by adding baselines and measurable targets; and
Supporting the development of a new national statistical development strategy for the
monitoring o f the PRSP and sector MTEFs.

66.
Status of the statistical system. The Congolese statistical system, which was supposed
to be guided in i t s development by the Multi-Year Plan for Statistical Development (Plan
Pluriannuel de De'veloppement de la Statistique) for the period 2005-9, i s currently insufficiently
strong for monitoring the PRSP and sector MTEFs. The heavy focus in the PRSP on survey data,
even when routine administrative data should provide the information, shows that the system i s
not producing the information expected from a fully-functional system. The health project,
building upon the work o f the HIV/AIDS project, i s working in the area o f a health management
information system, but many areas are s t i l l weak. The statistical development plan identified a
number o f areas for action, many o f which do not appear to have been followed, including the
passage of the statistical law.
67.
Monitoring CPS implementation. The CPS Results Framework establishes the results
chain for the Bank's program with a focus on outputs and outcomes, linked to longer-term
country outcomes. The CPS has identified a set o f outcome and output indicators to measure
progress (columns 3 and 4 o f the matrices in Annex 1). In most cases, these indicators are
quantified with expected target ranges, and in some cases, more qualitative information needs to
be derived. Where there are gaps in information, the Bank will work with the Government in
identifying specific measurements o f outcomes during the first year o f the CPS. The outcome
indicators have been selected taking into account the limited capacity for monitoring and
evaluation. Indicators in the areas o f agriculture development and social services are expected to
be monitored under the relevant sector projects.
68.
Implementation Progress of the CPS will also be monitored in annual Country
Portfolio Performance Reviews, as well as a CPS mid-term review which i s planned for
early 2011. It will assess progress in achieving the main CPS outcomes and outputs, dealing with
risks and problems that might hinder achievement o f the outcomes, and identifying systemic
issues that may affect the portfolio. It will review problems encountered in the collection and
analysis of data to measure progress and recommend corrective actions. The Bank will continue
to provide support and advice in the preparation o f the PRSP progress reports.
v) Funding

69.
The World Bank will support the above program through i t s existing portfolio, new
financing, and analytical and advisory services, as summarized below. It should be emphasized
that'substantialco-financing will be provided by the Government.

25

a) Existing portfolio

70.
The current World Bank-financed project portfolio consists o f five country-level
operations and one regional project, with an undisbursed balance o f US$72 million (excluding the
regional project). This amount i s expected to be fully disbursed during the CPS period. These
projects mostly address issues related to improving Government’s delivery o f basic services,
especially in health and education.

I 123.03 I 50.06 I 72.43 I

Total

Regional Financial
InstitutionsProject

Dec. 2009

June 2014

48.32’

0.25

48.07

S

S

b) New Financing and Analytical & Advisory Services

71.
The first two years o f the CPS correspond to I D A 15, with the third year falling
under I D A 16, for which the funding envelope i s yet to be determined. The CPS covers the
period F Y 10-FY12, which includes the last two years o f IDA15 period (FY 10-FY 11) and the first
year o f IDA16. The overall size o f the IDA envelope during the CPS period i s assumed to be
about SDR33 million, which amounts to an average annual allocation o f about SDRl 1 million.
These estimates for FYlO-FY12 are indicative only and can change. Actual allocations in these
years will depend on: (i)total I D A resources available, (ii)Congo’s performance rating in the
annual Country Policy and Institutional Assessment relative to other I D A countries, (iii)the
performance and assistance terms o f other I D A borrowers; (iv) the terms o f IDA’S assistance to
Congo (grants or credits), in particular a possible shift o f Congo from a grant-only to a mixed or
credit-only IDA countries in case i t s debt sustainability situation improves further, and (v) the
number o f IDA-eligible countries. The indicative allocation for FY 12 assumes a similar level o f
replenishment in IDA16 as in IDA15.
72.
The indicative I D A 15 and I D A 16 allocations are proposed to be distributed as
follows: US$15 million has already been allocated to the Education Project Supplemental, US$5
million to the HIV/AIDS supplemental, and US$2.7 million to the CEh4AC Regional Institutions
Support Project, leaving US$37.5 million. The proposed allocation o f this remaining amount i s
presented in the table below. Although the level o f IDA 16 funding i s not known yet, preliminary
discussions are ongoing on how to utilize these resources, especially during the third year o f this
CPS, which coincides with the first year o f IDA 16. The Government has proposed a forestry
operation and a supplemental to the Governance Project in this first year o f IDA 16, which i s
consistent with diversifying the economy away from oil dependence, and strengthening services
delivery, principal themes o f this CPS.

26

-

Table 6: Proposed New Activities for FYlO FY12
(USS Millions)
PROJECT FINGNCtNG (Millions)

FY12
FY12

Forestry Project
Supplemental to Governance Project

20
5

A N A L Y T K A L & ADVlSORY A C T I V I T I E S
Bank Budget financed
I

FY 10
FY 10

Public ExpenditureReview
Oil Revenue Management Support

FY 10
FY 11

HIPC Completion Report
Growth and Employment

FY 10
FY 10

Support to the Forestry Sector
Support for Preparation of a National Statistical Development Strategy

vi) Congo’s Transition to Middle-Income Country Status

73.
Congo’s elevated level o f budget resources and its high level o f GNI per capita
create opportunities for redefining Bank’s relationship with the country. This includes
exploring possibilities o f cost-sharing, as well as preparing for the transition from IDA to IBRD.
0

Exploring the use o f fee-based services. The Bank i s expected to deliver the bulk o f the
proposed non-lending assistance through its own administrative resources. However,
because o f the Bank’s limited administrative budget, and in view o f the country’s
growing level o f resources, the Government has shown openness to the notion o f feebased Bank advice in certain situations. Although discussions are s t i l l ongoing, such feebased services could be used on clearly defined tasks, especially those o f a short duration.
The Government could partially fund this technical assistance, with the rest o f the funds
coming from the Bank budget as i s common elsewhere in the Bank. Care would have to
be taken to safeguard fiduciary and other standards, as well as protect the Bank’s
independence and neutrality.
Transition from IDA to IBRD. Congo reached a GNI per capita o f US$1,970 in 2008,
which put the country above the income threshold for IDA lending for a second

27

consecutive year. If it remains above this threshold for a third year in 2009, IDA
hardened terms will be applied to Congo. Assuming that this income level i s maintained
or increased further, Congo will then progressively move towards graduating from IDA.
The transition to IBRD is, however, a long process and will require the country to meet
stringent eligibility criteria, to ensure that it i s creditworthy. Debt sustainability i s an
important element o f these criteria. As a HIPC country, Congo i s not eligible for IBRD at
this time. After the HIPC process, and depending upon i t s economic performance, Congo
will be assessed to determine if it meets the eligibility criteria. The Bank will also explore
possibilities o f developing enclave projects for developing infrastructure under the IBRD
window.

C.

PARTNERSHIPS

74.
Congo does not have many external partners. The most active partners are the French
Agency for Development, the European Union, African Development Bank, and, most recently,
the Chinese Government who, in 2006, entered into a fiamework agreement with the Government
that i s worth up to US$I billion (see Table 7). The Bank has had extensive consultations with the
traditional partners and intends to work closely with them for the delivery o f the assistance
program.

75.

The Bank’s strategy for collaboration with the other partners i s based on the
principal o f synergy and comparative advantage. For instance, the European Union i s taking
the lead on the Justice sector. This sector i s critical for, among other things, improving the
business climate (and, therefore, the promotion of MSMEs), especially with regard to the proper
functioning of commercial courts. The Bank will closely coordinate with the EU in this regard,
but will not be involved in this sector directly. Instead, the Bank will focus on the other aspects of
improving the business climate in which other partners are not very present. Similarly, there i s a
massive infrastructure program that i s ongoing, with financing fiom the Government as well as
other partners such as China. The Bank’s limited resources will be focused on maximizing
benefits from, and ensuring the sustainability of, these investments, especially with respect to
improving their management. This approach i s true for all the other sectors as well.

76.
During the consultations for the CPS, some partners expressed interest in moving
towards a joint country assistance strategy. AFD, AfDB and the EU a l l approved their country
assistance strategies in 2008. The end of the Bank CPS period (June 2012) coincides, more or
less, with the end dates of these strategies. By selecting a three-year period for this CPS, the Bank
will be fully aligned with i t s partners, making a joint country strategy a distinct possibility (see
Annex 4 for a summary description of each principal partner’s strategy). It i s expected that IFC
will also participate in such a joint strategy.
Table 7: International Development Partners - Ongoing and Planned Activities
(USD Millions)
AfDB
(2008-12)
25.5

Growth/Infrastructure

AFD
(2008-12)
8.2

1,000.0

1,212.6

Social

9.9

24.5

0.0

0.0

34.4

Governance

0.0

13.2

13.0

0.0

26.2

Justice

0.0

19.8

0.0

0.0

19.8

Other

8.9

15.1

20.0

0.0

44.0

Total

27.0

251.4

58.5

1,000.0

EU
(2008-13)
178.9

28

China

Total

(NA)

1,336.9

V. MANAGING R I S K S
77.
A deepening of the impact of the global financial crisis on Congo in the form o f a
prolonged slump in oil prices and accentuation o f demand shocks on other export goods
would constitute a serious threat to macroeconomic stability and growth prospects (high
risk). Congo has built up a strong fiscal and foreign exchange reserve cushion through i t s o i l
savings, but a prolonged slump in o i l prices could create severe fiscal tensions. These tensions
could either lead to a deterioration o f the fiscal stance, with serious negative implications on
macroeconomic stability, which could result in the PRGF getting off-track, or in significant cuts
in public spending. The latter would undermine the implementation o f the ambitious public
investment program and thereby jeopardize the diversification and growth agenda. The Bank will
monitor closely the situation, in close coordination with the IMF, and should this threat
materialize, realign i t s support accordingly. More broadly, the Bank, in cooperation with other
donors i s helping mitigate this risk on different fronts. On fiscal policy, it i s critical to enhance
spending efficiency, so as to improve preparedness for an increase in fiscal tension. In this regard,
the Bank i s supporting the Government’s reform efforts to enhance efficiency o f spending,
through analytical work (PER), and through its Transparency and Governance Project on building
capacity in budget management. In the long term, a more diversified economy will be more
resilient to external shocks than the current o i l dependent one. The Bank i s supporting the country
in this direction through the various activities described in this CPS.

78.
While Congo has come a long way in trying to consolidate peace and rebuild public
institutions, the situation i s still fragile (medium risk). A contested presidential election, or
popular discontent, could spark a fresh round o f civil conflict. The Bank, together with partners
like the EU, has been assisting with disarmament and demobilization o f former combatants. This
has helped reduce the remaining direct armed threats to peace and stability. However, it i s clear
that in the long term, the risk o f destabilization and conflict can only be minimized if there i s
broad-based growth that reduces poverty significantly in all parts o f the country. This i s
consistent with the main orientation o f the CPS. More transparency and better governance in the
management o f the country’s resources, particularly oil, i s particularly important in this regard.
The Bank supports this through completion o f the HIPC process and continued technical
assistance on key governance areas.
79.
The reform progress could slow-down or derail because of political economy factors
(high risk). Vested interest may delay effective implementation o f critical reforms in areas like
procurement or o i l management. Strong pressures from unions may postpone government
decisions on putting key infrastructure enterprises under private management. Resistance from
public employees could hamper efforts to shift personnel to remote areas to enhance the reach
and quality of social services. Under the ISN, the HIPC process contributed to generating a
momentum for reforms. The main orientation o f the CPS i s to shift from a conditionality-based to
a more mature middle-income type o f relationship, and to reach out to a large spectrum o f actors.
Through this approach, the CPS will help maintain the momentum after HIPC Completion Point
and thereby mitigate any risk of reform slow-down thereafter. The Bank will also continue i t s
support to non-governmental actors in the governance area, which would foster demand for
increased transparency and accountability, particularly in the areas o f public finance and o i l
sector management. Finally, the Bank will help the Government assess the social costs, identify
potential “losers” from reform measures and. devise possible compensatory measures as part o f
the Economic Diversification Support Project and analytical activities.
80.
Although there have been major improvements in portfolio quality, World Bank
funded projects still face some fiduciary risks (medium risk). The number o f problem projects

29

has declined from two to zero, in a portfolio o f five projects. However, the portfolio at risk by
amount i s 34.7 percent. The main challenge i s limited capacity, especially in the area o f
procurement. The recent improvements in portfolio quality are attributed to intense training and
constant hands-on support provided by the Bank’s procurement and financial management
specialists who are now based in the country office. Annual Country Portfolio Performance
Reviews, whose recommendations are rigorously followed up, have been instituted starting in
2008. The country director, who i s also based in the field (in the neighboring Democratic
Republic o f Congo), has intensified high level dialogue on the portfolio.
8 1.
While desirable, increased investments in infrastructure, mining and urban
development pose significant social and environmental risks to the natural environment and
could result in pollution and other undesirable side effects (medium risk). To address this
issue, the Bank will help the Republic o f Congo finalize a comprehensive body o f laws and
regulations to deal with environmental impact assessment and mitigation (the country lacks
environmental management tools at this time). The Bank will help strengthen the Ministry o f
Environment, including the possibility o f creating a new Environment Agency to ensure that
environmental laws and regulations are known and understood by private sector users,
administrators and civil society and adequate incentives and capacity are established to make
enforcement systematic and effective.

30

0

0

0

0

0

0

.

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

e

0

e

0

e

e

0

0

0

0

e

0

e

0

0

e

e

e

0

0

0

0

0

0

M
M

+
m
0

0

0

0

0

I

0

0

I

I

0

0

0

i

e*

B

8

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

M

u

a
0)

E

0

0

0

0

0

0

L
0

.-c
0

U

E

I
*

.-'Ele
a

U

3

3

.-e>

-.-3
a
u

5:
u
5
u

>

KE

r

4

6
L

a

&

E

0

v,

eM
>

0

0

0

i;

-E

0

0

0

0

Annex 2: Debt Sustainability Analysis for Congo

1.
This external debt sustainability analysis (DSA) i s an update o f the last full DSA
prepared for the Congo Republic in December 2008. The DSA update i s based on the stock o f
debt at end-December 2008, lower world oil prices, and new borrowing. It demonstrates that
Congo continues to be at high risk o f debt distress. The main conclusions o f the December 2008
DSA remain valid, as the findings o f the update suggest that (see also chart 1 and table 1 below):
The present value (PV) o f the debt-to-GDP ratio i s likely to breach the indicative
threshold over the medium term (2009-22), then fall sharply and remain below the
threshold thereafter (see Figure below). In comparison, the PV o f debt service-to-exports
ratio for the baseline and historical scenarios are projected to be below the threshold
throughout the period.
The stress tests highlight Congo’s vulnerability to various shocks. Under an export shock,
the PV o f debt-to-exports ratio i s above the threshold from 20 10 and remains there; and
under a combination shock the PV o f debt-to-revenue ratio i s above the threshold until
2020 but drops below it subsequently.

2.
The updated DSA i s based on the April 2009 World Economic Outlook assumptions on
global oil prices, which indicate a rise from US$ 52 per barrel in 2009 to US$ 75 in 2014. The
main macroeconomic projections are an average real GDP growth rate o f 3.5 percent and a rise o f
the current account deficit to about 20 percent o f GDP over the long term.
3.
The DSA update incorporates the recent debt settlement with litigating creditors
(involving a payment o f US$ 800 million and cancellation o f US$ 1.7 billion in arrears in late
2008). This settlement results in a one-time increase in the debt outstanding in 2007, compared
with the December 2008 DSA.
4.
A new full DSA will be conducted in the second semester o f 2009. This full DSA will
also include public debt, which takes into account the significant accumulation o f liquid
government assets.

37

Chart 1: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed Extern71 Debt under the
Baseline Scenario and Stress Tests, 2009-29
2,

a. Debt Accumulation

I 40

b.PV o f debt-to GDP ratio

150 7

35
1

30

25
0

20

-1

10

15

5

2009
2014
2019
AWFW Rate o f Debt Accumulation

2029

1

-

'

-150

2009

c.PV o f debt-to-exports ratio

250

-100

element o f new borrowing (YOri t scale)
Grant-equivalentfinancing (% o f OD#

-Grant
1

2024

-50 -

2014

2019

2024

2029

d.PV o f debt-to-revenue ratio

300

250
200
'OOj
50
O
-50
-100

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

100

I+

50 -

i

\

J

2009
-Baseline

-

2014

-100
-50
O

-

2019

2024

I
2029

_

2009

'

1

2014

M o s t extreme shock 1/

Historical scenario

2019

-

2024
I

2029

Threshold

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ T h e most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2 0 1 9 . In figure b . it corresponds to a Combination shock; i n
c. to a Exports shock; in d . to a Combination shock.

38

" 0 0 0
$000

zE

D

F

.-0

e

Ii

j

I

Annex 3: Performance Assessment of Interim Strategy Note (FY07 - FY09)

1.
The FY04-FY06 Transitional Support Strategy aimed at consolidating peace and
economic recovery. The rapid rise in oil revenues in 2006 and 2007 led to increased spending
and less concern with improving the quality o f public expenditure and transparency. Under these
conditions, it was felt that an interim strategy was more appropriate to give time to the authorities
to build up a consensus on how to address critical governance issues. The Interim Strategy Note
(ISN) for FY08-FY09 was reviewed by the Board on July 31, 2007. I t was designed to scale up
the governance focus and create the foundations for equitable growth. The governance agenda
targeted better oil sector governance and improved public financial management. The equitable
growth agenda Rad a special emphasis on health, underserved communities in urban areas, and
promoting rural sector development to foster economic diversification and address deep poverty
issues.
2.
The ISN suggested three strategic entry points: the HIPC process with triggers for
Completion Point covering key governance issues, the PRSP process to build up a consensus on
economic policies, and the strengthening o f key human and poverty alleviation programs in urban
and rural areas. The expected two main outcomes were adherence to good governance principles
and improved emphasis on poverty reduction.

3.
After fiscal slippages and delays in structural reform precluded completion o f an
earlier Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) approved by the IMF, the
Government managed to reengage with the 1M.F in 2008. The Government successfully
completed a Staff Monitored Program that covered the period January to June 2008, and thereby a
track record that led to resuming discussions on a PRGF arrangement. On December 8, 2008, the
IMF approved a new three-year arrangement under the PRGF.

4.

I n 2008 the Government made progress on key governance and public finance
management reforms. I t adopted and began implementing a Public Financial Management
action plan, including a draft plan for managing public investments. Congo became a candidate to
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) in February 2008 and initiated work on its
first report. In the oil sector, the authorities adopted and began to apply a reform program for the
state-owned refinery (CORAF) and prepared an initial draft of actions to bring the
commercialization o f Congolese oil up to international standards. They continued to certify oil
receipts on a quarterly basis to ensure transparency and accountability. These steps showed
renewed government commitment to reform, but more time i s required for meeting the ambitious
outcomes as set forth in the ISN.

5.
During the I S N implementation period, Bank assistance focused on strengthening
the dialogue on growth and public finance management and on intensifying supervision o f
the portfolio. In June 2008, the Bank and the Government held a high-level seminar to discuss
growth and economic diversification issues. This led to the initiation o f analytical work on spatial
infrastructure development to strengthen the corridor approach, and on constraints and
opportunities to private sector development. A public expenditure review was launched in a
highly participative manner. I t should be completed by November 2009.

6.
The portfolio includes 5 projects: the Transparency and Governance Capacity Building
project approved in 2002, for which a supplemental credit was approved in May 2007, the
HIV/AIDS project approved in 2004, for which a supplemental credit i s under preparation, the
Basic Education project approved in 2004, for which a supplemental credit i s also under

40

preparation, the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads Rehabilitation project approved in
2007 and the Avian Flu project approved in 2008. The credit for the Emergency Recovery and
Community Support project was closed o n December 31, 2008, and the grant for the
Demobilization and Reintegration o f Former Combatants was closed o n February 28,2009.

All projects are rated as satisfactory or moderately satisfactory for development
7.
objectives. The recently approved projects in agriculture and health have experienced long
effectiveness delays (10 months after Board approval for the former and 8 months f o r the latter).
About h a l f o f the portfolio is at risk, which i s largely a reflection o f the country’s high risk, postconflict environment, with weak institutions. A Country Portfolio Performance Review held in
June 2008 was most helpful in focusing senior government officials’ attention o n common issues
and difficulties encountered in project implementation.

8.
The outcome indicators in the I S N were not realistic in view o f the short period
covered by the ISN. Most o f them are unlikely to be achieved by the end o f June 2009. In the
governance area, it takes time to change deeply entrenched habits (see b o x below). Progress i s
being made, but all activities under the action plan supported by the ongoing Transparency and
Governance project are delayed. In the social sectors area, the outcome indicators, as selected in
the ISN, were not consistent with the result frameworks for the ongoing projects. In the rural
growth area, implementation o f the Bank-supported project was delayed. In any event, it would
have been impossible for the project t o deliver results as expected within the I S N timeframe.
Box: I S N Outcomes
Transparency and public finance management:
Outcome 1: SNPC receives unqualified financial audits by end 2009. Not achieved: audits are s t i l l
qualified, but accounting has improved.
Outcome 2 : National E IT I Committee i s constituted and i t s reports reflect Congo’s increased
adherence to good governance and transparency in managing oil revenues. Partially achieved: the EITI
committee has been established but i s not f i l l y operational; a first report i s under preparation.
Outcomes 3 and 4: Anti-corruption observatory certifies satisfactory progress in (i)improving oil
marketing; and (ii)implementing anti-corruption action plan. Partially achieved: the anti-corruption
observatory has been established, but i s not f i l l y operational. The Anti-Corruption action plan i s under
implementation.
Outcome 5: Government adopts a Public Finance Management Action Plan. Achieved
Outcome 6: A l l contract award information related to public investment i s published. Not achieved.
Outcome 7: Congo’s PEFA ratings improve. N o assessment was made.
Basic social services
Outcome 8: Increase number o f voluntary AIDS counseling and testing centers. Good progress was
made under the HIV/AIDS project, but the ISN outcome indicator i s not part o f the project’s results
framework.
Outcome 9 : Increase effectiveness o f education services, so as to increase completion rate to 75% in
primary, 40% in lower secondary and 15% in upper secondary. Not achieved: the completion rate in
primary education increased from 50 percent to 64 percent according to UN data (73 percent according
to government data). The project being focused on basic education, the indicators for the other parts o f
the education system were not relevant.
Rural growth
Outcome 10: Improve transport infrastructure in rural areas: not achieved
Outcome 11: Improve business environment for rural producers: not achieved
0
Outcome 12: Increase household income in targeted provinces by 15%: not achieved.

41

9.
ISN implementation provides important lessons for the preparation of the CPS.
These lessons focus in particular on how to engage most effectively in a difficult governance
environment, and how to make a difference in spite of a limited IDA financing envelope:
0

Realistic expectations. Expectations of impact of Bank support should be commensurate
with the limited amount of assistance provided. Significant time i s required for reaching a
consensus on sensitive reforms after decades of economic mismanagement and internal
conflicts, and the weak capacity in government administration.

0

Strategic use o f Bank resources: IDA’s envelope of about US$20 million per year pales
in comparison to Government’s investment budget of about US$I billion per year. In
order to have a real impact on growth, poverty, and social outcomes, Bank support will
need to be used in a more strategic manner whereby lending and non-lending activities
will particularly have to focus on spurring efficiency in, and more strategic choice of,
largely Government financed programs. Similarly, IDA’s limited funds will have to be
leveraged with significant co-financing from the Government. Finally, in light o f IDA’S
limited administrative budget for activities in Congo, some of the Bank’s support could
be provided (at least partially) in the form offee-bused sewices for selected activities.

0

Tackle governance from different angles: The Bank should complement its direct support
to governance reforms with a more substantive engagement on helping accelerate growth,
which i s a critical concern of the Government. As the positive response o f the
Government to the high-level seminar on growth and the policy dialogue on transport
corridors have shown, this i s important to demonstrate to the authorities the value-added
of engaging with the Bank. A second and related lesson was that it would be more
effective to treat governance as a cross-cutting issue. Enhancing transparency and
governance standards should not be treated in isolation, but as critical factors in
improving effectiveness in service delivery or infrastructure upgrading. Finally, the ISN
experience showed that there i s a need to engage not only with the Government, but also
with the demand-side of governance to bring about lasting change in these areas. This i s
particularly true in Congo’s post-conflict context, where formal and informal institutions
in- and outside o f government are still weak in capacity. The positive effect of Bank
support to publication of oil revenue data or the creation o f an Anti-corruption
Observatory are a case in point.

42

Annex 4: Description of Country Assistance Strategies for Congo's Principal Partners
(For Partners Whose Information Was Available)

1.
Agence Francaise de Developuement (AFD). In March 2007, Congo and AFD signed a
Partnership Framework Agreement. The agreement, which covers the period 2008 - 2012, was
revised in M a y 2008. AFD's support i s focused on three sectors, infrastructure, environment
protection and educatiodtraining. In the first area, AFD i s involved in (i)improving drainage
services in Brazzaville, (ii)enhancing the capacity o f the port o f Pointe-Noire to play an
increasing role as a regional port, (iii)
supporting maintenance o f the river navigation system, and
(iv) helping Government prepare and better manage infrastructure projects. In the second area,
AFD i s focused on helping Congo develop i t s forestry resources in a sustainable way within the
broader regional framework. In the third area, AFD supports implementation o f a new strategy for
technical education and vocational training in close association with the private sector. Additional
support i s provided to the health sector through a Sector-Wide Approach. Cross sectoral issues
being addressed in the framework agreement include governance (public investment program,
social security, and judiciary), higher education reform, and development o f civil society
organizations. The Bank will work closely with AFD on ensuring that the efficiency o f customs
services in the port o f Pointe-Noire i s enhanced. I t will also work with AFD on the forestry sector
and governance issues.
2.
African Development Bank (AfDB). In May 2008, the AfDB adopted a country strategy
paper for 2008-12, which aims at contributing to poverty reduction and attainment o f the
Millennium Development Goals through two key intervention areas: (i) infrastructure
development to support growth and improve the living environment (water, sanitation and
electricity); and (ii)promotion o f macroeconomic stability and growth. Under the proposed
Urban Development and Water Supply Project to be funded by the Bank will focus on urban
services and water supply while the AfDB will focus on financing sanitation. Under the second
pillar, AfDB envisages an institutional support to strengthen the resource allocation system and
the business climate. The proposed Economic Diversification Support Project will be closely
coordinated with AfDB. AfDB finances feasibility studies for key regional integration
infrastructure and facilities, including the proposed Brazzaville-Kinshasa bridge, a critical road
link between Congo, Gabon and Cameroon, and investment for enhancing the efficiency o f the
Central African Power Pool. The AfDB also intends to support statistical capacity development
through the International Comparison Program work; this would support the implementation o f
the national statistical development strategy rather than its preparation.

3.
European Union (EU). In January 2008, the Government and the EU signed a new
program o f assistance for 2008-2013 with two envelopes, one o f EUR 85 million for the regular
program and the other o f EUR 3.9 million for emergency situations. The program will support
two broad objectives, regional integration and governance. Under the first objective the focus i s
on transport infrastructure and economic diversification. Under the second objective, the focus i s
on public finance management (internal and external controls) and economic governance
(including in the forestry sector, the business climate and support to medium- and small-scale
enterprises). In addition, support will be provided to the health sector and to furthering the rule o f
law. The Bank intends to work closely with the EU on reforming the management o f the CFCO,
the main item under the transport infrastructure component o f the program, enhancing the
efficiency of the river port in Brazzaville, improving public finance management and the three
elements o f the economic governance agenda.

43

Partnership within the World Bank Group

4.
IFC. Currently, IFC does not have an active project in the country, but continues to
pursue prospects for involvement in projects along the following strategic priorities: (i)
proactively support the improvement o f the country’s business environment so as to foster more
foreign investment and facilitate the growth o f the MSME sector; (ii)develop and support MSME
projects that will capitalize on the country’s vibrant oil sector and derive positive externalities
from this activity by providing goods and services to this sector; and (iii)facilitate access to
finance for these local MSMEs by entering into partnerships with banks and other financial
institutions, and providing capacity-building to both the banks as well as the MSMEs. As
indicated earlier, the Bank shall work very closely with IFC, especially on supporting the MSME
sector, with the Bank focusing on the improving the business environment to complement IFC’s
activities, especially those related to access to credit. The two institutions will also work very
closely on the agribusiness sector.
5.
MIGA. Congo has been a MIGA member since 1991 and contributed to MIGA’s General
Capital Increase in March 2003. MIGA currently has no exposure in the Republic o f Congo, and
there i s no active application. In the course o f implementing the activities proposed under this
CPS, the Bank will work very closely with MIGA, especially with respect to attracting foreign
investors in the infrastructure, mining, and agro-business sectors. MIGA may be invited to
provide guarantees to Public-Private Partnerships.
6.
FIAS and PPIAF. The Foreign Investment Advisory Service and the Public-Private
Infrastructure Advisory Facility are expected to work closely with the Africa Region in the areas
o f investment climate reform and strategic work on infrastructure reform and development.

44

Annex 5: Country at a Glance
Republic of Congo
AS o i 91241oa

Congo, Rep. a t a glance
Key Development Indicators

9116/08

Congo,
Rep

SubSaharan
Africa

Lower
middle
income

38
342
21
61

800
24,242
2.4
36

3,437
35,510
1.0
42

58
1,540
2,750

782
952
1,870

6,485
1,887
4,544

-1 6
-3 8

8.2
3.7

9.7
8.6

55
79
12

50
72
50
94
27

69
41
25

91
79
113
102

89
50
99
88

93
85
112
109

71
20

58
31

88
54

Age dlrtrlbutlon, 2007

(2007)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNi per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

Female

7579
8084
4YO

x-34
1519
0-4

GDP growth (Oh)
GDP per capita growth (%)

20

0

10

m

10

wont

(most recent esllmafa, 200&2007)
Poverty haadmunt ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headmunt ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, 56)
Life expectancyat birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition ( % of children under5)
Adult literacy. male (Oh of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (Oh of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (Oh of age group)
Gross primary enrollment. female (W of age group)
Access to an improved water sourca (%of population)
Access to Improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

Under.6 mortality rate (per 1,000)
m1

150

1m
M
0

1885

1-

OConQo,Rep.

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and omdai aid
Top 3 donors (in 2006):
France
European Commission
Italy

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1980

1990

2000

2007

91

217

33

254

49
7
0

169
9
16

10
2
2

123
58
24

59
51

9.3
90

1.5
10

4.3
69

73
20 1

.7.4
-1.0

0.4
47.0

7.0
-7.9

211 3

272.3
92

712.0
100

479.3
274

m

xxx1

OSubSsharan Africa

'
Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual O
h change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terns of trade index (2000 = 100)

+GDP

198690

-GDP

1890-2000

per capita

200607

(average annual gmMh %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US%millions)

18
1 706

2.4
2,799

3.2
3,220

3.8
7,846

3.0
3.3

2.8
1.0

Agriculture
lndustly
Manufacturing
Services

11 7
46 8
75
41 7

(% of GDP)
12.9
40.6
8.3
46.5

5.3
72.2
3.5
22.5

5.0
59.6
6.0
35.1

3.4
5.2
6.8
2.2

0.7
1.7
-2.4
-0.7

Householdfinal consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital fonnation

48 8
17 6
35 6

62.4
13.8
15.9

29.1
11.6
22.6

28.7
14.1
27.1

2.3
4.3
-11.6

-2.2
-4.4
10.4

Exports of goods and services
imports of goods and SBN~WS
Gross savings

60 0
60 1

53.7
45.8
6.6

80.3
43.6
30.1

73.0
42.9
35.6

5.1
4.7

3.0
2.0

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2007 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for2006.
Development Economics Development Data Group (DECDG).

45

2.3
4.1

Congo, Rep.
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

(US$ mi//ions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

2,449
596
1,181

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

2007
IGovernance Indicators, 2000 and 2007
5,037
1.564
2,213

10

11

255
7.9

507
6.6

Voice and scmuntability

of law
Regulatory
Rulequality

Current account balance
as a % of GDP
Reserves, induding gold

223

Control of uarrupbon

2,362

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

t#2007
02000

26.6
26.2
18.5

36.7
35.7
16.1

Overall surplus/defidt

1.1

9.7

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

50
45

30

1

1

I'

1

50

75

~

0

Central Government Flnance

1

'

I ! ;

Poiitice stability

25

100

Country'r percenth rank (0-100)
higher vaIu.8 ,m*

b.Werntiog8

I

Soume Kaufmann-Kraav-Mastm World Bank

Technology and Infrastructure
Paved mads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

2000

2007

9.7

5.0

3

14

31
66.0

..

31
65.8
18.0

..

61.498

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

4,865
43
1,757

6,130
I01

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

151.1
1.6

79.3
1.5

Freshwater resourws per capita (w. meters)
Freshwaterwithdrawal (% of internal resources)

166
0

344
0

C02 emissions per capita (mt)

0.75

1.0

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $per kg of oil equivalent)

11.4

10.0

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

265

332

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principalrepayments
Interest payments

65
0
2
1

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

159
0
1

295
8
7

3
1
0

0
0
0

1

0

-

-

Foreign direct investment (net Inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (%of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

Composition of total external debt, 2006

Private, 2.136

JS$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.

2000

2008

-

-

37
106.4
116

2000

2007

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC o m account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MiGA
Gmss exposure
New guarantees

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2007 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. -indicates observaUon is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

46

0.0

9/16/08

Annex 6: Millennium Development Goals

Millennium Development Goals

Congo, Rep.

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate dosest to date shown, +/- 2 years)
Goal 1: h a l v e the rates for extreme p o v e r t y a n d malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio et $1.25 a day(PPP, %of population)
Poverty headcountratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumptionto the poorest qunitile (Oh)
Prevalence of malnutrition(% of children under 5)

I990

1995

2000

2007

11.8

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primaryschool enmliment (net, %)
Primarycompietlonrate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 1524)

82
59
46

45

55
34

55
73
43
97

94

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in educatlon and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagriculturalsector (% of nonagriculturalemployment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national pariiament (%)

85
26
14

84

90

2

12

7

G o a l 4: reduce under-5 mortality byhvo-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rata (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportionof one-year olds immunized.%)

103
67
75

110
70
38

117
74
34

126
79
66

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortallty by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

740
86
44

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HiV/AiDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 1549)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improvedwater source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected ereas (% of total land area)
C02 emissions (metric tons per capite)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subsuibers (per 100 people)
lntemet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

IEducaUon indicators (K)

+Primsry

-D-

I

Weasles immunization (X of I-year olds)

net enmllnwnt ratio

Ratio of gids to boy6 in primary d

OCongo. Rep.

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those speafied.

USubSahsrsn Afric~

.. indicates data are not available.

Development Emnomiu, Development Data Group (DECDG).

47

161

4.4
349
86

3.5
403
51

70
20
66.0

241
69

0.5
8.0

0.6
10.9

0.7
11.4

71
20
65.8
18.0
1.0
10.0

0.7
0.0
0.0

0.8
0.0
0.0

0.7
2.2
0.0
0.3

0.4
35.4
1.9
0.5

66.5

ICT indicators (per 1,000 people)

I I

0 Fixed + mbile subscribers
~

u60r6

9116/08

Annex 7: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Republic o f Congo
As Of Date 0411712009

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
.
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
Country Portfolio Performance Review during the year
(yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (UWproject)

2006

2007

2008

2009

6
2.8
16.7
19.1
50.0
43.9
26.1

5
3.1
20.0
33.6
40.0
51.6
32.8

6
3.4
33.3
25.9
50.0
51.2
21.0

5
3.9
0.0
0.0
40.0
34.7
17.9

Since
FY80

Last
FiveFYs
19
3
435.7
69.5
77.8
100.0
94.1
100.0

Memorandum Item
Proj. Eval. by OED by Number
Proj. Eval. by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress
(W.
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

48

Annex 8: IBRDADA Program Summary
Republic o f Congo
As Of Date 04/17/2009

Proposed IBRDADA Base-Case Lending Program
year

Project ID

us'(M)

2009
CG - HIV/AIDS & Health Additional Fin (FY09)
2009
CG - Basic Education Support Add Fin (FY09)
2010
CG Economic Diversification Support Project
2010
CG - Urban & Water Development S I L
20 11 Regional Telecommunications Project
Overall Result
*This includes $10 million from Regional Funding

-

-

49

5.0
15.0
10.0
22.5
15.0*
67.5

Strategic
Rewards (H/WL)

Implementation
Risks (HIWL)

H
H
H
H
H

M
M
M
M

M

Annex 9: Doing Business Indicators
Republic of Congo

Paying Taxes

179

178

-1

Trading Across Borders

176

174

-2

Enforcing Contracts

155

156

+1

Closing a Business

117

113

-4

Note: Doing Business 2008 rankings have been recalculated to reflect changes to the
methodology and the addition o f three new countries.

50

MAP SECTION

IBRD 33390
14°E

18°E

16°E

CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC

4°N

CONGO

4°N

CAMEROON
Ib

To
Batouri

ga

Mo

To
Ebolowa

2°N

en

tab

a

LIKOUALA

Ngoko

Souanké

Bétou

Sembé

2°N

Impfondo

Ouésso
Epéna

Co

SANGHA
ua

la

oué

gi
Lik

Etoumbi

Uban

GABON
0°

ko

ng

WESTERN
CUVETTE

o

Li

a

Mambili

Le

Sangh

C o n g o
To
Lambaréné

ng

ou

0°

ala

CUVETTE

To
Booué

Owando

Kouyou

im

Mossaka

P L AT E A U X
Co

Gamboma
i
én

N

k

2°S

ng

o

Okoyo

Lake
Tumba

a

Al

To
Lambaréné

Liranga

B a s i n

Ewo

Mbinda
Loué
s

é

s

NIARI

Ngo

Djambala

Zanaga

Mossendjo

Batéké

lou

Koui

Dolisie

D jo

Sibiti

BOUENZA

POOL
20

40

60

80

100 Miles
4°S

BRAZZAVILLE

18°E

To
Kikwit

Pointe-Noire

This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

i

Kinkala

Kayes

AT L AN T IC
OC E AN

Lake
Mai-Ndombe

0 20 40 60 80 100 Kilometers

0

Madingou

2°S

Kwa

Ngabé

ari

Nkola

LÉKOUMOU
Ni

4°S

KOUILOU

Fim

ué

Plateau
Makabana

DEMO CRAT IC
REPUBLIC
O F CO NGO

CO N GO
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

CABINDA
(ANGOLA)

To
Matadi

REGION CAPITALS
To
Lusanga

NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

To
M'banza Congo

6°S

RAILROADS

ANGOLA
12°E

14°E

MAIN ROADS

REGION BOUNDARIES
16°E

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
SEPTEMBER 2004

