Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank Group

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 50223 -TUN

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF TUNISIA

FOR THE PERIOD FY10-13

Public Disclosure Authorized

November 23,2009

Maghreb Country Management Unit
Middle East and North Africa Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official duties,
Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

The Date o f the Last Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report was September 21,2007

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS
Unit o f Currency = Tunisian Dinar (TD)
IUS$= 1.28 TD (November 2009)

FISCAL YEAR

January 1 - December 3 1

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA
AFD
AfDB
AIDS
ALMP
APL
AWI
CAS
CASCR
CASPR
CFAA
CER
CDM
CPF
CPIA
CPS
CPSCL
CSM

Analytical and Advisory Activity
French Development Agency
African Development Bank
Acquired Immune-Deficiency Syndrome
Active Labor Market Program
Adaptable Program Loan
Arab World Initiative
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Certificate o f Emission Reduction
Clean Development Mechanism
Carbon Partnership Facility
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Partnership Strategy
Caisse de Pr&t et de Soutien a m CollectivitPs Locales
Commission SupPrieure des MarchPsslHigher Tender Board
cso
Civil Society Organization
Concentrated Solar Power
CSP
Clean Technology Fund
CTF
DPL
Development Policy Loan
DPR
Development Policy Review
ECAL
Economic Competitiveness Adjustment Loan
ESMAP Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
Economic and Sector Work
ESW
European Training Foundation
ETF
European Union
EU
Foreign Direct Investment
FDI
Financial Sector Assessment Program
FSAP
Fiscal Year
FY
Governance and Anti-Corruption
GAC
Gross Domestic Product
GDP
Global Environment Facility
GEF

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HIV
IBRD
ICL
ICT
IDF
IEG
IEQ
IFC
ILA
IMF
IOM
JSDF
MDCI
MDG
MENA
MOU
MTEF
NDP
PEFA
PESW
PHRD
PIC
PPI
QA
QAG
R&D
ROSC
SME
SWAP
TA
UMA
VAT
WB
WBI
WTO

Human Immune-DeficiencyVirus
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Integration and Competitiveness Loan
Information and Communication Technology
Institutional Development Fund
Independent Evaluation Group
Institut d’Economie Quantitative
International Finance Corporation
Investment Climate Assessment
International Monetary Fund
InternationalOrganization of Migration
Japanese Social Development Fund
Ministry of Development and International Cooperation
Millennium Development Goals
Middle East and North Africa
Memorandum o f Understanding
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
National Development Plan
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Programmatic Economic and Sector Work
Policy and Human Resource Department
Public Information Center
Private Participation in Infrastructure
Quality Assurance
Quality Assurance Group
Research and Development
Reports on the Observance o f Standards and Codes
Small and Medium Enterprise
Sector Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
Union for Arab Maghreb
Value Added Tax
World Bank
World Bank Institute
World Trade Organization

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

MANAGERS AND STAFF RESPONSIBLEFOR THIS CPS

I

Vice President
Country Director
Task Manager

I Shamshad Akhtar

I Mats Karlsson
I

Eavan O’Halloran

I

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This Country Partnership Strategy was prepared under the guidance o f Mats Karlsson, Country
Director, by a team led by Eavan O’Halloran. Core team members o f the report include Ndiame Diop,
Sophie Muller, Kathleen So Ting Fong, Donia Jemail, Narjes Jerbi, Micheline Faucompre and Luis
Alvaro Sanchez. In addition, the following colleagues contributed: Najy Benhassine, Silvia ParienteDavid, Alexandra Ortiz, Rebekka Grun, Adriana Jaramillo, Anwar Soulami, Raffaello Cervigni, Nabil
Chaherli, Julian Lampietti, Daniela Marotta, Kanta Kumari Rigaud, Heba Elgazzaar, Lhassan Abnaou,
Jean Michel Marchat, Chantal Reliquet, Michel Bellier, Julia Bucknall, Lucie Tran, Mohammed
Benouahi, Dahlia Lotayef, Simon Bell, Jonathan Walters, Yolanda Tayler, Salim Benouniche, Gloria L a
Cava, Natalia Agapitova, Alexander Kremer, Catherine Laurent, Roberto Rocha, Xavier Chauvot de
Laila Moudden, and Leila Chelaifa.
Beauchene, Jaafar Sadok Friaa, Tony Bigio, Philippe ROOS,
For the IFC, Abdelkader Allaoua, Yasser Charafi, and Rapti Goonesekere were the core
contributors to the parts of the CPS dealing with the IFC program.
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the collaboration with the Tunisian government in the
preparation of this CPS. In particular, the Bank would like to thank the excellent collaboration with
Minister Mohammed Nouri Jouini, Minister o f Development and International Cooperation (MDCI), Mr.
Abdelhamid Triki, Secretary o f State, MDCI, and Mr. Kame1 Ben Rejeb, Director General, MDCI. The
document benefited from extensive and thoughtful discussions with government representatives and was
also enriched by contributions from other partners in Tunisia - development partners, members o f civil
society organizations, parliamentarians, academics and representatives of the private sector.

TABLEOF CONTENTS
Page
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1

I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

1

A.
B.

Introduction
Tunisia’s Development Achievements

11.

RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

5

A.
B.

Global Economic Climate
Medium Term Prospects and Debt Sustainability

5
7

111.

TUNISIA’S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

9

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Boost Growth and Transform Tunisia into a Knowledge Economy
Increase Employment and Address the Problem of Employability
Improve the Quality o f Service Delivery
Manage the Impacts o f Climate Change
Exploit the Benefits o f Regional Integration

9
12
13
15
16

IV.

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN

17

V.

WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP

18

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.

Nature o f the Partnership
Implementationof the CAS and Lessons Learnt
CPS Guiding Principles
Results
CPS Program
Financing
AAA

18
19
21
24
25
36
38

VI.

R I S K S AND IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES

38

APPENDICES:

Appendix 1: CPS Results Matrix
Appendix 2: CAS Completion Report
Appendix 3: Regional Integration Activities
Appendix 4: Tunisia CPS and Link to Bank-wide and MENA Region Priorities
Appendix 5: MENA Region Concentrated Solar Power Scale-up
Appendix 6: Donor Programs in Tunisia
Appendix 7: CPS Consultations Report and Communication Outreach
Appendix 8: World Bank Export Promotion in Tunisia
Appendix 9: SME Finance in Tunisia
Appendix 10: World Bank Managed Trust Funds in Tunisia

40
49
83
89
91
93
97
104
108
114

CAS TABLES
Annex A 1 : Tunisia at a Glance
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3 : Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program FY 10- 13
Annex B3: IFC Investment Operations Program
Annex B4: Summary o f Non-Lending Services
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA/Grants)
Annex B8: Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio

BOXES:
Box 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:
Box 4:
Box 5:
Box 6:
Box 7:

Key Social Indicators
Tunisia’s Strong Track Record in Water and Energy Management
Government’s Policy Response to the Global Economic Crisis
Areas o f Future Reform
Five Axes o f the National Development Plan
Good Donor Coordination
CPS Consultations and Communication Plan

FIGURES:
Figure 1 :
Figure 2:
Figure 3:
Figure 4:
Figure 5:
Figure 6:
Figure 7:
Figure 8:

Tunisia and Emerging Countries’ Growth Performance
The Dramatic Shift in the Composition o f Exports
Trend in Fiscal Deficits
Public Debts and Interest Payments
Current Account Deficit and Gross Official Reserves
GDP per Capita, Tunisia and Comparator Countries
Unemployment by Age Group
Unemployment by Schooling Level

TABLES:
Table 1: Investment Rates
Table 2: CPS Lending Program and Other Operations
Table 3: AAA Program

115
118
119
120
121
123
125
126
127

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.
Since independence, Tunisia has performed better than most countries in the region,
successfully implementing a far-reaching and ambitious development strategy with strong results.
This strategy i s characterized by an early commitment to structural reforms, steady investments in human
capital and infrastructure, pro-active macroeconomic management and a focus on global trade integration
with the accompanying needed market reforms. This development model has served Tunisia well as it
has sustained an average 5 percent growth rate over the past 20 years, with a corresponding increase in
the welfare of its population underscored by poverty levels that are the lowest in the region and strong
education and health indicators.
2.

Despite the excellent growth track record, Tunisia continues to suffer high rates of
unemployment particularly among the better educated. Tunisia recognizes that it must do more in
order to grow faster and become even more competitive and, most importantly, create jobs for its young,
well-educated population. This calls for an acceleration o f the economy’s structural transformation
towards a higher value-added, knowledge-intensive one. The Government i s finalizing the update o f the
1 lth
National Development Plan (NDP) which has the main goal to transform the economy to bring about
sustained job creation. At the same time, the current global economic crisis, especially the EU recession,
i s impacting negatively on Tunisia with a rapid decline in exports in late 2008 and the first half o f 2009.
The Government has shown skill in addressing the challenge and responded with mitigating measures,
drawing on experience o f managing exogenous shocks. There are promising signs that the worst o f the
impact may be over and the overall macro-economy remains solid with a comfortable level o f reserves.

3,
I n this overall context, the strengthening o f the partnership between Tunisia and the World
Bank Group through this CPS comes at an opportune time. Tunisia considers that the Bank Group i s
a key strategic partner which plays an important role in its development. The Government has often
expressed its appreciation for the Bank’s knowledge services and considers the Bank’s dialogue and
analysis as important inputs to the NDP and sectoral strategies. The Bank has notably supported the
Government on reforms and investments targeted at maintaining the country’s development
achievements, as well as providing support to better target further reforms. Thanks to i t s strong
development performance and continuous reforms, Tunisia achieved Investment Grade status and was
able to access financing on the global market for i t s development strategy, such as it did in 2007 with a
successful bond offering. In FY09, in the context of the global economic crisis, Tunisia turned to the
Bank for increased financing and the Bank responded by delivering record lending o f $335.6 million.
4.
The Government considers its partnership with the Bank as a strategic and long-term one
where the Bank’s role of knowledge partner in accompanying the country on i t s reform path i s
highly valued. Tunisia plans to carry out i t s NDP in the overall context o f continued pragmatic
economic management and pro-active public debt management. I t intends to engage external financing
when necessary but expects this to remain modest as the economy rebounds and the Government’s
mobilization o f i t s own internal financing further strengthens. I t will continue to engage the World Bank
Group in a broad range o f sectors given its appreciation for the knowledge role o f the Bank but will
maintain its IBRD debt at moderate levels. In a context of reduced international commercial financing,
IFC expects to play an active role in supporting the Government’s ongoing PPP program in infrastructure
(in particular in the power, water and transport sectors), by providing debt and equity financing to
selected projects. Tunisia views IBRD and IFC financing as contributing to long-term development
purposes to accompany the transition to a higher value-added and more knowledge-intensive economy.

5.
Tunisia has shown itself to be a consistent and successful development partner and this CPS
builds on its track record as a well-performing IBRD client. The sustained improvement o f human
development indicators and recognized leadership in critical areas such as water resource management

i

and energy efficiency underscore the good development performance. Tunisia i s considered a leader in
the region as regards to gender issues and strengthening women’s role in society. Furthermore, it scores
highly on comparative governance rankings and development indexes: it has consistently scored above its
income category and the MENA average on most dimensions, although there remains room for progress
in areas such as voice and accountability. The CAS Completion Report highlights that the achievements
recorded in the previous CAS were positive, underscored by the Government’s commitment to prudent
macro-economic management, phased structural reforms and steady investments in priority sectors.

6.
Alignment with the NDP, flexibility in approach and selectivity in the areas of engagement
are the core principles o f the CPS. Tunisia’s NDP provides strategic priorities which guide the CPS
and allow for greater alignment. I t confirms that employment generation remains the highest priority o f
the Government. The rolling nature o f the NDP obliges the Bank Group’s program to be flexible,
responding to challenges and demands as they present themselves. The NDP priorities have guided the
selectivity on where the Bank i s engaged and reflect the understanding o f where the client sees the valueadded of the Bank. The Government and the Bank have agreed on three CPS strategic pillars; (i)
employment, growth and competitiveness; (ii) sustainable development and climate change; and (iii)
improving the quality o f service delivery. Within these pillars, the CPS outlines a partnership program
which i s grouped into results areas that facilitate focusing activities and tracking impact. As the program
i s implemented, the Bank and Government will jointly assess progress and update results and indicators
to reflect the increased specificity of the program and to ensure continued alignment.
7.
The CPS outlines a lending program up to $280 million for FYlO and an indicative lending
program for FY11-13. The lending requests from Government all build on the Bank’s engagement to
date either through on-going operations or particularly through the programmatic AAA support to
employment, environment, SMEs, energy and social sectors. Increased IFC financing i s also expected
although investments would remain contingent on progress in key ongoing infrastructure projects, the
extent o f investment appetite in the country, and the financing terms in the local Tunisian debt markets.
The Bank and IFC also plan to work together on public-private partnership opportunities as requested.
The CPS outlines how the Bank’s regional integration initiatives and its management o f global funds can
benefit Tunisia, and discusses Tunisia’s interface with the Arab World Initiative.

8.
The CPS discusses the risks faced by Tunisia and the Bank Group’s program and describes
the measures for mitigating these risks. The most immediate risk of the global economic crisis i s
mitigated by Tunisia’s pro-active macro-economic track record, its proven capacity to respond and
prudent debt management that gives the authorities room to conduct fiscal policy and engage financing.
There are risks related to the pace o f reform on ensuring greater competition in the private sector
environment to move to a knowledge-based economy. To respond, the flexible CPS design ensures that
the program will move with the speed o f the Government in its implementation o f reforms under the
NDP. In addition, the approach to AAA will allow the Bank to assist the Government in addressing
challenges and thus reducing risks. Finally, implementation risks to the Bank’s program are posed by
slow procurement which causes significant delays in the execution o f Bank projects. The Government
and the Bank have been working in a concerted way to address the procurement issues in the portfolio and
the need for greater progress in procurement has been given more urgency recently by the Government as
it continues to manage the impacts o f the crisis and accelerates NDP implementation.
9.
In’ conclusion, the CPS sets out the enhanced strategic engagement of the World Bank
Group in Tunisia as the country continues to integrate globally and carries out an ambitious
transition to a knowledge-based economy. This partnership builds on the excellent opportunity offered
to the Bank to provide support not only through IBRD financing but, perhaps more importantly, through
strong knowledge products at country and regional level.

..

11

I.
A.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

Introduction

1.
Tunisia’s 1lthNational Development Plan (NDP, 2007-2011) charts an ambitious course to
generate sufficient employment through transforming its economy to a higher value-added,
knowledge-intensive one that will allow it to consolidate and improve its strong progress to date.
The NDP builds on a prolonged period since the 1960s o f very solid economic and social development
often in the face of unprecedented challenges and exogenous shocks. However, high unemployment
threatens the social achievements to date and the impact o f the global crisis puts extra pressure on Tunisia
to do better in terms o f growth. Tunisia recognizes that it needs to carry out a transformation to a higher
value-added, knowledge-based economy through increasing further the integration of its economy,
bringing about even faster improvements in productivity growth and innovation, and carrying out deeper
structural reforms in order to generate employment, particularly for its well-educated population.

2.
Tunisia is calling on the World Bank to play a key role in i t s development plan and
strengthen its partnership through its knowledge engagement and financing. The Bank has
remained a valued partner during important periods in Tunisia’s development, most often for its
knowledge role, although IBRD financing has proven important and timely. The Bank has a broad
program already in Tunisia and a productive dialogue with the Government and the country’s
development partners. This invitation for the World Bank to step up its engagement reflects a
strengthening o f the partnership with Tunisia and provides an excellent opportunity for the Bank to
provide enhanced support to a well performing, middle-income country.

B.

Tunisia’s Development Achievements

3.
Tunisia has made remarkable progress on equitable growth, fighting poverty and achieving
good social indicators. It has sustained an average 5 percent growth rate over the past 20 years with a
steady increase in per capita income that compares favorably to other emerging countries’ growth
performance (see figure l),and a corresponding increase in the welfare of i t s population that i s
underscored by a poverty level o f 3.8% (2005) that i s amongst the lowest in the region. The steady
increase in per capita income has been the main engine for poverty reduction. In addition to rising
incomes, public investment in infrastructure (roads, transport and communications) and human capital,
including housing programs, also played an important role in reducing poverty (about 60 percent of
Tunisia’s budget i s allocated to the social sectors). Rural roads have been particularly important in
helping the rural poor connect to urban markets and services. Food subsidies, which have been targeted
to the poor, albeit not optimally, have also helped the urban poor.
Tunisia is on track to reach the MDGs (Box 1). As regards education, in 2007/08, 97.4% o f
4.
both male and female 6 to 11 year olds were enrolled in school. Primary completion rates are high for
girls at 91% and have been increasing for boys reaching 87% in 2007/08. If the pattern o f lower
repetition rates in primary continues, all students regardless o f gender should complete primary school by
2015. Health status i s generally better than that found in most other MENA countries, as life expectancy
i s approximately 74 years and the infant mortality rate i s nearly the lowest in the region. Rapid progress
has been made on reducing infant and maternal mortality rates and malnutrition over the past two
decades, and HIV/AIDS prevalence remains relatively low. Coverage o f health care benefits i s provided
through two national social assistance schemes, which together cover approximately 85 percent of the
population. Access to basic socio-economic services (water, electricity, sanitation) i s near universal and

there i s a broad social protection system in place. Tunisia i s considered a leader as regards gender issues
and strengthening women's role in society. With 66% o f the population living in cities or towns, Tunisia
i s one o f the most urbanized countries in MENA.
Figure 1 - Tunisia and emerging countries' growth performance (Growth average for 2000-2007)
10
9
8
7

S

.-C

6

2 5
8

4

3
2

1
0

Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators

Life expectancy at birth (all/women)

I 70172 I 73/75 I 74/76 I

Poverty: Official poverty numbers show a decline in poverty between 2000 and 2005 from 4.2% to 3.8%. Data
from the latest household survey conducted in 2005 show a 37.6% increase in average per capita income between
2000 and 2005. The gap between Grand Tunis, the richest region, and the northwest and center west, the least
affluent regions, has narrowed. However, Tunisia's official poverty line only captures the essential needs of
physical survival. Using a higher poverty line, the World Bank global poverty project finds an incidence o f poverty
o f 7% for 2005, still the lowest in the MENA region. Policy makers are trying to face the challenge to look beyond
absolute deprivation as captured by poverty incidence to issues o f vulnerability and exposure to risk.

5.
Increasing integration into the global economy has driven economic growth. The first wave
o f integration reforms in the early 1970s created an off-shore regime that has attracted FDI and led to the
creation o f new industries for export (including textiles and clothing). The composition of exports in 2006
shows a strong evolution compared to 1980 when fuels accounted for 50 percent o f all exports (see Figure

2

2). The second wave o f trade liberalization in the 1990s helped penetrate new markets in manufacturing
(for example, mechanical and electrical engineering sector) and led to remarkable improvements in total
factor productivity'. These evolutions occurred, however, mostly in an offshore sector, operating with a
liberal investment climate. The domestic on-shore economy i s less dynamic, with lower levels o f growth
and a domestic private investment rate which continues to remain sluggish (around 14-15% in recent
years, see table 1).
Figure 2. The dramatic shift in the composition o f exports

+Fuel

s

20

Table 1: Investment Rates
~~

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008*

Gross investment ratio

25.2

23.4

22.8

22.3

23.5

24.0

24.9

Gross private investment

14.2

13.6

13.0

12.7

13.3

14.4

15.4

Foreign direct investment
National private
investment

3.3

2.5

2.4

2.5

3.8

4.4

6.3

10.2

11.1

10.6

10.2

2.3

10.0

9.1

Note Figures for F D 1 in 2006 do not include the $2 35 billion for the partial privatization of Tunisia Telecom

6.
Good and effective macroeconomic management, especially since 1996, has underpinned the
strong growth performance and helped moderate the impact of exogenous shocks on economic
growth. A continued pro-active fiscal policy has kept fiscal deficits below 3% (Figure 3) and prudent
debt management has brought down the public debt ratio to 47.5% o f GDP in 2008 (Figure 4), which has

'

"Tunisia's Global Integration: A Second Generation o f Reforms to Boost Growth and Employment", A World Bank Country
Study, 2008

3

contributed to Tunisia’s stable investment credit rating (BBBBaa2). Tunisia also has a good track record
o f keeping inflation under control at or below 3 percent (except in 2008 due to imported inflation). The
drop in the public debt ratio meant a decline in interest payments and, together with a favorable evolution
o f revenues, provided the fiscal space to increase transfers and subsidies from 3.7 to 4.2 percent of GDP
between 2006 and 2007, and thus protect the population from the increases in food and energy prices.
Figure 3 - Trend in fiscal deficits (YO)

-

Figure 4 Public debt and interest
payments (YOGDP)
’O

Ia

-----

BO

00%
-05%
-10 %
-15 %
-20%
-25%
-30%
-35%

50
40

7

4

35
3
25

2
30
20
1)

0

15
1

05
0

0FKCal deficn excl grants and p w a t (46GDP)
-Linear
(Overall fiscaldeficlt (46GDP))

This development model that Tunisia pursued over the past two decades has thus served the
7.
country well. However, despite the excellent growth track record, the Tunisian economy has not
generated sufficient jobs to employ the growing and better educated labor force. Unemployment has
been persistently high in Tunisia - 14.1% in 2008 - with the burden mostly falling on young and educated
individuals. The high level of unemployment reflects an imbalance between the demand for labor, tilted
towards the unskilled, and a growing supply of skilled labor where 57% are graduates of tertiary
education. In addition, the insufficient creation of businesses in knowledge-intensive sectors has also
contributed to keep employment of the educated workforce low. The profile o f labor supply positions
Tunisia well to changing the structure of i t s economy toward more skill-intensive sectors and higher
productivity in the long-run.

8.
Tunisia scores highly on governance rankings but business environment and accountability
issues continue to be cited as constraints to growth. Tunisia has consistently scored above i t s income
category and the MENA average on most dimensions of comparative governance rankings and
development indexes, although there are nuances behind these rankings. It achieves high scores on the
CPIA ratings, ranks 691h on the 2010 Doing Business indicators (up from 73rd in 2009 and from 81” in
2008) and 36th on the Global Competitiveness Index. In WBI’s World Governance Indicators, Tunisia i s
ahead in terms of government effectiveness, rule o f law, control of corruption and regulatory quality, but
has made less progress in areas of voice and accountability. Moreover, there i s still room for further
progress on strengthening the business environment - characterized by a heavy and pervasive intervention
by the state in the economy2-which has defined the private sector in Tunisia to date. The MENA region
has recently finalized a regional report on private sector development that concluded that there exists a
business environment in most MENA countries, including Tunisia, that i s perceived to be based on
privilege and unequal application of the rules of the game and has resulted in less competition. In
Tunisia, this environment has constrained the creation of jobs and i s the likely reason why private
domestic investment has remained intractably low.

* Based on a 2008 survey by lnstitut d ‘Economie Quantitative (IEQ) that surveyed 85 1 enterprises.
“From Privilege to Competition: Unlocking Private Led Growth in the Middle East and North Africa”, World Bank 2009

4

9.
Since the 1980s, Tunisia has been a pioneer among developing countries in emphasizing
environmental conservation, rationalizing energy use and managing its water resources prudently.
I t has also successfully implemented Bank projects using country systems for safeguard compliance, with
particularly strong results with respect to environmental safeguards. As shown in Box 2, Tunisia has
carried out impressive reform programs in water and energy in particular.

Box 2: Tunisia’s Track Record in Water and Energy Management
~

%%a
has achieved remarkable results in the areas of water supply and sanitation and improvements in these
services have continued to be priority areas in the national development plans. Currently the entire urban
population and over 90% o f the rural population have access to potable water. Moreover, 85% o f the population
has access to improved sanitation services. Though per capita renewable water resources are less than half the
MENA average, urban water i s supplied 24 hours a day, while water saving technology in the agriculture sector
has increased water use efficiency to the second highest in the region. These achievements are even more
remarkable given that water resources are limited, the climate i s arid, the ecosystems are fragile and the
required financial investments are high. The water sector’s performance i s due to the vision and experience of
the operators, to the institutional framework which has been implemented and to the sustained growth of the
economy. The relatively low-cost of water for low-income households has also helped increase overall service
delivery and the implementation of an efficient cost recovery system has played an important role. Tunisia i s
addressing the important water challenges of the next few decades through regularly updating i t s water resource
management and sanitation strategy with support from the World Bank amongst others.
Enerev

Tunisia should be particularly recognized for its early investments in energy efficiency and promotion of
renewable sources of energy. I t formulated a policy for rational use o f energy and promotion o f renewables as
early as 1985. The energy intensity of the economy stopped increasing in 1992 and has declined to the lowest
level in the MENA region. The Government has formulated a 4 year energy conservation program for 2008201 1 which proposes to strengthen further the institutional and legal framework that i s already well established.

I
11.
A.

RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

Global Economic Climate and its Impact on Tunisia

10.
The current global economic climate, especially the EU recession, i s having a negative
impact on Tunisia mainly through weakening external demand. Total export growth dropped from 12
percent in 2007 to 1 percent in 2008 at constant prices, and further to negative 22 percent (at current
prices) in the first half o f 2009 (the European Union i s the destination o f 76% o f Tunisian exports). This
was driven largely by declines in exports o f textiles, clothing and automobile components which together
represent more than 60% o f total merchandise exports, However, the worst o f the crisis in exports may
be over as much o f the decline occurred in the first quarter o f 2009. Textiles and clothing exports
rebounded in June and July 2009, while automobile components have regained a p p i t i v e growth
trajectory since July. Domestic trade remained unaffected and the telecommunications sector has
continued to grow strongly. Tourism, another sector sensitive to external demand, seems so far little
affected by the global crisis and could register positive growth in arrivals this year, thanks to Tunisia’s
price-competitiveness and the importance o f tourists coming from Algeria and Libya. Nevertheless, a
decline in the number o f tourists from the E U i s likely, accompanied by a decrease in the number o f hotel
nights.

5

11.
Fortunately Tunisia was well prepared to respond to this shock and the authorities have
responded effectively. Growth in 2008 reached 4.5%, revised downwards from the expected 6.3%, a
respectable performance given the global environment. The macro-economy in 2008 was sound with a
modest fiscal deficit (-1.2% in 2008), low inflation (3%), and a healthy level of reserves (5 months of
imports). The manageable level of public debt (47.5% of GDP in 2008 compared to 58% in 2005),
together with the modest fiscal deficit, have provided the Government with room to respond.
Furthermore, the financial sector was insulated - local banks have little foreign exposure and foreign
participation in the stock market i s only 28%, real estate loans represent only 10 percent of GDP, the
money market i s s t i l l highly liquid, Tunisia has managed i t s foreign reserves prudently and the Tunisian
dinar i s non-convertible for most capital-account transactions.
Figure 5. Current account deficit and gross official reserves
(Months of imports GNFS)
------ ----

p^

I

I

l___l____

_
I

6.0

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009 (proj)

12.
Despite the export shock, the economy shows resilience. This i s confirmed by the recent
assessment by the IMF in the framework of i t s Article I V consultations. Real GDP growth dropped
significantly from 4.5% for 2008 to 1.3% in the first quarter of 2009 but rebounded in the second quarter
to 2.5% as the fall in external demand was partially compensated by the dynamism in the mining, energy
and services sectors. The increase in salaries o f public servants (4.7%), public enterprise employees (4%)
and private sector employees (between 4.2 and 5.5%), decided in late 2008, i s also bringing about a
positive dynamic in private consumption.
13.
The external position remains comfortable. The current deficit contracted in the first trimester
of 2009 after having increased in 2008 (4.2% in 2008, due to oil and food subsidies) and i s projected to
decline to 3.5% in 2009. Thanks to the resilience of its tourism receipts and remittances of Tunisian
workers abroad, the external position remains solid despite a slight decrease in FDI. Reserves reached a
total of US$10.6 billion at end July 2009. The continuous inflow o f foreign exchange combined with
reduced issuance of government bonds over the last few years led to a situation o f over-liquidity which
the Central Bank managed to absorb by raising the reserve requirement o f banks. From January to May
2009, the nominal exchange rate depreciated by 1.7%, due to the depreciation o f the dinar vis-a-vis the
euro (4%) while the effective exchange rate appreciated by 1.5%.
14.
Inflation remains controlled, decreasing from its peak of 5% in 2008 to 3.5% in June 2009
thanks to a decrease in the price of basic products (food and oil) and an appropriate monetary policy.
Inflation i s estimated around 3.5% in 2009 (y-0-y) and i s expected to be contained and remain in the
range o f 3-3.5% thereafter. After two increases in 2008, the ratio of obligatory reserves was reduced from
10 to 7.5% by the end o f 2008. In addition, the Central Bank reduced the key inter-bank rate from 5.25%
to 4.5% in February 2009 for the first time in 30 months. Finally, even through customs receipts have

6

fallen by 3.6%, overall revenues increased by 9.5% thanks to an increase in VAT revenue and petrol
receipts.

-

Box 3 Government’s policy response to the global economic crisis
The Government’s response to the global crisis confirms both its approach to pro-active macroeconomic
management and to economic reform. In fact, the Government used the onset o f the crisis to move the reform
agenda forward. The Government took a set o f quick actions to support the real economy in response to the
economic slowdown. Measures were announced in December 2008 to increase public investment by 20 percent
and to assist exporting f m s . The main support measures were:
a subsidy o f 50 percent o f the employer’s cost o f social security for f m s experiencing a dramatic fall
(i)
in exports to Europe;
(ii) a subsidy o f 100 percent o f the employer’s cost o f social security for f m s that had to stop production
and run down stocks;
(iii) a subsidy o f 50 percent o f the cost o f export insurance;
an acceleration o f procurement procedures for public contracts granted to the local private sector; and
(iv)
selected reforms to enhance integration, improve the business climate and strengthen the financial
(v)
sector within the framework o f the Integration and Competitiveness program. This program supports
reforms including reducing the number o f tariff bands from 9 to 6, converging product quality and
safety norms to international standards, preparing a strategy for regulatory reforms in the services
sector, improving the business registry to make it accessible and up-to-date, reducing the delays in
access to industrial land (amendment o f the urban code) and reforming venture capital and mutual
funds to make them more effective.
The Integration and Competitiveness Program i s being supported by Tunisia’s main donors - World Bank, E U and
African Development Bank ( A D B ) - who increased their financing in 2009 to the reform program in line with the
Government’s strategy for undertaking greater external finance. The Bank increased the amount for its DPL on
Integration and Competitiveness to $250 million, in line with the increased financing from the EU and AfDB o f
$350 million combined.
In addition, in July 2009, the Parliament approved an additional stimulus package featuring an increase in public
spending o f more than TN700 million (equivalent to 1.4% o f GDP). Infrastructure projects (mainly road and
highways) ready for incorporation in next year’s Finance Law were advanced and are now being implemented. The
December 2008 measures aimed at supporting exporting f m s have also been renewed for another six months,
with eligibility now extended also to partially exporting f m s .
The Bank worked closely with the government in assessing the impact o f the crisis and preparing the response.
This program o f analytical support is ongoing as additional analyses requested by the Government are being
finalized.

B.

Medium-Term Prospects and Debt Sustainability

15.
The Government forecasts growth to increase to 3.3% in 2009. This i s expected to be reached
if the risks linked to the EU economic recession do not materialize and if the fiscal stimulus produces the
necessary effects in the short term. Further impacts from the global economic downturn are expected to
dampen external demand in most sectors not just for exports o f goods but also for services, including
tourism. Internal demand, especially private consumption and public investment, will act as the main
driver o f growth, supported by the Government’s stimulus plan4. Agriculture and energy are expected to
4

The impact o f the stimulus plan in 2009 (year 1) should not be overestimated. A recent paper shows that the impact o f an
increase in public investment i s small in the short run but robust in the medium term. Lengthy procurement procedures prevent a
rapid impact o f public investment on output. For more details, see Diop and Abdallah (2000): “The Dynamic Effects o f
Countercyclical Fiscal Stimulus on Output in Tunisia”, Policy Research Working Paper 5087 (October 2009).

contribute positively to growth, as well as most services sectors (notably trade and telecommunications).
Manufacturing industries (which account for 19% of GDP) should likely suffer negative growth given
their export-orientation, The pace of growth i s expected to increase in 2010 to 3.8% and to return to a
more sustained pace of around 5% from 201 1 onwards.
Key Macro-Economic Indicators and Projections
Actual

Growth o f Real GDP
CPI inflation (%change)
REER (US$/LCU)

40%
20%

Gross Domestic Fixed
Investment
Gross National Savings*
Current Account Balance
Trade Balance
Exports (merchandise fob)
Imports (merchandise fob)
Foreign Direct Investment (net
private)
National Government Balance
(excluding grants)
Primary balance
Total (current) revenues
o/w tax revenues

I

Total (current) Expenditures
Net Interest
Debt
Total Government Debt
External debt

Nominal GDP (million US$)

1

I

I
I

Estimate

Projection

63%
31%

45%
50%

33%
30%

75 5

57%
45%
74 9

12 7

12 0

22.3%
20.9%

23.5%
22.7%

24.0%
23.6%

-1.0%
-6.8%
36.2%
42.9%

-2.0%
-8.1%
37.8%
45.9%

2.5%

-3.2%
-3.2%
23.8%
21.0%
20.4%
2.8%
58.3%
37.3%

29,009

I

I

I
I

5 0%
3 1%
62 9

5 6%
3 2%

65 h

38%
31%
64 4

24.9%
22.8%

25.8%
23.2%

26.5%
24.8%

26.2%
24.0%

25.1%
22.8%

-2.6%
-8.1%
42.7%
50.8%

-4.2%
-9.8%
47.1%
56.9%

-3.6%
-2.4%
38.3%
40.7%

-2.6%
-2.4%
36.9%
39.2%

-3.1%
-2.0%
35.9%
37.9%

-3.2%
-1.3%
35.1%
36.3%

10.7%

4.4%

6.3%

6.0%

5.6%

5.2%

4.9%

-3.1%
-0.3%
23.7%
20.6%
20.2%
2.7%

-2.9%
-0.3%
24.0%
20.9%
20.2%
2.6%

-1.2%
1.1%
26.6%
22.6%
20.9%
2.3%

-3.8%
-3.8%
24.5%
20.9%
21.0%
1.9%

-3.6%
-3.6%
24.8%
21.3%
20.5%
2.0%

-3.3%
-3.3%
24.3%
21.3%
20.4%
2.0%

-2.5%
-2.5%
24.4%
21.4%
19.8%
2.0%

53.9%
32.2%

30,962

I
I

I
I

50.2%
29.3%

35,474

I
I

I
I

47.5%
29.0%

40,743

I

I

1

I

47.6%
27.8%

43,394

I
I

I
I

47.0%
26.2%

46,674

I
I

I
I

47.1%
21.7%

50,524

61 2

I
I

I
I

45.8%
20.1%

I

55,006

The financing o f the current account deficit comes mainly from foreign sources. FDI i s
16.
expected to slow down in 2009 (from a record increase in 2008) and then stabilize or increase in the midterm. Remittances showed a strong resilience to adverse economic conditions. Reserves are expected to
stay at comfortable levels in 2009 (around 4.5 months of imports) and for the rest of the mid-term period.

17.
Major public investment activities in 2009 and 2010 should help the economy recover so
long as the project preparation procedures and procurement are accelerated. Public investment i s
an important driver of growth and a key political counter-cyclical tool, but as noted in footnote 4 its
impact in the short term remains weak due to the long delays in the preparation of projects. The
uncertainty as regards the global environment and the possible delay in the execution of projects proposed
in the stimulus plan constitute risks to growth in 2009. Added to this would be the delay in the EU’s
recovery and i t s impact on Tunisia. A l l factors being considered, it i s likely that unemployment will
worsen in 2009 and the beginning of 2010 even if growth rates are positive.
18.
I t i s important for the Government to continue its policy of fiscal consolidation and active
debt management in the medium term. Once the downturn i s over, a decrease in energy subsidies
could facilitate both macro-economicmanagement and especially the debt management policy to decrease
further the ratio of debt to GDP. The Government intends to continue pro-active public debt management
through: (i) early repayment of high-interest debts; (ii) active management of the risk related to the

8

interest rate (8% of external debt in 2008 had a variable rate); and (iii) active management of exchange
and refinancing risks (in part through issuance of long maturity bonds in local currency). Keeping debt
increases below the rate of growth of the economy will help reduce debt-to-GDP ratios, freeing foreign
exchange reserves and allowing for the maintenance of reserves at a comfortable level through 201 1,

111.
A.

TUNISIA’S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

Boost Growth and Transform Tunisia into a Knowledge Economy

19.
The broad challenge for Tunisia over the long-term i s to accelerate the structural
transformation of the economy to increase productivity and generate sufficient numbers of skilled
jobs. The growth model followed to date has served the country well and Tunisia has attracted FDI and
established a light manufacturing industry that i s competitive on an international scale. This industry has
been supported by an off-shore regime that offers a good incentive framework to investors as well as
attractive fiscal and financial advantages. This regime facilitated a strong increase in exports and FDI as
well as a large creation of low-skilled jobs, especially for women which in turn helped reduce poverty.
This growth model was successful in the early stages in reducing total unemployment as, up until the late
1990s, the public sector was there to employ most university graduates. Now the public sector i s seldom
recruiting and the light manufacturing sector has not reinvented itself. The latter remains specialized in
low value-added sub-contracting and has not incorporated more knowledge-intensive segments in the
production process (in part because the European client does it). As analyzed in the World Bank’s 2009
Development Policy Review (DPR)’, the majority of new entrants to the labor market today have a
university degree while the productive sectors have weak capacity to absorb highly qualified workers.
This naturally raises concerns on the quality of growth achieved by Tunisia whereby growth has created
an employment profile focused on low skilled workers, leaving highly qualified workers behind.

The task for Tunisia is thus to bring
20*
about an economic transformation which
intensifies the sophistication of the economy,
creating demand for highly qualified labor,
which in turn will contribute to a rising
productivity o f the economy.
The DPR
provides a detailed analysis of the strategic
options to accelerate the structural transformation
of the economy and identifies reforms in the
areas of innovation, support to SMEs,
integration, and the other accompanying policies
needed to strengthen the financial sector, adapt
education, improve the functioning of the labor
market and continue to improve economic
governance. Tunisia’s own past experience and
the experience of other countries (such as
Malaysia) that have managed to jump the ladder
of technological sophistication (Figure 6 ) can
inform economic policy in the coming years.

Figure 6: GDP per Capita, 1960-2007, constant 2000 US$
Tunisia and Comparator Countries
)6,0w

--Jordan

@,ow

la,ooo

P/
. ... ...

t*,ooo

ti,ow

$0

continue to be crucial for growth to transcend the smallness o f the domestic market, tap into global
knowledge, transfer new technologies, foster competition and boost productivity. But this will
“Tunisia Development Policy Review: Towards an Innovation-Driven Growth”, Report # 50847-TN, World Bank

9

require reforms to integrate better the on-shore sector with the off-shore sector. Indeed, the on-shore
sectors benefited from high tariffs but faced a highly regulated business environment where enterprises
regularly cite anti-competitive practices. As the tariff protection o f on-shore activities decreases, the
regulatory and incentives gaps between on-shore and off-shore business increases. Not surprisingly,
domestic private investment has been low in this context despite the successful reforms in many areas o f
the business climate (underscored by international evaluations such as the Doing Business Indicators).

22.

Tunisia i s relatively well positioned to move towards a knowledge-based economy given its
progress, albeit at different speeds, on exploiting external markets, education, logistics, energy and
other areas. Tunisia can learn from i t s own positive experience, particularly in the off-shore sector, and
the experience o f other successful countries to launch this ‘transformation. Besides continuing to assure
macroeconomic stability in an environment o f high global uncertainty, Tunisia faces a broad agenda that
Box 4 identifies. The strategic thrust i s to seek a greater integration into the global economy (including
services and agriculture), such as has been undertaken in the framework o f the integration .program. This
should be supported by further efforts to strengthen the business environment, make finance available to
start-ups and innovators, reduce the costs o f logistics and create an innovation platform that can launch
the country into new areas o f economic activity such as I T and advanced services.
Box 4: Areas of Future Reform
Further Integration into the World Economv:
Trade policy: Tunisia i s advancing well in its trade policy reforms. Since January 2008, trade o f industrial goods
with the EU i s duty-free. The agenda i s however unfinished as import tariffs for non-EU trade are high and product
standards are not fully aligned with those of potential markets. The government has been reducing tariff dispersion
created by the gap between tariffs on EU imports and imports from other sources and these efforts should continue.
A key challenge will be to reduce non-tariff barriers in the services sectors unilaterally for some sectors (e.g.
telecom) and in partnership with regional and global partners for others (e.g., open skies agreements). Finally, export
promotion and particular support to SMEs will be critical since Tunisia’s f i r m s often manage to penetrate new
markets but do not mature in those markets (opportunistic export behavior).
Logistics: Logistics i s an integral part of integration reforms and improvement in logistics will benefit the overall
economy. The challenge i s to better integrate Tunisian services with international logistics networks, by blending
openness and consolidation o f local providers. A wide spectrum of areas need attention including trade facilitation at
customs, improving port performance, encouraging investment in logistics platforms and reducing entry barriers and
informality in the logistics sector. The government has launched investments in ports (Enfidha) and other critical
infrastructurebut there i s s t i l l a way to go to bring about the needed logistics overhaul.
ComDetition and the Business Environment:
For Tunisian firms to benefit fully from global integration and for greater innovation and productivity to flourish,
enhanced and fairer competition in markets i s required. Repeated surveys show that competition i s weak in the onshore economy, underscored by the 2008 IEQ study where 60 percent o f f i r m s denounced anti-competitive practices
such as implicit agreements, discrimination among clients and linked sales and 67 percent of firms cited at least one
type o f unfair competition in the domestic market. The private sector has often denounced the regulatory
environment which they face. The slow execution o f reforms often reduces their credibility and thus their equal and
reinforced application would greatly improve their credibility and the private sector’s response. The MENA
region’s flagship report on Private Sector Development6 emphasizes that this i s a regional problem. As Tunisia
looks to the future, and ifit intends to pursue a credible transformation of i t s economy, the role o f the state needs to
become more selective and much lighter with a smoother and more equal implementation of policies.

“From Privilege to Competition: Unlocking Private-Led Growth in the Middle East and North Africa”

10

Financial Sector: Onshore firms need better access to credit as do potential new entrants. Most financing tools are
available (bank finance, factoring and leasing, stock market, venture capital, etc.) and the government has put in
place several dedicated support mechanisms ( e g BFPME a bank specifically dedicated to SME finance and
SOTUGAR for guarantees). However, despite this fairly favorable environment that generates viable financing
opportunities, private sector funding (as a percentage o f GDP) has leveled off in the last decade. Tunisia’s IMFWorld Bank Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP - 2006) presented a diagnosis with recommendations that
remain valid. In line with the recommendations, the government has been improving the design o f the public credit
registry and promoting the creation o f well-regulated credit rating agencies. A plan i s underway - with the support
of the Bank’s DPL to the Integration and Competitiveness Program - to reduce the size o f the non-performing loans,
and provisioning them (only 53.8% are currently provisioned). In addition to strengthening banking, and in line with
the FSAP recommendations, the development of the non-banking financial sector i s a priority, as innovative
channels of financing are needed to support SMEs and encourage entry and innovation (see Appendix 9 for details
on SME financing in Tunisia).
Innovation, Research and DeveloDment: Tunisia has followed an active policy to develop a national innovation
system including scientific research, technological diffusion, education and industrial upgrade. It has achieved
notable progress in terms of the public investment rate in R&D - including ICT and e-government, the proportion o f
researchers in the population and the education level o f its work force. In addition to the investments made, a dense
institutional infrastructure has also been put in place to support innovation, science, technology and research with
multiple research and promotion agencies active, often with overlapping mandates. Despite this progress and
investment, recent analysis shows that there i s still a limited contribution o f research in the economy, a developed
technological base i s still fledging and the partnership between the productive sector and research institutions i s
weak.

23.

Agriculture requires special attention as it remains an important sector of the economy
(about 10 percent of GDP) and employs a sizeable percentage of the labor force (about 16 percent
of the total labor force and 27 percent o f the rural labor force). The natural potential o f agricultural
land has been mobilized fully and rainfed agriculture remains dominant in terms o f land use, with strong
inter-annual variations in rainfall. Despite decades o f Government efforts to protect natural resources,
over-exploitation and inadequate land management have led to significant resource degradation. The
performance o f the sector and the agricultural policy o f the Government have a respectable record o f
growth but the agriculture sector i s working below its potential for pro-poor growth. Agriculture growth
has not been as strong as the overall economy (average annual growth o f 2.8 percent), and to a great
extent, poverty i s a rural phenomenon (the Government figures estimate rural poverty as being twice the
national average o f 3.8 percent). In this regard, there i s a need - as mentioned in Box 1 - to look at
poverty beyond absolute deprivation and poverty incidence and instead try to address issues o f
vulnerability and risk for poor farmers.
A recent study on Tunisian agriculture’ found that productivity in certain sub-sectors i s low
and not competitive internationally. Some o f these sectors survive through subsidies, most notably a
low price o f water for irrigation. Fulfilling agriculture’s potential will require (i)trade and price
liberalization and a reconfiguration o f the state intervention in commodity markets; (ii)modernized public
services in areas such as input and output marketing, research and phyto-sanitary controls; (iii)leveraging
support to the private sector based on needs expressed rather than by imposing regulations; and (iv)

24.

supporting more effective rural finance and irrigation water management. Tunisia has taken an active
part in the Doha process and has started bilateral negotiations for liberalizing agriculture and services as
part o f its Association Agreement with the EU. But, as Tunisia contemplates further liberalization o f
trade, there i s greater urgency - expressed by the Government through the NDP - to address the current
limitations o f the enabling environment, while at the same time developing an upgrading program (“Mise
ci niveau ’7 aimed at improving productivity.

’“The Competitiveness o f Tunisian Agriculture: Retrospective and Perspectives”, May 2009, World Bank ESW
11

25.
The transport sector in Tunisia contributes about 5.9 percent o f GDP and i s relatively well
developed even though quality and capacity could be strengthened. In several instances, Tunisia's
current transport infrastructure and logistics services are still short o f fully supporting a growing and
modem economy, especially one that i s dependent on exports and integration. There are capacity gaps in
urban and inter-urban infrastructure, value-added logistics are under-developed, and congestion i s a
growing and serious problem in most large urban areas. Energy saving i s a key challenge for the
transport sector as it consumes 3 1 percent of the country's energy and 56 percent of oil products, thus
being one of the main contributors to Green House Gas (GHG) emissions. Relevant reforms are being
pursued in several transport-sub-sectors (institutional reform o f ports, public-private partnerships in
Enfidha airport) but the pace of these reforms should be accelerated to strengthen Tunisia's ability to
grow at a stronger rate. The Government has a large transport investment program in the NDP with a
focus on facilitating trade and improving urban transport services. As part o f the stimulus plan described
in Box 3, the Government has targeted increased public investments in the transport sector.
Increase Employment and Address the Problem o f Employability

B.

26.
The pattern o f economic growth until now has not generated sufficient employment for an
increasingly better educated labor force. Unemployment has been persistently high in Tunisia reaching
14.1% in 2008 with the burden falling on young and educated individuals (Figures 7 and 8). The
unemployment rate reflects three factors; (i)demographically, Tunisia i s boasting a large number of
higher education graduates entering the labor market (57% o f entrants have a university degree), thus
swelling the labor supply o f educated people; (ii) the existing economic sectors (textiles and clothing,
agriculture, agro-industry, automobile components, tourism, etc.) are predominantly intensive in lowskilled workers and do not generate sufficient demand for workers with a post-baccalaureate level o f
educatioddegree; and (iii) while greater trade integration and significant FDI inflows have allowed new
sectors to emerge, the trend o f business creation in newer, knowledge-intensive sectors i s insufficient.
Despite high levels o f education o f women in Tunisia (who make up the majority o f university graduates),
their participation in the labor market remains low.
Figure 7 - Unemployment by age group

Figure 8 - Unemployment by schooling level

& 1641

I

20% -

& 20.24
T

16%.

A p 26.21

1OX

.

,_" -. .
6% -

,

OK

184

1118

2W4

2006

2OM

2001

oal
1894

1nr

m

2Wb

2WS

2007

27.
A critical action to address some aspects of the unemployment problem lies in the move
towards a knowledge intensive economy which can shift the demand for labor towards the more
educated. This brings rise to a particular set of issues that need attention; (a) the workings o f the labor

12

market; and (b) the availability of required skills. The labor market in Tunisia i s relatively rigid, affecting
the distribution of jobs between formal and non-formal, and affecting negatively the labor productivity of
the overall economy. Firms create informal jobs because the labor code i s overly rigid. This rigidity i s
also linked to a public policy of protecting workers that i s provided through the firm rather than more
effectively through neutral general schemes. Removing this rigidity would require putting in place social
safety nets that go beyond what i s now in place towards well-targeted labor market programs. In
addition, the government could increase the flexibility in the rules and procedures governing hiring and
firing, retrenchment and firm restructuring which are currently too rigid.

28.
There i s an urgent need to provide the appropriate skills to assist transformation of the
economy. The Investment Climate Assessment surveys point to quality of labor as a constraint and there
i s widespread evidence through various business surveys of a skills mismatch and a high-skilled brain
drain (the 2008 IEQ enterprise survey found that over 60 percent of f i r m s were constrained because of
lack of engineering, technician or skilled worker profiles). Therefore, there i s a need for re-orienting
higher education to technical and scientific sectors, as well as a need for a new and comprehensive focus
on skills development encompassing professional reinsertion and retraining of workers in traditional
sectors and reforming the higher education system to respond to the needs o f a knowledge-based
economy. New ways of working will need to be explored with the private sector to ensure both a better
match with the needs of firms and the delivery of training.
Notwithstanding the importance of skills and a well functioning labor market, the driver to
29.
create more jobs remains the private sector demand for hiring people. Thus the issue i s how to
unleash the demand for employment in the private sector. If Tunisia’s economy remains in the traditional
sectors, this will imply that firms will continue to need more uneducated labor as they grow, thus leaving
the unemployment situation relatively unchanged. The solution i s naturally increased trade and
investment but calls for a more fundamental shift to a skills-intensive, knowledge economy that operates
in a more competitive and enabling environment.

C.

Improve the Quality o f Service Delivery

30.
Tunisia’s public sector has helped steer the economy along a sustained growth path and
deliver increasingly better outcomes. However, now the public sector once again faces the challenge to
reinvent i t s e l f to meet emerging challenges. Selected and phased reforms have been undertaken to date
but would need to be further continued in five areas that are already identified in the NDP as priorities: (i)
introduction of new methods of public adminstration; (ii) weeding out of obsolete regulations; (iii)
equitable rule enforcement; (iv) active encouragement of greater openness and participation; and (v)
strengthening of Monitoring and Evaulation capacity. The Government has introduced performance
based budgeting and Medium-Term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEF) which are showing some progress.
The effectiveness of public procurement urgently needs to be addressed and a serious reform program
undertaken. Slow and burdensome procurement procedures have greatly constrained the delivery of
services and infrastructure.
3 1,
Tunisia has made great progress in extending the educational system to greater segments of
the population. As already noted in Section Iabove, Tunisia most likely will meet i t s MDG targets. In
addition, enrollment rates and completion rates continue to improve in upper basic education (12-16 year
olds) and secondary levels. Enrollment in tertiary education has tripled in the past ten years reaching 3 1%
of 19-23 year olds, 58% o f whom are female. Forecasts are that higher level education enrollment rates
will continue to increase at a rate of approximately 10% per year. Total expenditures on education (not
including vocational training) represented 6.1% of GDP in 2006, higher than the average of OECD and
middle-income countries. Allocations within the sector follow the needs emerging from a shrinking 6-1 1
year old population and an expansion o f post-primary education.

13

32.
The coming challenge i s to improve the quality and relevance of education. International
students tests for children in Grade 4 and 8 show that Tunisian students’ scores in math and science are
average for countries o f similar income levels. Since 2000 the government has undertaken extensive
curriculum reforms, but evaluations show that greater attention should be paid to linking pedagogical
reform and learning outcomes. The rapid expansion o f the popuation in secondary education has seen
worsening of performance and higher drop-out rates, with resulting weak links between secondary
education, vocational training and higher education institutions. In addition, the increased demand for
secondary education has led to hiring o f young teachers who are not prepared to respond to the demands
o f a diversifying population. In the future, Tunisia will continue to face a demographic transition that will
shift a greater share of the student body to secondary and tertiary education, making it urgent to work on
relevance and quality. Universities and other institues o f higher learning need to have the incentives aqd
the flexibility to respond to labor market demands which will imply controlling the flow o f students,
particularly where there i s recognized over-supply in certain professions. The Government i s aware o f
these challenges and i s undertaking strategies to address them, taking into account that the challenges of
reform across all forms o f higher level education (university, vocational) are significant and additional
measures will be needed to ensure the sufficient re-orientationo f the education system to the needs o f the
market.

33.
Health status in Tunisia is generally better than that found in most other MENA countries,
and the health-related MDGs are largely on track to be achieved. The population enjoys a relatively
high life expectancy rate o f 74 years (76 for women), rapid progress has been made as regards infant and
maternal mortality rates and HIV/AIDS prevalence remains relatively low. Coverage o f health care
benefits i s provided through two national social assistance schemes, which together cover approximately
85 percent of the population. Tunisia i s also experiencing an epidemiologic and demographic transition,
such that a greater prevalence o f non-communicablechronic diseases and a gradually ageing population
will likely increase the demand for more technologically complex health services. This transition will
require ensuring effective and sustainable health services and promoting healthy lifestyles to address
demand.
While the health sector performance compares favorably with other countries at a similar
34.
income level, there are a number of health system challenges that need to be addressed. These
include improving the quality o f public services and the efficiency o f health resources, particularly in
public hospitals, and improving equity in terms o f expanding health insurance coverage and reducing the
financial burden on the poor. Tunisia has witnessed a relatively rapid increase in total health
expenditures, largely attributed to the particularly high rate of growth o f out-of-pocket household
spending at private health facilities. This trend reflects a growing dissatisfaction with the quality o f
service offered by the public sector.

35.
Tunisia has developed a comprehensive social protection system combining active labor
market programs (ALMPs), social insurance and social assistance programs. The latter include
consumer food and fuel subsidies, targeted transfers, emergency and education loans and family
allowances. Tunisia i s rightly proud of i t s social protection system and spends approximately 19 percent
o f GDP through the general budget or through contributions levied on the affiliates to the social security
system. However, the current system o f unemployment assistance leaves most workers uncovered and
provides weak and even adverse incentives. As noted previously, i t would be advisable to move
gradually to a more universal and neutral protection scheme that would support a greater mobility in the
labor market. The pension system i s running annual deficits which have to be covered from reserves.
Various pillars o f the social safety net system are not well targeted to the poor despite some reform efforts
in the past - such as food and fuel subsidies. The system has unconditional transfers in cash and in kind
that are high and it lacks evaluation on their impact. The Government has made efforts to simplify and

14

streamline the system but much remains to be done to ensure greater efficiency and better targeting.
Medium-term fiscal stability will requre continuing reform o f the subsidies system.
36.
Sustaining the decentralization and de-concentration process, through strengthening of
municipal and local authorities, i s needed to improve the quality o f services to citizens. With a 66%
urbanization level that continues to increase, there i s pressure on municipalities to improve their services
as service delivery has not kept pace with population growth in urban areas. Some o f the pressing
challenges in this area are: (i) capacity building at municipal levels; (ii)fostering local economic
development; (iii) preserving the urban environment; and (iv) safe-guarding the country’s cultural
heritage. In the 1990s, a process o f decentralization was supported by an increased transfer o f
responsibilities to municipalities and the creation of a specialized financial institution (Caisse de PrBt et
de Soutien uwc Collectivite‘s Locales - CPSCL) to provide lending and manage central transfers to
municipalities. These measures were followed by reforms of local finance and tax systems which have
had positive but limited effects. There has been little progress made in the de-concentration o f municipal
income and municipalities have few services for which they are fully responsible, a narrow set o f income
sources and a constraining infrastructure investment program. There i s a need for future budgetary
reforms in order to target a more de-concentrated delivery o f public services, as well as engage the private
sector more in the delivery o f services. Tunisia benefits from a huge cultural heritage that currently
remains under-exploited. Preserving and promoting better this heritage i s a critical element in continuing
to transform the current tourism model (based on the lower-end, beach-type holiday) to a higher-end
model with greater value-added to the local economies.

D.

Manage the Impacts o f Climate Change

37.

Tunisia’s already vulnerable environment is being further tested by climate change. Tunisia
i s a land and water scarce country and has managed these scarcities well, building an institutional set-up
that has kept the country well supplied with water (see Box 2). However, the rapid demand for water
associated with economic growth and greater coverage of the population has meant that the country i s
reaching i t s maximum potential and must bring demand in balance with supply. This means measures to
induce greater productivity in water use, particularly in agriculture that i s the major consumer (agriculture
uses the.majority o f the water resource base, although the potable water share i s projected to increase
from 13.4% in 2010 to 17.7% in 2030). There i s also room to expand the recycling o f water through
treated waste water reuse. Tunisia’s agricultural economy, despite the investments that have been made,
remains vulnerable to the variability of rainfalls that causes recurrent droughts: in years where drought
occurred, there was a decline in agriculture output with an average corresponding 1% decline in overall
economic growth. The urgency to meet the water use challenge i s further highlighted by the current
consensus amongst experts that Tunisia’s climate will become warmer and drier over the coming decades,
with precipitation possibly declining 10% by 2030. Moreover, efforts to increase water productivity in
agriculture should be accompanied by efforts to preserve fertile arable land (it i s currently estimated that
about 47 percent o f arable land i s eroded). A combination o f conservation, desalination, recycling and
agricultural rationalization i s essential to ensure water use i s sustainable in the medium to long-term.

38.
Tunisia has achieved considerable progress to date on energy efficiency and increasing the
use o f renewable energy sources. As previously outlined in Box 2, Tunisia boasts one of the highest
energy efficiencies in the MENA region. However, it must bring about greater progress if it i s to reach
the levels o f neighboring Mediterranean countries such as Greece and Portugal. Tunisia has made some
laudable efforts in promoting alternative and renewable forms o f energy although the vast majority of its
energy needs are s t i l l met through the use o f fossil fuels. Tunisia evolved from being a net exporter o f oil
and gas in the 1970s and 1980s into a net energy importer by the late 1990s. Today imports supply a
quarter of energy needs but this i s expected to increase with greater advances in industrialization and
greater consumer demand in cities. The challenge thus remains to continue the path o f reducing the

15

energy intensity o f the economy, find alternative non-fossil sources o f energy and reduce energy
dependency on imports and fossil fuels. Leveraging the resources of the private sector in the
development o f large scale renewable energy projects can accelerate the pace of diversification o f
Tunisia’s energy mix, in particular in electricity generation, taking advantage o f Tunisia’s good wind and
solar resources. The recent new law allowing large industrial customers to generate their own electricity
from renewable resources, and efforts to develop large scale wind and solar parks are steps in the right
direction. Encouraging private sector participation, through a more favorable regulatory framework, as
well as providing visibility to international investors could accelerate the pace o f development o f
Tunisia’s renewable energy sector.

39.
High value assets in urban areas and tourism resorts, and strategic infrastructures in
transport and other sectors are already exposed to natural disaster risks, which could be exacerbated
by climate change. Flooding in cities i s happening with greater frequency, causing severe damage to
sanitation and road infrastructure. Urban development i s concentrated in coastal areas that are
increasingly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Coastal cities in particular, often the location o f
globally-important cultural heritage sites, are increasingly under threat from rising sea levels and coastal
erosion. Changes in sea temperatures are also impacting the delicate marine ecosystems o f key tourism
sites (for example, Gulf of Gabes).
40.
Tunisia i s well placed to benefit from external financing in support of climate change
mitigation and adaptation. Financial instruments, such as the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) and the
Carbon Partnership Facility (CPF) can help re-align low carbon development options with Tunisia’s
national interests, by closing the financial gap at investment stage (CTF), or generating additional stream
o f revenue upon delivery o f carbon emissions reductions, even beyond 2012 (CPF). IFC’s strategic focus
on the financing o f private-sector led renewable projects in Tunisia can also play a substantial role in
encouraging private sector investment in the country’s renewable energy sector, in particular early
investors. Furthermore, Tunisia could eventually become a net exporter o f renewable energy through
participation in the MENA Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) scale-up initiative and the possible energy
interconnection project between Tunisia and Italy (see section on CPS program for details).

E.

Exploit the Benefits of Regional Integration

4 1.
Tunisia would be in a better position to address most of the above development challenges if
it anchors its development strategy into an open regional framework. Regarding the employment
challenge, Tunisia’s strong integration with the EU could yield much more benefits in terms of growth
and job creation with stronger regional integration. Indeed, by widening the scope for economies o f scale,
the latter would allow Tunisia to attract more foreign (and regional) investments to fuel growth and job
creation. A larger market would also make Tunisia more attractive for investors outside the EU. This
would create more effective capacity to reduce unemployment in Tunisia and in the region as a whole.

42.
Regional integration would also allow Tunisia to better address climate change issues.
Concerted efforts at the regional level would allow Tunisia and its neighbors to address drought, water
and land scarcity issues while enhancing the capacity to invest in clean technologies, undertake research
on environment sustainability, biotechnology, water management technologies and renewable energy.
Situated between Libya and Algeria, two large and energy-rich countries, Tunisia cannot afford to
manage its key environment concerns alone.
43,
Mainstreaming regional integration in Tunisia’s development agenda will require greater
cooperation in many areas. In the area o f trade, regional integration should be considered as one
element in a strategy o f trade and broader economic liberalization, which also encompasses unilateral and
multilateral removal o f trade barriers. A decisive move towards adopting common approaches to

16

standards and eliminating behind-the-border barriers to trade and investment would improve the overall
regional investment climate and boost growth. Beyond synchronizing trade and. investment regimes,
greater project-based cooperation could be sought in many areas: energy, transport, banking and
environment. Tunisia stands to benefit from the different activities underway through the Arab World
Initiative and has been active in pushing for such initiatives both in the Maghreb and the MENA region.

IV.

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT P L A N

44.
I n 2007, the Government launched its llth
National Development Plan (NDP) which covers
2007-2011. The Government i s currently updating the N D P to adapt it to a rolling development plan with
regular updates during i t s implementation, to respond to new challenges and demands as they present
themselves and assess risks and constraints regularly. The update o f the N D P will be finalized before the
end o f 2009 and extended to cover the 2010-2014 period. The NDP emphasizes that employment
generation remains the highest priority o f the Government and it lays out the goal for Tunisia to establish
an information society and a knowledge-based economy with a focus on human capital development. The
plan outlines that the next decade in Tunisia w i l l be marked by deepening reforms and the acceleration o f
the pace o f their implementation. The Government recognizes that Tunisia must do more in order to grow
faster and become more competitive, in order to deliver on the employment challenge.
.

Box 5: The Five Axes o f the NDP
The consolidation o f the economy and acceleration o f growth through further efficient integration into the global
onomy and private sector development. This involves deepening o f structural reforms, consolidation o f good
ivemance and transparency, strengthening competitiveness, diversification o f the sources o f growth and
velopment o f innovation capacities and continued solid macroeconomic management
A comprehensive development approach that guarantees sustainable growth and a harmonious balance among
economic, social and environmental priorities. The Government will continue to pursue poverty-fighting
programs that ensure effective income distribution and further strengthen the social safety net. This axe focuses
on integrating the environment dimension into programs, generalization of environment upgrading, increased
energy efficiency, improved waste management and rationalization of natural resources exploitation
The modernization o f the national economy towards a knowledge-based one, so as to offer new sources o f
growth and to improve the capacity o f job creation and adapt it to the new structure of employment demand.
This encompasses accelerating the improvement o f productivity, upgrading of knowledge in the private sector,
and upgrading the ICT infrastructure and promoting generalization in its use. The axe also focuses on the
development o f the necessary human resources, adaptation o f the educational system to the knowledge economy
and the creation o f centers of excellence in training and research. Finally, as regards the critical issue o f
innovation, the plan targets greater focus on science and technology, introduction o f a partnership between
research centers and the productive system.
The consolidation o f investment in human capital in order to increase i t s contribution to growth and
consequently to establish its driving role in the development process. This involves improving the quality of
education, better adaptation of professional and vocational training programs, reforms in the university system,
creation o f centers o f excellence in the universities and development o f pre-school education. In the health
sector, the goal i s to bring about a higher quality in medical services and a control o f health expenditures.
Finally, efforts will be concentrated on the generalization o f social security coverage and better targeting of
support programs to women and children.
The adoption of sectoral policies which respond to the need for transforming the economic structure through a
greater diversification in the productive base and an increase in the contribution o f high value-added and skillintensive activities. Efforts will be focused on transforming the agricultural system, exploiting investment and
development opportunities in traditional sectors such as textiles, tourism, mechanical engineering and
electronics. and strenethenine the Derformance o f services in the economv.
As part o f its NDP, the Government i s evaluating the availability o f financing for the
investments and reforms planned, given the overall macro-economic and public finance situation.
This i s being undertaken in the overall context o f continued pragmatic economic management and pro45.

17

active public debt management that has served Tunisia well up to now8. With a public debt ratio o f
47.5% o f GDP in 2008, Tunisia has some space to increase its debt prudently. IBRD financing will be
requested for those key investments where the value-added of the partnership with the Bank i s strong.
For some large projects, IFC’s financing and support to public-private partnerships can support the NDP
(on the model o f the Enfidha Airport when IFC arranged the total debt package o f EUR380 million).
Tunisia does not view the World Bank Group’s financing partnership purely as a response to the global
crisis but sees the role o f IBRD and IFC financing as contributing to long-term development purposes to
accompany the transition to a higher value-added and more knowledge-intensive economy.
The strong collaboration between the Bank and the Government on analytical work has
46.
facilitated a common understanding of the challenges and reform options. The Bank’s knowledge
work contributes to the national dialogue on challenges and constraints to development. For example, the
recently-completedDevelopment Policy Review has informed the NDP update. Other parts of the Bank’s
knowledge work - particularly programmatic ESW - inform the design of sectoral strategies and their
related investment programs. There i s agreement on the analysis and reforms needed and also a large
degree of convergence between development partners’ and the Government’s perspectives o f areas where
progress to date has been good.

V.
A.

WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP

Nature of the Partnership

47.
The Bank’s relationship with Tunisia i s mutually acknowledged as being good and has
emphasized the importance o f flexibility to evolving needs. In particular, the Bank’s engagement in
Tunisia has focused on quality analysis and global knowledge which has underpinned all lending
operations. The Government has often expressed i t s appreciation for the knowledge services of the World
Bank’ and it considers the Bank’s dialogue and analysis as useful inputs to their National Development
Plans and sectoral strategies. The knowledge role o f the Bank i s especially valued because the Bank has
undertaken economic and sector reports in a fully collaborative way, with strong ownership from
Government. Equally important, the Bank has been able to mobilize rapidly its team and resources to
respond flexibly when requested and to focus on providing just-in-time policy advice. The Bank’s nonlending program i s one that builds on a good track record and i s sufficiently multi-sectoral in nature to
respond flexibly to the client’s demand.

48.
The financing role o f the Bank has also remained flexible and has undergone some
important evolutions over the past few years. The management o f the economy by Government meant
that Tunisia achieved Investment Grade status and was able to access favorable financing on the global
market”. As a consequence, the Government did not seek large financing from IBRD during the FY0608 period as foreseen in the previous CAS. In parallel, the Government decreased its public debt and
repaid considerable amounts o f its debt to IBRD. The fiscal year 2009 marked a significant new
departure in the Bank’s relationship with Tunisia. Due to the more favorable IBRD terms, and in the
context of the global economic crisis, Tunisia sought the Bank as a preferred financial partner with record
lending delivered o f $335.6 million in FY09. In particular, Tunisia engaged i t s first Development Policy

* One element o f the country’s prudent management o f its debt involves the support o f the Bank’s Treasury department. Tunisia
was the first country to sign an MDA with the Bank in 2003, and i s among the top users o f hedging products and one o f only
three countries to have used the MDA to execute hedging transactions.
This occurs in the context o f the World Bank Group’s annual and spring meetings as well as visits to Tunisia by senior
management.
lo I n 2007, the Government launched a highly successful $260 million equivalent yen Samurai bond, underscoring its stable
investment credit ratings (BBBIBaa2).
18

Loan ($250 million) in support o f its ambitious global integration and competitiveness agenda. The
experience of the last several years has thus shown that the Government masters itstmobilization o f
external financing and the Bank has shown flexibility in adapting its financing to needs. The Bank’s role
i s valued independently of the volume o f financing which has allowed it to maintain an important
strategic and fruitful partnership with the country. Finally, Tunisia has appreciated the Bank’s reliance to
a large extent on its country systems for financial management and for safeguards due diligence and has
performed successfully in this regard.
49.
I F C has been active in Tunisia since the early 1990s and currently has a committed
portfolio o f US$278 million in 8 companies. While IFC has historically had a limited role in Tunisia
due to alternative sources o f financing at lower spreads, it has more recently stepped up its activities and
been positioning itself as a partner which can add value on a wide range o f issues instead o f just
financing. IFC’s engagement i s predominantly in infrastructure and financial markets, including
microfinance targeting women borrowers. Recently, IFC has been active in Tunisia’s infrastructure sector
in step with the Government’s efforts to develop i t s public private partnership (PPP) initiatives, as well as
in the general manufacturing sector. For instance, in FY08, IFC invested EURlO5 million for its own
account and mobilized EUR255 million to finance the upgrade o f Monastir Airport, the construction of
the new Enfidha Airport, and the operation o f both under a 40-year Build-Operate-Transfer concession.
In.FY09, IFC invested an additional EUR28 million in this project.

B.

Implementationo f the CAS and Lessons Learnt

50.
The previous CAS for Tunisia was approved in June 2004 and covered the FY05-08 period.
The CAS had three strategic pillars: (i) strengthen the business environment; (ii)enhance skills and
employability; and (iii) improve the quality o f social services. The CAS continued to emphasize the
knowledge role o f the Bank and proposed an ambitious lending program for FY05-08 of up to $200-$300
million each year. The CAS Progress Report (CAS-PR) was completed in September 2007 and
confirmed that the CAS pillars and strategy remained valid. The CAS-PR updated the lending program of
the CAS and laid out an indicative program for FY08-09 o f $200-$250million per year.

51.
The CAS Completion Report (CAS CR) notes that the implementation o f the CAS was
globally positive although lending volumes did not reach the proposed amounts. The decision o f the
Government to engage alternative external financing on the global market reduced new IBRD
commitments to Tunisia, which declined from $163 million in FY05 to $1 14 million in FY06, $88.8
million in FY07 and just $6 million in FY08. This trend was reversed in FY09 when lending increased to
$335.6 million. In parallel, the size of the project portfolio, comprising IBRD and GEF operations,
declined slightly from 17 projects to 15. However, given that a substantive program was in place at the
beginning of the CAS, yearly disbursements averaged $123 million and the overall size o f the portfolio
remained relatively robust at around $500 million. The average disbursement ratio for FY05-09 was
satisfactory at 21.4 percent, close to the Bank’s average. There were no problem projects during the CAS
period, and pro-activity and realism indicators remained good. While all new lending did not develop as
expected during the CAS, the Bank was able to deliver i t s program through the on-going portfolio of
projects, selective new investments and a concerted focus on AAA.
The Trust Fund portfolio made an important contribution and allowed the Bank to
52.
innovate. The trust fund portfolio - encompassing GEF, IDF, and several country-specific and regional
trust funds (see Appendix 10 for details) - has been integral to the Bank’s overall partnership with
Tunisia. It has allowed for innovation in the program through financing a more comprehensive AAA
program than the one financed purely through the Bank’s budget, testing o f pilot approaches in new areas
and increasing the Bank’s ability to deliver a critical mass o f support within the overall framework of

19

sectoral engagements. Tunisia’s strong leadership in’ environmental management has allowed it to benefit
from a broad and dynamic GEF portfolio, often as a complement to IBRD financing. The mobilization o f
other types o f trust funds in support o f AAA has also facilitated important areas o f reform dialogue on
procurement, labor markets, energy sector, youth and environment.

53.
The CAS CR highlights that there were important positive achievements of the Bank’s
program but there were also areas of improvement needed. Overall, the picture i s a positive one with
clear results in the following priority sectors: (i)export promotion, trade integration and tariff reform; (ii)
improvements in access and quality o f service in the transport, water and energy sectors; and (iii)progress
noted in the education sector and developing the knowledge economy. Tunisia also performed strongly in
the Use o f Country Systems approach for safeguards,where two projects piloted the approach successfully
and for financial management where country systems are mainly used. The CAS CR also concludes that
there was good performance on cooperation with donors (see Box 6). However, the CAS CR points out
that more modest results were achieved in some key sectors - employment, social protection policies and
increasing the competitivity o f agriculture. Improving the quality of social services, especially making
higher education more relevant, remains challenging.
54.
The Bank’s program i s judged to have been responsive and timely in delivering good
quality AAA which was conducted in close cooperation with the Tunisian authorities. In particular,
there was gradual but significant results of the Programmatic ESW (PESW) approach, which helped build
capacity and consensus on a set o f major issues in employment, macro-economy, trade integration, and
energy. In its April 2009 report, IEG evaluated the Bank’s performance in Tunisia on earnings growth
and employment creation and gave the Bank’s Program a satisfactory outcome rating. The report
concluded the following (i) the Bank’s strategy and interventions were relevant to the issues; (ii)
performance was strongest in the Bank’s support to macroeconomic policy; (iii)there was a positive
contribution from the Bank on trade liberalization and fiscal policy; and (iv) high quality work was
delivered on the financial sector, including work undertaken jointly with the IMF. The Government has
also emphasized i t s appreciation for the good quality o f country dialogue and analysis” which has been
greatly strengthened by the increasingly decentralized Bank team in Tunis.

55.
The CAS CR identifies the operational factors that dogged the Bank’s program and which
are, for the most part, linked with procurement weaknesses. This led to slow disbursements and
repeated extension o f projects. Excessive centralization of decision making power on procurement
processes i s the main cause for the considerable delays. The lessons learnt on procurement are
particularly pertinent going forward: Tunisia must grasp more opportunities to align procurement systems
with international best practices, as well as to harmonize and develop knowledgeable and skilled human
resources and institutional capacity. The need for greater progress in this regard has been given more
urgency recently by the Government as it launches the rolling development plan and steps up public
investments. The CPS will aim to capitalize on this momentum to ensure real progress in procurement.
56.
The CAS-CR recommends a greater alignment between the Bank’s program and the
country’s priorities. A main conclusion o f the CAS-CR i s that the CAS could have been more aligned
with Tunisia’s NDP priorities and time-frame for undertaking intended policy reforms. This i s a key
lesson learnt that i s embedded in the CPS which aims for greater alignment with the NDP. The CAS-CR
also emphasizes the importance o f having a more practical results framework with a corresponding focus
needed on strengthening M&E systems.

I ’ Main analytical reports produced during this time included the Global Integration Study, MILES, FSAP, Employment PESW,
Water and Sanitation Strategy, SME Finance Study, Agriculture Sector Review, Energy Management Policy, and Development
Policy Review.

20

57.
An important conclusion o f the CASCR i s that Tunisia performed well in areas where it
was ready to deepen reforms and it has performed less well in areas where it determined that the
political or economic context was not yet ripe for such bold measures. The experience in Tunisia i s
that reforms are undertaken steadily but relatively slowly to allow for the necessary time to study issues,
consult with all national parties, and ensure consensus before embarking on any new policies. Once the
climate i s considered ripe to move forward with reforms, Tunisia has brought about good results.
Consequently, key considerations for this CPS include the need to be more sensitive to the time-frame o f
reforms and not just the substance o f reforms. The Bank’s experience in Tunisia has shown that when
Tunisia has committed to a reform path and has engaged the necessary financial and institutional
resources, then its achievements are impressive.

58.
Lessons learnt from the I F C program. Tunisia benefits from i t s stable business environment
and i t s investment grade rating. However, there continues to be high levels o f regulation and government
intervention in the economy. IFC’s experience in the country has demonstrated that successful project
implementation i s often contingent on Government support to investors (particularly foreign investors) to
navigate the Tunisian administration and meet the country’s regulatory requirements.
Box 6: Good Donor Coordination
In the context o f a strongly-owned and country-led program, the Government plays a lead role on donor
harmonization and coordination. The Government has a deep understanding of the comparative advantage of
each donor based on its assessment of the technical quality of their work and the terms o f their financial support.
The main donors in Tunisia are the European Union (EU), the African Development Bank (AfDB),
Agence Francaise de Developpement, Japan and the World Bank. The EU, AfDB and World Bank have
deepened their collaboration in the past couple o f years, most notably around their budget support which i s being
provided to Tunisia’s integration and competitiveness program. This positive experience has solidified the
increased financial role that Tunisia i s requesting from donors and serves as a model o f donor cooperation in
support o f the Paris Declaration.
The EU i s an important development partner for Tunisia because o f the overall context of the EU
Neighborhood Policy and Tunisia’s strong political, economic, social and cultural ties with Europe. The EU has
an active program o f support focused on economic reform, education and environment. In addition to their
support to the integration and competitiveness program, the World Bank and the EU have a particularly close
collaboration on performance-based budgeting, PEFA, employment and education and are seeking greater
collaboration around water and agriculture.
The Bank, AfDB and Agence Francaise de Developpement are also collaborating well in sectors such as
water, energy, agriculture, municipal development and cultural heritage management. Appendix 6 has further
detailed information on donor programs in Tunisia.
IFC has also been actively collaborating with other IFIs and will pursue more opportunities moving
forward, especially for large projects. For instance, IFC helped bring in the AfDB, Proparco and the European
Investment Bank as co-financiers for the Enfidha Airport project.

C.

CPS Guiding Principles

59.
The Bank’s engagement emphasizes the importance o f understanding the Tunisian context
and building on the strong relationship that already exists. The World Bank Group i s working with a
Government that has a strongly-owned strategy and a solid understanding o f where the Bank can add
value. IBRD financing i s very small compared to the country’s budget so the Bank’s financing role must
be selective on the critical priorities. Similarly, IFC financing w i l l selectively target projects where its
additionality, role, and development impact are clear. The Bank’s role w i l l be very much in the vein o f
partnering with the country when requested and agreeing on how and where we should and should not
engage. Within this context, and with the benefit o f the lessons learnt from the implementation o f the

21

Bank’s program to date, the main principles that guide the Bank’s partnership for the future are
alignment, flexibility and selectivity.
Alignment
60.
The update o f the NDP into a rolling development plan provides strategic priorities which
guide the Bank’s program as outlined in this CPS. The CPS aims to align the Bank’s program to the
maximum extent with the NDP as regards priorities, approach and pace o f reform. As previously
mentioned, the Bank’s knowledge work informs the NDP, particularly the recently-completed
Development Policy Review. There i s agreement on the analysis and reforms needed and also a large
degree o f convergence between the Bank’s and the Government’s perceptions o f areas where progress to
date has been satisfactory. The CPS focus i s on supporting the directions that the Government has
decided on but aiming to clarify thematic context when necessary, highlight trade-offs, add value by finetuning implementationmodalities, assess risks and bring international experience to bear.

61.
Greater alignment with country systems will also be pursued. Tunisia has successfully
piloted the use o f country systems approach for safeguards compliance in the Bank’s water and solid
waste projects and will continue this going forward through broadening it to other projects in the
portfolio. The Bank has also concluded that Tunisia has performed well with respect to financial
management in the Bank’s operations. Such a track record strengthens the case for greater use o f DPLs in
the Bank’s program.

Flexibility

62.
The CPS aligns with the flexibility demanded by the rolling development plan. Within the
context of clear national priorities, the CPS adopts a flexible approach on how best to support the
government as circumstances change. By being demand driven, it avoids programs that are not realized,
as noted above about the last CAS. The CPS builds on the experience in Tunisia that the Government
only requests IBRD financing when it judges it necessary, when it has carefully weighed the pros and
cons o f all alternatives and where it assesses that the Bank can add most value. In the same manner, the
IFC program i s designed to be focused on a select number o f sectors, yet will remain flexible and
responsive to new opportunities.
63.
The use o f DPLs will become gradually more important as a way o f introducing flexibility
through aiming for a realistic assessment o f reform progress and possibilities and focusing attention on
where success i s most likely and reforms are most urgent. The challenge for the Bank i s to deepen its
understanding o f the pace o f reform implementation and develop more the “how” rather than the “what”
given the degree o f convergence on the substance of the strategies and reforms needed. This approach
will be critical in ensuring effective implementation and results. In areas where a phased approach i s
required, the Bank will use opportunities to promote future reform efforts through advocacy and sharing
o f international best practice.
64.
Flexibility means that the AAA program i s aimed to provide timely analysis and to set the
ground for operational work. On the knowledge front, the Bank will continue to provide just-in-time
policy advice and to mobilize Bank and non-Bank international best-practice, even if in some cases the
Bank’s knowledge work does not lead to IBRD lending but rather to financing from other partners. The
Bank’s knowledge work i s valued and requested by the Government both for its substance and for its
timely delivery, so having flexibility in the AAA program i s critical to be able to respond to requests
when they are forthcoming.

22

Box 7: CPS Consultations and Communication Plan

In the preparation of this CPS, and as a regular part o f a l l its activities, the Bank has consulted different development
partners and independent actors in Tunisia which has greatly enriched its knowledge base and understanding o f the
country. The elaboration o f the CPS has been a collaborative process with Government through multiple discussions
at different levels starting in November 2008. The Government has a clear vision o f where it wants the Bank to
engage but it has also been open to dialogue on other issues on which the Bank was in more o f an advocacy mode.
This has nurtured the context o f the CPS and the sectoral content o f the Bank’s engagement in areas such as
employment, education and service delivery.
For the CPS itself, consultations were carried out with other development partners at urban and rural levels with
representatives from private sector, NGOs, Parliament, civil society, unions, farmers’ associations and women’s
groups. The following issues were highlighted (further details are in Appendix 7):
0
Rural development: Participants were particularly keen to stress that special attention should be given to
improving access to micro-finance and strengthening rural infrastructure for water accessibility/coverage and
improved hygiene.
Private Sector: The main recommendation from entrepreneurs i s for an improved administrative and
bureaucratic inter-face with the Government, strengthening the financial sector and access to finance for firms,
and developing trade and transpop further. The importance of professional training was also highlighted.
Parliamentarians: The challenges as they seem them revolve around areas identified as priorities: education,
employment, developing the private sector, agriculture and health.
0
Civil Society: The CSOs cited issues o f transparency and accessing information on the state’s activities due to
what they perceive as a lack of communication and insufficient consultations. CSOs would like to see the
Government encourage a more effective participatory dialogue and implicate it in aspects of the decentralization
process and its relationship with the various development priorities.
The Bank also consulted Tunisia’s main donors and collaborated particularly closely with the African Development
Bank (AfDB), given the degree of harmonization o f the two development banks’ programs and due to the fact that
the AfDB was conducting i t s mid-term review of it s strategy at the same time.
The development o f the CPS benefited from several other Bank-related activities that occurred during the process
which are detailed in Appendix 7 “CPS Consultations Report and Communications Outreach”.
The CPS consultations reaffirmed the importance o f reaching out and listening to different audiences. Stake-holders
expressed great interest in interacting more with the Bank to debate development issues and have greater access to
Bank reports (global, regional and national). Moving forward, the main vehicle for outreach efforts and access to
development content will be: (i) the Tunisia websites; (ii)conferences, workshops, dissemination events on topics o f
relevance for Tunisia’s or the region’s social and economic development (Le. World Development Report 2009,
MNA report on Job mobility); (iii) ongoing consultations on the Bank’s activities, and (iv) further strengthening the
Public Information Center (PIC) housed within the library o f the University of Tunis.
Consultations around the CPS will continue in order to interact further with those met during the CPS process and
share the Bank’s strategy with a broader audience to promote a better understanding of issues, challenges and reform
trade-offs. In addition, Bank teams working on lending and analytical work will be encouraged to identify
mechanisms early on for engaging with civil society and strengthening participatory processes. The Bank will ensure
that the PIC’S impact be further increased by generating greater awareness o f its services among stake-holders. The
Bank’s outreach efforts will be conducted jointly with local and development partners such as the European
Commission Delegation, the United Nations and the African Development Bank in Tunis. These are proactive
institutions in their outreach efforts and have expressed willingness to co-organize events with the Bank as was
already successfully done previously.

23

SeIectivity

65.
The priorities o f the NDP will continue to guide selectivity on where the Bank i s engaged.
While the Bank’s program in Tunisia remains broad, selectivity i s imbedded in the program by the client.
The Bank has had an active and fruitful dialogue with the Government during the CPS preparation
process and the design of the program reflects the decision of the Government to engage the Bank on
specific areas where it sees a clear role and value-added. These areas o f intervention are those where the
Bank already has a long-term engagement or where the Government i s now inviting the Bank to step up
i t s partnership. The choice o f selected areas has gone through the filter of whether they meet the criteria
o f ownership, strategic impact, harmonization with other actors and a focus on implementation.
66.
The CPS emphasizes synergy across interventions around priority results. The Bank’s
support will aim to bring greater synergy in the range o f Bank instruments around the client’s priorities
through ensuring streamlining o f IBRD, Trust Funds, and AAA, and eliminating where possible
dispersion in the portfolio. In particular, the Bank will continue to strive to create the building blocks for
engagement through phasing of instruments: on-going dialogue and AAA program (supported by trust
funds) form the foundation of the engagement and lending will only be carried out where there i s already
a solid knowledge base and a clear assessment of the reform program and implementation schedule.
Trust Fund financing - including GEF, Carbon Funds, and Clean Technology Fund - will continue to be
delivered in those areas such as energy and environment where the Bank already has an engagement and a
coherent approach, preferably in parallel with IBRD financing.

67.
The Bank’s program seeks greater synergies and collaboration with the other main
development partners in Tunisia (see Appendix 6 for further details on donor harmonization). The
Government pro-actively coordinates the programs of donors, requesting co-financing where appropriate
and encouraging greater harmonization around priority issues such as global trade integration,
employment and education. For its part, the Bank has continued to deepen i t s collaboration with the
African Development Bank, EU and AFD, as well as participate in other donor coordination fora
involving bilateral and the UN agencies. There i s a good understanding among Government and donors
o f the comparative strengths o f each donor which enhances the complementarity o f programs. The Bank
recognizes that harmonization with other donors may mean disengaging where we do not bring the most
value-added, letting other donors lead in areas where they have greater comparative advantage, and
accepting that the Bank may be asked to play a convening role rather than a financing one.
68.
For the IFC, the focus will be on projects where its additionality, role and development
impact are strong. Through its debt instruments, IFC will focus i t s interventions on: (a) projects with
large financing needs, exceeding the capacity of the domestic banking sector; (b) projects which
necessitate foreign currency financing; or (c) projects requiring longer term maturities than those
available locally. In select cases, IFC will also target smaller size investments in the manufacturing,
agribusiness and social sectors, using debt substitutes, such as guarantees as may be needed. Through its
equity and quasi-equity instruments, IFC will consider projects with strong demonstration effect and high
development impact (for example, renewable energy projects, high value-added manufacturing, ICT and
health & education).

D.

Results

69.
One important lesson learnt on results from the CAS-CR i s to ensure a more reasonable
and practical results framework that accounts for the flexibility o f the Bank’s approach. The
previous CAS contained a highly ambitious and, in some cases, inappropriate results matrix which had
overly detailed goals and indicators that were not aligned with the evolution o f the program. It proved

24

out-dated, overly rigid and often didn’t capture progress. The CPS results framework i s simplified but
dynamic, with the intention that it should evolve as the Bank’s program evolves. Where the Bank’s
program i s already engaged (those projects active at the time of this CPS and confirmed areas of future
engagement), the matrix provides a detailed description o f expected results and indicators. For those
activities where the nature o f the Bank’s engagement has yet to be defined but where we expect future
opportunities will lie, the matrix aims to set out the broad goals. The matrix also has designed outcomes
realistically given the pace o f reform in Tunisia. As the program i s implemented, the Bank and
Government will jointly assess progress and update the matrix to reflect the increased specificity o f
results and indicators and to ensure continued alignment with the country’s program.

70.
Naturally any attempt to show attribution for outcomes i s difficult because the Bank has
limited influence on the achievements o f broad social and economic objectives. Rather, the goal i s to
assess contribution instead o f attribution. Achieving and demonstrating results will remain a critical
element o f the Bank’s program and monitoring results o f Bank-financed interventions will coincide with
overall monitoring o f Government results in the National Development Program. In this regard, the Bank
will ensure that results indicators in projects/programs are those which are shared by the Government and
will provide continuous support to strengthening capacity at the national level for monitoring and
evaluation.

E.

CPS Program

71.
The Government and the Bank have agreed on the CPS Program that supports Tunisia’s
strategy to generate employment through establishing a knowledge based economy with emphasis
on human development. The pillars o f the CPS are:

1. Growth, competitiveness and employment;
2. Sustainable development and climate change; and
3. Improving the quality o f service delivery.
The Bank’s program i s hereafter laid out along the lines of these three pillars and its delivery i s focused
through six results areas that facilitate targeting o f activities, tracking o f impact and monitoring of results.
Both the country-specific activities and the regional activities which cover Tunisia are described
(Appendix 3), as well as Tunisia’s interface with the Arab World Initiative (Appendix 4).

72.
IFC’s partnership with Tunisia will continue in the next few years, with efforts focused on
the infrastructure and financial sectors. On a case by case basis, IFC will also support private led
investments in the social sectors (health and education) and in the manufacturing sector. In the
infrastructure sector, IFC will continue its support to the Government’s PPP program, with an emphasis
on the power (gas-fired and renewable energy generation), water (sanitation and desalination) and
transport (ports) sectors. In the financial sector, IFC will support the country’s banking sector, through
direct investment in important banks, and a continued focus on enhancing domestic financing to local
SMEs, including micro-finance institutions.
Pillar 1. Growth, Competitiveness and Employment

73.
Given its political and economic importance and the high priority assigned by the NDP, the
employment challenge i s central to the CPS. To address this, the Bank’s program focuses on two
results areas which combined should help Tunisia transform over the long-haul into a knowledge
economy and generate employment for an increasingly educated population. The first results area
addresses the growth and composition o f the demand for labor by deepening global integration, enhancing

25

the environment for private sector (especially SMEs) and financial sector development, as well as
opening space for the development in Tunisia o f a knowledge economy through greater global integration
o f services and improved conditions for existing business to innovate. The second results area turns
attention to the employability o f labor, with the aim to improve the adequacy o f the skills mix supplied by
the educational system and to develop the labor market policies and social assistance mechanisms that
w i l l facilitate an increased mobility o f labor in the economy. In both o f these areas, the Bank’s work will
increasingly take a regional outlook as regional integration i s critical to further growth. Success achieved
in Tunisia in addressing unemployment would yield valuable lessons for other countries in the region.

Results Area 1: Deepening Trade & Facilitating the Transformation of the Economy

and services

The export penetration o f new markets i s increased
Logistics costs are reduced
Greater convergence o f product standards and quality norms to
the EU and international norms
The services sector i s better integrated to the regional and global
economy
The enabling business environment for private Strengthen implementation o f competition law
sector (SMEs) improves
Continue to improve the quality o f the business environment
Capacity o f the financial sector to fund
Improved stability o f the banking sector.
productive activities increases
Improved access to finance
Improved institutional and regulatory environment for microfinance
Access to finance o f MSMEs and private sector participation in
infrastructure increases through IFC investments
The foundations for a knowledge economy are Increased share o f ICT sector in GDP
Streamline science, technology and innovation (STI) policy at the
strengthened
highest levels.
Agriculture Sector performance improves
Increase in average agricultural income o f rural households in the
North-West region o f Tunisia
Agricultural production systems improved and crops diversified

74.
Together, the various components o f the first result area work to facilitate the
transformation o f the economy with the contribution o f the CPS organized around three themes. The
first theme focuses on global integration through support to rationalizing tariff protection, trade
facilitation and logistics with the objective to open to competition those activities (including services) that
have not been well integrated into the global economy through improving conditions under which
businesses operate. The second theme i s to improve the environment for businesses (especially SMEs)
through reducing the regulatory burden, curtailing anti-competition behavior and strengthening the
capacity o f the financial sector to intermediate savings and finance investment especially among small
enterprises and new entrants. Lastly, the CPS assistance focuses on two sectors that the government has
assigned a special priority, strengthening the foundations o f the knowledge economy and agriculture.
Deepen Global Integration for Trade in Goods and Services

75.
The CPS will support a greater integration o f Tunisia into the global economy. The World
Bank Group’s support focuses on a gradual reduction in the external tariffs and thus the level o f
protection o f the on-shore economy, which includes the serviced sector and where the Tunisian economy
has a great potential to generate skilled jobs. Thus far, the growth o f the services sector has lagged the
growth o f the rest o f the economy and i t s participation in total exports i s below that at countries with

26

similar levels o f development. The tariff reduction and simplification i s already underway and will serve
to eliminate distortions across various preferential trade regimes with the support o f the Integration and
Competitiveness DPL program (ICL). The first ICL was already delivered in FY09 in close collaboration
with the EU and African Development Bank (AfDB) and the second phase will be delivered in FY 1 1 and
will deepen the agenda.

76.
The CPS will continue to provide strong support to the improvement o f logistics to help
further the integration of the economy into the global markets. The expectation under the CPS i s to
help reduce the direct and indirect costs o f trading with the rest of the world. Although Tunisia already
has made progress in developing a working logistics sector that facilitates trade, recent analytical work on
trade points to gaps that need attention for the country to be fully integrated into international logistics
networks. To help close these gaps, the Bank will continue supporting improvements in the access to
export markets through availability o f finance and support for the improvement o f trade logistics. The
third phase of the Export Development project (FY 11) will build upon and anchor more deeply the
institutional reforms and support to SMEs started in the first two phases o f the project, whose positive
achievements are informing the design o f similar projects in the region (see Appendix 8 for full details on
the Bank’s Export Development projects in Tunisia). Further work on logistics i s carried out under a
PPIAF, AAA and other trust funds. While the Government has not requested Bank financing for transport
in FY 10 or FY 1 1, the large program o f transport infrastructure investments outlined in the NDP and the
stimulus plan mean that future requests for financing may be forthcoming. The WBG would consider
such requests positively given its long-term engagement in the transport sector, both through lending and
providing technical advice.

77.
Work on integration and trade facilitation will have a regional focus as well. A broad AAA
program - strengthened by additional activities o f the Arab World Initiative - will address specific
regional issues such as barriers to integration, cross-border trade issues, regional transport and logistics,
and regional financial systems (see Appendix 3: Regional Integration Activities for more details). The
Bank i s discussing with its regional partners potential activities in the trade and transport sectors that
could strengthen the overall momentum and widen benefits expected from facilitated trade. The Bank’s
role i s that of convener and facilitator, as well as knowledge partner and potential future financier. The
support of the Bank aims to complement the priorities of the EU’s Regional Transport Action Plan for the
Mediterranean Region 2007-2013. In the area of logistics, the Bank’s program i s looking at the following
initiatives; (i) audit o f logistics efficiency on intraregional trade aiming to support improved trade
facilitation between countries; (ii)regional trade facilitation and logistics conferences for Maghreb
countries; and (iii)a study on logistics training programs to agree on quality standards and develop
curricula for the training of logistics specialists in each country.
78.
As part of the focus on global integration, the I F C will continue supporting inward and
outward South-South investment flows. IFC will assist companies interested in investing in the region
and other developing countries given that Tunisia i s proving to be a source o f South-South investments in
the Maghreb and Africa. IFC has financed some projects with Tunisian sponsors looking to invest within
the Maghreb and other developing countries in the areas of manufacturing, banking, and health, insurance
and leasing. Conversely, as it did in the past in the infrastructure sector (Enfidha Aiport), IFC will also
support investments in Tunisia by other regional or other emerging markets investors.
The Enabling Business Environment for Private Sector (SMEs) Improves

79.
The CPS prioritizes improving further the business environment, especially in the on-shore
sector o f the economy and for SMEs. As the economy opens, the CPS supports a strategy that increases
the attractiveness o f doing business in Tunisia, building on the continued progress shown to date in this
area (Doing Business 2010 places Tunisia in 69thplace, an improvement o f four rankings compared to

27

2009). The strategy i s based on a large body o f analytical work that has identified the main restrictions to
doing business and the needed reforms to allow the country to move to a more knowledge-based one.
Particular focus will be on strengthening competition law and support to SMEs, and tracking progress
through periodic surveys. This i s being supported by the ICL series, the Export Development Projects, as
well as through AAA (a possible future AAA could cover specific aspects o f the business environment for
services sector development - construction, tourism, financial, real estate).
Capacity of the Financial Sector to Fund Productive Activities Increases

80.
The Government i s working on improving the stability o f the banking sector and deepening
its ability to finance new economic activity. The Government’s work to improve the performance of the
financial sector i s on the analysis and recommendations o f the 2006 FSAP by the Bank and the IMF, a
recent policy note on S M E financing (Appendix 9: SME financing in Tunisia) and on the on-going
regional flagship report on the financial sector. The assistance of the Bank, tracked in part through the
ICL series but delivered mainly through AAA, will center on improving the stability o f the banking
system by reducing the share o f non-performing loans and increasing the share o f provisioning. In
addition, the support foresees increasing financial resources from the banking and financial sector towards
SMEs and the creation o f new companies. IFC will maintain its engagement in the financial sector
focused on (i) improving access to finance and competitiveness especially o f SMEs; (ii) exploring
financing opportunities o f large and complex private sector infrastructure investments which will help
unleash the growth potential o f the country; and (iii) engaging in sectors that are not serviced by Tunisian
commercial banks, . e.g. IT, health, and education. IFC will retain flexibility and continue exploring
opportunities in Tunisia where it can add value and where it has a clear developmental role to play. IFC
and the Bank will also work together, as requested, on supporting public private partnerships.

81.
Support for the financial sector includes a regional focus. The Bank’s Arab World Initiative
(AWI) knowledge program i s looking at the benefits o f greater financial integration in the MENA region
and the 2010 Flagship Report for MENA will focus on the financial sector. For the Maghreb, the Bank’s
AAA work encompasses assessing possibilities for enhanced competition and greater scope for
economies o f scale. The Bank i s aiming to contribute to the Maghreb financial integration effort by
maintaining an active policy dialogue and offering technical assistance in areas critical for harmonization:
(i) governance o f the banking system, (ii) managing financial crises, (iii)accounting, auditing and credit
reporting; and (iv) insolvency and creditor rights.
The Foundationsfor a Knowledge Economy are Strengthened

82.
The support for the knowledge economy centers on the further development of the I C T
sector as part o f a strategy that seeks to make the services sector overall more competitive. The ICR
project (FY05) will continue to be implemented and a new TA will be conducted on innovation and high
technology that will seek to identify promising high-tech/knowledge-intensive sectors and provide
guidance on how they should best be supported. Further, to create conditions that foster the development
o f high value industries, the Bank i s completing a AAA on Competitiveness Poles and would consider
financing investments as part o f a follow-up project in FY 1 1 or later years. Such a project would support
the development of competitiveness poles to be designed and managed by the private sector targeting
high value-added industries through the financing o f needed infrastructure, technological platform
(incubators, technological resources centers), and technical assistance.
Agriculture Sector Performance Improves

83.
The CPS proposes to continue support for agriculture and the rural population. The Bank
will continue supporting interventions that improve the incomes and socio-economic conditions o f some

28

of Tunisia’s poorest people who live in the rural areas o f the north west of the country, with a focus on
farmers associations, SMEs and micro-finance.To this effect, the Bank will prepare a fourth phase o f the
North West Development Project (FY 1 1.) The Government has also requested a follow up on the Bank’s
Agriculture Sector note and Agricultural Support Services Project (which closed in December 2008) with
an operation in agriculture in FY 1 1. This operation may take the form o f a DPL and would be delivered
in close cooperation with the EU which has ear-marked budget support in this area.
Results Area 2: Improving Employability
ResuWOutcomes at end-FY13

Specific Areas of Focus

Institutional framework for higher education
favors quality improvements

Improved access to higher education
Quality Assurance Agency for higher education fully operating
The Grants under the Competitive Fund (PAQ) are completed
and evaluated
Regional plans for technical and vocational education are under
implementation
Greater integration o f ICT in education and training
Improvement in the utilization rate o f continuous education
Improved incentive environment for hiring workers
Improved safety net for the unemployed

Skills o f professionals and graduates improve
through continuous education

Facilitate employment through effective and
well targeted Labor Market Policies

84.
CPS activities under this results area support the objective o f increasing the employability
o f labor from two perspectives. On the one hand, the CPS includes work to improve the alignment
between the needs o f the labor market and the supply o f skilled personnel coming into the market. On the
other hand, the CPS will support the reform of the labor market in an effort to combine greater flexibility
in hiring and firing with a more adequate system o f social assistance that protects workers rather than
specific jobs.
Institutional Framework for Higher Education Favors Quality Improvements

85.
The CPS supports improvements in the quality of education and greater adequacy of the
supply o f skills to the market. First, the focus on inclusion will continue at all levels of education, while
at the same time promoting excellence in teaching and learning. In this regard, higher enrollments are
expected in secondary and tertiary education, which are supported by the on-going Education and Higher
Education projects. Here the agenda includes reforms o f the institutions o f higher learning that would
provide the universities with greater autonomy and would engage the private sector more forcefully in the
delivery o f educational services.
Skills of Professionals and Graduates Improve Through Continuous Education

86.
The work on skills and their adequacy will be supported by the Education and Higher
Education Projects and a Skills Development Project (FY11). The latter will support the government
to put in place a program that includes (i)consolidation o f the partnership between the training system
and private sector; (ii)reform of the financing mechanisms used for pre-service and in-service training;
and (iii)developing a life-long learning policy framework. The project will define the specific results
under the program. The AAA program will focus on skills analysis and youth inclusion which will
encompass analyzing the current skills o f the unemployed youth and how these align to what the market
needs.

29

Facilitate Employment Through Effective and Well-Targeted Labor Market Policies
87.
The CPS will respond to the request of the Government to support labor market reform
through a new DPL program on Employment (FYlO), with a focus on easing o f hiring and firing
restrictions. This DPL i s under preparation and specific reforms are not yet identified. Extensive AAA
(through the Programmatic ESW on Employment) i s informing the design o f the Employment DPL. This
DPL, like the ICL, will be closely coordinated with the European Union that also has earmarked budget
support in this area. The Employment DPL will be delivered in alternate years to the ICL, thus ensuring
one DPL operation per year in Tunisia. In addition, the Bank will continue i t s AAA program within a
programmatic framework which encompasses Active Labor Market Policies (ALMP), study on youth
exclusion (looking at unemployment issues beyond educated youth), social protection, and education.
The gender dimensions of the unemployment challenge will feature strongly in these activities. IFC will
consider investing in sectors that are both technology-intensive and labor-intensive. Employment
generation, as well as the skill-intensity o f employment, will remain key selectivity criteria for IFC during
this CPS period. IFC’s focus on the financial, infrastructure and select high value-added manufacturing
and social sectors will also support this objective.
88.
The Government and the Bank are discussing options for support to different aspects of the
current social protection system. The Bank’s AAA program can provide support for targeted reforms to
the social protection systems which can increase labor mobility and job creation, while at the same time
improving efficiency in budget management. The Government has expressed an interest in support for
piloting labor-intensive services such as early childhood development, old-age and community nursing
and after-school tutoring which can be win-win in terms o f human development outcomes and in terms o f
employment (especially for female and university graduates). Other areas of work could encompass
statistical capacity building for better monitoring o f vulnerabilities and impact evaluation o f social
programs. The specific activities in this area will be discussed in the CPS Progress Report as confirmation
on the lines o f engagement i s not yet in place.
89.
At the regional level, the Bank’s program in the Maghreb countries encompasses different
elements of employability issues (more details are in Appendix 3): (i) skills development - improving
the quality and relevance of post basic education to give better job opportunities for young people,
through the development o f a regional qualifications system; (ii)building the capacity of management and
provision of Quality Assurance (QA) in Higher Education in the MENA countries, to enable them to
participate in the mutual recognition of International Qualifications and Standards. The Mediterranean
Integration Program will help the Tertiary Education Institutions and the Quality Assurance Agencies in
the MENA region to reach the European QA standards; (iii)activating labor markets,- building the
capacity (including design, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation o f results) for effective labor
market intermediation institutions to improve matching o f demand and supply for existing skills; better
employer-focused skills enhancement; facilitating the transition between education and employment;
creating opportunities for young people to develop entrepreneurial skills and income generating activities,
supported by twinning arrangements between relevant and interested public sector institutions in the
EuroMed area; and (iv) improving social protection and labor management for migrants - in partnership
with the European Training Foundation (ETF) and IOM, facilitating legal and safe intermediationo f labor
demand and supply across the Mediterranean.
Pillar 2. Sustainable Development and Climate Change

90.
The CPS supports the government’s commitment to manage the impacts of climate change
and to maintain the leadership position it has built in the region. While Tunisia has been in the
forefront in MENA on environmental issues, it still faces serious challenges on environmental
sustainability and natural resource management. The main challenges include, first, the limited

30

availability of water, which i s likely to decrease in the future and, second, the growing dependence on
fossil energy. The Government i s looking to the Bank to step up its assistance to respond to these
challenges given the Bank’s broad experience in the country through its previous and on-going
interventions on the environment, energy, agriculture and water sectors and its global knowledge o f
climate change issues. To respond, the CPS aims to focus efforts to bring about synergies across
activities around an integrated approach which delivers value-added over the long-term while addressing
urgent issues. The World Bank Group will therefore target its interventions towards producing results in
two cluster areas which are: (i) strengthening environmental and natural resources management; and (ii)
promoting energy efficiency and renewable energy. As regards the latter area, the CPS recognizes the
linkages between this pillar and pillar 1 whereby investment in clean energy can create more jobs per
dollar invested than investment in fossil fuel energy. As part o f the CPS program, the Bank will endeavor
to mobilize greater financial support for Tunisia through the Clean Technology Fund, Carbon Funds, GEF
and other Trust Funds. Greater use of country systems for environmental and other safeguards will also
be carried out.

Results Area 3: Strengthening Environment and Natural Resource Management
ResuMOutcomes at end-FY13
Measures to strengthen the management o f water
demand in place and measures to increase water supply
introduced
Progress in managingthe impacts o f climate change

The negative environmental and health impact in cities
i s reduced

Specific Areas of Focus
Irrigation intensity i s improved
Strengthen infrastructure for wastewater re-use in Tunis
Improved soil conservation
Improved conservation, utilization and management o f
natural resources
Increased capacity for dealing with climate change
Reduction o f national ozone depleting potential
Increase volume o f sewage collected in Greater Tunis
Improved modalities o f public private partnerships for
waste management
Improved management o f health waste

Measures to strengthen the management of water demand in place and measures to increase water
supply introduced

9 1.
The CPS supports Tunisia’s strategy to manage judiciously and in a sustainable manner its
limited water resources. I t supports both the demand side to curb the use o f water and the supply side
by increasing its availability. On the demand side, the Bank will promote more efficiency in the
management and operation o f selected irrigation schemes, improved access to and consumption o f
drinking water in poorly-served rural communities, and strengthening the water institutions in demand
management practices. The Bank will provide its support through the recently-approved Second Water
Sector Investment project (FY09) and a follow-up operation in the outer years o f the CPS. On the supply
side, the Bank will assist in developing the re-use o f treated waste water for irrigation purposes, through
the planned Northern Tunis Wastewater project and its GEF partner project (both FY lo), which may also
have a follow-up operation during the CPS period depending on progress. In turn, building on the
Government’s efforts in promoting PPPs in the water sector, the IFC and the Bank will consider investing
in private-sector sponsored projects in desalination and water sanitation. Tunisia i s one o f the priority
countries for the IFC comprehensive MENA water sector strategy initiative.
The AAA program will provide further support to the government in water management
92.
through continued evaluation o f the implications o f climate change for water resource management and
analyzing options for water supply-augmenting projects (desalination and waste-water re-use), which

31

could be submitted to careful cost-benefit analysis, explicitly incorporating future climate change
scenarios and developing analytical tools required to deal with trade-offs. The Bank will also continue to
support key reforms and institutional strengthening, building on the recently-completed Water and
Sanitation Strategy (April 2009), through further promoting demand-driven water management,
incentivizing water savings and better controlling ground water extraction. The Bank will provide
technical advice to the Government in the re-balancing of water resource allocation in favor o f higher
value added production in irrigated agriculture through the proposed Agriculture/Climate Change Project
(FY 11). Other areas of support through regional and country AAA would be in helping the Government
with disaster risk management based on Tunisia’s vulnerability to weather induced hazards whereby the
Bank can work with the Government on mainstreaming disaster risk reduction into priority sectors to
mitigate disaster risks.

Progress in Managing the Impacts of Climate Change
93.
The Bank will support Tunisia’s efforts to improve land management practices, with
emphasis on creating sustainable production systems in rural areas. The focus o f the Bank’s work
will be on helping farmers improve agricultural productivity and natural resource management through
soil and water conservation, small-scale irrigation, agro-forestry and pasture improvements. The goal i s
to ease the vulnerability o f some o f the poorest communities in Tunisia and develop better capacity to
manage the impacts of climate change. Bank support for these efforts will be provided through the
Community Based Integrated Rural Development Project (FY 10) and its GEF complement the Water and
Land Optimization Project. An Agriculture/Climate Change project will also be delivered in FY 1 1 (as
mentioned in paragraph 83). Other projects already mentioned, the Northern Tunis Wastewater project
(FY10) and the North West Development Project (FY11) will also contribute to improving land
management practices and incorporate as necessary disaster risk reduction measures. Tunisia is also the
recipient of a PHRD Grant on Climate Change o f the Forest Ecosystem that will provide further synergies
with other Bank work. The Bank will continue i t s support to help Tunisia reduce ozone depleting
substances in the country through the on-going Ozone Depleting Substances project. The Gulf o f Gabes
project will continue to focus on coastal environmental issues that are being exacerbated by climate
change.

The Negative Environmental and Health Impact in Cities is Reduced

94.
The CPS supports the country’s environment agenda to meet the mounting urban
challenges. Objectives of the government’s environment agenda in urban areas include improving
municipal solid waste management practices, containing coastal erosion, developing infrastructure that i s
adapted to climate change impacts, and reducing landfill gas emissions and the production of ozone
depleting substances (these issues are being supported by the on-going portfolio o f projects - Gulf of
Gabes, Ozone Depleting Substances, Landfill Gases Project, Municipal Development and Sustainable
Municipal Solid Waste Management). In particular, the CPS provides concerted support to consolidate
improvements in solid waste collection, disposal/treatment and management services, with a focus on cost
effectiveness and environmental sustainability while benefiting from carbon finance funds. The on-going
Municipal Solid Waste Management Project and Municipal Development projects will provide this
support.
95.
Lastly, the Bank will use several regional initiatives to provide further support to Tunisia in
addressing climate change especially in the context o f the Arab World Initiative. Relevant initiatives
include a multi-donor regional climate change trust fund, study on social impacts o f climate change, an
assessment o f the climate change ecosystem of the region, technical support to planning and capacity for
waste water treatment and a regional analysis looking at the economic and social impacts o f climate
change on agriculture. The city of Tunis i s also covered under a regional study on the vulnerability o f

32

coastal cities to climate change and natural disaster. In the water sector, MENA supports capacity
building o f institutions such as the Arab Water Council, and activities such as the Arab Water
Management Initiative, Regional Water Initiative and a regional IDF in Public Engagement in Water
Management. Finally, the Marseille Center for Mediterranean Integration has two relevant programs on
Strategic Urban Development and Cities and Climate Change which will also facilitate knowledge
sharing in the region.
Results Area 4: Promoting Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy

Improve Energy Intensity
Reduce dependency on fossil fuels

Reduced energy intensity o f GDP
Decline in Green House Gas emissions
Increased energy efficiency investment
Increase the share o f renewable energy in primary
energy

Improve Energy Intensity

96.
The Bank’s program supports the ambitious strategy o f the Government in the energy
sector to reduce the intensity o f energy by 3% per year which recognizes the importance o f effective
energy efficiency policy and related investments. The goals o f this program include (i) providing a
larger and more secure energy supply through scale-up of the potential in renewable sources; (ii)
promoting enhanced energy efficiency in key sectors such as industry, transport and residential buildings;
and (iii)contributing to global efforts to control carbon emissions. The design o f the strategy under this
pillar has benefited from Bank’s AAA delivered mainly through the Programmatic ESW which i s
supported by the Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) Global Partnership (a type o f
trust fund). The ESMAP covers various studies to review the country’s energy management policy,
assess the options for pricing methodologies and procedures, identify barriers to energy efficiency
improvements, increase penetration of renewables and make recommendations to scale up investment in
energy efficiency and renewable energy.

97.
To increase the supply of efficient energy, the Bank i s helping develop a local market to
finance energy-efficiency investments by the private sector. To this effect, the recently-approved
Energy Efficiency Project (FY09) provides lines o f credit to financial institutions in Tunisia to finance
investments and assistance to develop the capacity to evaluate these investments. Pending on the pace o f
project progress and the demand from the private sector, the Bank would consider a follow-up operation
later in the CPS period. The Bank i s also supporting enhanced energy efficiency in the industrial sector
through the implementation of a Global Environment Facility (GEF) Energy Efficiency project (FY05).
Another GEF grant has been requested by the Government o f Tunisia in FY 10 to complement the Energy
Efficiency IBRD project through technical assistance and biomass pilot projects. In turn, IFC i s
committed to support viable renewable energy investments, contingent on the evolution of the Tunisian
regulatory environment and the availability o f well designed private sector sponsored renewable energy
generation projects. In a first phase, this will consist o f providing financing, as needed, to industrial
companies seeking to generate wind power for their own consumption. In a second phase, IFC will also
consider solar generation projects.
Reduce Dependency on Fossil Fuels

98.
I n a further effort to increase domestic supply of non-fossil fuel energy, the Bank i s working
with the Tunisian authorities on accessing resources o f the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) in order
to help the country use i t s large, and largely untapped, renewable energy potential for wind and solar

33

energy. Tunisia’s solar energy potential could be promoted in the context of the Bank’s regional initiative
on Concentrated Solar Power (CSP), launched together with the African Development Bank, which i s
likely to get up to $750 million concessional financing for the region from the Clean Technology Fund
(see Appendix 5 for details). This initiative has synergies with the Mediterranean Solar Plan which
promotes CSP and other renewable technologies, as well as regional market integration. Tunisia has
already proposed several projects for consideration in the CSP regional investment plan. Further support
to develop wind energy will come through preparing a carbon finance operation that will purchase
Certificates of Emissions Reductions (CER) from the Sidi Daoud wind farm of 34 MW. Several other
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) projects are in preparation with Bank assistance, including a
solid waste project and a gas flaring reduction project.
99.
To curb energy demand, the Bank i s preparing a Low Carbon Transport Strategy in support
of the Government’s stated objectives of improving the energy efficiency of the transport sector and
reduce i t s vulnerability to oil price increases while decreasing GHG emissions, air pollution, and noise
pollution through some specific strategic decisions and actions. This i s part of the NDP’s focus for the
transport sector on energy savings activities as part of an overall coherent strategy to reduce energy
consumption and pollution.
100. The CPS supports sharing o f knowledge on energy at the regional level, where Tunisia’s
experience can serve as a model in various areas and should contribute to activities under the AWI.
For instance Tunisia has been conducting industrial audits and offering capital subsidies for energy
efficiency investments since the late 1980s, and the approach could be adopted by other countries. The
U M A (Union for Arab Maghreb) organization has set-up several committees to improve cross-country
cooperation and one of them i s focusing on energy efficiency programs in industry and buildings. The
Bank i s coordinating on these initiatives. In addition, the Bank i s bringing international knowledge to
inform the thinking behind a possible creation of a regional energy market by being an honest broker in
helping cross-border coordination, bringing experience from other regions and catalytic financing,
including for interconnection projects within the Maghreb. The Bank has very recently been asked by the
Government to provide technical assistance to the early stages of a possible interconnection project
between Tunisia and Italy that would involve a sub-marine cable between the two countries. This could
eventually lead to a future request for financing of the project.
Pillar 3. Improving the Quality o f Service Delivery

101. Following good progress in ensuring access to services, the Government sees as the next
challenge to improve the quality o f service delivery, particularly as regards delivery of services to
citizens (education, health, and municipal services.) The support under the CPS i s grouped around two
results areas: (i) improving the quality of social services; and (ii)strengtheningthe capacity of the state at
central and municipal levels to deliver quality services.
Results Area 5: Improving the Quality o f Social Services
ResultdOutcomes at end-FY13
Remain on track to meet the MDG education goals

The quality o f service delivery and long-term efficiency
at hospitals improves

Specific Areas of Focus
Primary Completion Rates move closer to 100 percent
Quality o f basic and secondary education improved
Improve availability o f outpatient and inpatient services
and medical goods at hospitals
Build operational and financial management capacity at
the central government and hospital level

34

Remain on Track to Meet the M D G Education Goals
102.
The CPS will support the Government’s commitment to the continued transformation o f
the education system and address the efficiency in the delivery of health services. In education the
strategy of the government is: (a) to continue improving access in secondary and tertiary education; (b) to
work on quality at all levels; and (c) to achieve a greater level of matching between the supply of the
educational system and the needs of the market. In line with this strategy, the government has asked the
Bank to provide support through the Employment DPL, Education, Higher Education, and Skills
Development projects, which have already been discussed under the first pillar.

The Quality of Service Delivery and Long-Tem Efficiency at Hospitals Improves

,103. I n the health sector, after two years o f World Bank technical assistance, the Government
has invited the Bank to work on improving the quality of hospital service delivery and the efficiency
and sustainability of financing for health services. The Bank will respond to this request for advice and
resources to improve service delivery at hospitals through a Health project, which will be delivered in
FY 11. Support to the health sector will also be provided through an Avian Flu Trust Fund that was
activated in August 2009.
Results Area 6: Strengthen the Capacity of the State at Central and Municipal Levels to Deliver
Quality Services
Specific Areas of Focus
Procurement reform
Multi-annual budget and performance based budgeting
Further integration and alignment o f public financial
management with international standards and good
practices.
Improved relevance and targeting o f public services to
the private sector
Living conditions in urban areas improved by upgrading Surveys under the Municipal Development Project show
improvement in the perception o f quality o f l i f e
the quality o f service delivery by municipalities
Enhanced performance indicators o f SONADE
Financial indicators for CPSCL improve each year
Greater private participation in solid waste management
More efficient and sustainable development o f Cultural Number o f visitors to museums supported under the
Heritage potential
project increases.
Results/Outcomes at end-FYU
Capacity o f the public management system improves

Capacity of the Public Management System Improves

104.
At the level of the central Government, the CPS will continue to support the Ministry of
Finance with the modernization of budgetary practices. The Bank, in close cooperation with the EU,
i s providing analytical and methodological support to strengthen budget management through multi-year
programming and improved expenditure efficiency through performance-based budgeting (PBS). The
work undertaken thus far has already led to the development o f MTEFs in education, higher education,
and vocational training. In mid-2009, a PEFA exercise was launched in Tunisia which will analyze and
make recommendations on strengthening the public expenditure management system, and provide a
benchmark to track future progress. The Bank will also continue to work with Tunisia on the successful
experience of using country systems for financial management by further integration and alignment of the
country’s PFM arrangements with international standards and good practice. In this regard, two main

35

areas will be the focus o f attention; (i)move towards computerization o f the accounting system which
remains manual despite a well computerized budget; and (ii) supporting a more comprehensive view o f
the public sector control systems and framework.
105. Additional support includes assistance with the reform of public administration. The
Government has recently requested the Bank to mobilize Trust Fund financing for the National Program
for the Development o f the Public Administration (known by its French acronym PROQAP). This
program i s an ambitious one that targets the modernization o f the public administration through (i)
focusing on the quality o f services to the public and enterprises, especially as regards services targeted at
SMEs and the R&D sector; (ii) reducing costs through optimization o f procedures and (iii) strengthening
human resources. Bank support will come through AAA and the mobilization o f trust fund resources.
Living Conditions in Urban Areas Improved

106. The CPS supports strengthening o f municipalities to deliver better services and bring about
improved living conditions in urban areas. The main thrust in this regard foresees strengthening the
operational capacity o f the Caisse de Pr&tet de Soutien aux Collectivites Locales (CPSCL) that provides
lending to and manages central transfers to municipalities. The Bank’s contribution centers on the design
o f incentives to improve municipal finance performance and on the upgrading o f the capacity o f CPSCL
to select projects and co-finance investments. The Government has asked the Bank to continue its support
and focus in addition on large agglomerations and on the preparation o f urban development strategies
focused on environment sustainability issues. The main instrument to support these objectives will
continue to be the Bank’s Municipal Development Project, which i s now in its third phase and for which a
fourth phase i s planned under the CPS. The expectation i s that these efforts will contribute to improving
the living conditions in urban areas, the perception of which will be tracked by the follow-up Municipal
Development project through periodic surveys.
107. Complementary efforts to improve the quality o f life in urban areas center on waste
management, sanitation, urban services and preserving cultural heritage. Rapid urbanization i s
putting pressure on sanitation services and waste management. The Government has requested the Bank
for a follow-on operation to the Solid Waste Management project with delivery likely in FYI2 to
consolidate improvements in solid waste collection, disposalhreatment facilities and management
services, with a focus on cost-effectiveness and environmental sustainability, benefiting from carbon
finance funds.

More Efficient and Sustainable Development of Cultural Heritage Potential

108. The Government has indicated its desire to have a follow-up Cultural Heritage project to
the one currently underway that would cover issues o f heritage preservation (including rehabilitation o f
old urban centers, medinas), cultural industries, urban management, and local economic development.
The Bank will seek to continue to innovate in responding to this request and to ensure synergy with other
urban and municipal development projects underway or planned.

F.

Financing

109. The proposed IBRD lending program i s confirmed for FYlO through official requests
received from Government and project preparation i s already underway (Table 2). Tunisia can
access a financial envelope o f up to $280 million in FY10, of which 25% i s likely to be development
policy lending. This financing will be sufficient to cover the Government’s IBRD requests in FY10.

36

Thereafter, the Government would likely only request higher levels o f IBRD financing should it face a
protracted difficult global environment and not mobilize sufficient financing elsewhere either on the local
or global markets’*. Such a request would be considered in the context o f IBRD’s overall resource
availability.

110. The lending program for FY11-13 i s indicative at this stage and will be managed in the
context o f country demand and the Bank’s ability to service such demand in the context of its
capital position. For now, the Government has indicated i t s project requests for FY 1 1, o f which several
are already under preparation. The FY 12 and FY 13 lending program i s indicative only and currently
outlines the natural evolution o f the Bank’s long-term engagement in certain sectors and thus foresees
follow-up DPLs for Integration and Competitiveness and for Employment, as well as follow-up
investment operations in Education, Higher Education, Energy Efficiency, Water Sector Investment,
Tunis Wastewater and Solid Waste Management. These and other possible new operations would be
agreed with Government during the course o f CPS implementation and as the country situation evolves.

I

Community Based Integrated Rural Development
F Y I1

I

Integration and
Competitiveness DPL 2

,I
Municipal Development 4

Other: GEF Operations for FYIO: Land and Water Optimization $10.7m, Tunis Wastewater $8m and Energy
Efficiency $3.5m. GEF Operations for FY 11: Eco-Tourism $2.8m and Health Waste $6m.
The Sidi Daoud Wind Farm will benefit from the Carbon Finance facility ($2.6 million),
A Japanese Social Development Fund (JSDF) grant o f $2 million i s being finalized for an Active Labor Market
Policy in support o f Community Based Child Care Centers
A Trust Fund Grant of $3 million i s being mobilized in support o f the National Program for Development o f the
Quality o f the Public Administration (PROQAP).

’’

The prudent management by Tunisia o f i t s debt, its good access to international capital markets, its mastery o f risk mechanisms
and its strong relations with donors suggest that the country will be able to comfortably secure the needed financing.

37

G.

AAA Program

Improving Employability

Global Crisis
T A on Unique Identifier
PPIAF on Transport Logistics

Competitiveness Poles ESW
Innovation & Technology T A
Assessment o f Government Debt Market

in MENA

T A Financial Sector
Regional Flagship Report on Financial
Sector in MENA
Doing Business Assessments

Employment Programmatic ESW
ALMP (incl. thesis competition)
Social Protection AAA
Youth Exclusion Study
Skills Development Analysis
JSDF on ALMP for Community Child
Care Centers
Maghreb Regional Migration Study

ANGE
Strengthen Environment & Natural Resources Management

PHRD Grant on Climate Change Impacts on the Oak Forest Ecosystem
PROFISH - TA on Fisheries
Global Facility for Disaster and Risk Reduction (GFDRR)
Regional Costs o f Water Degradation AAA
Regional GEF in support o f planning and capacity for waste water treatment and
recycling
Strengthening Capacity for Clean Development Mechanism
Pilot on Use o f Country Systems for Environmental Safeguards
Multi-Donor Regional Trust Fund on Climate Change

Promoting Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy
Programmatic ESW Energy
Regional Energy Management Incentive
(REMIT)
Concentrated Solar Power (studies and
TA)
Low Carbon Transport Strategy AAA

c Administration Trust Fund (PROQAP)
TA Public Financial Management (follow up to ROSC Accounting and Auditing)

VI.

R I S K S AND IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES

11 1. The global crisis i s the most immediate risk facing Tunisia due to the recession in the EU
and Tunisia’s dependence on the EU market for its exports. Should the crisis continue across the
medium-term, this will likely result in a further drop in demand for Tunisia’s exports and a reduction in
foreign direct investment. The economic risks can be partly mitigated through continued strong
macroeconomic management: Tunisia’s track record shows that it has good capacity to respond to
negative shocks and, so far, it has weathered the impacts well. The Bank hopes to help mitigate this risk
through ensuring close monitoring of the overall macroeconomic context through regular liaison and
dialogue with the Government and an enhanced AAA program that focuses on management o f macrorisks and impact of the global crisis, as well as just-in-time analysis of options for remedial measures. If
the crisis proves longer-lived, the Bank’s program can be adapted through the application of the principle
o f flexibility.

38

112. IFC’s program may also be affected in the event of a continued deterioration o f Tunisia’s
macroeconomic situation, declines in FDI, and reduced risk appetite o f local and foreign investors.
During the financial crisis, IFC has been actively engaged in portfolio management and i s ready to
provide assistance to existing clients in need o f restructuring their companies to adjust to the external
environment. IFC also actively stepped up to mitigate the impact o f the sharp contraction o f available
external private financing by initiating early discussions with interested bidders in relation to ongoing
infrastructure PPPs (power and water) on alternative financing options and IFC’s potential contributions.
113. There i s a risk that the desired outcome o f the increase in public investment will not
materialize because of lack o f fiscal space to follow through on the stimulus package. Given
Tunisia’s room to engage more public debt, the financing from local and external sources (including
IBRD and other development partners) should help to mitigate any possible squeezing in fiscal space.
Moreover, the Government has consistently shown that it adheres to its fiscal deficit targets (below 3%)
and manages its reserves prudently. This macroeconomic management provides a solid foundation for
responding to the negative impacts and suggests that policy will respond in the face o f negative shocks.
The launch of the PEFA in mid-2009 could also allow the Bank and other partners to provide an updated
assessment on the management o f public finances.
114. The nature and ambition o f the reform agenda may be such that only slow progress will be
made. The goal o f the Bank Group’s program i s to ascertain carefully when opportunities for addressing
difficult issues arise, build on the analytical foundation and then respond in a supportive and beneficial
way. Tunisia has shown that it engages steadily but, in some cases, slowly on reforms as many important
reform measures are based on a consultative and consensus-building approach that takes time. Given the
complexity o f such reform measures, a key consideration for this CPS includes the need to be more
sensitive to the time-frame o f reforms and not just the substance of reforms. This underscores the
importance o f ensuring knowledge sharing on the “how” o f reforms and not just the “what”. The Bank
Group will also endeavor to have wider dissemination o f analytic work and continued consultations with
development partners, civil society, private sector and other actors to help generate a broad consensus for
reform. The impact o f the crisis may have a positive effect here as it underscores the urgency o f timely
reforms to ensure that the economy - and the private sector in particular - can respond.
1 15.
There is a risk that the NDP may not achieve the desired success and that growth rates will
remain respectable (at 4-5 percent) but not reach a higher level. I t i s possible that the risks already
identified above will combine with a slow implementation o f the NDP and Tunisia would, in the mediumterm, get stuck exporting low-productivity goods and would not be able to master the high-productivity
knowledge-intensive course that it wants to take. The Bank Group hopes to mitigate this risk through a
broad program of support to the goal o f transforming the economy that encompasses global integration,
private sector development (especially SMEs), skills development, education, labor market reforms and
innovation. In particular, the Bank Group will make available international best-practice knowledge to
Tunisia and can draw on i t s global experience in other countries that have pursued such a path.

116. There are implementation risks to the Bank’s program given the problems of slow
procurement. Tunisia’s track record in implementing IBRD investment projects i s satisfactory but .not
stellar and there i s a room for more progress to be made here. Mitigation measures being taken include a
gradual increase in the use o f the DPL instrument within the allowed lending envelope, continued AAA in
support o f the Government’s reform program which focuses on implementation, continued intensive
procurement training and stepped-up portfolio support on the investment portfolio through reinforcement
o f the Bank’s decentralized team in the Tunis office. The risk o f implementation delays in the DPLs i s
being mitigated through careful design that takes into account the necessary time-frame for reforms and
lays out a building-block approach to reform measures to ensure continued engagement.

39

0
d-

M
Y

iz

x

'0

9

%
0

8

8
8

1

C

9

Y

m

B
8
3

m

c)

0

G
o

Y

3

d-

x

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

N
d

*

* *

m
d

.-m

u
C
cd

4
a,
*
m

.*E

d

u

ri

0
VY

Y

8

8

.3

W

seI

.-C

z

cd

C

.e

VY

B

e

a

*

*

4

*

*

*

*

I

0

CI

m
a,

3

.-m
e
c

e
0

r
0
c

a,

e

a,

8
a,
Y
*

*

2c4

-

-E!
P

Y

9

B
E!
P

Y

m

Y

8
9

3
m

a

5

a
0

Y

VY

s
C

I-

U

C

8

E
0

.
I

3
8

:

+

a

.-E
a
K
cd

.-c

0

e
a,

5

8

&

s

:
8
C

.-m
.-2
C

a
Q
6

b

c

3
Y

a

n

G
E
S

3

3
41

0
W
0

ri

ga
a,

5

zz
s

M

a
m

a,
0

u

a

3
c

L

.-a,L e
i
L

0

.

e

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Appendix 2
CAS COMPLETION REPORT

Date af CAS: June 3,2004

Date of CAS Progress Report: September 2 1,2007

Period Covered by the CAS Completion Report: June 2004 - March 2009
CAS Completion Report completed by:
Sophie Muller, Junior Professional Associate, and Eavan O’Halloran, Senior Country Officer, with
contributions from Country Team members.

Date: April 2009
Summary

The CAS Completion Report (CASCR) assesses the contribution o f the Bank’s program in Tunisia for the period
June 2004 -March 2009. I t concludes that the CAS strategic objectives were consistent with the government
program and the country’s long term goals.
Under CAS pillar I “Strengthening the business environment and improving the competitiveness of the Tunisian
economy”, clear results have been obtained in areas such as trade integration, access and quality of service in the
transport, water, and energy sectors, protection of the environment and the strengthening o f the banking sector.
Good progress has been recorded in improving the investment climate and business environment, although there i s
s t i l l room for hrther gains in this area.
Under pillar I 1 “Enhance skills and employability o f graduates and labor force in a knowledge economy”, significant
progress has been made in terms o f efficiency at all educational levels, while results have been modest regarding the
relevance o f the education system, employability o f the labor force and development o f a knowledge economy, and
insufficient in terms o f financial sustainability o f the education system.
Achievements of pillar I11 “Improve the quality o f social services through enhanced efficiency o f public
expenditures”, are notable as regards fiscal mobilization and debt management, where very strong results were
achieved. Progress in the areas of social protection policies has been slower than expected and only more recently
has some progress been made. Little progress has been achieved in the areas o f health and pension where the Bank’s
program during the CAS period was limited.
The Bank’s program in Tunisia i s characterized by a good country dialogue as the Tunisian Authorities value the
Bank’s support, especially for the knowledge aspect o f the Bank’s work. However, the CASCR highlights
implementation delays - based mainly on slow procurement - as a recurring issue that has affected the portfolio
quality.
An important conclusion of the CAS CR i s that Tunisia made steady progress in areas where it committed to reforms
and provided the necessary leadership and resources, although sometimes the pace o f this progress was slower than
expected. This was due to the political sensitivities o f the reforms and the need to build consensus across
stakeholders in the country which naturally demand more time.
Key considerations for the next CPS period include the need to be more aligned with the country’s own national
development plan, be more sensitive to the time-frame of reforms and not just the substance o f reforms, and to
provide enhanced support to Government in addressing unemployment.

49

Introduction

1.
The CAS completion report (CASCR) assesses the effectiveness o f the 2004 Country
Assistance Strategy for Tunisia in bringing about expected results and highlights the lessons
learned over the period. The report’s conclusions will inform the new Country Partnership Strategy
(CPS). It i s an evaluation tool for the Bank’s country team to help guide strategic thinking for the future
and learn important lessons from past engagement.
2.
I n addition to discussions with the country team, this assessment i s based on reference
documents such as the CAS, the CAS Progress Report, Project Implementation Status and Results
Reports, supervision reports (Aide-Memoires and Back-to-office Reports), Implementation Completion
Reports, IEG reports and QAG Assessments. The draft of the CASCR has been shared with the Tunisian
Government and their reactions and comments will be incorporated.
3.
The 2004 CAS had a strong focus on results with a detailed results matrix. As such, it
provides a set of core measurable outcomes that has helped guide the implementation o f the
program and facilitated’the assessment process. Since it was the first attempt by the Bank in Tunisia to
systematically identify results and indicators, it was conceived as a joint learning exercise where lessons
learned would help design subsequent monitoring and evaluation efforts. However, the results matrix had
important weaknesses - it was very ambitious, over-reaching and applied a standard of attribution rather
than contribution to the Bank’s activities in influencing development outcomes. Moreover, the Bank’s
program in Tunisia evolved significantly from what was laid out at the time of the CAS so many
important activities were not encapsulated in the results matrix.

I. Tunisia’s Long Term Strategic Goals
4.
The 2004 CAS was designed to support Tunisia’s loth National Development Plan (20022006) whose main goals were to (a) accelerate the pace of growth in order to reduce unemployment, boost
incomes, and consolidate Tunisia’s progress in the reduction of poverty; (b) foster the emergence of a
knowledge economy in order to take advantage o f Tunisia’s valuable human resources and facilitate
integration in the global economy; and (c) uphold social achievements by ensuring that all social groups
participate in the benefits of economic and social development.
5.
I n 2006, the Government set an ambitious agenda to double per capita incomes by 2016 and
to reduce unemployment from 14 percent to 10 percent over the same period. Tunisia’s 1 Ith
National
Development Plan for the period 2007-11 supports this agenda and i s based on four pillars: (a)
accelerating private sector driven growth; (b) maintaining macro stability; (c) upholding social
achievements and human development and (d) preserving natural resources.

-

6.
The key challenges identified in the CAS (a) employment growth and (b) maintenance o f
macro stability and social achievements were fully in line with the Government’s development
agenda. The three strategic objectives (pillars) set out in the CAS: (a) strengthened investment climate
and competitiveness, (b) improved education quality and graduate employability for an increasingly
knowledge-based economy, and (c) improved social services through more efficient public expenditure-Plan.
also respond directly to the goals of the 1 lth

-

7.
During the CAS period, Tunisia made progress towards these long-term strategic goals,
although challenges remain. The GDP growth surpassed the average rate of 5 percent a year that had
been anticipated in the base case scenario, since it reached 5.5 percent in 2006, 6.3 percent in 2007 and
4.5 percent in 2008 (thus averaging a 5.4% growth rate over the period). This i s particularly good given
the impact of the global economic slowdown in 2008. Overall, recent growth performance reflects the

50

dynamic behavior o f exports, robust private consumption and growing foreign investments. Tunisia has
been particularly successful in integrating into the global economy thanks to trade reforms, the
establishment o f a free trade area between Tunisia and the EU for industrial goods in January 2008, and
the signing o f a large number o f trade agreements with other partners. Sound macroeconomic
management has allowed Tunisia to resist adverse shocks, including the Multi-Fiber Agreement
dismantling in 2005.

-

8.
Tunisia committed to reforms in priority areas
such as supporting private sector
development (as witnessed by continued improvements in its ranking on Doing Business indicators)
and reforming higher education and indeed some notable progress was made. However, reforms
took longer than anticipated which had an impact on the expected results. The modest level o f gross
private sector investment (between 13 and 14 percent between 2005-2008), remains a concern that i s
shared by the Government and the Bank. Moving forward, the Government recognizes the need for
building on past progress and strengthening reforms to support private sector investment and to ensure
that growth and investment further accelerate and translate into job creation.

-

9.
Despite the admirable progress on economic management, the unemployment challenge
remains and i s threatening Tunisia’s good economic and social achievements. The 1 lth
Plan
considered that an annual growth rate o f at least 6.1 percent was needed to reduce unemployment. While
growth has been respectable, it fell short o f this target (except in 2007) and no progress was made in
terms o f reducing the unemployment rate over the CAS period, which hovers around 14 percent o f the
labor force.
11. Progress and Achievements of CAS Outcomes

10.
Outcomes for each CAS pillar are analyzed in terms o f the pillar’s main objective, related
Bank instruments and the CAS monitoring indicators. I t i s understood that activities in any particular
pillar are likely to contribute to the outcomes o f other pillars, that CAS activities build on each other, and
that each outcome i s likely to be influenced by more than one instrument and by activities in other pillars.
Consequently, pillars are not separated or seen in isolation, but as the main arteries through which efforts
and resources flow in the direction towards achieving the CAS goals.

1 1.
Although the results matrix has proved relevant in the assessment process, some weaknesses
have been noted. I t was far too detailed and ambitious given the nature of the Bank’s program and often
the choice of indicators was not the most appropriate. The CAS had clearly indicated the need to better
define some indicators as the implementation was progressing, and set the CAS Progress Report as an
opportunity to do so. Yet, it seems that this has not been done as the result-matrix does not report relevant
updates. Where data on indicators i s weak, the assessment has also used information related to CAS
milestone^'^ and incorporated qualitative judgments. The CAS results are collectively summarized in
Annex 1.
A. Pillar I Outcomes: Strengthening the business environment and improving the
competitiveness o f the Tunisian economy

12.
This CAS pillar responded directly to both the loth Development Plan (2002-2006) and the
llth
plan (2007-2011) that set the objectives to accelerate growth, integrate Tunisia to the global
economy and promote the role of the private sector. The ECAL I V project and the Bank’s AAA work
have been the backbone o f the Bank’s engagement in the competitiveness agenda. Building on the
l 4 CAS milestones are intermediate outcomes that were incorporated to the results matrix to track implementation towards
expected CAS outcomes.

51

analytical work, the ECAL IV focused on improving the regulatory framework for private investment and
strengthening competition. Overall, CAS outcomes under this pillar have been satisfactory. Clear results
have been obtained in areas such as trad,e integration, access and quality of service in the transport, water,
and energy sectors, protection o f the environment ‘and the strengthening of the banking sector. The
promotion of economic competition has, however, yielded more moderate results.

13.
I n i t s March 2009 report, I E G evaluated the Bank’s performance in Tunisia on earnings
growth and employment creation and gave the Bank’s Program a satisfactory outcome rating. The
report concluded the following (i)the Bank’s strategy and interventions were relevant to the issues; (ii)
performance was strongest in the Bank’s support to macroeconomic policy; (iii)there was a positive
contribution from the Bank on trade liberalization and fiscal policy; and (iv) high quality work was
delivered on the financial sector, including work undertakenjointly with the IMF.
Outcome 1.1 Improved incentives system and increased transparency and predictability of the regulatory
fiamework: satisfactory
Table 1
Performance Indicators
Baseline
Goals for 2008
Result (year)
Increase in annual FDI inflows
$650 million average
Increase by 50%
$1.6 billion (2007)
S 2.038 billion (est. 2008)
for 2002-2003

Proposed Activities
0
0
0

Economic Competitiveness DPL (ECAL) I V
ECAL V project
ICA

0
0

0

Activities Undertaken during CAS
ECAL I V project (2005-2007)
SME Study (2007)
Global Integration Study (2007)

14.
The CAS monitoring indicator shows considerable progress, other relevant data provide
important contextual elements. The CAS monitoring indicator, which was the increase in annual
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows, surpassed the target, as shown in table 1. However, the IEG
report o f the ECAL IV points out that FDI was relatively limited in a few sectors - the large increase in
FDI in 2006 reflects US$2.35 billion received from the partial privatization of Tunisie TBlecom, and
around two thirds of overall 2007 FDI went to the energy sector.
15.
The CAS monitoring indicator may not be the most suitable to assess achievements under
this outcome. As stated in the CAS, this outcome also has to be measured against indicators of the ECAL
IV”, which were defined after the CAS and the result matrix were finalized. One of the ECAL IV
indicators shows that investments by on-shore and off-shore companies have increased but the target set
in 2005 was not met: On-shore investment grew by 6.1% instead of 9.7% and off-shore investment grew
by 17.7% instead of 37.9% (perhaps reflecting overly ambitious expected indicators at that time). The
ICR o f the ECAL IV indicates that the number o f private investment opportunities increased and the
number of administrative authorizations for private investment and the delays in granting authorizations
have been reduced. However, the CAS Progress Report expressed concern about the low level o f
domestic private investments, and highlighted the need for better understanding the reasons for it and
identifying measures to help the authorities redress the situation. Further improvements o f the business
climate are being supported by the FY09 Integration and Competitiveness Loan - ICL (proposed in the
CAS as ECAL V), which was approved by the Board in March 2009. In addition, the Loi sur l’lnitiative
Economique that was enacted in December 2007 contains several “investment climate” reforms, including

’’

PDO Indicators o f the ECAL I V are: (i)level o f bank provisioning as a share of NPLs; (ii)job creation by private sector; (iii)
evolution of investment by on-shore and off-shore companies; (iv) evolution o f FDI and (v) number and amount of new l i f e
insurance contracts.

52

provision on the protection o f investors; and the level o f private investment showed some recovery signs
in 2008.
16.
The Bank contributed to noticeable results with regard to the tax system, the increased
transparency of accounting standards and the improvement of the competition regulatory
framework. Following an assessment o f the fiscal system, undertaken as part o f the ECAL I V project,
the fiscal Law no. 2006-80 was enacted in December 2006, normalizing VAT rates and reimbursement
mechanisms and simplifying the relationship between tax payers and tax administration. The standard rate
o f corporation tax was reduced from 35 percent to 30 percent in order to increase competitiveness and
encourage investment. The ECAL IV also contributed to improved transparency and respect o f
international accounting standards with the requirement for public companies to publish certified financial
statements. The Competition Authority and the competition regulatory framework have been improved
thanks to the Law 2005-6 that aims at strengthening the power o f the Competition council, notably in
terms o f auto-seizure, the council’s independence and actions taken against unfair competition. However,
the Global Integration Study underlined that while Tunisia’s competition laws meet international
standards, implementation issues remain and the capacities o f the competition authorities could be
enhanced. Recognizing this situation, the Government undertook to pursue these reforms with the support
of the Bank’s Integration and Competitiveness Loan (FY09).

17.
Some progress has been made towards other CAS milestones such as leveling o f the playing
field between off-shore and on-shore firms and upgrading the capacity of the judiciary. Despite
considerable Government’s efforts to reduce the incentive gap between onshore and offshore sectors in
recent years, as witnessed by the continued improvement in the Doing Business indicators and other
indexes such as the Global Competitiveness Repod6, the on-shore sector s t i l l faces constraints. In
contrast with offshore firms, formal enterprises selling in the domestic market cite what they perceive as
anti-competitive practices and unfair competition stemming from privilege, informality, tax and social
security avoidance. Following a round-table of magistrates that took place in January 2007 to assess
Bankruptcy procedures, bankruptcy regulations have been implemented.
18.
Sustainability o f the outcomes o f the ECAL I V i s high due to the particular attention given
to supporting the reform program, the clear commitment o f the authorities and the synergy
between donors supporting the reforms (the WB, AfDB and the EU). The design was the result o f an
extensive dialogue with the Tunisian authorities, which were very active in the loan preparation and, in
some cases, went beyond the committed benchmarks o f the loan agreement. This activity i s also a good
example o f donor coordination since it was designed, implemented and supervised jointly with the EU
and the AfDB. The cooperation between partners was excellent and the presence o f the EU, World Bank
and the AfDB in Tunis helped the dialogue between all three institutions and with the Government.
Other activities proposed in the CAS have not been carried out, at the client’s specific
19.
request. The Investment Climate Assessment was not conducted as planned because the authorities
wished to carry out the analysis on their own, with some limited level o f Bank support. This involvement
helped foster country ownership and capacity building but, at the same time, did not allow for
international benchmarking. Instead o f producing an ICA, and as requested by the client, the Bank
delivered a SME Study. Focusing on SME development, the study provided concrete recommendations
for the reforms o f the technical centers o f the Ministry o f Industry and of industrial land management in
Tunisia, and contributed valuable input to the Ministry o f Industry’s strategy in these two areas. Another
result o f the study was the capacity building o f IEQ (Institut d’Economie Quantitative) to independently
conduct ICA surveys and analyze the data.
l 6 Tunisia’s ranking on the Doing Business Indicators improved from 8 I in DB2008 to 73 in DB2009 and 69Ih in DB2010. In
the 2009 Global Competitiveness Index, Tunisia i s ranked a commendable 361h place.

53

Outcome 1.2 Lower transaction costs: moderately satisfactory

Table 3
Performance Indicators

Number of procedures to start
business reduced
Minimum capital requirement
reduced

Baseline
10 in 2003

4

Result (year)
10 (Source: Doing
Business 2009)

352% o f GDP in 2002

<50%

Eliminated (2008)

4%

7% of estate (Source:
Doing Business 2009)

2 days

2 days (2008)

Goals for 2008

8% of estate in 2003

Cost of closing business reduced
Customs clearance and technical
controls delays reduced

Average o f 8 days in
2003

Table 4
Proposed Activities
e

e
e

Economic Competitiveness DPL (ECAL) I V
ECAL V project
Export Development I1 project
Information Society project
Additional demand-driven policy notes

Activities Undertaken during CAS
Projects under way at start o f CAS:
e Export Development Iproject (2000-2004)

Activities undertaken during CAS:
e ECAL I V project (2005-2007)
e Export Development I1 project (started in 2005)
e ICT Sector Development project” (started in 2005)
SME Finance policy note (started in 2007)
e Global Integration Study (2007)
TA Development o f logistics services and
infrastructure (2008)
e TA for implementing Trade Integration Reforms
(started in 2008).

20.
Two out of four indicators were met, as shown in table 3, and two CAS milestones” were
achieved, which are the revision o f the Customs Code and the continued reduction o f the number o f
tariffs on imports outside the E U (which was reduced from 14 to 9). Some reductions also took place in
the applied most-favored nation (MFN) tariffs on imports o f inputs and intermediate products from the
rest o f the world. Little progress was made, however, with regard to the dismantlement o f import
monopolies and the modernization o f commercial registries. A study on the modernization of commercial
registries was carried out by the Bank in 2004, but no action was taken by the Government until March
2009 when the Inter-Ministerial Council o f Tunisia adopted a draft law amendment designed to ensure an
effective updating of the information contained in commercial registries. This measure was a prior action
o f the I C L that was approved by the Board in March 2009.

Strong results were achieved in the areas o f customs and trade facilitation thanks to the
21.
Bank’s Export Development projects I and 11. Activities supported by the Export Development I
project, which was rated satisfactory by IEG, helped improve trade transactions. Customs clearance and
technical controls now take 2 days on average, compared with an average o f 8 days in 2003. This was
achieved through the simplification and adoption o f international standards for trade documentation, and
” ICT Sector

Development project was called Information Society project during CAS preparation.
CAS milestones are intermediate outcomes that were incorporated to the results matrix to track implementation towards
expected CAS outcomes.

54

the establishment of electronic processing, through the creation of a semi-public agency (Tunisie Tradenet
- TTN). These results are likely to be sustainable as the modernized customs are now more focused on

trade facilitation than control. However, there i s a need for stronger coordination among different
agencies involved in the TTN network to accelerate progress in this regard. This issue i s currently being
addressed by the second Export Development project (EDP2), which pursues the same development
objectives and also includes a component on WTO technical barriers to trade enquiry point. Additional
financing of the EDP2 was granted in FY08 to respond to the high demand for Export Market Access
Fund (EMAF) services by the private sector. As of March 2008, this operation i s making satisfactory
progress. In addition, the ECAL I V contributed to the implementation of measures designed to reimburse
VAT taxes more quickly to those doing international business, which should create an incentive for
exporters.

22.
Although the two CAS indicators on business creation and closing costs did not register
strong improvements Tunisia made laudable progress on the Doing Business Indicators. Tunisia’s
ranking in the Doing Business survey improved from 8 l S t in DB2008I9 to 73rd in DB2009 and 69‘h in
DB2010 with major regulatory improvements in the area of business creation and in the financial sector.
Improvements have taken place regarding business transaction costs. The minimal capital requirement
was eliminated in 2008 but it i s not evident that this was due to the Bank’s contribution. Activities
initially planned in the area of ICT were modified and did not include a component on reducing
transaction costs and improving market access. The ECAL IV, as mentioned in Outcome 1.1 a,
contributed to reduce the number of administrative authorizations for private investment and the delays in
granting the authorizations.
Bank ESW, especially the Global Integration Study, played an important role in shaping
23.
the Government’s trade and competitiveness program. This study made various recommendations to
reduce the gap between preferential and MFN tariffs make the on shore sector more competitive and
harness the potential in services sectors, which formed the basis of the recently approved ICL operation.
The review of logistics services and infrastructure has prepared a strategy to develop efficient logistics
infrastructure and services that also helped inform the content of the ICL program. The SME finance
policy note, currently being finalized, focuses on the demand for enterprise credit and i s aiming at
identifying potential credit market failures and credit rationing for SMEs, and assessing the quality of
demand of credit. Preliminary findings of this study have provided inputs to the design of the ICL. In
addition, technical assistance i s being provided on tariff reforms to anticipate trade integration reforms to
be supported under the ICL.

l9 The

Doing Business website does not provide information on rankings prior to 2008

55

Outcome I.3 Improved delivery/efjciency of infiastructure services by public and private j r m s :
satisfactory
Table
Performance Indicators
BaseIine
Result (year)
Share o f I C T sector in GDP
No. of fixed and mobile telephone lines as YOo f
population
Share o f population using the internet
Internet hosts based in Tunisia
Container terminal o f Rad& privatized by
2006, deep-water port in Enfidha put in
concession and Center-East Airport put in
concession by 2006.

5% in 2003
32% i n 2003

60%

6.3% in 2003
1,625 in 2003

30%
4000

Subcontracting o f urban transport services
(passenger-km) by SociCtC des Transports de
Tunis.
Labor costs o f SNCFT of total operating
expenses
Increased gross investment in energy efficiency
in Tunisian industry
No. o f energy services enterprises in operation
(indicator added)
Energy saving

1.70%

3% in 2006

50% in 2006

58% in 2003

0

Average water tariffiaverage cost
Average sewerage tariff/ average cost
Unaccounted for water
Sewerage coverage rate (Indicator added)

98%in 2002
67.6% in 2002
20.1YOin 2002
Rural 4.8%, urban
80.1% and national
total 40.2% in 2004

Connection to potable water rate (Indicator
added)

Urban 98.7%, rural
40.2% and national
total 40.2% in 2004

Share o f municipalities with financial situation
problems that have restructuring plan contracts

9.2% (2008)
94.7% (2008)
27.25% (2008)
11,534 domain names (Jan 2009)
Concession process o f the Rades
container terminal has been put on hold.
Enfidha deep sea port: Bidding
documents have been issued to 8 shortlisted investors with a view to award the
concession in 2009.
Enfidha airport: Works are in progress
and the airport should open for traffic by
end 2009.
4.6% (2007)

52% (2007)

$20 million for
2005-2008
3

$16 million (2005-2007)

I O ktoe/year

200 ktoe/year on average (2000-2008)

110%
80%
18%

88.6% (2006)
61%(2006)
19% (2006)
Rural 5% in 2008,
Urban 87% in 2006 (in cities covered by
ONAS),
National total 55% in 2006
Urban 100% in 2006, Rural 91YOin 2008,
National 97% in 2006

100%

54%.
Out o f 132 municipalities which were in
difficult financial situation, 34 have
gained a sound financial situation per the
XIth Plan. Out o f the 98 municipalities
left, 53 municipalities Le. 54% - have
signed a restructuring plan and 45
municipalities i.e.46% are currently
preparing their restructuring plans which
are expected to be completed by June
2009.
In 2008, the Municipality o f the city o f
Sfax has launched a private concession
for the regional slaughter house.
4 private Parking contracts for
municipalities confirmed by end 2008
Pilot municipal waste collection by
private sector launched in 2 cities
2007 figure i s 455 TD
2008 figure i s 470 T D

8 (2009)

-

-

1 private concession project financed by 2005,
3 by 2008 in municipalities.

Increase o f tourism receipts by tourist
Increase o f no. o f visitors on cultural sites

3

400 T D per tourist
in 2002
3 million in 2003

-

5%
4 million

2.7 million (2007)

56

e

Proposed Activities
Urban Water Supply project
Energy Efficiency project
Tourism project
Tunis urban transport project (potential)
WBI capacity-building program on PPI
Infrastructure/water notes
Strategic environment assessment
Information Society project

Table 6
Activities Undertaken during CAS
Proiects under way at start o f CAS:
Transport Sector Investment Iproject (1998-2005)
Transport Sector Investment I1 project (started in 2002)
e Grand Tunis Sewerage project (1 998-2005)
Cultural Heritage project (started in 2002)
Municipal Development 111project (started in 2003)
Solar Heating GEF2’ project (1995-2004)
Ozone Depleting Substance M T 2 ’ project (started in 1994)
Activities undertaken during CAS:
ICT Sector Development project” (started in 2005)
Urban Water Supply project (started in 2006)
Energy efficiency GEF project (started in 2004)
Nine Landfills ICFZ3project (started in 2006)
Jebel Chekir Solid Waste Management ICF project (started in
2006)
Tunis West Sewerage project (started in 2006)
Sustainable Municipal Solid Waste Management project (started in
2007)
e Avian Influenza Preparedness project (approved in 2008)
Water and waste water strategy (2007)
e Review o f energy management policy (started in 2007)
e TA Development o f logistics services and infrastructure (2008)
e Financing strategy o f Urban Transport (2008)
Low Carbon Transport Strategy (started in 2008)

Overall, results under this outcome were good. Eight CAS indicators have been achieved,
24.
six partially achieved and three not achieved. However, those indicators that were partially achieved
have registered very good progress and one could conclude that the indicator was overly ambitious to
begin with. Four activities have not been conducted but five projects were added to the Bank’s program.

25.
I n the transport sector, the overall quality o f service has improved, the private sector
involvement increased and pollution reduced. During the implementation period o f the Transport
Sector Investment Iproject, the private sector’s share o f transport investments increased to 55% against
the baseline o f 25% and the target o f >50%. A reform o f the port sector has set the stage for a more
efficient model, more conducive t o competition and more commercially managed operations in ports. A
new transport law has also reformed the institutional framework and paved the way for new financing
mechanisms o f urban transport. This, combined with trade facilitation measures and custom
modernization achieved under the Export Development Iproject (outcome 1.2), resulted in increases in
efficiency and quality o f service. Regarding pollution, the use o f unleaded gas has increased gradually
from 4% in 1998 to 71% in 2005 and a regulation limiting the sulfur content o f fuel to 0.035% has been
approved and effective. The on-going TA on development o f a l o w carbon transport strategy will provide
valuable input regarding adaptation t o climate change and mitigation measures in the transport sector.
Implementation delays characterized both phases o f the Transport Sector Investment
26.
project, which had to be extended. This i s not only due to procurement delays resulting from the

*’Global Environmental Facility Trust Fund
2’
22

23

Montreal Protocol Trust Fund
ICT Sector Development project was called Information Society project during CAS preparation
Italian Carbon Fund

57

procedures of the Commission Superieure des Marches (cf. part 111), but also to the magnitude of reforms
prescribed under these projects and the time needed for the Government to establish and enact new
legislation.
All indicators have been reached in the energy sector and some were even surpassed.
27.
Achievements in terms of energy savings and the number of energy services enterprises created have
surpassed the targets. The value of gross investment in energy efficiency in the Tunisian industry may be
higher than the $16 million stated in Table 5 as this figure only reflects one part of the Tunisian industry
that i s dealt with under the Energy Efficiency project. The gross investment in energy efficiency in the
Tunisian economy as a whole i s $110 million. The Solar Heating project also reached i t s goal of
encouraging the use o f renewable energy, establishing a competitive market of suppliers in Tunisia and
strengthening renewable energy institutions. Nevertheless, energy programs lack continuity and are
heavily dependent on government financial support and international grants. For instance, the solar water
heater program slowed down when GEF support came to an end. This i s why the Government decided to
revisit i t s energy management policy, for which the Bank i s currently providing support.

28.

Significant achievements have been made in terms of access to water and sanitation, and
reduction of urban and coastal pollution. As stated in the IEG evaluation report of the Grand Tunis
Sewerage project, this operation has substantially improved the service levels of urban sewerage.
Appropriate new sewerage technologies have also been introduced and urban and coastal pollution has
been significantly reduced. The connection to potable water rate has greatly increased, in particular in
rural areas, as shown in Table 5 . An additional project on Tunis sewerage started in 2006 in order to
pursue the objectives of the first project. Urban water supply issues are also being addressed through a
Bank project that i s progressing slowly due to procurement delays. Finally, the Bank has provided the
Government with guidance on a water and waste water strategy that was finalized in 2009.

29.
Municipal infrastructure activities are producing mixed results, as the CAS indicators show.
The Municipal Development I11 project, still ongoing, has produced good results in terms of financing
priority municipal investments but the institutional strengthening component i s making slower progress,
although QAG has rated the achievement of development objectives as moderately likely. In addition to
the Municipal Development I11 project, the Bank i s providing technical assistance, via PPIAF, to the city
of Sfax to include private sector participation in the operation of a new slaughterhouse. The Sustainable
Municipal Solid Waste Management project, started in 2007, i s making progress, although delays
occurred in starting up the institutional component of the project.
30.
Efforts were made towards privatization of services, improved financial capacity o f public
enterprises and opening o f tariff regulations in the transport and water sectors. The privatization
processes have produced mix results. In transport, the container terminal of the port of Rades has not yet
been privatized but the concession o f the passenger terminal at the port o f L a Goulette has been awarded
and that of Enfidha deep sea port should come to fruition later in 2009, while the construction of the
concessionned Enfidha airport i s ongoing. Furthermore, private bus operators are providing 4.6% of urban
transport services in the Tunis area under concessions with the Ministry o f Transport. Private sector
objectives in the water sector have not been achieved because of the Government's change of view on the
Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) scheme that would have allowed the Office National de
1 Yssainissement (ONAS) to outsource some of its activities. Delays in concession processes are partly
due to the lack of capacity in Tunisia for private provision of infrastructure. The Bank played a role in the
preparation of the recent concession law and should pursue this effort and help Tunisian counterparts
develop regulations and tools to manage such complex procurement processes.
31.
The Government has faced challenges with regard to reforms aimed at improving the
financial capacity or reaching the financial autonomy of public enterprises such as the water utility
ONAS and Socie'te' Nationale des Chemins de Fer Tunisiens (SNCFT), and still subsidizes some

58

subsectors. Although the severance program for the SNCFT was fully implemented, i t s labor costs remain
above the 2008 target and its financial situation i s still fragile, as well as that of ONAS. Tariff
restructuring objectives in the water sector and on the financing o f public service obligations in urban
transport have not been reached either, partly due, in the water sector, to the changes in the Minister and
ONAS’ CEO, which made tariff increase decisions more difficult to obtain. The financing strategy o f
urban transport, recently completed, has identified sustainable financing mechanisms relying on non
budgetary resources for this sector.
32.
The I C T sector has substantially developed. Three out o f four CAS indicators, as shown in
table 5, have been met and even surpassed the target, showing evidence o f improved access to ICTs. The
ICT sector development project contributes to better delivery o f services also through the creation o f eportals such as e-culture that has been recently completed. An achievement o f this project i s the design o f
special software to enhance the learning performance o f disabled students (3,000 disabled students have
been reached to date) and the equipment o f 24 Internet centers to allow disabled persons to access the
Internet. Such an achievement i s considered as international best practice. However, delays in the
implementation of the process to award new fixed line and mobile licenses have prevented fwrther
liberalization o f the sector during the CAS period. The Government has recently announced its intention
to award new competitive licenses and the process i s expected to be completed by end 2009.

33.
Progress in the area o f cultural tourism has been steady but slow. The ongoing Bank’s
activity, the Cultural Heritage project, i s experiencing implementation delays and the other planned
activity, the Tourism project, was dropped because o f change in government priorities. Tunisia was the
first country where the Bank designed a free standing Cultural Heritage project. Although this project has
significantly contributed to the renovation o f some cultural sites and the improvement o f communication
on the national heritage, the implementation of major components i s slow, mainly because o f procurement
delays and the institutional difficulties within the two institutions in charge o f cultural heritage
preservation and management to adapt to techniques necessary to improve cultural heritage management
and promote cultural tourism. One should mention that no progress on CAS indicators should be expected
until the project closes since cultural visitors to the museums rehabilitated under the project will be
attracted only after the site works are completed. At the time o f the mid-term review, the project was
reduced to four sites rather than six. This decision was made to increase focus on a reduced number of
emblematic sites for added impact and also to accommodate for higher costs than originally expected.
However, as QAG underlined, the potential economic benefits may be underestimated from a “world site”
o f the caliber o f the Bardo museum (which i s being renovated and expanded with the support of the
project).
34.
Other Trust Fund activities are addressing the following issues: The Bank’s activity designed
to provide Tunisia with support in decreasing the use o f Ozone Depleting Substance (ODS) i s progressing
well despite the slow implementation. Waste management issues are tackled through two activities that
are aimed at installing a Gas Recovery and Flaring Project at the Djebel Chekir landfill and nine new
landfi11s.

Outcome I .4. Increased competitiveness of agriculture while enhancing environmental and social
sustainability: moderately satisfactory
Table 7
Performance Indicators

Improved irrigation efficiency
Other indicators to be proposed

Baseline

85% in 2003

Goals for
2008

105%

Result (year)

85% in 2005. No new data but related studies
do not indicate that there has been much
improvement since 2005.
The rural sector-wide review was only finalized

59

following the completion o f the
Rural Sector-Wide Review and
reflected in CAS Progress Report.

in mid 2009 due to delays caused by Ministerial
reorganization and by the need to refocus the
strategy to take into account Tunisia’s
accession to the preferential EU markets for
agricultural products. Therefore the sector
wide review was not completed in the CAS
period and no indicator was ever proposed

Table 8
Proposed Activities
Natural resources management I1 project
Water sector investment I1 project
Gulf o f Gab& project
Africa Stockpile project
Strategic environment assessment
Rural sector-wide review
TA and AAA on environment for harmonizing
environmental impact assessment systems,
mainstreaming environment in sectoral policies,
and developing environmental indicators
related to MDG#7

Activities Undertaken during CAS
Proiects alreadv under way at start o f CAS:
Natural Resources Management Iproject
(1 997-2004)
Water Sector Investment Iproject (2001-2007)
Agricultural Support Services project (20022008)
e
Northwest Mountainous and Forestry Areas
Development project (started in 2003)
Protected Areas Management GEF project
(2002-2009)
Activities undertaken during CAS:
Gulf o f Gab& GEF project (started in 2005)
e
Africa Stockpile GEF project (started in 2005)
e
Agriculture policy review (2006)
e
Cost assessment o f water degradation (2007)

35.
The objective o f increased competitiveness of agriculture has been partially met. The C A S
monitoring indicator does not indicate any progress and other indicators that were t o be added and included
in the C A S Progress Report in order to reflect the conclusions o f the rural sector-wide review, were not
actually added. It i s therefore difficult to determine the extent to which this outcome has been reached.
However, all projects that include components on agriculture competitiveness are rated moderately
satisfactory, and all C A S milestones24 have been met: the Water Sector Investment project contributed to
the implementation o f a water tariff structure based o n fixed and variable terms. 186 new irrigation schemes
have also been created or rehabilitated and 80% o f irrigated areas equipped with water saving techniques,
thereby increasing water productivity. The Agricultural Support Services project helped develop regional
research centers and programs and produce agricultural statistics. With the project support to agricultural
commodity trade associations, agricultural product quality and exporting capacity have also been improved.
The Northwest Mountainous and Forestry Areas Development project contributed t o increase in crop yields
and diversification and greatly supported poverty reduction efforts in the northwest region o f Tunisia, one
o f the poorest regions in the country. Some important issues affected the effectiveness o f the Water Sector
Investment and Agricultural Support Services projects, as highlighted in their ICRs, Poor access to finance
in rural areas has led to lower production ratios than anticipated; and the lack o f synergy between the Water
Sector Investment project and the Agricultural Support Services project limited their potential outcomes.
IEG rated the performance o f the Agricultural Support Services project as substantial based on progress
made towards specific project objectives.
36.
Good achievements were reached in terms o f environment protection. Achievements under the
Water Sector Investment project in this area, rated as modest by IEG, include the development o f several
maps showing areas at risk o f salinization and zones o f possible land degradation covering the entire
country, and the identification o f 206 potential sources o f water pollution and 11 sites which could use
CAS milestones are intermediate outcomes that were incorporated to the results matrix to track implementation towards
expected CAS outcomes

24

60

treated wastewater in non-agricultural sectors, so that water resources could be used sustainably.
Furthermore, the study covering the cost assessment of water degradation was able to build capacity on
environmental valuation, which will enable the Tunisians to replicate this type of cost analysis in other
sectors of the economy. The Protected Areas Management project, which closed at the end of 2008,
developed capacity o f national parks’ staff, public awareness of natural resources management, and
improved biodiversity conservation in three distinct ecosystems of Tunisia as demonstrated by the increase
in the number of selected species.

37.

The participatory approach developed by the Bank’s projects yielded good results in terms

of community development and social impact. The Natural Resources Management I project was
successful in promoting local integrated development and paved the way for participatory projects in
Tunisia. The first Water Sector Investment project achieved considerable progress in terms of community
development. An estimated 80% of irrigation schemes are currently managed by local water users

associations, although female participation remains low. As noticed by IEG, however, these local
associations have yet to achieve full financial autonomy and are not able to fully cover their operational and
maintenance costs. The Northwest Mountainous and Forestry Areas Development project has achieved its
objective of assisting 180 rural communities to formulate community development plans, which contributed
to better policy and planning framework for local governments and increased participation by the
beneficiaries. Continued support to these young institutions i s s t i l l required, however, in order to ensure
their sustainability. Improvement of irrigation schemes has also enabled beneficiaries to diversify and
increase their revenues, contributing to labor generation and a reduction in rural migration. The Bank’s
activities allowed the rural population to have better access to safe drinking water (cf. Table 5).

38.
Other planned activities have either been delivered, albeit later than planned, o r are under
preparation. The Natural Resources Management I1 project has been renamed the Community Based
Integrated Rural Development Project and i s currently under preparation for delivery in FYI0 and the
second phase of the Water sector investment I1 project was delivered in FY09. In the case of the Water
Sector Investment 11, i t s delivery was delayed as the first project had to be extended in order to complete
various project activities which took longer than planned given their innovative and cross-sectoral nature.
The ECAL I V has been instrumental in the reduction o f the level o f non-performing loans
39.
(NPL) and the increase in the provisioning ratio. The CAS target was almost fulfilled reaching 17.3% in
2008 and the provisioning and restructuring efforts of the NPL portfolio have brought their level to 53.8 %
in 2007 while the target was 55% for 2006. NPL levels are still high by international standards but similar
to other Middle Income Countries. New targets have been set up in the context of the 1lth
Plan and are
supported by the Integration and Competitiveness DPL (ICL): 15% o f NPLs and 70% of provisioning by
the end of the ICL.

61

Outcomel.5. Banking sector more responsive to the needs of the private sector: satisfactory

Performance Indicators

Baseline

Proposed Activities
0
0

0

Economic Competitiveness DPL (ECAL) I V
ECAL V project
Follow-up technical support to the ROSC
Accounting and Auditing
TA Support for Financial market integrity

I

Goalsfor2008

I

Result (year)

Activities Undertaken during CAS
Projects undertaken during CAS:
0

0
0

ECAL I V project (2005-2007)
FSAP Update (2006)
AML/CFT25Assessment (2007)
ROSC data module (2006)

40.
Overall, the banking sector has been institutionally strengthened. The 2006 Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP) Update provided the framework to allow the government to conduct a series
of reforms intended to improve the credit culture, promote good governance, and strengthen the legal
framework for banks. A 2006 legislation gives the Banque Centrale de Tunisie (BCT) new powers to
monitor the financial system, ensure alignment with prudential norms and regulations, enforce transparency,
and supervise publication of financial and economic data. Thanks to the ECAL I V project, transparency and
respect of international accounting standards have greatly improved with the requirement for SMEs to
publish certified financial statements. A working group has been set up to apply IFRS standards to
consolidated accounts. The credit registry sponsored by the central bank has been modernized and i s now
fully operational.
41.
Two out of three CAS monitoring indicators have met their targets and the third one shows
progress. The number of listed companies and mutual funds has increased and this trend i s continuing, in
particular as a result of fiscal incentives that have encouraged the opening of capital and stock exchange
listings.
42.
Significant progress was made with the support o f the ECAL I V in the development o f
contractual savings, especially in the insurance sector. As underlined in the IEG report of the ECAL IV,
the role of the insurance supervisor was strengthened, restrictions on the participation of foreign investors in
insurance companies were reduced, and the flexibility of companies to raise regulated insurance rates was
granted. In addition, a new law was passed that increased the mandate of the securities market regulator,
and enhanced the transparency o f the market. Sales turnover of life insurance rose 44% from 2005 to mid2007, while the capital of insurance companies rose 28% during the same interval. The total number of life
insurance contracts, however, has slowed down between 2005 and 2006 but this i s due to consolidation of
numerous small contracts and the value amounts o f the contracts have increased considerably from
56.5MDTto 78.4MDT.

’’ Anti-Money Launderingand Combating Financingo f Terrorists
62

Outcome 1.6. More dynamic local public and private financial markets: satisfactory

Table 11
Performance Indicators

Baseline

Increase no. o f f i r m s listed in stock exchange
Flexible money market interest rate created by
2007
Share o f bonds issues and increases in equity
capital through the stock exchange

42 in 2003

6% of gross
investment in 2002

Goals
for 2008
60

10%

Result (year)

5 1 listed companies and 57
mutual funds (end 2007)
Created in 2007
11% (2008)

(calculation: share of stocks and bonds issues
(excluding Government bonds) in the total
gross investment - Source: Central Bank)

Table 12

0
0

0
0

Proposed Activities
Economic Competitiveness DPL (ECAL) I V
ECAL V project
IDF Public Debt Management
TA on public debt management and development o f local debt market
Study on non-banking finance sector

Activities Undertaken during CAS
ECAL I V project (2005-2007)

0

B. Pillar I1 Outcomes: Enhance skills and employability of graduates and labor force in a
knowledge economy

43.
This CAS pillar was relevant to the Government’s development agenda to reduce
unemployment to 10 percent by 2016. Both the loth Development Plan (2002-2006) and the 1lthplan
(2007-2011) aim at expanding the knowledge economy and investing in Tunisia’s human capital.
Overall achievements under this pillar are moderately satisfactory. Significant progress has been made in
terms o f efficiency at all educational levels, while results have been modest regarding the relevance o f the
education system, employability o f the labor force and development o f a knowledge economy, and
insufficient in terms o f financial sustainability o f the education system. The 2009 IEG review o f three
countries’ performance o n growth and employment (Tunisia, Turkey and Columbia) assessed that the
Bank’s program on earnings growth and employment creation had been satisfactory and well adapted to the
needs.

Outcome 2.1. Improved quality and relevance of all levels of the education system: moderately
satisfactory

Table 13
Performance Indicators
Primary (first cycle) completion rate

Baseline
79.4% in 2003

Goals for 2008
90% in 2007

Result (year)
89% (90.6% for girls, 86.7 % for
boys) (200712008 school year)

Secondary education completion rate

45.5% for girls &
42% for boys in
2003
30.5% in 2003

50%

50.6% (57.2% for girls, 42.8% for
boys) (2007/2008 school year)

40% by 2006

39.4% (2007)

1000: 1

15:l

26 : 1(2007/2008 school year)

Percentage o f university students who
graduate from 2-year degree programs
Student to computer ratio in secondary
schools

63

Table 14
Proposed Activities
EQIP I11 project
Higher Education reform support 111 project
Vocational training project
PESW Employment
ICA
Study on lifelong learning and vocational
training

Activities Undertaken during CAS
Projects already under wav at start o f CAS:
EQIP Iproject (2000-2006)
EQIP I1 project (started in 2004)
Higher Education Reform Support I 1 project (1998-2004)
Proiects undertaken during CAS:
Higher Education Reform Support I11 project (started in
2006)
Higher Education strategy (2004)
Programmatic ESW (PESW) on Employment that
included (i) TA Employment strategy capacity building
(2005); (ii) TA Employment strategy (2006); (iii) TA
Skills development / social insurance (2007); (iv) TA
Skills development / social insurance (2008)

44.

The internal efficiency o f primary, secondary and higher education significantly improved.
The EQIP Iproject was rated moderately satisfactory by IEG as there was progress made on achieving the
development objectives. This operation did achieve results in terms of quality of primary education, mainly
due to the generalization of the competence-based approach. The completion rate came very close to
meeting i t s target (89% instead of 90%). The only area of concern remains the dropout rate in the upper
primary education, which kept increasing until 2006, partly because the number o f students increased and
the curriculum changes were not introduced until 2006. In higher education, the Higher Education Reform
Support I1 project contributed to introducing pedagogic reforms, teacher training, greater university
autonomy, quality assurance plans and to expanding shorter-term professional programs, which in turn
played an important role in improving overall quality. The follow-up Higher Education Reform Support I11
project made good progress on the implementation o f the new law approved in February 2008 that includes
the adoption of Quality Assurance Standards for external evaluation o f institutions.

45.
Sustainability of these achievements will depend upon better results in terms o f program
evaluation and stakeholders' involvement. The above-mentioned activities have introduced changes in
the areas of student assessment, teacher evaluation, and pedagogic reforms but have not allowed for
program evaluation, which would have ensured the sustainability o f the use of the new approaches. Their
outcomes would also have been greater had they developed a communication strategy towards parents,
teachers and communities in order to reach a larger consensus in favor of the reforms. Such issues are
currently being dealt with by the ongoing operation EQIP 11.
46.
Some achievements have been made in terms of relevance of the education system and
employability o f the labor force. The Higher Education Reform Project I11 was designed to deal with the
issue of relevance of the education system and included piloting two-year programs with the business
sector. The issues of integration of higher graduates to the labor market, skills mismatch and development
o f vocational training programs were analyzed through the PESW Employment, which was delivered under
a series of four TAs. This work fed into the design of the Higher Education Reform 111 project. The
capacity of monitoring and evaluating the relevance of education and employability has improved
markedly.

47.

The PESW has contributed to a sustained dialogue with the Government on Employment
issues covering a wide range o f topics. (See Box I on PESW Employment). The Government
demonstrated strong commitment and co-delivered several of the PESW outputs, and synergies were
created with activities under CAS Pillar I(such as the SME study). The Bank's PESW outputs fed into the
'national consultation on employment' that was carried out by the Tunisian Authorities in 2008.

64

Box 1: Main Achievements of the PESW Employment

The PESW Employment i s an innovative Bank instrument designed to provide the Tunisian Government with a
multi-year capacity building program in the area o f employment policy formulation and monitoring. This activity
was delivered during the CAS period under a series of four TAs, which have contributed to strengthening the skills
and methodology of the staff of the Observatoire de I'Emploi et des Qualifications (ONEQ). With the support o f the
PESW, the ONEQ and the Ministry o f Employment have co-delivered high quality individual level tracer surveys on
VET, Higher Education graduates and micro-credit ALMP graduates. In particular, the ONEQ has developed
capacity to deliver to very high standards, which i t could effectively share throughout the MENA region.
Furthermore, the MILES report (the integration report of the PESW, product o f the TA FY08) has received a warm
reception by various Ministries and the Ministry o f Employment has called it the 'new strategy for employment'.
The Bank's PESW outputs fed into the 'national consultation on employment' that was carried out by the Tunisian
Authorities in 2008. This consultation was aimed at developing concrete new employment policies, in various crossinstitutional thematic stakeholder groups, involving all relevant Ministries as well as the Higher Education sector,
Tunisian scientists from abroad, industry experts, the unions and research institutes. As a result o f this consultation,
a decree reforming the ALMP portfolio was issued in February 2009.
The initial steps for the planned project on vocational training have been conducted and have allowed for a sustained
dialogue with the Government over employment issues. This dialogue has recently led the Government to express an
interest in the Bank taking a leading role for a national reform for employment, under a DPL operation planned for
FY 10. As part of the PESW, a tracer survey of Vocational Training graduates was conducted, and the results will be
used as a baseline for the future professional development project (FY 10). As part o f the reforms to be supported,
the Government i s initiating financing o f TVET reform, through piloting the use o f vouchers for 1000 trainees.

Outcome 2.2 Improvedfinancial sustainability of the education system: not achieved

Performance Indicators

Baseline

Share of budget for non-salary
current expenses

2.5% for primary
education and 6.5%
for secondary
education in 2003

Share o f student services
outsourced

15% in 2003

Goals for 2008
remains at least
2.5% for primary
education and 6.5%
for secondary
education

3.3% for primary
education and 4.7% for
secondary education
(2008)

50%

20% o f housing

Result (year)

Table 16
Proposed Activities

EQIP 111project
Higher Education reform support 111 project
Vocational training project
Economics of education note

Activities Undertaken during CAS

Projects already under way at start of CAS:
EQIP 1 project (2000-2006)
EQIP I1 project (started in 2004)
Higher Education Reform Support I1 project (1 9982004)
Projects undertaken during CAS:
Higher Education Reform Support Illproject
(started in 2006)
Higher Education strategy (2004)

65

48.
The CAS indicators under this component were highly ambitious and consequently were not
achieved. The Higher Education Reform Support I1 project, which closed in 2004, was intended to support
the implementation of cost-recovery reforms, the increase of tuition fees, non-academic services and private
sector participation in service delivery. None of these materialized, and the non-salary expenditures even
f e l l from 12% to 5% of total expenditures for higher education. As part of the CAS goal on improved
financial sustainability, the restructuring of scholarships and loans schemes made some progress but did not
allow for major changes. Although the internal efficiency improvements impacted the financial
sustainability of higher education, it i s not sufficient to ensure the long-term sustainability of the system
given the growing demand for higher education in Tunisia.
49.
The weak achievements under this outcome were mainly due to an over-reaching CAS
objective that wasn’t grounded in the realities o f the reform environment. The overall implementation
of financial reforms of higher education rested on measures that did not change the existing structure o f
relying on state expenditures. The action of the Government towards such reforms was influenced by their
political sensitivity and the practice to guarantee free access to higher education. The Higher Education
strategy, which was mainly designed to inform the design of the third phase of the Higher Education
Reform Support project, did not manage to build a consensus with the Government on cost-recovery
reforms. More attention to developing a communication strategy and building support for financing reforms
amongst students and parents, who showed resistance to cost-recovery reforms and skepticism concerning
public-private participation, could have strengthened the outcomes. But the setting of this CAS goal was
overly ambitious and not relevant to what was feasible at that time.
50.
Possibilities for future improvements exist. The private sector participation has gained in
strength as a priority objective in the Government’s strategy. One has to acknowledge that reaching
consensus over policy reforms takes time and that the results of the Higher Education I1 operation that
closed in 2004 may bear f r u i t s in the future. The follow-up operation, which started in 2006, supports the
same objectives and i s making good progress on the implementation o f the new Higher Education Law that
was approved on February, 25, 2008. This law promotes increased autonomy for Universities and provides
opportunities to outsource student services. The Ministry o f Higher Education plans to introduce
performance-based budgeting and sign contracts with universities to deliver their work programs.
Outcome 2.3 Improved linkages between research, higher education and the market place leading to
greater innovation and competitiveness ofjrms: moderately satisfactory

Table 17
Performance Indicators
Share o f students graduating with
scientific and technological
qualifications
Employment rates among these
graduates

Doubling o f number o f start-ups by year
2008
Private sector investment in R&D (Note:
the baseline uses incorrect terminology.
The 0.75% figure for 2003 i s not for
private sector investment in R&D but
rather for total investment (private and
public) in R&D. For the sake o f
consistency, therefore, the indicator
should be “Investment in R&D”

Baseline

Goals for 2008

Result (year)

3 1.95% in 2003 and
32.87% in 2005

42%

34.8% (2007)

87% in 2004 (based on
2005 longitudinal
survey)

90% (2006)

There i s no reliable information on
this specific group o f graduates but
it i s unlikely that the indicator o f
90% has been achieved because
overall unemployment rates o f
graduates increased to 25 percent in
2008

0.75% o f GDP in 2003

Increase o f 50%

Total investment in R&D reached
1.19% o f GDP in 2008 and 1.25% in
2009.

66

Table 18
~~

~

Proposed Activities

TA for production o f annual report on knowledge
economy and support on scientific research policies
and innovation
Information society project
Follow-up support on knowledge economy and

innovation

Activities Undertaken during CAS

Pro-iectsalready under way at start o f CAS:
Agricultural Support Services project (2002-2008)
Higher Education Reform Support I1 project (19982004)
Projects undertaken during CAS:
Knowledge economy (2005)

Follow-up support on knowledge economy and
innovation (2007)

5 1.
The CAS indicator on private investment in R&D shows clear progress and some progress is
noted on students graduating with scientific and technical qualifications. Steps have been taken
towards better awareness of the knowledge economy. The Bank organized with the Tunisian authorities, in
November 2004, a national knowledge economy conference that included a wide audience from the private
sector, and helped raise awareness. This activity allowed building capacity of the IEQ, which was in turn
able to contribute a summary document at a Maghreb Knowledge Economy Conference held in Tunis in
early May 2005. Technical assistance has been provided to Tunisia in the preparation of an annual report
surveying knowledge economy developments and policies, the second edition of which was published in
May 2006 by IEQ. Yet, IEQ has produced no other annual report since 2006. The follow-up activity
consisted mainly in facilitating the idea of techno parks through a series of conferences. Two techno parks
are now operational and five others are under preparation. The government i s rehabilitating and expanding
industrial zones in different regions and i s trying to integrate them with research institutes and laboratories.

52.
Some improvements have been made in the development of the scientific and technological
educational system and linkages between research and the market place. The Higher Education Reform
Support I1 has been instrumental in the purchase of 42 lots of laboratory equipment, which benefited
students and teachers of several engineering schools, science faculties and Higher Institutes of Technology
(ISETs) throughout the country. The expansion of short-term professional programs at ISETs, whose
students are the most successful in finding employment, as well as the provision of teacher training for
ISETs have played a role. The Agricultural Support Services project also helped develop regional research
centers and programs and produce agricultural statistics.
C. Pillar 111: Improve the quality of social services through enhanced efficiency o f public
expenditures

53.
This pillar was aligned with the Government’s goal to uphold social achievements and
ensure equitable growth where all social groups participate in the benefits o f economic and social
development. Tunisia has made good progress in terms of fiscal mobilization and excellent progress in
terms of debt management by reducing the debt to GDP ratio to 47.5% in 2008 from 61% in 2003. Progress
in the areas of budget management and employment and social protection policies has been slower than
expected which reflects the complex nature of reforms in these areas and the need for a longer-term reform
horizon (as witnessed in many other countries). Little progress has been achieved in the areas of health
and pension where the Bank’s program was limited in these areas.

67

Outcome 3. I Increased budget flexibility and better fiscal mobilization to reduce public debt: satisfactory

Table 19
~

Performance Indicators

Reduction o f wage bill (% o f total
central government expenditures)

Baseline

Goals for 2008

Result (year)

46% in 2003

<40%

43% (estimated 2008)

o f GDP)

6 1YOin 2003

<55%

47.5% (2008)

Interest payments reduced to 10%
o f total central government

1 1.5% in 2003

Reduction o f total public debt (%

10%

10% (2007)

expenditures starting from year
2006 and kept below thereafter

Table 20
Proposed Activities

Activities Undertaken during CAS

Public expenditure review
IDF grant for public debt management
TA support for public debt management and
local debt market development

Proiects already underway at start o f CAS:
IDF grant for Public Debt Management (20042007)
TA support for public debt management and
local debt market development (2004-2005)

54.
The CAS indicators show good progress. The reduction o f total public debt i s a result o f the
government’s pro-active public debt management, which included using Tunisie Telecom privatization,
proceeds to cover a substantial share of the public debt. Notable progress was also made in reducing the
wage bill even if the CAS indicator wasn’t met (again, possibly due to an overly ambitious CAS indicator).
Furthermore, progress towards normalizing the tax system was achieved with the support o f the ECAL I V
as VAT rates reimbursement mechanisms were clarified (cf. Outcome 1.1).
55.
One may question, however, the extent to which the Bank contributed to this progress as the
PER was not conducted and the two Bank activities conducted under this outcome yielded poor
results. The ICR o f the IDF grant for Public Debt Management rated it unsatisfactory as activities were
achieved under only two out o f the five components. The objectives, however, were partly achieved
through other Bank instruments, including the Treasury’s Technical Assistance on Public Debt
Management in 2004-2005. But this TA has been executed only partially due to implementation delays and
limited coordination within the Bank, between this activity and the IDF grant, caused some confusion. The
improvement of budget management functions has also been supported through the PESW on Public
Financial Management (cf. Outcome 3.2).

Performance Indicators
piloted

Baseline

Goals for 2008

Result (year)

performance budgeting
piloted in two large
ministries by 2006 and
rolled out to key line
ministries by 2008

now structured their budget in
programs with performance
indicators for FY08; budget
law i s expected to be passed
in the new program structure
for these Ministries in
FY201 I

68

Table 22
Proposed Activities
0

0
0
0

Activities Undertaken during CAS

Public expenditure review
ECAL I V project
ECAL V project
Follow-up on CFAA recommendations
Potentially other ESW and TA

Pro-iectsundertaken during; CAS:
ECAL I V project (2005-2007)
0
TA Performancebased budgeting reform
(2005)
0
TA Public financial management (2006)
0
TA Public financial management (2007)
0
TA Budget management reform (2008)

56.

Important achievements were made under this component despite the complexity of the
reform and the time needed to reach consensus. Achievements under this outcome were reached with
the support of the PESW on Public Finance Management that was delivered under a series of four TAs. The
first TA, conducted in 2005, had modest impact on policy reforms and was rated moderately satisfactory by
QAG for this reason. The Bank pursued a step-by-step approach and dialogue with the government was
maintained through a dissemination workshop on budget reforms in the Maghreb countries in 2006, and the
delivery of a methodological guide for program budgeting classification in 2007. The reform i s now on
track and the government i s making good progress. Most of the necessary institutional arrangements for the
reform have been made and four pilot Ministries have restructured their budget by programs. The reform
master plan which was delivered in 2008 has raised awareness amongst the Tunisian authorities with regard
to the sequencing and the financial and technical implications of the reform. This result has been reached
thanks to a prudent and participatory approach where the master plan was developed in close coordination
with the Tunisian authorities. The global MTEF work has now begun, with financial support from the
European Union, a partner with whom the Bank has been working since 2006. Furthermore, although no
follow-up activity to the 2004 CFAA was conducted (as requested by the Tunisian Government), some of
the CFAA recommendations are included in this performance budgeting reform program.

Outcome 3.3 Improved coverage, quality and financial sustainability of health, social protection and
pension systems: not achieved
Table 23
Performance Indicators

Increase in health care expenditures
Decrease in the share o f private expenses
for health care
Share o f regional and university hospitals
accredited

No. o f ALMPs i s consolidated or reduced,
based on evaluation o f impact and costeffectiveness

Review o f the regulatory framework o f
the labor market and o f protection
mechanisms to improve flexibility o f the
labor market while strengthening
protection mechanisms for workers'
waees

Baseline

Goals for
2008

Result (year)

15% increase
letween 1987-1997
9% in 2002

<lo% from
2004 to 2008
40%

Between 2004 and 2007:
Increase o f 13.5 1%
48.9% (2007)

0

10%

The accreditation system for
hospitals has not been
implemented as o f 2009. The
Government has requested the
Bank's support for this in the
future, through a formal request
received in June 2009 for a new
Bank health project that will
work on the accreditation
system among other issues

National
consultation
on
employment carried out in
2008. A decree reforming the

69

(indicator added)

ALMP portfolio was issued in
February 2009
Same as above
N o activity conducted

Pension reform program launched by
2008

Table 24
Proposed Activities
0
0 ,

0
0
0
0
0

Public expenditure review
PESW Employment
Strategic note on pension reform
Dialogue on pension reform
Health sector project
SMEEmployment project
IDF Women and regional development
WBI program on health sector reform

Activities Undertaken during CAS

Activities underway at start o f CAS:
TF for statistical capacity building (2004-2005)
Activities undertaken during CAS:
0
0

0
0

TA Employment strategy capacity building (2005)
TA Employment strategy (2006)
TA Skills development / social insurance (2007)
TA Skills development / social insurance (2008)
Health sector review (2005)
TA Assessment o f hospital performance (2008)
WBI TA and training on impact evaluation

57.
Some steps have been taken in the health sector. A new health insurance program was
initiated in August 2004 which aimed to improve the social coverage and quality of services, as well as
manage better the costs of the system. Since 2007, this reform has been gradually implemented with
important steps taken in the regulation of private health providers and their coverage under the national
health insurance program. These steps were taken by the Government and the Bank’s activities have been
rather limited during the CAS period in this regard. The Health sector review, the first one to be conducted,
was delivered at the beginning of the period and indirectly helped the Government in formulating i t s 1 lth
five-year health plan (2007-2011). But it was completed too late to inform the 2004 CAS and no further
activity, including the health sector project, was conducted afterwards. At the request of the Tunisian
authorities, however, a new technical assistance on assessment of hospital performance has recently been
delivered.
58.
Dialogue over social protection and active labor market policies i s slowly producing some
results. The series of four TAs delivered as part o f the PESW Employment (also see Outcome 2. I and Box
I ) has significantly helped build capacity of the Observatoire de 1’Emploi et des Qualifications (ONEQ),
whose team demonstrates high technical skills that it could effectively share throughout the MENA region.
The PESW explicitly fed into the national consultation on employment that was carried out by the Tunisian
Authorities in 2008 and a decree reforming the ALMP portfolio was issued in February 2009. No dialogue
has been pursued on the pension reform, because the Tunisian authorities have not confirmed their request
for Bank support. The Government undertook i t s e l f to reform aspects of the pension system starting in June
2006. The Centre de Recherches et d’ Etudes de Securite Sociale conducted a study on legislation and a
consultative committee - chaired by the Minister of Social Affairs and Solidarity - was put in charge to
follow up on the study.
There has been substantial capacity building in the area of Monitoring and Evaluation. An
59.
impact evaluation workshop (April 2008), requested by the Ministry of Employment, has been delivered by
the Bank and co-funded by UNDP. It benefited about 100 participants from most central and line
Ministries, including its agencies and the Central Bank. The Ministry of Employment continues to build i t s
capacity in this area, through Bank and other donor means, and to apply it consistently. Furthermore, the
Trust Fund on statistical capacity building, which closed in 2005, helped build capacity of the National
Statistical Office’s staff, for example on access to survey micro data.

70

111. Measuring Bank Performance
A. Volume, lending instruments and scenarios

60.
The volume of lending was significantly lower than had been anticipated in the CAS, which
forecasted a base case program of $200 to $300 million a year on average. The total volume o f loans
delivered was $372 million over four years, averaging $93 million per year.
61.
Out of 1426projects planned in the CAS, only 5 were undertaken. But two additional projects
were initiated, namely the Tunis West sewerage project and the Sustainable Municipal Waste Management
project, illustrating the Bank’s flexibility in implementing the CAS. No departure in instrument type
occurred and five loans were approved as planned, with one Development Policy Loan (ECAL rV), one
Technical Assistance Loan (ICT Sector Development) and 3 Sector Investment Loans. The two additional
projects were also SILs. Although suggested in the CAS, no SWAP was used during the CAS period.
62.
The gap between the planned lending program and what was delivered can be explained by
several reasons: (i) the Government preferred to access favorable external financing elsewhere and
launched a highly successful $260 million yen Samurai bond in 2007. This meant that it did not engage
in a high level of IBRD lending as originally expected; (ii)implementation delays led to extension of
projects which delayed the need to prepare follow-up projects, and (iii)Tunisia’s own calendar of
development strategy meant that the Bank program had to adapt to the timing of projects planned therein.
The extension of the Water Sector Investment Iand the Natural Resources Management Iproject meant that
the second-phase of these projects was delayed to FY09 and FY 10 respectively. The extension of the EQIP
I1 project also did not allow for the repeater project to be undertaken during the CAS period. ECAL V
(renamed Integration and Competitiveness Loan), initially planned for FY07, was postponed to FY09 in
Plan.. The
order to coincide with the country’s own development strategy and the execution of the 1 lth
Government did not confirm i t s interest in planned projects such as Tunis Urban Transport. For projects in
Employment and Health sector, the Government has indicated it would like the Bank to deliver these in
FY 10 to align better with the 1 1th Plan.
B. Portfolio quality

63.
The IEG evaluation of projects that exited the portfolio in FY00-08 shows that the quality o f the
portfolio i s high and above the M E N A average in terms o f outcomes, sustainability and institutional
development impact (Table 25). QAG evaluated quality at entry in five projects and concluded that four of
them were satisfactory and one was rated moderately satisfactory. No project was at risk and there were no
problem projects during the CAS period (Table 26). The disbursement ratio was satisfactory during the
CAS period although dropped in fiscal 2007 and 2008 (Table 26).

~

~

~~

The Export Development I 1 project was mentioned in the CAS as part o f the proposed activities but does not appear in the table
of actual deliveries (Annex 2) as i t was approved at the end o f FY04.
26

71

Table 25: IEG Evaluation Findings of Evaluated Projects
(Projects Exiting Portfolio FY00-08)
Satisfactory
Outcome (%)

Country

Net
Commitme
nt
V$M)

Likely
Sustainability (%)
Net
OIW
Commitme Adjustme
nt
nt

Institutional Dev.
Impact (%)
Net
OIW
Commitme Adjustme
nt

nt

(US$M)

Tunisia

1,653

52 1

96.1

100

96.6

100

53

0

MENA
Algeria

7,276
552

1,925

85.4
62.4

97.4

84.8
51.2

95.1

43
42

22

Morocco

1,204

523

72.9

100

92.2

100

28

47

Egypt

1,360

500

95.4

100

59.6

Jordan
Bank
wide

603

240

91.5

100

99.6

100

29

0

48,678

81.7

82.8

81.4

83.4

55

53

150,406

44

Source: BusinessWarehouse

Table 26: Portfolio Management Indicators
Projected Targets
(CAS)
FY05-08

FY05

Actual Performance
FY07
FY06

Disbursement Ratio (%)

22

21.1

26.4

19.7

18.4

Disbursement Lag: Orig. (%)

20

30.6

23.5

19.2

23.7

% Projects at Risk

5

0

0

0

0

% Problem Projects

5

0

0

0

0

100

nab.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Indicator

Realism Index

FY08

64.
However, delays in implementation have led to slow disbursement and closing date
extensions. Out o f 9 projects that were planned to close during the CAS period, only one closed on its
original closing date (ECAL IV). Projects were extended from 12 to 36 months. These extensions put the
average age o f the Tunisia portfolio above the MENA and Bank-wide averages for FY05-08 (Table 27).
Table 27: Average Age o f Projects in Tunisia
FY04

FY05

FY06

FY07

FY08

Bank

3.9

3.8

3.7

3.7

3.7

MENA

4.3

4

4

3.9

3.8

72

65.
Implementation delays are mainly due to procurement issues. This i s why both the 2005 and
2008 CPPR focused on procurement processes, and a continuous dialogue was conducted with the Tunisian
Authorities throughout the CAS period. As part o f the 2008 CPPR, four workshops were organized in 2008
and the first half of 2009, the first two exclusively with the Higher Tender Board (CSM) and the last two
with project implementation units in order to identify practical solutions that would help ensure timely
implementation of projects. Key reasons for delays and a set of recommendations have been identified as
Implementation agencies lack knowledge of Bank’s procedures: Specialized training
workshops are being organized in partnership with the CSM for staff of implementation
agencies. Bank teams are also advised to include a Procurement Specialist (PS) in every
supervision mission;
Redundant Bank and CSMprocedures for prior control: These have been clarified during the
CPPR workshops; however, the Tunisian counterparts apply additional national requirements.
Although these requirements are not inconsistent with the Bank Guidelines, they add to the
complexity of the procurement processes and delay the procurement execution;
Lack of coordination between intra-ministerial departments for selection of consultants, the
process of which is not well understood and implemented: Roles and responsibilities of
technical and procurement units have been clarified during the workshops and should be
followed up by the PS within each project;
Multiple implementation agencies in a project: Bank teams are requested to limit the number
of implementation agencies in a project to the extent possible; in case numerous agencies are
involved, a coordinated capacity building program should be implemented;
Lack of common standard bidding document: A standard bidding document has been
prepared in FY09 under the second phase of the Water Sector Investment project. Such
documents should be used under all projects ;
Lack of detailed and regularly updated procurement plans: Bank teams are requested to
attach an updated procurement plan to each supervision Aide-Memoire. This will allow for
anticipating and reducing implementationdelays;

66.
A Technical Assistance on the Modernization of Public Procurement (IDF) was also provided (this
closed in March 2009). This was designed to modernize public sector procurement management and
buildhrain human resources with the overall objective to improve the effectiveness of public expenditure.
.The Implementation Completion Memorandum for the IDF noted that some progress was made on
improving the public procurement website and building capacity (including training of trainers) but that less
progress had been made on strengtheningthe public procurement management information system.
C. Results approach

67.
The results approach was integrated into the design and supervision o f activities, although
further progress i s needed in the area o f Monitoring and Evaluation. Initiatives taken by the Bank towards
the end of the CAS period are offering good prospects for improvement in this area. For the first time, a
specific monitoring and evaluation workshop was designed and conducted together with Tunisian
counterparts as part o f the Sustainable Solid Waste Management project, setting the stage for similar
activities in other projects.
68.
At the CAS level, further improvements in the design of the results matrix would be
necessary. During the course of this assessment of the 2004 CAS, important weaknesses have been noted
regarding the choice of indicators and their ambitious nature, which may not have been the most appropriate
in some cases. For instance, additional relevant data could have been useful to the assessment of the
outcomes 1.1 and 1.4, the pillar I1 and the outcome 3.2. Data i s not available in some cases, in part hecause
the indicator chosen i s hardly measurable (i.e. Outcome 2.3). Furthermore, some of the indicators added at

73

the occasion of the CAS Progress Report lacked baselines and targets and other indicators weren't added as
planned. Finally, lack o f details in the CAS document about the measurement method of each indicator has
proved to be a major constraint in many cases.

D. Safeguards
69.
The Bank provided continuous technical assistance to the Government during the CAS period on
environment and social safeguards. Tunisian counterparts generally show very good awareness and
competences on these issues. Social safeguards are being respected and implemented with a participatory
approach. As the existing Tunisian environmental regulatory framework i s relatively sophisticated, the
Bank tested the "Use o f Country Systems" approach for Environmental Safeguards in the Sustainable Solid
Waste Management and Water Sector Investment projects, which proved successful.

E. AAA program

70.
The AAA program i s o f high quality and responsive to the client's needs, as indicated by the
country assessment conducted by QAG for activities delivered during the period FY02-FY06. The overall
program was rated satisfactory, including the dimensions o f internal quality, coherence and integration, and
Bank inputs and processes. QAG rated the program highly satisfactory in the area o f strategic relevance.
The Government values the quality o f AAA and policy advice and i s highly committed to the definition o f
tasks. The program i s mostly demand-driven and there i s generally close cooperation in carrying out the
task, leading to important capacity building.
71.
The impact o f the AAA program i s important in the medium-term. The Government o f
Tunisia sees AAA products through a long term lens, as they wish to reflect on whether and how some o f
the recommendations might best be put into practice. They remain convinced that a gradual and steady
approach i s superior and they have made commendable achievements. The Bank thus needs to be aware of
the importance o f the timing o f reforms analyzed by the AAA and not just the nature or scope of the
reforms. The QAG assessment o f the AAA program rated the likely impact as satisfactory.
72.
Dissemination o f AAA i s still limited. QAG rated the area of participation, consultation and
dissemination as moderately satisfactory. Indeed, the close collaboration and detailed discussions held
between task teams and cooperating officials did not extend beyond government circles. This i s why, as
QAG noted, the client's commitment with AAA starts strong at the conception stage and diminishes
progressively thereafter. After this review, the Bank and Government worked successfully together to
strengthen dissemination of key AAA reports in FY07 and FY08, broadening the audience to other
stakeholders such as private sector, academia and civil society.
73.
As planned in the CAS, the Bank continued piloting the PESW approach, which has
produced slow but significant results. Both PESW on Employment and Public Finance management have
been instrumental in building capacity and consensus on a set of major issues and have contributed to
significant results at the end of the CAS period (see Box 1 and Outcome 3.2).

F. Country Dialogue and Aid Coordination
74.
As intended in the CAS, the Bank has put a renewed emphasis on country dialogue, which
was significantly strengthened during the CAS period particularly through strengthening o f the Tunis-based
team. The QAG evaluation of quality at entry o f four projects highlighted the good quality o f dialogue
between the Tunisian Government and the Bank. The Country Office, although s t i l l small, has played a
major role in facilitating relationships with the client and the donor community. There i s recognition that
the Bank's presence in Tunis has been instrumental in pursuing dialogue on Bank's ongoing activities with

74

Tunisian counterparts. It has also been very helpful in coordinating aid with other donors, especially
through very good and regular informal discussions. The Tunisian Authorities value the Bank’s support,
especially for the knowledge component that the Bank contributes, and have often expressed their
appreciation of the on-the-ground partnership from the Tunis office.

75.
Substantial efforts were made in the area o f outreach and communication as compared to
the previous CAS period. Conferences, such as the Maghreb Roundtable in 2005, workshops and
consultations on Bank’s activities in the areas o f agriculture, investment climate, governance, trade and
climate change have been organized during the CAS period, allowing for greater interaction with
stakeholders in the country. For the first time, an agreement was reached for the Bank to contribute to a
speakers program or conferences on development issues and knowledge within the National Library in
Tunis. The Public Information Center has also been strengthened so that average monthly visits went from
40 in 2007 to 1 18 in the first semester of 2008.
Cooperation with development partners has been close during the CAS period. Bank teams
76.
worked with bilateral donors (AFD and KFW) and multilateral institutions (AfDB and EU). This has
materialized mainly through the co-financing o f several projects, as indicated in Table 28. Cooperation has
been particularly close with AfDB as it houses the Bank’s office in Tunis. Informal dialogue was conducted
with GTZ on environment issues. Collaboration also took place in the area of outreach as, for the first time;
a joint conference was organized in 2007 with the EU and the UN on access to development information.
However, Government’s preference for bilateral relationships with each donor did not give the opportunity
to develop joint analytical work and harmonize financing procedures as suggested in the CAS.
Table 28: Tunisia Cofinancing Activities
Proiect
Water Sector Investment
ECAL I11
Municipal Development 111

ECAL I V
Water Sector Investment I1
Integration and Competitiveness DPL
Skills Development

Cofinanciers
KFW; AFD; AfDB
AfDB; EU
AFD
AfDB; EU
AFD; AfDB
AfDB; EU

IV. Key considerations for next CPS

77.
I t i s important to align better the Bank’s work program with Tunisia’s own calendar o f
development strategy. The CAS CR has noted a significant gap between the planned lending program and
what was delivered. One of the reasons for this gap i s that some projects planned in the 2004 CAS had to be
postponed in order to coincide with the execution of Tunisia’s National Development Plan (2007-2011). It
i s therefore important that the future CPS be designed with more flexibility and aligned both in substance
and timing with the rolling National Development Plan.
78.
The Bank needs to be more sensitive to the time-frame of reforms and not just the substance
of reforms. The CAS CR has highlighted the slow but steady pace of reforms’ implementation in Tunisia.
Tunisia performed well in areas where it was ready to deepen reforms and it has performed less well in
areas where it determined that the political or economic context was not yet ripe for such bold measures.
Greater time i s needed to build consensus within Tunisia and to ensure broad ownership. The challenge
moving forward will be for the Bank to work closely with the Government on supporting i t s reform agenda
that takes into account the realities of the political economy of Tunisia but that also pushes forward on
unblocking some of the key constraints to growth, private sector development and employment creation.

75

79.
An important lesson learnt on results for the future is to ensure a more reasonable and
practical results framework that accounts for the flexibility o f the Bank’s approach. The CAS
contained a highly ambitious and, in some cases, inappropriate results matrix which had overly detailed
goals and indicators that were not aligned with the evolution of the program. It proved out-dated and overly
rigid and often didn’t capture progress. Moreover, the results matrix aimed to show attribution for
outcomes rather than contribution. As a relatively small player in Tunisia, any attempt to show attribution
for outcomes i s naturally going to be difficult because the Bank has limited influence on the achievements
o f broad social and economic objectives.
80.
Development Policy Loans @PL) should be encouraged. The Bank had envisaged developing
the sectoral DPL type of lending in Tunisia as it i s a very flexible instrument and i s particularly relevant to
accompanying reforms, but there was not sufficient awareness among Tunisian counterparts of the benefits
of this type of instruments and not much lending taken on. The recent successful experience of delivering
the Integration and Competitiveness DPL, however, has now built an understanding and appreciation for
this instrument within Government, particularly when it i s aligned with budget support from other donors
such as the EU and AfDB.

81.
Employment creation will have to be a key area o f engagement in the next CPS. The CAS
made specific reference to employment as being a key challenge in Tunisia and each CAS pillar was
designed to tackle the employment issue from different angles (growth, education, services). However,
there was no specific pillar or outcome focused on employment. Given that unemployment remains a key
concern in Tunisia and that no progress was made over the CAS period in this area, the next CPS will have
to address this issue more directly, both on the supply and the demand sides.
Further progress will be needed in the area of Monitoring and Evaluation, despite initiatives
82.
taken by the Bank towards the end of the CAS period.

76

x

I

a

e

e

e

0

0

Annex 2
Tunisia - Planned IBRD Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY05-CY08)

CAS Plans (June 3,2004)

FY
2005

Project
ECAL I V
Information Society

GEF projects (grants):
Gulf of Gabes
Energy Efficiency
Africa Stockpile (Regional Operation)

2006

Urban Water Supply
Higher Education Reform I11
Natural Resource Mgmt I1
Tourism

Completion Report (December 2008)

US$M
150 to 200
15 to 20

6.1
8.5
5

50 to 70
50 to 60
30 to 40
40 to 50

Status

150
13.13

GEF Projects (grants):
Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY06

6.3 1
8.5

Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY I O
Dropped
Additional Actual Grants:
Africa Stockpile
Nine Landfills (Carbon Offset)
Jebel Chekir Solid Waste (Carbon
Offset)

2007

ECAL V
Water Sector Investment I 1
SME/Employment

150 to 200
50 to 70
30 to 50

Total

Tunis Urban Transport
Health Sector
Education Quality Improvement
Project I11
Vocational Training

For all:
200 to 300

38
76

4.0
13.5
7.8

Forwarded to FY09
Forwarded to FY09
Dropped
Additional Actual Projects:
Tunis West Sewerage
Sustainable Municipal Solid Waste
Management

2008

US$M

Actual
Actual (ICT Sector Development)

66.8
22.0

'

Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped

784.6 to
1079.6

Additional Actual Projects:
Export Development I1 (additional
Financing)

6.0

Grants: Avian Influenza

0.6
412.64

80

Tunisia - Planned AAA and Actual Deliveries (FYOS-CYOS)

CAS Plans (June 3,2004)
Core Diagnostic and Other Diagnostic
Public Expenditure Review
Investment Climate Assessment
Country Advisory and Policy Notes
PESW on Employment
Study on non-bankingfinancial sector
Additional demand-driven policy notes

Technical AssistanceITrust Funds
TA program on public debt management and
development of local debt market (with IMF)
TA for production o f annual report on
knowledge economy and support on scientific
research policies and innovation
Trust fund for statistical capacity building

Completion Report (December 2008)

Not conducted
Not conducted

Delivered as a TA below
Not conducted
Higher Education Strategy - Nov. 2004
Health Sector Review - June 2005

Partially completed - April 2005
Knowledge Economy -June 2005
Actual
Employment Strategy Capacity Bldg -June 2005
Environment Social Safeguards - May 2005
Actual
Not conducted
IDF for Modernization o f Public Procurement

IDF for Public Debt Management
IDF for Women and Regional Development

Core Diagnostic and Other Diagnostic
*
Follow-up on Investment Climate Assessment
Country Advisory and Policy Notes
*
Rural Sector-Wide Review
PESW on Employment
*
PESW on Public Finance Management
Dialogue on Pension Reform
*
Infrastructure/WaterNotes
Economics o f Education Note
Additional demand-driven policy notes
Technical AssistanceITrust Funds
*
TA on Social and Environmental Safeguards
TA on Procurement and Financial
Management Certification
TA Support for Financial Market Integrity
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building

*

IDF for Public Debt Management

Not conducted
FSAP Update - Jan. 2006
Agriculture Policy Review
Delivered as a TA below
Delivered as a TA below
Not conducted
Postponed to FY08
Not conducted

-

May 2006

Use of Country System Safeguards - Feb.2006

Not conducted
Not conducted
Completed - Dec. 2005
PESW Employment Strategy - June 2006
Public Financial Management - June 2006
Performance Based Budgeting Reform -Sept.2005
Actual
IDF for Modernization of Public Procurement

Core Diagnostic and Other Diagnostic

81

CAS Progress Report
Country Advisory and Policy Notes
PESW on Employment
PESW on Public Finance Management
Strategy Note on Pension Reform
Study on Lifelong Learning and Vocational
Training
Strategic Environment Assessments (tourism,
agriculture, climate change)
Additional demand-driven policy notes

Delivery delayed to FY08

Delivered as a TA below
Delivered as a TA below
Not conducted
Not conducted
Not conducted
SME Study - May 2007
Cost Assessment o f Water Degradation - March
2007
AML/CFT Assessment - April 2007
Technical Assistance:
Public Finance Mgt (MTEF) - June 2007
Use o f Country System Environment - April 2007
Skills Dev/Social Protection - June 2007

2008

Trust Funds
IDF for Public Debt Management

Actual
IDF for Modernization o f Public Procurement

Core Diagnostic and Other Diagnostic
Development Policy Review
CAS Progress Report

Delayed - FY 10 delivery
Completed - Sept. 2007

Country Advisory and Policy Notes
PESW on Public Finance-Management
PESW on Employment
Follow-up Support on Knowledge Economy
and Innovation
Additional demand-driven policy notes

Delivered as a TA below
Delivered as a TA below
Done
Global Integration Study - Nov. 2007
Water and Wastewater Strategy - Dec. 2007
Financing strategy o f Urban Transport - June
2008
Technical Assistance:
Budget Management Reform - June 2008
Strategy for the development of Logistics Services
and Infrastructure-June 2008
Skills Development/Social Insurance - June 2008
Assessment o f Hospital Performance- June 2008

IDF Grants:
Public Debt Management - closed in August 2007
Modernization o f Public Procurement

82

Appendix 3
Regional Integration Issues in the Maghreb and MENA
Issues

Current World Bank Program & Potential Future Activities

ENERGY
Maghrebcountries i s very diverse.
Algeria and Libya are important
exporters o f hydrocarbons,
Morocco i s almost entirely importdependent, and Tunisia i s
increasingly becoming more
import-dependent

.

However, all these countries face
common challenges: globalization
o f energy markets, security o f
supply, environmental protection
and industrial competitiveness.

The MENA region has amongst the
world's best production conditions
for solar power: abundant
sunshine, low precipitation, and
plenty o f unused flat land close to
road networks and transmission
grids.
MENA's consumption of energy i s
growing faster than that o f any
other region in the world. In the
Mediterranean Basin as a whole,
demand for green electricity i s
growing very rapidly.

The World Bank has launched an initiative to support
deployment of Concentrated Solar Power (CSP)'scale-up to
facilitate both renewable energy development and energy market
integration (see Appendix 5). This would be at the scale o f
about 1,000 M W over a 6-8 year time frame, through around 810 commercial-scale power plants in Maghreb countries. This
would be complemented by related transmission investments by
adding highly concessional funds from the Clean Technology
Fund (CTF) to other sources o f capital. About $750 million in
CTF resources i s being sought as part o f the preparation o f a
regional investment plan. This plan i s scheduled to be submitted
before the end o f 2009. A workshop was held in Rabat in June
2009 to initiate the preparationof the investment plan and
discuss projects for possible inclusion in the investment plan.
The Maghreb countries presented projects amounting to 6001000 M W of CSP capacity by 20 15.
The MENA CSP scale-up has strong synergy with the
Mediterranean Solar Plan (MSP) whose vision i s to take the
world-scale solar potential of the South, and the green electricity
needs of the entire MediterraneanBasin, and transform it into a
massive opportunity. This would be done by linking 20GW of
power production from solar (as well as other renewable energy
resources and suitable energy efficiency and demand side
management options) through reinforced transmission grids to
demand centers o f the Mediterraneanregion, both in the North
and the South.
Morocco and Tunisia are eligible countries under the CTF and
have expressed interest in participating in the CSP scale-up
initiative and in contributing to the preparation of the CSP
Regional Investment Plan
In addition to the above work, the World Bank i s bringing
international knowledge to inform the thinking behind a possible
creation o f a regional energy market by being an honest broker
in helping cross-border coordination, bringing experience from
other regions and catalytic financing, including for
interconnection projects within the Maghreb and with
neighboring regions. A request for Bank's assistance on an
energy inter-connector project between Tunisia and Italy has
already been received

83

TRANSPORT
In the Maghreb, current transport
flows reflect the level o f regional
integration which has the following
dimensions: (i)very low within the
region since the share o f intraregional in total trade was only 2.7
percent in 2007; (ii) well advanced
with European countries which are
the main economic partners and
represent 80 percent o f trade; and
(iii)limited to a few sectors with
other African countries.

A Bank survey on the Efficiency o f
Logistics Infrastructureand
Services to Promote Regional
Trade showed the high burden o f
logistics costs in the Maghreb and
MENA, and the resulting hurdles
to the development o f trade for
countries where exports
significantly contribute to
economic activity.
Shipping i s the main transport
mode for trade between Maghreb
countries and Europe and
environment risks are a concern.
Heavy traffic should continue to
increase with the development of
exchanges and the motorways o f
the seas supported by the Euromed
transport plan.
The continuity and capacity o f
transport networks i s critical to the
development of freight transport
and passenger traffic between
Maghreb countries and with
Europe. There i s a critical need to
remove physical obstacles to cross
border transit and facilitate the
development o f quality transport
services.
There would be important benefits
in harmonizingtransport and safety
regulations or standards on
internationaltransport routes.
Currently country standards for

The Bank i s discussing with its regional partners potential
activities in the transport sector which could strengthen the
overall momentum and widen benefits expected from facilitated
trade. The Bank’s current role i s that o f convener and facilitator,
as well as knowledge partner although it stands ready to provide
financing as needed.
The Bank’s work aims to complement the priorities o f the
Regional Transport Action Plan for the Mediterran,eanRegion
(2007-20 13) prepared by the European Union under the
Euromed initiative. This action plan i s being funded by the
European Union, European Investment Bank, African
Development Bank and other donors involved in transport
operations in Maghreb countries.
The Bank’s program i s looking at the following initiatives in the
area o f logistics; (i) Audit o f logistics efficiency on intraregional
trade to provide a regional action plan taking stock o f national
initiatives and aiming to support improved trade facilitation
between countries; (ii) Regional trade facilitation and logistics
conferences for Maghreb countries which would allow for
sharing experience in addressing impediments to efficient
logistics and the facilitation o f trade as well as provide the
opportunity to discuss and agree on joint initiatives; and (iii)
Study on logistics training programs to agree on quality
standards and develop curricula for the training of logistics
specialists in each country.
The Bank i s promoting the “Western Mediterranean Marine
Highway Development and Coastal and Marine Contamination
Prevention” project with a view to reduce the risk o f ship-based
environmental contamination.
A study could assess the current condition o f and gaps in the
road, rail and port infrastructure within Maghreb and linking
those countries to Europe, identify the capacity investments or
rehabilitation works required to satisfy capacity and quality
requirements, and suggest coordinated initiatives to promote
cross border transport services. Based on the results of the study,
the Bank could participate in the promotion o f specific
investment operations - infrastructure as well as logistics zones
- and services development in coordination with other donors.
As a first step to address this issue, a study could review current
standards and recommend common references also consistent
with European Union regulations. In order to help each country
step up i t s efforts to address road safety issues through
partnerships under a regional approach, the Bank could facilitate
further road safety initiatives coordinated by the Arab Maghreb

84

total loads, maximum axle loads
and dimensions of trucks are not
harmonized between Maghreb
countries. All Maghreb countries
are affected by the risks o f high
human safety and economic tolls of
road accidents.

Union.

1
FINANCIAL SECTOR

Financial development in the
Maghreb region ;s uneven. Banks
dominate the financial sector but
there are significant differences in
financial depth across the three
countries.

The Bank’s knowledge program i s looking at the benefits o f
greater financial integration in the Maghreb through assessing
possibilities for technological spillovers, enhanced competition
and greater scope for economies o f scale. The MENA Region’s
Flagship Report for 2010 i s under preparation and i s focusing on
the Financial Sector.

A recent external study suggested
huge gains from intra-regional
integration o f non-bank financial
markets. It found that creating a
larger Maghreb market through
integration would lead to the
consolidation of firms at the
regional level in the insurance
market and stock market that
would channel more funds to
finance local businesses

The Bank has joint programs with the Arab Monetary Fund
(AMF) in the areas o f payments and settlements, credit
reporting, and debt management systems. The Bank i s also
working with the IMF which has been actively engaged with
Maghreb countries in the area o f financial integration.The
Monetary and Capital Markets Department o f the IMF provides
technical assistance on payment systems, central bank
operations, financial stability and banking supervision. The
Bank intends to become more involved in this IMF initiative
through collaboration on the design o f the reforms conducive to
greater integration.

Financial integration in the
Maghreb could generate larger
efficiency gains if it i s part o f a
broader integration agenda in the
region, and a step towards further
economic integration with other
MENA countries and the EU.

The Bank i s aiming to contribute to the financial integration
:ffort by maintaining an active policy dialogue and offering
technical assistance in areas critical for harmonization: (i)
payments and settlements, (ii)accounting and auditing, (iii)
:redit reporting; (iv) insolvency and creditor rights; (iv)
:orporate governance of listed companies, and (v) corporate
governance o f private and state banks. TA on financial
regulation and supervision could cover specific areas, such as
:he adoption of Basel 2, Solvency 2 for the insurance sector,
:ffective arrangements for home-host country supervision, and
jeposit insurance systems. Finally, the Bank could also provide
TA on housing finance, as housing i s one o f the critical pre:onditions for labor mobility within and across borders.

PRIVATE SECTOR

CVELOPMENT -TRADE AND INVESTMENT

Regional integration at the private
sector level involves both trade and
investment dimensions.

rhe Bank’s AAA work in this area looks at (i) integration
hrough trade - imports and exports; and (ii)integration through
nvestment - FDI.

For the Maghreb countries, the EU,
U.S. and China are more prominent
trading Dartners than are other

The recent MENA PSD Flagship report on private sector
levelopment analyses why MENA countries have not been
picker to embrace integration through investment. I t highlights

85

MENA countries. The share o f
intra-regional in total trade was
only 2.7 percent in 2007, whereas
trade with European countries
represented 80 percent. Among
MENA countries, only Saudi
Arabia figures among the top 6
trade partners o f Maghreb
countries for imports, and no
countries in the region provide a
leading destination for exports.
There i s huge potential for further
progress by lowering remaining
tariff and non-tariff trade barriers.
Non-tariff trade barriers pose a
much bigger constraint to regional
integration than any deficiencies o f
infrastructure.

how patterns o f privilege have created barriers to entry and
investment, sustained by a political economy that, in many
countries, has resisted rapid reform. It concluded that breaking
down these barriers opens channels to greater regional and
international integration through productive investment and the
mobility o f capital, goods and workers. The Bank’s dialogue
and AAA program in the MENA countries i s informed by this
regional analysis.
Recent work by the Bank suggests that the payoffs to further
liberalization in services are higher for services than in
manufacturing. The AAA programs o f Bank countries are using
this work - and other studies - to inform the dimensions o f
reform programs.

EMPLOYABILITY
Access to adequate employment
opportunities, in particular for
qualified youth, i s a key challenge
in the Maghreb and other countries
in MENA. The world average
unemployment rate for the
population aged 18-25, i s 11
percent while the average for
MENA i s 25 percent.

The Bank’s program in the Maghreb countries encompasses
different elements of the following four key issues:

(1) Skills development - Improving the quality and relevance o f
post basic education to give better job opportunities for young
people, through the development o f a regional qualifications
system.

In the regional labor market, the
low capacity o f MENA countries
to create quality jobs domestically
diminishes their capacity to attract
migrant workers, and the lack of
skills o f their workforce leave them
at a disadvantage compared to
skilled workers from East and
South Asia.

(3) Activating labor markets. - Building the capacity (including
design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of results)
for effective labor market intermediation institutions to improve
matching o f demand and supply for existing skills; better
employer-focused skills enhancement; facilitating the transition
between education and employment; creating opportunities for
young people to develop entrepreneurial skills and income
generating activities, supported by twinning arrangements
between relevant and interested public sector institutions in the
EuroMed area.

(2) Building the capacity o f management and provision o f
Quality Assurance (QA) in Higher Education in the MENA
countries, to enable them to participate in the mutual recognition
In particular, job creation has not
been sufficient to accommodate the o f International Qualifications and Standards. The
growth in the labor force, including Mediterranean Integration Program will help the Tertiary
Education Institutions and the Quality Assurance Agencies in
an increasing number o f women
the MENA region to reach the European QA standards.
and youth.

In most countries, programs to
address youth unemployment have
been unsatisfactory. In addition,
social security systems (including

(4) Improving social protection and labor management for
migrants - In partnership with the European training Foundation
(ETF) and IOM, facilitating legal and safe intermediation of

86

pension, unemployment and health
insurance) are rarely designed to
support mobility and labor market
flexibility while providing
adequate income protection for
workers. As a result, employability
has risen to the forefront in the
agenda o f countries in the region.

labor demand and supply across the Mediterranean. Advancing
the policy dialogue on bilateral social protection coverage and
social security portability for labor migrants in MENA-EU
countries.

Migration to Europe - legal and
illegal - still often presents the
only opportunity for young people
although i s becoming increasingly
difficult as the EU implements
stricter border controls and fewer
work permits.

CLIMATE CHANGE
Maghreb countries share similar
ecosystems, have comparable
agricultural systems, and similar
patterns o f urban development.
They have similar profiles of
vulnerability to climate change and
much to learn from each other on
how to integrate climate change in
their development process.
The economic prosperity of the
Maghreb region will depend
crucially upon adequate
management o f strategic sectors
such as agriculture (a key user of
water resources) and development
o f coastal zones which i s where
most o f the region’s most vibrant
economic activities cluster and
which are critical for the tourism
sector. These sectors are already
exposed to a highly variable
climate, and they are likely to
become more vulnerable in the
future as a result o f climate change.
Experts concur in projecting a
warmer and drier climate, as well
as more frequent extreme events,
such as floods and storm surges.
Recent scientific literature suggest
that a rise in sea levels might
materialize at a faster rate than

Development o f a regional policy framework on climate change
and agriculture, through a study addressing the following
questions: a) How will the region’s food security prospects be
affected by climate change; b) Will climate change alter the
ability o f the Maghreb’s high-value agriculture to compete for
potentially lucrative export markets, particularly in the EU. The
framework could then lead to the following activities:
Pilot program for testing natural resource management
options that can reduce carbon emissions from agriculture,
combat desertification, and increase the resilience o f local
communities to climate change
Establishment o f a capacity strengthening program (possibly
in partnership with Meteo France or with the Hadley Center
in the UK) to enhance the countries’ ability to model future
climate change
Regional study to evaluate the impacts o f climate change on
fisheries
Development o f practical decision tools to integrate climate
change in the programming o f water investments (possibly
in partnership with the Arab water academy)
Regional study on human mobility (scaling up a study which
i s currently underway)
Regional initiative on empowering community based
adaptation and disaster risk management
Pilot program to support, in partnership with the

87

previously anticipated, with severe
:onsequences for the high value
assets located in the region’s
:oastal areas.
Groundwater over-use i s
widespread in the Maghreb, and
with the drying-up of surface
water, i s likely to become an even
more acute problem.
All countries have in common that
they are almost fully reliant on
fossil fuels to meet their energy
needs and therefore are relatively
carbon intensive.
They also share a vast and largely
untapped endowment of renewable
energy sources. In particular,
Maghreb countries have the
world’s best production conditions
for solar power: abundant
sunshine, low precipitation, and
plenty o f unused flat land close to
road networks and transmission
grids.
Transport i s a priority sector in
MENA for C02 emission
reduction as it i s the most energy
intensive in the world2’. I t i s a
major and fast growing contributor
to GHG emissions in Maghreb
countries.

Marseille center, the development o f urban adaptation plans in
selected Maghreb cities (plans would address implications o f
climate change in terms o f locations, urban densities, urban
mobility systems, integration o f residential and productive
functions, and energy use)
The main proposal for cross-border cooperation in the area o f
renewable energy i s to further develop the MENA CSP scale-up
initiative (mentioned above in energy section).
The Maghreb countries are at different stages o f development in
their energy efficiency programs and could benefit from sharing
experience and drawing lessons from countries in the region and
elsewhere that have several years of implementation experience.
For instance Tunisia has been conducting industrial audits and
offering capital subsidies for energy efficiency investments since
the late 1980s, and the approach could be adopted by other
countries. The UMA (Union for Arab Maghreb - in French,
Union pour le Maghreb Arabe) organization has set-up several
committees to improve cross-country cooperation and one o f
them i s focusing on energy efficiency programs in industry and
buildings. Another possible area of cooperation i s in
harmonization of technical norms and standards to facilitate
trade and the setting up o f common equipment manufacturing
facilities.
In the area o f transport, the following activities are proposed: (i)
a study to draw the lessons o f past experiences and assess how

different transport and vehicle production policies in similar
contexts have disparately affected GHG emissions; (ii)a pilot
program in partnership with the Marseille center to take stock of
current transport initiatives, share knowledge, and jointly
mobilize international expertise; and (iii) development of
methodologiesto incorporate climate change impacts in
transport infrastructure planning and use, and to retrofit existing
facilities.

See “Tapping a Hidden Resource: Energy Efficiency in the Middle East and North Arica”, ESMAP Report No 48329MNA, February 2009
27

88

Appendix 4
Tunisia CPS and Links to Bank-wide and MENA Region Priorities

World Bank Group and MENA Pri6rities
WORLD BANK SIX STRATEGIC
DIRECTIONS
Poorest countries, particularly Africa;
Fragile and post-conflict states;
Developing a competitive menu of development
solutions for MICs;
Playing a more active role with regional and
global public goods;
Expanding opportunity in the Arab World;
Fostering knowledge and learning.

ARAB WORLD INITIATIVE
Six areas o f focus:
0
Education
0
Job creation and private sector development;
0
Regional infrastructure and trade facilitation;
0
Inclusion;
0
Corporate and public governance;
0
Natural resources.

MENA STRATEGIC DIRECTIONS
Accelerate economic growth and the creation o f
jobs and enhance MENA’s integration with the
rest of the world;
Improve the inclusion of youth, women, disabled
people and minorities in the economic and public
sphere;
Help the people in areas suffering from conflict.
Global challenges for MENA are:
Climate change, water stress and natural resource
management;
Vulnerabilitv. oil and food subsidies and social

*

Link with Tunisia CPS

As an Arab country, Tunisia i s part o f the Arab
World Initiative.
The main thrust o f the CPS i s to support the
country’s development goal o f increasing
employment, especially for the young and educated.
The Tunisia CPS puts forward the complete range of
development solutions for a MIC with a program
that includes a broad range of AAA, lending, GEF
grants and trust funds.
This fully aligns with the Bank’s corporate goal of
expanding opportunity in the Arab world.
The CPS emphasizes the importance o f the
knowledge role of the Bank.

The Arab World Initiative i s detailed in the CPS as
regards how the Bank’s program supports the areas
of focus: Education, job creation and private sector
development, regional issues and trade facilitation,
and natural resources are all core elements of
Tunisia’s CPS.
Public governance - focused on improving the
quality o f service delivery and on the interface with
the private sector - i s also a part o f the Bank’s
program.
Inclusion in Tunisia relates to the Bank’s work on
strengthening the social protection system, further
building on strong progress on gender equality and
focusing on youth issues in the support to
employment.

The growth/competitiveness/employmentpillar i s at
the core of the CPS and Tunisia’s development
strategy continues to place integration at center
stage.
As regards inclusion, the Bank’s program intends to
work with Government to devise better designed
and targeted social protection measures and safety
nets to address vulnerability issues.
The global challenge of climate change i s also a
core pillar in the CPS, particularly as regards water
resource management and energy efficiency.

89

protection and safety nets;
Education for global labor market, labor and job
mobility and global demographic and labor force
imbalances.
Operating Principles are adaptation and
responsiveness.
A country-based approach.
Service Package has finance, knowledge and
coordination.
Moving closer to the clients and partners and
reaching out to stakeholders

RESPONSE TO THE CRISIS
The Bank aims to triple IBRD lending for the
FY09-11 period with a concentration on fastdisbursing DPLs.
The VFF, INFRA and IFC-led private sector
platform are the main programs.

Governance and anti-Corruption (GAC)

The Bank’s education program in Tunisia focuses
on the critical need to enhance the quality o f the
education system for meeting the requirements of
the labor market.
The CPS principles o f engagement emphasize
alignment and flexibility, with a continued strong
knowledge program at the heart o f the Bank’s work.
An increasingly decentralized team in Tunis will
strengthen the Bank’s partnership with the client
and development partners, as well as permitting
greater information sharing and partnering with
other stakeholders. ’

The Bank already increased the amount of the FY09
DPL (for Integration and Competitiveness) to $250
million in response to the Government’s request for
increased support from development partners to
manage the impacts o f the crisis.
TA and policy advice to macro-economic
management i s being provided with specific AAA
planned on addressing the impacts of the global
crisis.
The CPS foresees strengthening of capacity for
project implementation which will, in parallel,
support the Government’s own implementation o f
i t s national fiscal stimulus plan.
DPLs will gradually become more important in the
Bank’s program, enhancing the reliability of
financing.
IFC i s providing advice to corporate clients on how
to manage risk.
Close monitoring o f economic and social
developments and close coordination with countrylevel and regional-level partners will continue.
The Bank will continue to play its part in resource
mobilization and aid effectiveness
Tunisia i s not a GAC focus country but related
governance work remains a part o f the Bank’s
program.

90

Appendix 5
M E N A Region
Concentrated Solar Power Scale-up Program
Introduction

1.
The MENA region has amongst the world's best production conditions for solar power:
abundant sunshine, low precipitation, and plenty o f unused flat land close to road networks and
transmission grids (see figure 1). MENA's consumption of energy i s growing faster than that o f any
other region in the world and, in the Mediterranean Basin as a whole, demand for "green" electricity i s
growing very rapidly.
Figure 1 Global Direct Normal Solar Radiation (kWh/m2/day)

I

h

kwhlmzfday

_-

_____-Source: Ummel, Kevin and Wheeler, David, Desert Power The Economics o f Solar Thermal Electricity for Eui.ope, North Africa and the
Middle East, Center for Global Development, 2008

2.
In the MENA region, there i s an increasing interest in Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) with
projects under implementation in Morocco, Egypt and Algeria. The main objective o f this program i s
to support gigawatt scale CSP deployment in the MENA region to accelerate the global market
adoption o f this solar technology - by realizing major cost reductions, through the economies o f scale
implicit in such a large-scale plan. CSP i s a relatively simple technology, but i s currently high cost
because of small production runs - large-scale demand could change that dramatically. The
Mediterranean region could therefore be the cradle o f a technological leap forward in the battle against
climate change.
3.
Demand for electricity in the Southern Mediterranean i s growing rapidly, driven by
urbanization and rising incomes. Southern Mediterranean countries broadly share the same goals as
their northern neighbors for green electricity - energy security considerations and local environmental
needs predominate, but climate change mitigation i s a rapidly emerging issue in the South.

91

4.
In this context, the MENA CSP scale-up has strong synergy with the Mediterranean Solar Plan
(MSP) whose vision2*i s to take the world-scale solar potential of the South, and the green electricity
needs of the entire Mediterranean Basin, and transform it into a massive opportunity - by linking
20GW o f power production from solar (as well other renewable energy resources and suitable energy
efficiency and demand side management options) through reinforced transmission grids to demand
centers o f the Mediterranean region, both in the North and the
This would provide an
opportunity to satisfy regional demands for green electricity, and an opportunity to promote regional
integration and energy security in the Mediterranean and beyond. The success o f the MSP depends on
the development o f an operational framework for sharing of the costs and benefits between partners.
To the extent that such a framework i s agreeable to the parties, MDBs could play a key role in
financing.
Rationale for C T F Financing

5.
The Clean Technology Fund (CTF) presents a great opportunity to promote near-commercial
low-carbon technologies like concentrating solar power (CSP). In order to fund project investments,
CTF could be accessed to provide highly concessionary funding3’. From a global perspective, it i s
critical that the best solar resources are utilized for solar scale-up and the MENA region offers this
opportunity. Scaling-up of CSP can provide a catalyst for an increase in manufacturing in the MENA
region. For the current plants under implementation, roughly 30% of the hardware i s locally
manufactured. If there i s an assured demand for large capacity additions in the GW scale,
manufacturing o f precision components like the receiver tubes and mirrors may also become viable in
the region. To sum up, the scaling-up of CSP can spur local production and create new jobs, which in
turn will increase tax revenues for governments in the MENA region. “Green jobs” will be important
-economically and politically - for the success of a MENA CSP Scale-up.
Financing Plan

6.
The World Bank Group will work with the African Development Bank, Arab and Islamic
Funds, European Investment Bank, AFD, KfW, and other donors to develop a regional investment
program for significantly scaling up CSP through the CTF and other public and private sector
financing. A regional CTF investment plan in the range o f US$ 750 million i s being prepared to
leverage total concessionary funding in the range o f US$ 6-g3’ billion to achieve a GW order scale-up.
Other concessionary sources o f financing might include the EU neighborhood funds, bilateral grants as
well as fiscal incentives offered by National governments. The level of the scale-up will obviously be
linked to the availability o f concessional finance from various sources as well as CDM and green
electricity sales revenues. The concessionary financing will leverage commercial financing in the
range o f about US$ 15 billion.

*’

The European council approved in principle the Union for Mediterranean (UfM) in 2008, presided over concurrently by
France and Egypt. Proposed regional initiatives under the UfM to enhance regional cooperation include de-pollution o f the
Mediterranean, maritime and land highways, civil protection, Mediterranean solar plan (MSP), higher education and research
and the Mediterranean business development initiative.
29 Demand-side management energy efficiency measures may also be needed to facilitate the grid integration o f solar power.
30
The CTF terms for public sector investments are 40 yr maturity, I O yr grace, 0.25% service charge and 0.10% M D B fee.
The private sector terms are yet to be finalized.
3 ’ This i s a preliminary estimate based on an approximate 30% capital cost subsidy requirement for 5 GW additions based on
an average o f US$ 3000-40OO/kW. These will be revisited during the preparation o f the investment plan.

92

Appendix 6
Donor Programs in Tunisia

Overview

1.
In the context of a strongly-owned and country-led program, the Government in
Tunisia has a deep understanding o f the comparative advantage o f the main donors based on an
assessment o f the technical quality of their work and the terms o f their financial support. The main
donors in Tunisia are the European Union, European Investment Bank, African Development Bank
(AfDB), Agence Francaise de Developpement (AFD), Japan (JICA), German Cooperation (GTZ),
Islamic Development Bank, UN Agencies and the World Bank.
2.
The Ministry o f Development and International Cooperation has the responsibility for
coordinating the programs o f donors and represents the main Government counterpart for donors.
While Tunisia i s a signatory to the Paris Declaration on the Harmonization o f Aid, it did not
participate in the 2008 Survey.
3.
The EU, AfDB and the World Bank have deepened their collaboration in the past couple of
years, most notably around the joint budget support which i s being provided to Tunisia’s Integration
and Competitiveness Program. This positive experience has solidified the partnership among these
three donors and serves as a model o f donor cooperation in support of the Paris Declaration.
4.
The Bank consulted particularly closely with the AfDB in the preparation o f the CPS as the
AfDB was conducting the mid-term review of its country strategy for 2007-201 1. The AfDB’s
strategy has three pillars; (i) strengthening o f macro-economic policy and acceleration of structural
reforms; (ii) modernization o f infrastructure and strengthening of productive sector; and (iii)
consolidation o f human capital. The program encompasses support to infrastructure, higher education,
health, PSD, employment and the integration agenda.
5.
The EU i s an important development partner for Tunisia because of the overall context o f the
EU Neighborhood Policy and Tunisia’s strong political, economic, social and cultural ties with
Europe. The World Bank and the EU have a close collaboration on performance-based budgeting,
PEFA, and employment and are deepening this further in the education, water and agriculture sectors.
Areas o f focus for the EU program include: reform and modernization o f the judicial system, private
sector development, support to the EU Neighborhood Partnership Agreement and regional agreements,
industrial modernization, natural resource and water management, improvement of youth
employability, higher education and health. The EIB’s investments are focused mainly in (i)
infrastructure for energy, industry, transport, water supply, and solid waste, and (ii) support to SMEs.

6.
The World Bank, AfDB and Agence Francaise de Developpement (AFD) are collaborating
well in sectors such as water, energy, agriculture, municipal development and cultural heritage
management. The strategy for AFD i s designed around three areas of concentration : (i) strengthening
o f the competitiveness of enterprises including support to financial restructuring o f firms, development
o f hotels, and the national program for professional upgrading ; (ii)improving living conditions of the
population with a focus on urban development, rural development and support to the water sector; and
(iii) stronger management of natural resources.

93

7.
I F C has also been actively collaborating with other IFIs and will pursue more opportunities
moving forward, especially for large projects. For instance, IFC helped bring in the AfDB, Proparco
and the European Investment Bank as co-financiers for the Enfidha Airport project.
8.
Japanese Development Agency (JICA): Areas o f concentration o f JICA’s program include
electricity, water, infrastructure and environment through technical cooperation and financial support.
9.
Islamic Development Bank (IsDB): The support from IsDB i s targeted in the areas o f
agriculture, management o f natural resources and the environment
10.
UN Agencies (UNDPAJNFPAAJNICEFAJNEP): The main focus areas o f the UN agencies
are: (i)the health and education sector, particularly as regards achieving the MDGs; (ii)support in
strengthening national capacity on employment issues; (iii)gender issues, including fight against
gender-based violence; and (iv) youth, employment, and migration issues.

1 1.

The German Cooperation (GTZ): The program i s mainly focused on the environment.

Figure 1 below sketches out the main areas o f engagement o f the principal donors as per the
12.
strategic axes o f the NDP and the World Bank’s three pillars o f i t s CPS.

94

Appendix 7
CPS Consultations Report & Communications Outreach

During the course of its engagement in Tunisia, the World Bank has maintained a good dialogue with the
Government and with different development partners including parliament, private sector, academia, civil
society organizations and local representatives. In the preparation o f the CPS, consultations were carried
out in different fora, orchestrated both around the CPS itself as well as around other elements o f the
Bank’s work in Tunisia (analytical reports, projects, conferences, etc). The goal o f these consultations
was to understand better the priorities, challenges and obstacles to development and to ascertain where the
World Bank has brought value added and where its engagement could be strengthened. These
consultations were also an opportunity to disseminate key analytical reports and lessons learned from the
World Bank’s program in Tunisia.
Consultations with Government

The elaboration o f the CPS has been very much a consultative and continuous process with Government
through a series of discussions at different levels. These consultations were carried out mainly with the
Ministry of Development and International Cooperation (MDCI) which coordinates the Bank’s program
in Tunisia, although discussions were held with other Ministries where the Bank has activities. The CPS
discussions were launched in November 2008 with a large meeting between most of the World Bank’s
Tunisia Country Team and the principal interlocutors and representatives of different Government
Ministries and agencies. Thereafter, the Bank’s team followed up through a series o f meetings with the
MDCI and other Ministries to understand more clearly how they viewed the World Bank’s engagement,
what were the lessons learnt from the past, and where they were seeking the Bank’s partnership in the
future.
These consultations concluded that the Government has a clear vision o f where and indeed how it wants
the Bank to engage. Moreover, the Government and the Bank kept an open mind about discussing other
issues on which the Bank was in more o f an advocacy mode - such as regards regional integration. This
level o f frank and open dialogue has nurtured the CPS and the sectoral content o f our engagement,
particularly in areas such as employment, education and agriculture.
Perhaps most notable from the experience o f preparing the CPS i s the important strengthening of the
relationship between the Bank and the Government. The Government actively contributed to the CPS
beyond consultations through reviewing earlier drafts o f the document and providing useful insights,
comments and inputs. This was carried out with good candor and underscored the marked improvement
in the quality o f the communication and partnership between the Bank and the Government.
Preparation of Other CPS Consultations

The Bank’s CPS team prepared specific CPS consultations during the month o f June 2009 with a set of
development partners and stakeholders. This process was started first with an identification o f the sites
where the consultations could take place and the target audiences that needed to be reached. The idea was
to create events o f respectable but congregated size to allow a productive discussion and debate.
The Bank team targeted specific partners and stakeholders through a careful review o f the main civil
society organizations, private sector representatives, professional organizations, unions and academics. I t
was decided to hold consultations in Tunis and in the town o f Beja in the north west o f the country, the
latter because it i s located in one o f the poorest areas o f Tunisia and i s a region where the Bank has had a

97

long-term engagement through the North West Development project. The Bank has developed strong
partnerships with local stakeholders and beneficiaries in this region and thus it was felt that participants to
the Beja consultations would be already informed about the World Bank’s work and thus their insights
and points o f view would be particularly valuable. Invitations to the consultations in Beja were extended
to local representatives, CSO, women’s groups, farmers groups and NGOs. Three sets o f consultations
were held in Tunis with invitations extended to (i) private sector; (ii)CSOs including academia, unions,
NGOs and representatives o f associations; and (iii) Parliament. The participants from the Parliament
were proposed by the Government with due consideration for broad representation among different
political parties.
Approximately 67 invitations to the consultations were sent out with a note on the CPS process which
provided information on the nature and goal o f the consultations. At the meetings themselves,
information packages were prepared and made available on site according to the target audience.
Regarding the attendance, there was strong representation at the consultation in Beja with many local
CSOs attending the meeting, as well as a good representation at the Parliamentarians consultation where 7
members o f Parliament attended. However, there was weak representation at the private sector and CSO
consultations in Tunis despite the Bank’s efforts to invite a broad spectrum o f people.
Different channels and means of communication shared with participants included:
0

0

0

An informational web package posted on the Tunisia website with links to related CPS and
country data (http://go.worldbank.org/BTYHHQIRIO).
Invitations for participants, including a framework note (“note de cadrage”) explaining what a
CPS i s along with the purpose o f the consultations.
Information packages with a set of brochures (such as an updated one-pager o f the WB Tunisia
Project Portfolio, 10 Things to Know about the World Bank, the WB Public Information Center
resources) as well as more targeted materials according to the group (whether public, private or
CSO) or region where the CPS event was taking place (i.e project PIDs, related sector analysis
and studies).
A Press release o f the activities including the World Bank’s website and email contact
information for feedback.

Consultation with local CSOs (Beja)

The first phase o f the Consultation process was initiated with a round table involving local stakeholders
from the agriculture and environment sectors in the town of Beja in the north-west of the country. During
this consultation session, the discussions evolved essentially around the problems o f the farmers’
organizations (“Groupements de Developpement Agricole” or “GDA”) financial sustainability and the
difficulties in accessing micro-credits. This issue was a particularly important one for those who had
received training by the GDA and were not able to start new production or business lines due to lack o f
financing. The Bank Group was asked to step up i t s work on micro-finance in the region either through
the North West Development Project (currently funded by the Bank), the IFC’s support to ENDA, the
main micro-finance organization in Tunisia, or through some other means. Improving the lives o f rural
women was cited as an important issue, particularly as regards universal water accessibility/coverageand
improved hygiene. Participants also cited the persistent problem o f brain drain towards urban centers and
the need for the region’s development to be accelerated so that local graduates and young people can
return to work there.

98

Consultation with Private Sector (Tunis)

This consultation took place in Tunis and involved managers and heads o f enterprises from the private
sector. Their main concern related to labor market problems, in particular in the industrial sector in terms
o f personnel training and competence. Participants also addressed the issues related to the
implementation o f administrative decisions (the case o f the cumbersome and lengthy reimbursement o f
VAT paid by exporters) and stressed the difference in approach between imports which are very
restrictive and exports which are highly favored. The financial sector i s still perceived as being
insufficiently adapted to the needs o f businesses in terms o f financing and administrative procedures.
Transport was identified by participants as an obstacle to the development of their business. They also
suggested that the effort to enhance employment should be broadened to focus on the industrial and
services sector, including trade. They noted that more efforts must be made in professional training to
enable their businesses to address the deficit in adapted profiles. Supporting R&D and facilitating
exchange with Sub-Saharan Africa constituted other themes o f discussion.
Consultation with Parliamentarians (Tunis)

The second Tunis session was a lunch debate with 7 members of the Chamber of Counselors and the
Chamber o f Deputies. The discussion centered on the government’s national priorities such as education,
employment, developing the private sector, agriculture and health. The consultations confirmed that the
Bank’s proposed CPS program i s focused on national priorities and has tFe support of stakeholders across
Government branches. The slow process with procurement was also discussed to ascertain ways o f
reducing the lengthy public procurement procedures (both for World Bank projects and for the
Government’s own investments).
Consultation with CSOs (Tunis)

This session was with CSOs who were representative and active in different domains including social
services, local development, rural development and women’s rights. There was a consensus between the
various participants on priority activities for the country’s sustainable development. The representatives
emphasized the gap between the theory and practice with regard to the state’s approach to engaging with
CSOs which was perceived as needing greater communication on a local, regional and national level.
They also raised the problem o f transparency and access to information and the absence o f a social
dialogue on good governance. The civil society stakeholders’felt that it was necessary to assess the
impacts o f projects through regular consultations and to have an evaluation each time there i s a change
from one strategy to another and from one policy to another.

Sectoral Consultations

Other consultations on elements o f the Bank’s program in Tunisia were held in different fora between
November 2008 and June 2009 according to important development themes.
Consultations on Energy efficiency

On November 25‘h and 26‘h 2008, the World Bank organized consultations in Tunis on energy efficiency
with decision makers and various partners from different countries of the MENA region. The workshop
mobilized about forty participants, national and local decision makers, stakeholders and
expertshesearchers in charge o f economic, financial, planning and energy issues o f the MENA countries
in the presence o f some donor representatives and international institutions.

99

The Tunis consultation workshop focused on policies and strategies linked to energy efficiency through
(i)pricing and social protection; (ii) institutions linked to energy efficiency; (iii)financing mechanisms;
and (iv) the lessons learnt as well as the challenges inherent in implementation.
The workshop enhanced the sharing o f experiences linked to energy efficiency between countries o f the
MENA region, by getting comments from the countries on the results o f the study before its finalization,
by making it possible to have an exchange o f views on priority actions in terms o f energy efficiency, and
by discussing the potential role o f the donors including that of the World Bank.
The consultation was a successful exchange among MENA countries on their experiences o f
implementing energy efficiency strategies and energy pricing reforms. The World Bank study provided a
platform for this exchange o f views in the form of a knowledge base and a conceptual framework.
Tunisia, which i s the most experienced and advanced MENA country in terms o f national energy
efficiency strategy implementation, was able to showcase its approach.
International Conference on Climate Change, Hammamet, Tunisia

The World Bank was invited to participate substantially with a financial contribution and key note
speakers in the “Cinquieme Colloque International sur I’Energie, les Changements climatiques et l e
Developpement durable”, organized in Hammamet from June 15 to 17th, 2009. This event was attended
by a broad spectrum o f participants from universities, environmental agencies, private sector and NGOs
and provided an excellent opportunity to put forth important elements o f the World Bank’s climate
change work and to highlight priority measures needed in this area.

Consultations on the Private Sector Development Flagship report ('%ram Privilege to Competition:
Unlocking Private-Led Growth in the Middle East and Africa’?

The consultations organized in Tunis from December 1Oth to 12‘h, 2008, put forward the main messages of
the regional report o f the World Bank that deals with the development o f the private sector in the Middle
East and North Africa region. This report analyzes its different aspects, namely the role of the State and
its institutions to ensure a greater impact o f the current reforms in investments in the region. The aim of
this presentation was to appraise the viewpoints of the different stakeholders on these issues in Tunisia.
A first event, in the morning of December 1 1th 2008, involved key stakeholders from the government and
the private sector, and was co-hosted by the Government. The presentation focused on the gap between
reforms as they’re designed and the way they’re implemented. This gap i s prevalent across the region and
explains why the impact o f past reforms on private investment in the region has been muted compared to
other regions. The presentation triggered an interesting debate and discussion and found large consensus
among the participants around the main points of the report.
The discussion focused on how this diagnosis relates to the Tunisia situation, and focused more
specifically on the need to increase the extent o f involvement o f the private sector in Tunisia in the policy
debates with government on the design and prioritization o f reforms, as well as the evaluation of progress.
Participants from the government, the private sector and academia acknowledged that a lot o f reforms
have taken place in Tunisia, but that the implication of the private sector to these reforms could have been
stronger to accelerate the needed structural transformation o f the economy. This diagnosis i s in line with
the report’s messages and some participants commended the report for highlighting what they viewed as a
key issue in Tunisia.

100

Increased partnership between the State and the private sector in identifying what firms really need and
assessing how effective i s the implementation of reforms has been identified in the discussion as an
important agenda for Tunisia. Recent initiatives in that direction between the customs administration and
the private sector will be strengthened and expanded through the support of the Bank’s Export
Development projects.
was organized by the Tunis World Bank
A second, smaller event on the afternoon of December 1 lth
office with selected private sector representatives. This allowed for a freer discussion on the above
mentioned critical issues for Tunisia and confirmed again the main thrust o f the report.
Youth Consultations

The World Bank, in collaboration with the Ministry of Youth and Sports, jointly hosted a consultative
workshop on 29th April, 2009, on the Bank’s MENA region report on “Youth - an under-estimatedasset:
towards a new agenda for the Middle East and North Africa - the progress, challenges and way ahead”.
This report was particularly pertinent for Tunisia in the context of its new national youth strategy that
covers 2009-2014 and that envisages supporting the insertion o f 400,000 young Tunisians into the
workplace.
The workshop’s aim was to present the main recommendations of the report and establish a discussion
platform with the different Ministries on their activities and their action plans within the framework of the
national youth strategy. Amongst other issues, the report analyzes (i)the context in the Middle East and
North Africa region; (ii) the transition phases of youth including education, employment, migration
movements, health, and starting a family; and (iii)recommendations for multi-sectoral policies in favor of
youth.
About 50 participants attended the workshop, including youth action groups, students and many high
level representatives from different Ministries (Ministry of Development and International Cooperation,
Ministry of Public Health, Ministry of Culture and Heritage Protection, Ministry of Employment and
Professional Youth Insertion, Ministry of Education and Training, Ministry of Social Affairs, Solidarity
and Tunisian abroad, Ministry of Higher Education). Representatives from international organizations
were also present including the United Nations, UNICEF, and the African Development Bank.
In response to demand expressed by the Ministries, the World Bank discussed possible follow-up
activities with the Ministry of Youth and Sports to: (i) discuss potential collaboration on activities which
are being organized for the 2010 Year of International Youth; (ii)explore the opportunities of focusing on
the impact of Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) given the large number o f programs the different
Ministries have. For example, the WB could provide M&E for the National Strategy o f Youth, which
presents an opportunity to integrate M&E from the beginning of the process; and (iii) hold bilateral
meetings with different ministries to explore the proposed follow-up and other potential demand.

A second small informal workshop was hosted by the World Bank on April 30th with young people and
youth organizations at the World Bank’s Public Information Center at the University of Tunis El Manar.
The objective of the workshop was to disseminate the report and get feedback on challenges,
opp0,rtunitiesand solutions for youth in the region today. The aim of the discussion was to listen to youth
and youth groups to get an idea of their thoughts on these topics. During this session, the youth and youth
groups prepared write-ups on the challenges, opportunities and solutions for youth. They used this as a
basis for discussions for 6 break-out groups. Each group reported back their views on these topics and
generated ideas to feed into the Bank‘s dialogue with the Government on the Youth agenda (Summary
available).

101

Global Integration Report Presentation and Dissemination at the University

A presentation on the Bank’s report on “Tunisia’s global integration: a new generation of reforms to
boost growth and employment” was held at the University o f Tunis El Manar on May Sth 2009. About 80
participants from academia and different donor agencies such as the AfDB, the AFD and the UN attended
this event. This occasion allowed a platform for discussion and debate, triggering strong interest among
the participants as the topic i s considered very pertinent to the local and global context.
The study covers mainly the following points: it assesses past integration policies by describing the
policies implemented and evaluates their impact on foreign direct investments, exports and employment;
it examines the present challenges o f the integration o f Tunisia after the creation o f the free trade area
with Europe for industrial products in January 2008; and it also proposes specific reforms which are
necessary in order to draw on the vast potential o f the services sector.
Following the presentation, the participants held a lively debate on Tunisia’s integration, expressing their
concerns in certain sectors as well as their points of view for the future. The World Bank’s Tunis office
received positive feedback and numerous requests for more information and a larger dissemination of the
report given the widespread interest in the study.
Water report dissemination with media and web users’ reactions

In June 2009, the World Bank team working in the water sector organized with local and governmental
counterparts a dissemination event for the report “RBflexion stratkgique sur I’eau potable et
I’assainissement en Tunisie”. This event provided an opportunity to present the main findings o f the
report as well as to give an evaluation o f the sector with the suggested next steps to be followed.
The event was picked up by journalists and articles were posted on different local websites. One o f the
articles written had negative connotations and misinterpretations regarding the report’s recommendations.
Immediately the Bank’s team took action and produced a clarifying note with regard to the
misunderstandings entailed by the article. The Bank team also followed up on the reactions o f the
different readers to the article. A number o f readers - those who either had attended the dissemination
event or who showed interest in the water sector in Tunisia - freely expressed their thoughts mentioning
that the report’s messages were of a different nature and were not negative. Some even went all the way
by saying that the journalist did not seem to have understood the report at all. This event could be
considered as a new consultation means. The reaction in the form o f blogs presents a new and different
communication channel for the Bank’s consultation work in Tunisia as it i s a spontaneous reaction on
behalf o f web users who show interest in WB analysis and studies.

I. Communications and Outreach
1.

The CPS consultations reaffirmed the importance of reaching out and listening to different
audiences. Stake-holders expressed great interest in interacting more with the Bank to debate
development issues and have greater access to Bank reports (global, regional and national).

2.

Two key elements facilitate mainstreaming o f communications into World Bank activities to
support reforms: first, decision makers are increasingly convinced of the need to open up the
dialogue on reforms to socioeconomic actors, and second, the World Bank i s increasingly
recognized as a trusted partner and a strong reform proponent.

102

3.

Through focusing on promoting dialogue, building awareness and understanding o f the reform
process, World Bank communication activities will facilitate consensus-building for reform
and contribute to feeding the public debate in view o f generating more proactive responses
and leveraging local ideas and inputs. The Country Office will continue to expand i t s
outreach and communication to strengthen partnerships in the implementation o f the new
CPS.

4.

Consultations around the CPS will continue in order to interact with those met during the CPS
process and share the Bank’s strategy with a broader audience to promote a better
understanding of issues, challenges and reform trade-offs and to contribute to leveraging
ideas and local input from non-traditional World Bank partners. In addition, Bank teams
working on lending and analytical work will be encouraged to identify mechanisms early on
for engaging with civil society and strengthening participatory processes. Some of the Bank’s
outreach efforts can be conducted jointly with development partners such as the European
Commission Delegation, the United Nations and the African Development Bank in Tunis.
These institutions are also stepping up their outreach efforts and have expressed willingness
to co-organize events with the Bank as was successfully done in the past.

Communications & Outreach Strategy

Promote a better understanding o f issues, challenges and reform tradeoffs
o Raise awareness of reforms by strengthening communications on AAAs and operations
Position the World Bank as a global knowledge institution.
Support CPS implementation :
Ensure participation in Bank programs by strengthening stakeholders involvement, mainly
through disclosure, translation and outreach.
o Communicate on results with the goal o f increasing Bank’s operational effectiveness through
dialogue, outreach and communication.
o

Improve access to development content:
o Share information to enhance quality o f the Bank-supportedprograms.
o Identify adequate partners through which “knowledge resources” can be transmitted (Le.
Public Information services).
Communication Strategy will be implemented through four main pillars

Civil Society Engagement.
e

Knowledge Dissemination.

e

Communication for Bank Operations.
Media Outreach, with a specific focus on Web outreach:
o The Bank’s websites in three different languages (English, French and Arabic) have proven
to be an excellent resource o f information locally and internationally.
o The web visitors have considerably increased between 2007 and 2009, increasing from 476
monthly users in September 2007 to 1,676 in September 2008 and 2,569 in 2009.

103

Appendix 8
World Bank Export Promotion in Tunisia

Overview

1.
The Bank has a long-term engagement in Tunisia in support o f export development through the
Export Development Projects (EDP), of which the second phase i s coming to a close and the third phase
i s under preparation. The objectives o f the EDPs are to create a conducive export environment and
encourage trade in Tunisia, with a focus on supporting SMEs. The successful experience o f the EDPs in
Tunisia reflects to a large extent the country’s commitment to trade liberalization and the request for
continued engagement o f the World Bank in this area. Tunisia has been committed to trade liberalization
since the 1970s through various programs including through an export promotion program for Textile and
Clothing exporters in the early 1970s, and the signature o f the first Association Agreement with the EU in
the mid 1980s. Tunisia’s trade policy has rested on three pillars: (i)promoting exports, through generous
incentives to attract FDI in the offshore sector, incentives to exporting firms, and trade agreements; (ii) a
decisive move toward a market economy started in 1986, and a large number o f structural reforms that
were introduced gradually including: liberalizing tariffs and prices, privatizing state enterprises, reducing
entry barriers to economic sectors and pre-authorizations, and enacting a new competition law; and (iii)
more recently, trade facilitation.
2.
In addition, Tunisia has complemented these export promotion efforts with an industrial
upgrading (“mise a niveau”) program put in place in 1996, and largely supported by the EU. The program
aimed to enhance the organizational, technological, and marketing capabilities o f f i r m s being gradually
exposed to competition vis-a-vis the EU. This EU supported program also implemented in Morocco,
Senegal and Madagascar, has been particularly successful in Tunisia. In 2004, the Government launched
a more ambitious program - Programme de Modernisation Industrielle (industrial modernization program
or PMI), designed in cooperation with the EU, and aimed at providing technical assistance to support firm
creation, innovation and quality enhancement.
3.
Trade facilitation has received much emphasis since 2000, when the government adopted a
comprehensive approach to the issue, with the objective to improve trade facilitation through streamlined
technical controls, improved customs procedures, and increased access to information on standards and
technical regulations to raise transparency and meet international trade obligations.
Assessment o f the Export Development Projects

4.
The Bank’s project experience and IEG reports have assessed the EDP projects in Tunisia as
successful with notable achievements. These assessments concluded that the successful experience of
EDPs in Tunisia reflects the design of appropriate programs that support the country’s export
development. Amongst other achievements, the export structure o f firms that benefited from the export
development program i s much more diversified (in products and markets) than other exporting firms. The
success hinges mainly on the sustained commitment from Government and the World Bank’s
responsiveness and flexibility in the design o f customized programs. Also, the lessons learned are being
disseminated across similar projects in the Bank. For example, FAMEX, the World Bank pilot matching
grant for export promotion that i s financed under the EDPs, was successful in Tunisia in terms of export
revenues, employment, and demand from the private sector. The program has quickly surpassed i t s
performance target of supporting 500 individual firms. Similar programs have subsequently been
implemented in Ethiopia and Cambodia.

104

The Second Export Development Project (EDP I
I
)

5.
The development objectives of EDP I1 which i s currently underway are: i)to improve access to
export markets and finance, and ii)enhance the efficiency and performance of trade clearance processes
(customs operations and technical controls).
The project’s main components are:

0
0
0

Second Export Market Access Fund (EMAF 11);
Pre-shipment Export Finance Guarantees (PEFG) Facility;
WTO Technical Barriers to Trade Enquiry Point ;
Trade Logistics - Enhanced integration o f technical control procedures and strengthened risk
management protocols;
Trade Logistics - Streamlining and Strengthening o f Customs Procedures.

Component 1: The Second Export Market Access Fund (EMAF II)

6.
A major component of the EDP I1 i s EMAF I 1 (USD 22.5 million) which helps Tunisian firms
(mostly SMEs) boost growth, employment and income through new export initiatives and the
diversification o f markets and products. EMAF I1 i s a matching grant program that provides nonreimbursable co-financing o f 50 percent for individual firms and 70 percent for professional associations
on a demand-driven basis to help implement investments in market research and pre-competitive
programs that increase export market access and competitiveness;

7.

EMAF outcomes (March 2009). Increased exports in new markets and arrival o f new exporters.
0

898 firms (project target 1000) have finalized or are implementing their export plans under the
program;

e

30 percent of these firms are new exporters and 49 percent of these plans target new export
markets for Tunisia;

0

The first 460 exports plans which are completed generated an additional USD 171 million o f
exports revenues. It i s expected that additional exports generated by firms under the scheme will
reach USD 300 million by the end of the project;

0

About 28 percent o f these firms are in services and about 50 percent o f the beneficiaries are
SMEs o f less than 100 employees (small firms o f less than 50 employees account for 3 5 percent
o f all beneficiaries).

Component 2: Pre-shipment Export Finance Guarantees (PEFG) Facility

8.
This component aims at further encouraging financial institutions to provide pre-shipment
working capital financing to emerging exporters with viable export contracts. Eligible sub-loans financed
are guaranteed for up to 90 percent o f the outstanding principal amount, which represents nonperformance risks o f SMEs and emerging exporters which the participating financial institutions must
bear for up to 180 days.

105

9.
The facility i s available to all Tunisian SMEs and emerging exporters in all manufacturing,
processing, and service activities that are unable to access pre-shipment export finance from commercial
banks.
10.
From November 2006 to February 2009, 187 applications (mostly from SMEs) were processed.
The amount of credit guaranteed reached $16.1 million and the related value of exports was $45.4
million.

-

Component 3: W T O Technical Barriers to Trade Enquiry Point

11.
This component aims to strengthen the capability o f the Standards and Intellectual Property
Institute (INORPI) for collection, analysis and dissemination of standards information. Specifically, this
sub-component includes i)the Procurement of computerized systems to strengthen WTO Enquiry Point
(including the creation o f a new digital database of Tunisia technical control regulations), ii)the training
of INORPI and Ministry staff in best practice management of information on standards and technical
control regulations to meet WTO obligations in the TBT Agreement32,and iii) technical assistance for
dissemination (web-based information dissemination on standards, through the new INORPI website).

12.

The main outcomes of this component are the following:
Notification to WTO of new Tunisian technical regulations now takes 2 months (project target)
instead of 4-6 months before the project;

0

The access time to WTO notifications on export technical controls i s now down to 2 months
(project target) instead of 5-12 months before the project;

0

Tunisian standards have been digitalized and are now available on-line. The new website of
INNORPI i s operational since April 2009 and modeled after the website of the Canadian Council
of Norms (which i s a worldwide reference in this area).

-

Component 4: Trade Logistics
Enhanced integration o f technical control procedures and
strengthened risk management protocols

13.
This sub-component finances the application of e-governmentto technical control procedures and
processing to complement the e-government mechanisms developed under the EDP I.The objective i s to
improve the efficiency, speed and transparency of technical control procedures, thereby further reducing
import clearance times. This component includes i)the automation of workflow and decision making
processes of technical control agencies33,ii)the implementation o f an integrated risk management system
at the level of each of the technical control agencies34and iii)the implementation o f a technical control
digital database.

-

3 2 The Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT Agreement) was negotiated during the Uruguay Round o f the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and entered into force with the establishment o f the WTO at the beginning o f 1995. The TBT
exists to ensure that regulations, standards, testing, and certification procedures do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade. The
agreement prohibits technical requirements created in order to limit trade, as opposed to technical requirements created for
legitimate purposes such as consumer or environmental protection
33 - “back-office” re-engineering o f the seven technical control agencies and one central analysis laboratory (LCAE), and the
implementation o f a web-based, standard application linked to allow control agencies to accelerate their authorization process.
34
This system will provide fast response for inspection, reduce the number o f consignments subject to inspection, lab testing
and other technical control inspection, and reduce control overlaps that currently exist between the technical control agencies and
customs.

-

106

14,

The main outcomes of this component are the following:
Reduced time for technical inspection services authorizations (AMC/APE). On average, since late
2007, it takes 9.84 hours to provide these authorizations against several days before the project
(project target, delay between 0 and 2 days);
About 70 percent of all the authorizations are now processed through the new digital system.

Component 5. Trade Logistics - Streamlining and Strengtheningof Customs Procedures

15.
This component streamlines customs clearance procedures in order to reduce border clearance
delays while at the same time strengthening control processes. It includes a technical assistance for the
implementation of risk analysis, management and selectivity techniques to customs control and
administration; in parallel, techniques are also introduced within Tunisian Customs for deferred control
and post event audit35. Furthermore, the management information system of the customs i s being
improved by adding database definitions for collection of data within SINDA (Tunisia Customs
Information System) which will enable regular analysis of customs operations effectiveness, productivity
measures, fraud cases, detection rate, and other management indicators. Finally, the technology
infrastructure i s being stren hened to support these changes (procurement of scanners, computer
hardware and other equipment ).

g,

16.

The main outcomes o f this component are the following (March 2009):

0

The average time for custom’s clearance i s now around 14 minutes against a project target of 15
minutes (and 2-4 days before the project);

0

Import declarations assigned the Green Channel (immediate release) are now around 60 percent
(against 0 before the project);

0

The overall duration of stay in ports for containers (which includes loading/unloading, customs
clearance) has been significantly reduced from 9.2 days in 2006 to 5.6 days in 2008.

These procedures act as a safety net for facilitation by providing a range of control mechanisms (documentary, physical, and accounts
verification) that also act as strong deterrents to customs fraud and smuggling.

jS

’‘

The investment is targeted at reducing border crossing delays while improving customs effectiveness in control, revenue collection and national
security

107

Appendix 9

SME FINANCE IN TUNISIA

Overall background

1.
As discussed in this CPS, Tunisia’s National Development Plan has a main goal to transform the
economy to bring about sustained job creation. This will necessitate strengthening the development o f the
private sector, particularly industry (manufacturing) and services. In order for these sectors to grow
sufficiently, it i s necessary for the private sector companies to be adequately financed.
2.
The Tunisian government has long been aware o f the need to support companies in their search
for financing. Over the last decade, the government has strengthened legal and regulatory frameworks in
this area, created public financing systems, facilitated the development of financial markets and helped to
expand the supply of financial products; especially those geared at SMEs.

3.
SMEs play a vital role in Tunisia because 98 percent of Tunisian firms (across all sectors) fall
into this category. The main consequence o f the prevalence of SMEs in Tunisia’s economic landscape i s
that all development strategies are de facto based on the performance of this category of companies.
SMEs’ ability to obtain financing for their business operations and investments i s therefore crucial to
Tunisia’s future economic development.

SME financing in Tunisia: despite a favorable environment, private sector financing has reached a
plateau”
4.
SME access to financing i s a product o f both demand and supply constraints. Companies are
deprived o f financial services either because o f constraints that exist at their level (demand side factors) or
because the formal financial system as a whole i s not able to accommodate their needs (supply side
factors). Supply side factors, i.e. making financial products and services available at a reasonable cost,
depend not only on macroeconomic and microeconomic factors, but also on government initiatives.
5.
Data available in Tunisia underscore a kind o f paradox. Tunisian SMEs have operated in the last
few years within a constantly improving macroeconomic framework and business environment. Most
financing tools are available (bank finance, factoring and leasing, stock market, venture capital, etc.) and
the Tunisian government has put in place several dedicated support mechanisms (e.g. BFPME a bank
specifically dedicated to SME finance and SOTUGAR for guarantees). However, despite this fairly
favorable environment that generates viable financing opportunities, private sector funding (as a
percentage o f GDP) has leveled o f f in the last decade. In effect:
e

Recent growth in outstanding credit i s mainly a result o f the increase in consumer credit. Though the
lion’s share o f outstanding credit (almost 80 percent) went to productive sectors between 2005 and
2007, outstanding consumer credit nevertheless increased more sharply than business credit.
Outstanding consumer loans thus rose by an average o f 21 percent38between 2005 and 2007, while
loans to the productive sector only climbed by an average o f 6 percent (Chart 1)

” A more detailed analysis o f these issues i s provided in a forthcoming WBG policy note which will be delivered to the
Government before the end o f 2009.
Consumer credit i s made up mostly o f short-term credit and real estate loans - 1.e. 40 and 56 percent o f outstanding credit in 2007 and 2008
respectively.

’*

108

0

0

0

Most o f the credit to the productive sectors goes to the services sector (56 percent) then to industry
(roughly 38 percent, Chart 2). Within services, the main recipients are trade, hotels and restaurants; in
industry, the main beneficiaries are the agro-industry and construction sector (Chart 3 and 4);
Most o f the credit to productive sectors goes to private companies (about 96 percent in industry and
services in 2007);
Most o f the credit to the productive sectors i s short-term (about 65 percent in industry and 50.5 percent
in services in 2007, Chart 5);
Even though credit to the private sector i s on average higher in Tunisia than it i s in the Middle East
and North Africa region as a whole, it remains much lower than in the OECD advanced economies. It
has remained stable, at roughly 64-66 percent of GDP since the mid- 1990s, despite the implementation
by the Tunisian government of various mechanisms aimed at promoting financing of this sector (Chart
6).

Chart 1. Growth rate o f outstanding credit to
the economy broken down by beneficiary.

Chart 2. Sectoral breakdown of business credit.
IIll1 l!

30

911 11
Si! 11

25

711 I1

zn

60 I1

51) I1
I5
40 11

30 il

I l!

211 0
5
II1 11

n 11

I1

ZOO1
bd Crodils

21!07

2006
ai^^

prolcssmnnols E Crad~tsJW( ~ a n i e u l i e r ~

Chart 3. Breakdown o f outstanding credit in
services in 2007.
s n t e et action
Services
collectifs
sociaux et pers

sociale
2 2%

Admlnlstra'ion
puh,lque

Educatiun

Smcr

-\.

3 5%

\
'

Co m inewe
rcparations duto

communication

locations.
services a m
ent

2 4 7%

17 1%

109

Chart 5. Outstanding credit broken down by
term in industry and services in 2007.

Chart 6. Credit to the private sector (Pet of GDP).

65 1

T
~

60 0

400

300

0
2I Oo o

00

I

~

I

_O0I
500

'

1

1

p1
P'
~W~~~

~~~~~

~~e~~~
lli

I

111"

1

~~~~~~

i"

~

I

jw

PP e@

i

W
J

I

I

I

LIndmtrie E %r\ ices

....

I

g g

.*.:

*

Source BCT and World Bank data

- -.
--

*

\l*i"'

N

N

---r---"LDL

.---TW*,C

6.
In short, recent growth in outstanding credit i s mostly due to an increase in consumer credit. SME
financing remains limited and largely short-term. This raises questions about the real efficiency o f the
policies implemented, whether regulations or support mechanisms.
Enterprises' perception: signijicant and persistent problems of access to financing that stem from
banks' stringent requirements

7.
Available data from 2006 and 2008 firm surveys show that Tunisian companies consider access
to and cost of bank financing to be two o f the greatest barriers to their growth. 29.7 percent o f firms,
irrespective o f sector, considered access to bank financing to be a "major" obstacle to their growth, while
49.9 percent o f firms saw the cost o f bank financing in the same light. This perception i s even more
negative for small enterprises. It i s therefore hardly surprising to observe that self-financing, mainly
reinvested profits, i s the main source o f funding for Tunisian companies.
8.
The banking system's contribution remains moderate. Depending on the sector, bank credit
provides for between 11 and 24 percent of long-term asset financing compared with 48 to 52 percent from
retained earnings. Financing provided by SICARs (venture capital in the Tunisian context) and other nonbanking financial institutions play a minor role, irrespective o f sector. To some extent, the relatively
limited use o f bank financing by Tunisian SMEs reflects the negative perceptions referred to above.
9.
The available data indicate that Tunisian SMEs consider banks' collateral requirements to be the
chief obstacle blocking access to bank credit (on average, the banks require collateral worth up to 167
percent o f the loan granted). Though they are mentioned less often, administrative procedures and
documents to be submitted are also obstacles. Conversely, according to the firms, SICARs' and leasing
companies' small share in the financing o f Tunisian companies appears to stem partly from the
companies' inadequate grasp o f these financing tools. Low recourse to financial markets i s also mainly
due to companies' lack of knowledge and to the perception that this type of financing i s the preserve o f
large companies.

110

10.
These data underscore the perception that the financing problems faced by Tunisian companies
and SMEs are considered as structural. They also indicate that firms do not appear to expect to see an
improvement in the short term.
The supply offinancial products and services

11.
The main types o f financing available to SMEs in Tunisia are: i)bank financing that can help
SMEs in the operational phase (working capital requirements, investment), ii)factoring and leasing that
help to fund operations (and, in the case of leasing, sometimes constitute an alternative to investment), iii)
the stock market, which provides medium and long-term financing and iv) venture capital, which aims
more specifically at companies in the start-up phase.
The banking system and bank lending

12.
The Tunisian banking system has undergone profound changes in the last decade: the creation o f
SOTUGAR in 2003, and that of BFPME, which works exclusively with SMEs, in 2005, the change in
status of development banks to universal banks, and the privatization o f Banque du Sud. Despite the
recent improvements, the sector still has certain structural characteristics that limit bank lending to SMEs:
For a relatively narrow market such as Tunisia’s, the number o f credit institutions appears to be large
(20 entities), credit supply i s therefore highly fragmented. In this context, it appears to be difficult for
Tunisian banks to create new products or try to tap into new risky markets such as the SME market,
for they would be unable to achieve the necessary economies o f scale or absorb the initial losses;
In spite o f the significant improvements recorded in recent years, Tunisian banks are still burdened by
the level of non-performing loans on their balance sheets3’. In this context that i s not conducive to risk
taking, there i s some concern that Tunisian banks will continue to remain on the sidelines o f SME
financing for a while longer, or even turn from it altogether in the current climate o f economic
recession and resurgent corporate default risk;

Tunisian banks also appear to be ill-equipped to adequately capture SME risk. This i s a result o f i)
factors specific to SMEs (opaque finances, excessively high debt ratios, low quality of demand and
projects, difficulty of obtaining collateral), ii)characteristics specific to banks (limited loan technology
- little use o f credit scoring, lack o f information on SMEs, inexperience in certain areas and lack o f
sufficiently qualified personnel in this segment) and iii) the external environment (difficulties o f
registering collateral, absence o f sector information and studies).
13.
In recent years, the Tunisian government has taken two very important measures aimed at
facilitating SME financing by offsetting banks’ reluctance to lend to this sector: the creation o f BFPME
and SOTUGAR. Even though banks see these mechanisms as a step forward, they are still somewhat
reluctant to use them and invoke reasons relating to cost and time delays (SOTUGAR) or to the
duplication o f procedures and contractual details (BFPME).
Leasing

14.
The leasing business i s relatively new to Tunisia, it was introduced in 1984. There are currently
10 leasing companies in operation. The three largest companies account for almost 60 percent o f the
market. Leasing has increased significantly in Tunisian SMEs in recent years as a source o f funding for
fixed asset investment. Leasing penetration in gross fixed capital formation reached 1 1.4 percent in 2007.

- These non-performing loans decreased from 24 percent o f total credits in 2003 to 17 percent in 2008 while loanloss provisioning increased from 43.1 percent to 53.8 percent over the same period

39

111

Even though it i s making steady strides, the sector still faces constraints such as i) the absence of a
secured transaction registry, ii) the difficulty of obtaining financing for specialized equipment, which
makes leasing less attractive to industrial SMEs and iii) the persistently high financing cost o f financial
leasing.
Factoring

15.
Factoring i s a useful financing tool that accelerates SMEs’ cash flow and enables them to meet
their working capital requirements. Factoring i s a technique whereby, under the terms of a contract, a
specialized credit institution takes responsibility for collecting a company’s debts while opting to bear any
losses incurred as a result of debtor insolvency. The factoring sector i s expanding and continuing to
contribute to financing the Tunisian economy and to managing account receivables. The volume of
invoices purchased amounted to a total o f m D 408.7 million at end 2007. 83.9 percent of this derived
from domestic business. The factoring business involved 464 sellers and 22,852 factors in 2007. The
sector nevertheless faces several challenges such as i)contract enforcement difficulties, ii)difficulty in
obtaining information on companies’ credit histories and payment records, and iii) the absence of a
specific legal framework.
The Stock Market
16.
In December 2007, an alternative market (Marche‘ alternatij) was launched to facilitate SME
access to financing. The hope was that this newly-created market would help to diversify financing
sources (and therefore reduce the cost of capital) and be a vector for the transformation of SMEs, which
are often family companies. Requirements for SMEs’ entry into the alternative market have been adapted
in accordance with international best practices; they are less stringent than the conditions imposed on
larger companies listed on the primary stock market. This market remains little developed because it faces
a number o f
0

Institutional constraints: the small size of the primary stock market (in 2006, as measured by market
capitalization, it was 14.7 percent of GDP, i.e. six times smaller than the markets in Egypt or
Morocco) i s not an attractive example, low liquidity on the primary market increases the risk of low
liquidity on the secondary market, the level of investor protection could be improved,
disclosure/reporting of financial information need to be improved and there are s t i l l obstacles to
foreign investor participation;

Demand constraints: lack of information odawareness of the fact that the alternative market could be
a source of long-term financing for SMEs, strong reluctance to disclose the information required for
market flotation and the perception that there i s a high cost to enter this market, which acts as a strong
deterrent to potential candidates.
Venture Capital (SICARs)

17.
Venture capital i s a type of private equity capital. It i s a structured technique that provides capital
to high-growth emerging companies. Venture capital enables enterprises to obtain private equity capital
that i s granted without any collateral (or tangible and intangible guarantees) and i s paid back in the
medium term by the enterprise i t s e l f once it has started to generate profits. SICARs provide funding to
help to finalize the financing plan. Together with the project sponsors and FOPRODI (a development
fund), SICARs provide between 35 and 40 percent of total investment. There are currently over 40
SICARs operating in Tunisia. At the end of 2007, in over 12 years of activity, venture capital had helped
to finance 1,300 companies, with funds amounting to close to TND 600 million. While the Finance Law
of 2009 made it possible to remove major hurdles to the development o f SICARs, there are s t i l l two
strong constraints that will take longer to address:

112

0

0

Due to the limitations of Tunisian stock market and the alternative market, prospects of exit via the
stock exchange remain slim;
It appears that a number of SICARs lack expertise in the appraisal, approval and monitoring of
technology projects. This inhibits their involvement in this sector.

Conclusion

18.
As a whole, despite the government’s substantial commitment to supporting the private sector and
SMEs, financing granted in the last decade has plateaued at roughly 64 to 68 percent of GDP. This i s
because there are still a number of constraints on the smooth functioning of the SME financing system.

113

Appendix 10: World Bank Managed Trust Funds in Tunisia
Closing
T F No.

Projecf

Trust
Fund

Date

US$
'000

BEIRE
/I

R

TF055745

GEF Africa Stockpiles Programme

GEFIA

30-NOV-09

4,000.0

TF05 1308

GEF2 FSP-Protected Areas Management Project

GEFIA

28-Feb-09

5,108.8

TF056587

TF056659

I Tntal

I GEF PDF B- Managing Health Care Waste and PCB
I

GEFIA

I

31-Mar-09

I

340.0

I

R

I

Carbon

I

31-Dec-15

1

13,510.0

I

R

GEF FSP-Gulf of Gabes Marine and Coastal Resources

I ICF Landfill for Djebel Chekir
I

R

I

ICF ERF'A for Landfills of Bizerte, Sousse, Sfax, Gabes,

I

I

5A.905

1/ BE: Bank Executed
RE: Recipient Executed.

114

c

I

CAS Annex A1:Tunisia a t a Glance

9/1/09

M East
Key Development Indicators

8 North

Tunisia

Africa

Lower
middle
income

Age distribution, 2007

72008)

Female

Population mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (56 of total population)

10 3
164
10
66

GNI (Atlas method US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method US$)
GNI per capita (PPP international 9)

313
8,778
17
57

3,435
35,510
10
42

360
3 510
7,140

883
2,820
7,402

6,543
1,905
4,585

45
35

59
41

102
91

3
13
74
18

4
17
70
32

86
69
110
107

82
65
108
103

88
77
112
109

94
85

89
77

88
55

GDP growth (Oh)
GDP per capita growth ( O h )

8

4

2

0

2

4

percent of lotal wpulation

(most recent estimate, 2003-2008)
Poverty headcount ratio at 51 25 a day (PPP Oh)
Poverty headcount ratio at 52 00 a day (PPP %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1 000 live births)
Child malnutrition ( % of children under 5)

vl

Adult literacy mala (Oh of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy female (Oh of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment male ( % of age group)
Gross primary enrollment female (Oh of age group)
Access to an improved water source ( % of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (Oh of population)

Net Aid Flows
(US$ mflhons)
Net ODA and offlcial aid
Top 3 donors (in 2007)
France
European Commission
Germany
Aid (Oh of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1980

240

1990

2000

Lo

Under -5 rnortallty rate (per 1,000)

69
38
25

2008

391

222

79
1
26

76
25
-8

93
71
2

128
117
27

28
38

33
48

12
23

09
30

12 8

65
45

30
32

50
59

09
64

14
100

12
100

1

80
70
BO
50
40

30
20
10
0

II

1880

'Tunisia

1885

2000

2007

'Middle Easl 6 Norlh Afnca

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (Oh)

310

I

1

lo

L o n g - T e n Economic Trends
85

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average local per US5)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

04

I

--o- GDP

1980-90

05

-

GDP per capita

1990-2000

200048

(average annual growth %j
Population mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

64
8 743

82
12314

96
19,443

10 3
40,743

24
33

16
47

10
49

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

14 1
31 1
11 8
54 8

(% of GDPj
15 7
29 8
16 9
54 5

12 3
28 6
18 2
59 1

99
32 6
17 9
57 5

28
31
37
35

23
46
55
53

27
-2 9
-23 9
77

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

61 5
14 5
29 4

63 6
16 4
27 1

60 7
15 6
27 3

62 8
14 6
27 0

29
38
-1 8

43
41
36

50
43
21

Exports of goods and servicas
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

40 2
45 6
25 1

43 6
50 6
22 2

44 5
48 2
23 1

61 0
65 3
21 8

56
17

51
38

43
30

Note Figures in italics are for years other than those specified 2008 data are preliminary
Aid data are for 2007

indicates data are not available

6

Development Economics Development Data Group (DECDG)

115

r

Tunisia
Balance o f Payments and Trade

2000

2008

G o v e r n a n c e i n d l c a t o r s , 2000 a n d 2007

(US$ millions)
Total merchandiseexports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

5,840
6,556
-705

19,184
24,544
-1,367

Voice and accountability

Current account balance
asa%ofGDP

-821
-4 2

-1,712
-4.2

Regulatory quality

Workers' remittances and
compensation o f employees (receipts)

798

1,977

Reserves, including gold

1,821

8,861

Political stability

Rule of law
Control of corruption

I

0

82007
O2000

Central Government Finance
(%of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

24 1
216
199

27.3
22.8
21.0

-3 7

-0.8

25

Paved roads ( % o f total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per MO people)
High technology exports
( % o f manufactured exports)

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

75

100

higharvaluar imgyberrsrrarngs

Technology and Infrastructure
Overall surpiusldeficit (includes grants)

50

Country's percentile rank (C-100)

2000

2007

68 4

65 8

11
34

89
53

External Debt and Resource Flows
En v l r o n m e nt

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debtrelief(HIPC.MDRI)

11,307
1,906

20,776
2,lV

58 2
20 1

51.5
7.7

-

Totaldebt ( % o f G D P )
Totaldebt service ( % o f exports)

-

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity(net inflows)

Agricultural land ( % o f land area)
Forest area ( % o f land area)
Nationally protected areas ( % o f land area)
Freshwater resources per capita (cu meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

61
62

429
26

63
68
15
4x)

C 0 2 emissions per capita (mt)

21

22

GDP perunit o f energyuse
(2005 P P P $ per kg of oil equivalent)

69

78

794

863

2000

2008

C o m p o s i t i o n o f t o t a l external debt, 2008
Energy use per capita (kg o f oil equivalent)

IBRD 1 3 5 3
D A , 22
-IMF,

0

M h a l multiJaieral, 4,545

(US$ millions)

IBRD
Pnv

,

/Bilatctal,

3,282

US$millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
C o s t to starta business ( % o f GNIpercapita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
( % o f managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.

2000

-

2000

2008

11
7.9
39
2007

'

Stock market capitalization ( % o f G D P )
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

14.5
75

15.3
7.7

Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

1,211
06
150
79

1,353
70
273
74

IDA
Totaldebt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

39
0
2

22
0
2

11
11
1

58
58
0

1

2

-

-

IFC (fiscalyear)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
o f which IFC own account
Disbursements f o r IFC own account
Portfolio sales,prepayments and
repayments f o r IFC own account
M IGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

-

116

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
Tudsla

(estmate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

1990
59
74
59
85

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at 51 25 a day (PPP % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line ( W of population)
Share of inwme or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition ( % of children under 5)
Goal 2:
ensure that children are able to complete primary schoollng
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, 56)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

1995
65
76
56

93
80
44
84

ellmlnate gender disparity In education and empower women
Goal 3:
Ratio of girls to boys in pnmary and secondary education (Oh)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector ( % of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (Oh)

2000
26

59

90
57
90

86

23
7

4

Goal 4:
reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Underd mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

52
41
93

Goal 5:
reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence ( % of women ages 15-49)

2007

94
87
75
93

97
89
85
96

100
25
12

104
25
23

40
32
91

31
25
95

81
60

90
66

31

31

01
25
101

86

21
18
98

100
89
50

Goal 6:
halt and begin to reverse the spread of HlVlAlDS and other malor diseases
Prevalence of HIV ( % of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,OW people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS ( 5 6 )

01
26
78

halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Goal 7:
Access to an improved water source ( % of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (Oh of population)
Forest area (56 of total land area)
Nationally protected areas ( % of total land area)
C 0 2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (wnstant 2005 PPP 5 per kg of oil equivalent)

82
74
41

78
52

90
81
62

16
64

18
65

21
69

94
85
68
15
22
78

Goal 8:
develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

37
00
00
03

58
00
00
14

10 0
12
27
22

12 5
76 7
16 8
75

Education indlcaton (Oh)

Measles Immunization (Oh of I
olds)

:./___
50

-year

100

too

75

90
80
70
EO

50

2002

2004

2006 2007

25
0
1990

-d- Pnmary net

-4P-

1005

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

enrcliment ratio

Ratio of gills lo boys In pnmary 6 secondary

education

3

50
40
30
20
10
0

25

2000

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

Wunisia

PMiddle East 6 Nollh Afnca

OFixed + mobile subscribers
-Internet users

2006 2007

CAS Annex 8 2
Selected Indicators" of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 1011512009

Indicator
Portfolio A ssessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Awrage Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$'OOO)
Awrage Supervision (US$'OOO/project)

2007

2008

2009

2010

17
4.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
19.7

16

5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.4

16
4.6

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.5

15
4.9
13.3
14.7
13.3
14.7
4.6

No
1827
96

Yes
1607
95

Yes
1379
73

Yes
1350
85

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
100
5
Proj Em1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
4,409.4
465.2
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
15.0
0.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
8.9
0.0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
A w a g e age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on dewlopment objectiwx (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP
As defined under the Portfolio Improwment Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Inwstment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects actiw in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all actiw projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

118

CAS Annex 8 3
IBRDADA Program Summary
As Of Date 10115/2009

Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year
2010

Project ID
Community Based Integrated Rural Dev
Employment DPL
Northern Tunis Wastewater Treatment
Carbon Fund: Sidi Daoud Wind Farm
GEF: Energy Efficiency
GEF: Land and Water Optimization
GEF: Tunis Wastewater

201 1

2012-13

Integrated Competitiveness DPL2
North West Development 4
Skills Development
Export Development 3
AgriculturelClimate Change
Municipal Development 4
Health Services Strengthening
Education PAQSET 3
Competitiveness PolesllnnovationRechnology
Cultural Heritage 2
Regional Energy Inter-Connection
GEF: Eco-Tourism
GEF: Health Waste

strategic
R;ward;

Irnplementafion b
Risks (H/M/L)

H/M/L
H
H
M
H
M
M
M

M
M
M
M
M
L
M

H

M
L
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M

M

M
H
H
M
M
M
H
M
M
M
M

I
'

Employment DPL2
Water Sector 3
Solid Waste Management 2
Higher Education 2
Integration and Competitiveness DPL3
Northern Tunis Wastewater Treatment 2
Energy Efficiency 2

119

CAS Annex B3
IFC Investment Operations Program

Commitments (US$ml
Gross
Net**

2007

2008

2009

0.00
0.00

652.50
237.56

56.48
56.48

0
0
0
0
0

89.83
0
3.69
1.15
5.32
100.0

69.9
30.1
0
0
0
100

0

0
0
0
0

9.02
71.02
19.96
100.0

100
0
0
100

0

Net Commitments bv Sector (%l
CIN
COC
CFN
CFGF
CGM
Total

Net Commitments bv Investment Instrument
(%)
Equity
Loan
Quasi loan
Total

2010*

* As of August 31, 2009
** IFC’s Own Account only

120

-

CAS Annex B4 Summary of Non-lending Services
As Of Date 1011512009

Product

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$OOO)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Donor, Bank
Govt, Donor, Bank,
Public Dissem
Govt, Donor, Bank,
Public Dissem
Govt, Donor, Bank,
Public Dissem
Govt, Bank
Govt, Donor,Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Donor,Bank
Govt, Donor,Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Donor, Bank,
Public Dissem
Govt, Donor, Bank,
Public Dissem

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD,
PS
KG, PD,
PS

KG, PD,
PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

Recent completions
SME Study
Cost Assessment of Water Degradation
Clean Development Mechanism TA
Public Finance Management TA
Use of Country System Environment TA
Skills DevelopmentlSocial Insurance TA
Country Assistance Strategy Progress Rpt

FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY08

313
26
66
77
37
336
35

Water and Wastewater Strategy

FY08

145

Global Integration Study

FY08

295

Development of Logistics Services TA
Budget Management Reform
Skills DevelopmentlSocial Insurance TA
Asessment of Hospital Performance TA
Review of Energy Management Policy
Tunis Urban Transport Efficiency A
Agricultural Sector Review Update
Performance Based Budgeting
Health Services Improvement TA
MENA Region Flagship Report on Private Sector
Development
Development Policy Review

FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FYO9
FY09
FYO9
FYO9
FY09
FYI0

94
89
144
135
469
38
242
125
75
nla

FYI0

450

FYI0

250

FYI0
FYI0
FYI0
FYI0

100
150
160
75

Govt, Donor, Bank,
Public Dissem
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank

FYI0
FYI0
FYI0
FYI0
FYI0
FYI0
FYI0
FYI0

100
100
80
80
200
200
150
220

Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Donor,Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank

Underway and Planned
Country Partnership Strategy
Social Protection AAA
Competitiveness Poles ESW
SME Finance Policy Note
Trade Facilitation and Logistics TA
Management of Macro Risks and Impact of Global
Crisis
PEFA
TA on Unique Identifier
Performance Based Budgeting TA
Regional Energy Management Initiative
Assessment of Govt Debt and Capital Market Devt
Climate Change Impact on Cities in North Africa
Regional Report on Cross-Region Trade in MENA

KG, PS
KG, PS

121

TA Procurement
TA Public Financial Management
PROFISH

FYlO
FYlO
FYI0

50
50
TF

Innovation and Technology
Energy PESW

FYI0
FYI0

80
160

Employment PESW
PPIAF Transport Logistics
ALMP/E2W Pilots Impact Evaluation
Low Carbon Transport Strategy

FYI0
FYI1
FYI1
FYll

120
TF
210
75

Services Sector AAA

FYll

Youth Exclusion Study

FYll

Skills Development Analysis

FYll

Public Expenditure Review
Growth and Macro Management
Clilmate Change Mitigation and Adaptation

FYI1
FYI1
FYI1

Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Donor, Bank,
Public Dissem
Govt, Bank
Govt, Donor, Bank,
Public Dissem
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank

Govt, Bank, Public
Dissem
Govt, Bank, Public
Dissem
Govt, Bank, Public
Dissem
250
130
130

Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank
Govt, Bank

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD,
PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. KG: Knowledge generation; PD: public debate; PS: problem-solving.

122

CAS Annex B6

Indfcator

National accounts (as

Oh

'

-

Key Economic Indicators

Actual

2005

'

2006

Estamte
2009

2008

2007

Propcted
' 2012

2011

2010

ofGDP)

100
IO
32
58

100
IO
30
60

100
9
30
61

100
9
29
63

100

29
60

100
10
29
61

78
22
3
19

78
23
3
20

77
24
3
21

76
25
3
22

77
26
4
22

76
26
4
23

75
26
3
23

75
25
3
22

Exports ( W S f
Imports ( W S )

50
50

50
53

53
56

62
65

52
56

51
54

50
52

49
50

Gross domestic savings

22

22

23

24

23

24

25

25
23

100
11
29
60

100
11

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fuced investment
Government investment
Private investment

Gross domestic product'
Agriculture
Industry
Services

8
28
64

21

23

24

23

23

25

24

29009

30962

35414

40743

43394

46674

50524

55006

2870

3040

3230

3510

3760

4060

4270

4590

'Real annual growth rates (%,calculated from 90
prices)
Gross domestic product at mrket prices
Gross Domestic Income

40
33

57
55

63
54

45
61

33
64

38
56

5.0
5.1

5.6
5.5

'Real annual per capita growth rates (%,
calculated from 90 prices)
Gross domestic product at mrket prices
Total consumption
Private consurrption

30
38
40

46
39
41

53
38
40

35
37
37

23
79
83

28
55
61

4.0
2.5
2.2

4.6
3.2
3.1

Exports (GNFSf
Merchandise FOB

14510
10488

15984
11689

20056
15147

25198
19184

22768
16616

23634
17202

25127
18131

2686 I
19282

Imports ( W S f
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

14648
12456
-138
1502
-304

16657
14202
-673
1639
-619

20826
18023
-769
I880
-917

26565
23 I94
-1367
2164
-1712

24236
17672
-1468
3194
- 1545

25190
18305
-1556
3565
1224

26244
19141
-1 1 I 6
3965
-1581

27380
I9994
-520
3859
I772

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Oflicial
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

725
192
-27
219
279

3305
-789
-186
-603
242

1545
-227
9
-236
322

2562
-9
-1 I 5
106
725

2588
-644
246
-89 1
-24 1

2600
-276
404
-680
-65

2650
-505
457
-962
102

2700
-247
428
-675
104

Change in reservesd

-892

-2138

-723

-1566

-157

-1035

-666

-785

-0 5

-2 2

-2 2

-3 4

-3 4

-3 3

-2.2

-0.9

16

63

12 0

I O

-3 2

09

4.9

6.4

-5 7

52

11 4

70

76

67

4.3

4.0

a o s s national savings'
Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

'Balance ofpayments (US%millions)

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% o f GDP)
'Real annual growth rates (YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primry
Manufactures
Merchandise irrports (CIF)

-

-

123

CAS Annex B6 - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

'

Public finance (as
of GDP at market p i c e s ?
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+)or deficit (-)
Capttal expenditure
Foreign financmg
Monetary indicators
MZiGDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)
Pnvate sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
'Price incfices( Y R ~ O =loo)
Merchandlse export pnce mdex
Merchandise i q ~ o rpnce
t
index
Merchandlse t e r n oftrade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumr price index (%change)
GDP deflator (% change)

Actual

'

2005

Estimate

'

2006

2007

2009

2008

Projected

2010

'

2011

2512

23.8
20.4
3.4
6.4
0.8

23.7
20.2
3.5
6.4
-3.0

24.0
20.2
3.8
6.6
-0.9

26.6
20.9
5.7
6.5
0.3

24.5
21.0
3.5
7.3
0.0

24.8
20.5
4.3
7.9
0.0

24.3
20.4
3.9
7.2
-0.4

24.4
19.8
4.6
7.1
0.1

58.8
11.5
0.0

60.3
12.2
0.0

62.0
13.5
0.0

64.3
14.5
0.0

66.9
9.7
0.0

67.1
8.0
0.0

66.2
7.0
0.0

65.0
7.0
0.0

1514.6
171.6
882.8

158.8
185.9
85.4

183.7
211.8
86.7

230.4
254.8
90.4

186.8
179.5
104.0

21 1.4
174.3
121.3

212.4
174.7
121.6

212.3
175.5
121.0

75.5

74.9

72.7

72.0

65.6

644

62.9

61.2

20
33

4.5
36

31
3.7

5.0
57

3.5
2.1

3.4
3.7

3.3
3.3

3.2
3.2

'a.

GDP at mrket prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use o f I M F resources.
T
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU'' denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCUdenotes appreciation.

124

C A S Annex B7 - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

‘

2005

Actual
2006

Estiirated

‘

‘

2007

2009

2008

‘

2010

Projected

2011

2012

I7875

18638

20445

20776

20132

19856

19351

19104

69

1I 6

370

1016

-644

-276

-505

-247

2034

2974

2709

2786

2949

2780

2913

2630

TDOIXGS~

11 1.6

105.6

92.7

75.7

80.5

76.5

69.9

647

TDOIGDP

61.6

60.2

57.6

51.0

46.4

42.5

38.3

34.7

TDS/XGS

12.7

16.8

12.3

10.2

11.8

10.7

10.5

8.9

ConcessionaVTDO

19.0

19.7

19.6

19.9

22.2

23.3

24.0

23.7

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursemnts (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)
WS$m)”
Debt and debt service indicators

(%I

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

IBRD DSIpubIic DS

16.1

18.7

10.2

18.2

9.3

8.9

8.2

8.3

Preferred creditor DS/public

41.8

47.3

45.6

48.2

34.4

40. I

34.6

37.6

1.9

2.5

1.1

1.3

1.1

0.9

0.9

0.7

1444

1571

DS (%f
IBRD DS/XGS

IBRD T W (US$mj’

1565

1353

1 I90

1085

1065

Ofwhich present value o f
guarantees (US$m)
Share o f IBRD portfolio (YO)
IDA TDO (US$mj’

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

28

26

24

22

20

18

16

14

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f l M F credits and net shortterm capital.
b. “XGS” denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers’ remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defmed as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlemnts.
d. Includes present value ofguarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types ofboth loan and equity instruments.

125

0

0

0

0

0

-

0

0

0

2
r

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

m
k
N
m

o

0

o

m
o!

0

0

m
u!

o

m

o

(

0

0

0

N

2

O

D

o

O

o

o

o

-

0

0

0

o

o

-

r

m

o

o

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

o

m

o

o

o

q

o

o

W

Y

2m

O

o

Y
m

o

(

P

N
P

O

.

-

V

O

o

~
ID
N

o

~

" 0
mr.
m -

0

W

o

o

o

u!

5

m

O

O

o

o

128

