Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

91199

Country
Partnership
Strategy for

FOR THE PERIOD 2013–2017

India

THE WORLD BANK GROUP

Country
Partnership

India
Strategy for

FOR THE PERIOD 2013–2017

THE WORLD BANK GROUP

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Acknowledgments
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the close collaboration of the Indian authorities in the preparation
of this Country Partnership Strategy. The preparation of the document involved extensive discussions with
government representatives at the federal and state levels, as well as civil society. The strategy is the result
of a team effort that relied on knowledge, experience, and guidance from individuals across the World Bank
Group. We thank them for their contributions.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. As The World Bank Group encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for non-commercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

iv

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Foreword
This India Country Partnership Strategy for the World Bank Group comes at a moment where both India
and the World Bank are at important points in their history: India has crossed the threshold to become a
middle-income country and is poised to lift millions out of poverty in years to come, in all likelihood more
than any other country in the world. The World Bank Group has committed itself to the goal of eliminating
extreme poverty by 2030 and boosting shared prosperity. For our team it was clear that our strategy should
aim squarely at supporting India’s and the World Bank Group’s shared goal to eliminate poverty. We therefore
analyzed what would be the best ways of maximizing the impact of growth in India on poverty alleviation. We
did this by comparing the performance of Indian states over the last decade and analyzing why those states
that lifted more people out of poverty succeeded in doing so. We also looked at historic performance of
other large federal countries at times when they had long periods of sustained growth and lifted many people
out of poverty. And we took India’s own 12th Five-Year Plan as our basis, as both our goals are fully aligned.
Through this work we came to a number of important shifts compared to previous strategies:
1. In order to help eliminate poverty, we should shift our resources (limited though they are in comparison to
India’s needs) to where the battle against poverty must be won: in India’s low income states;
2. We should see India’s rapid rural to urban transformation as a tremendous opportunity, both for agriculture
and for poverty alleviation and competitiveness;
3. All parts of the World Bank Group - IBRD, IDA, IFC, MIGA - should work as one, not by accident but by design;
4. We should not be content just to provide financing. Our limited resources can only have meaningful
impact when they bring something new that can be tested and after that rolled out in other programs.
With our partners in the Government of India, we hope to use this strategy as the basis for a continued
strong engagement with India for years to come. In order to justify the resources that this requires, we
understand that our primary focus should be on using the available resources in the best way possible and
faster. Development in India is a rapidly moving process, so anyone who wishes to contribute to it must
move fast. We also understand that we need to keep learning to adjust to India’s unique and complex path
and to understand some of the fundamental challenges the country faces: How will cities become sources of
competitiveness and efficiency? How will India keep growing rapidly and have enough water and energy to
keep that growth going? How can India lift more people out of poverty faster without them being at risk of
falling right back when a family member gets sick?
We will not answer these questions alone, and these are not the only questions that need answering. But we
will work hard to add our experience and knowledge to help answering them and others.
I am grateful to all those who contributed to this strategy, in the Government of India, IFC, MIGA, IBRD and
IDA. We all understand that this is just a document. The hard work starts now.
Onno Ruhl
Country Director, India
v

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

vi

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Contents
1.

Executive Summary / 2
Achievements and remaining challenges / 3
A vision for India in 2030 / 4
Development challenges / 6
The World Bank Group program / 7

2.

Introduction / 10

3.

Achievements / 12

4.

Vision: India in 2030 / 16

5.

Challenges / 20
Platform for growth / 21
Spatial transformation / 24
Human potential / 27

6.

World Bank Group India Country Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17) / 30
Strategic engagement area 1: Integration / 33
Strategic engagement area 2: Transformation / 40
Strategic engagement area 3: Inclusion / 48

7.

Implementing the WBG Country Partnership Strategy / 56
Guiding principles of engagement / 56
Lessons from country strategy 2009-12 / 59
Current WBG portfolio / 60
Collaboration and partnerships / 62

8.

Financing the strategy / 64

9.

Monitoring of results / 68

10. Managing risks / 70
List of tables
Table 7.1. Low-income and special category states / 57
List of boxes
Box 3.1. India and the WBG: A unique relationship spanning six decades / 14
Box 4.1. Government vision: India’s 12th Five-Year Plan / 17
Box 5.1. India’s economic outlook / 22
Box 6.1. Health in India / 51
Box 6.2. Addressing gender issues / 53

vii

Country Partnership Strategy for India: FY 2013–17

List of figures
Figure 4.1. Poverty and prosperity in India in 2030 / 18
Figure 5.1. Correlates of fast economic growth: the rate of urbanization / 25
Figure 5.2. Correlates of shared prosperity: off-farm employment in rural areas / 26
Figure 6.1. India CPS results chain: engagement areas and outcomes / 32
Figure 8.1. Impact of IDA Graduation on India, by IDA Replenishment, IDA15-19 / 65
Figure 8.2. Annual IDA and IBRD lending to India, FY09-24 / 66
Country strategy annexes
Annex 1: CPS results framework / 73
Annex 2: Progress towards the Millennium Development Goals / 80
Annex 3: Poverty in India / 85
Annex 4: IFC indicative non-lending activities / 88
Annex 5: Overview of main trust funds activities / 92
Annex 6: Country financing parameters / 96
Annex 7: Government of India Project Screening Criteria / 97
Annex 8: Consultations Held to Inform the Preparation of the CPS / 99
Annex 9: The Indian statistical system / 107
Standard annex tables
Annex A2: India at a glance / 110
Annex B2: Selected indicators of Bank portfolio performance and management / 115
Annex B3A: CAS Annex B3A - IBRD/IDA Program Summary: India / 116
Annex B3B: IFC investment operations program / 118
Annex B4: Summary of World Bank Knowledge Services - India / 119
Annex B5: Social indicators / 123
Annex B6: Key economic indicators / 125
Annex B7: Key exposure indicators / 129
Annex B8A: Operations portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) / 130
Annex B8B: India: Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio / 135

viii

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The last Country Strategy (CAS) Report No. 46509 was discussed by the Board on November 14, 2008, and the last
CAS Progress Report (CASPR) Report No. 58433 was discussed by the Board on December 14, 2010.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
US$1 = Rupees (Rs.) 54.57 as of March 7, 2013
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
April 1—March 31
WORLD BANK FISCAL YEAR
July 1—June 30
IBRD/IDA
Vice President: Isabel Guerrero
Country Director: Onno Ruhl
Task Team Leader: Dorota Nowak

MIGA
Vice President: Michel Wormser
Director: Kevin Lu
Task Team Leader: Paul Barbour

IFC
Vice President: Karin Finkelston
Regional Director: Thomas Davenport
Task Team Leader: Gunjan Gulati

Abbreviations and Acronyms
AAA
BRICS
CAS
CPS
CTF
DFID

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa
Country Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy
Carbon Trust Fund
United Kingdom Department for
International Development
FDI
Foreign Direct Investment
GAAP
Governance and Accountability Action
Plan
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GFATM Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis, and
Malaria
GSDP
gross state domestic product
GST
Goods and Service Tax
HIV/AIDS Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired
Immunodeficiency Syndrome
IBRD
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
ICDS
Integrated Child Development Services

ICT
IDA
IFC
IT
LIS
M&E
MDG
OECD
PMGSY
PPP
PRI
RWSS
SBL
SPPB
SSA
UN
WBG

information and communication
technologies
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
Information Technology
low-income state
monitoring and evaluation
Millennium Development Goal
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
public-private partnership
Panchayati Raj institution
rural water supply and sanitation
Single Borrower Limit
Special Placement Private Bonds
Sarva Shiksa Abhiyan
United Nations
World Bank Group

Dollar amounts ($) are U.S. dollars.

1

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

1. Executive Summary
India is uniquely placed to help reduce global poverty and boost prosperity. The
country has the largest number of poor people in the world, as well as the largest
number of people who have recently escaped poverty but are still vulnerable to
falling back. India’s encouraging results in recent years on the dual challenges of
fighting poverty and boosting prosperity justify strong support for India as a key
part of the global effort to bend the arc of history by accelerating the decline in
poverty. India’s per capita income remains low, and its development challenges
are deep and complex. As the country strives to bring about quicker and deeper
changes, this strategy lays out an approach for the World Bank Group to support
India in achieving even more ambitious results in the near future. Aware that
World Bank Group finances will always be modest compared to India’s challenges,
that support can be a catalyst for change at this crucial time. For that reason, this
strategy makes the case for continued high levels of World Bank Group financial
support for India.

2

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Achievements and remaining challenges
India’s economic and human development is one of the most significant global
achievements of recent times. Between 2005 and 2010, India’s share of global
GDP increased from 1.8 to 2.7 percent, and 53 million people were lifted out of
poverty. Growth has steadily accelerated over time, showing resilience even in
the aftermath of the global crisis. In the last decade, India’s economy expanded
at an average annual rate of 7.6 percent, placing it in the top 10 of the world’s
fastest growing nations. Exports account for 21.5 percent of GDP, three times
more than in 1990, and net inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) make
up another 1.6 percent. India is home to globally recognized companies in
pharmaceuticals, steel, and space technologies, and the country is a leader in
the use of information technologies for e-government purposes and public
service delivery. In line with these transformations, India is now among the top
10 percentile of fast growing nations and has become a prominent global voice.
Progress on human development has been remarkable; life expectancy more
than doubled from 31 years in 1947 to 65 years in 2012 and adult literacy more
than quadrupled, from 18 percent in 1951 to 74 percent in 2011.
While India has made significant progress in reducing absolute poverty, it
remains home to one-third of the global poor. On the positive side, India has
already achieved the first Millennium Development Goal (MDG 1) by halving
the proportion of people living on less than $1.25 a day. Most notably, rural
poverty has decreased by 14 percentage points, and the less well-off are
increasingly reaping the benefits of shared prosperity, with consumption
growth of the bottom 40 percent rising to catch up with average consumption
growth. But with GDP per capita at $1,410 in 2011, India remains at the bottom
of the group of middle-income countries. More than 400 million people still
live in poverty. With population growth, the absolute number of poor people
actually increased in some of India’s poorest states between 2004–05 and
2009–10, with poverty rates three to four times higher than those of the most
advanced states—Haryana, Kerala, and Punjab.

India is home to
globally recognized
companies in
pharmaceuticals,
steel, and space
technologies, and the
country is a leader in
the use of information
technologies for
e-government
purposes and public
service delivery.
In line with these
transformations, India
is now among the
top 10 percentile of
fast growing nations
and has become a
prominent global
voice.

Despite rapid economic growth and positive human development, Indian
society remains highly segmented and income inequality is rising. Inequalities
vis-à-vis disadvantaged groups such as so-called scheduled castes, scheduled
tribes, and women persist. Structural inequalities have kept entire groups
trapped, unable to take advantage of opportunities that economic growth has
offered. While much progress has been made in education, health, maternal
mortality, and fertility, gender inequality remains high. The ratio of girls to boys
has decreased steadily over the last fifty years—a trend associated with the
“missing women” phenomenon; it is particularly low in some of India’s more
advanced states.
A middle class is emerging, but only a fifth of the population has firmly
escaped vulnerability. Even above the threshold for the World Bank Group’s
global indicator of shared prosperity (defined as consumption growth of
the bottom 40 percent of the population), a large number of people have
consumption levels that are very close to the poverty line. Many of India’s
newly non-poor, especially in rural areas, remain vulnerable and minor

3

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Helping India address
its development
challenges is central
to the World Bank
Group’s goal of
reducing poverty
and boosting shared
prosperity.

shocks—illness, natural disasters, poor crop yields, indebtedness—can easily
push them below the poverty line. People who are no longer vulnerable
are defined as those living in households with an income that is at least
twice the poverty line. India’s continued progress is not only significant
for its people, especially those still living in poverty, but also for the global
achievement of the MDGs. Helping India address its development challenges
is central to the World Bank Group’s goal of reducing poverty and boosting
shared prosperity.

A vision for India in 2030
The overarching objective of the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) for the period FY2013–17 is to support poverty reduction and
shared prosperity in India. That objective is closely aligned with the vision for
development outlined in the country’s 12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013–17), which
calls for “faster, sustainable, and more inclusive growth” focusing on poverty
reduction, group equality, regional balance, empowerment, environmental
management, and employment. It foresees annual GDP growth of 8.2 percent,
with all states growing faster than they did under the 11th Plan. It envisions
a reduction of the poverty rate by 10 percentage points, building on the
generation of 50 million new work opportunities in the non-farm sector and
an increase in the average schooling of the population to seven years. The
Plan also targets the elimination of gender and social gaps in schooling, a
decline in the infant mortality, and a gradual improvement of the ratio of girls
to boys.

4

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Continued rapid economic growth is a precondition for poverty reduction and
shared prosperity. Its role cannot be overstated. Before the industrial revolution
India was one of world’s wealthiest countries, accounting for more than a
quarter of global GDP, but by the time of Independence in 1947 its economy
was universally stagnant. Since then the country has emerged out of the low
“Hindu rate of growth,” and has the potential to become a global economic
powerhouse once again. But growth will also have to be more inclusive than in
the past. If growing numbers of people are to benefit from economic growth,
regardless of their gender, caste, or state of residence, more will be needed.
Although India has done better than most countries in terms of economic
growth, the degree of poverty reduction associated with one percentage point
of GDP growth has been less than in countries such as Brazil and China.

Although India has
done better than most
countries in terms
of economic growth,
the degree of poverty
reduction associated
with one percentage
point of GDP growth
has been less than
in countries such as
Brazil and China.

The diverse experience of Indian states is revealing of what could be
accomplished—and what would be realistic—in striving to attain the
overarching objectives of the CPS. Some states have done better than others
in terms of economic growth; others have done better in terms of poverty
reduction and reducing vulnerability. Differences are to be expected in the
short term, but these differences have persisted over extended periods. The
CPS scenarios to 2030 are predicated on the observed performance between
2005-2010, a period of high growth and poverty reduction. Two scenarios are
presented in the CPS:
•

Base scenario. Under the base scenario, India’s GDP growth rate, as well as
the speed at which the numbers of poor and vulnerable people decline for
every percentage point of growth, remain the same as in 2005–2010. In this
scenario, the GDP growth rate would be sustained at 8.2 percent. Income
per capita would reach $5,283 in 2030 at 2010 prices, compared with $1,375
in 2010, poverty would drop from 29.8 to 12.3 percent, and the share of
people above the vulnerability threshold would increase from 19.1 to 33.6
percent.

•

Ambitious scenario. Under the ambitious scenario, India sustains rapid GDP
growth in the base scenario but improves its performance to that of the
best-performing state at the 80th percentile of the distribution in terms of
poverty reduction and reduced vulnerability. Over the period 2005–2010
those states were Rajasthan and Karnataka, respectively. Matching, at
the national level, the performance of these high-achievers would be an
extraordinary accomplishment. Under the ambitious scenario, the poverty
rate would decline to 5.5 percent, and the share of people who are no
longer vulnerable would reach 41.3 percent.

India has the potential of making a dramatic contribution to poverty
reduction and shared prosperity globally. In principle, the new global target
to “bend the arc of history” could be attained through a combination of
successes across other countries. But it is unlikely that this will happen
unless India continues to make substantial inroads. The CPS scenarios to
2030 also reveal the implications of India’s sustained, high growth on the
number of people living below the poverty line and above two poverty
lines or the vulnerability line (those no longer vulnerable of falling into
poverty). If the base scenario were realized, the number of global poor
5

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

At present only
16 percent of the
workforce derives its
income from regular
wage employment,
and more than 50
percent are engaged
in agriculture. The
female labor force,
already low as a
proportion of the
total labor force,
decreased from 34 to
29 percent between
2000 and 2010,
with the drop being
particularly marked
for women at higher
levels of education.

6

would fall by 191 million and the number of people above the vulnerability
line would increase by 277 million. If the ambitious scenario were realized,
the corresponding figures would be 304 and 394 million. The former is
comparable to China’s contribution to global poverty reduction over the last
two decades and the latter amounts to raising to prosperity the equivalent of
the combined present populations of France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the
United Kingdom.

Development challenges
India’s recent development experience shows that achieving the ambitious
vision by 2030 will require addressing a wide range of challenges. With a
young population and 8 million people entering the labor force every year,
India could reap a substantial demographic dividend, but there could also be
considerable stress if employment opportunities are not commensurate with
expectations. At present only 16 percent of the workforce derives its income
from regular wage employment, and more than 50 percent are engaged in
agriculture. The female labor force, already low as a proportion of the total
labor force, decreased from 34 to 29 percent between 2000 and 2010, with
the drop being particularly marked for women at higher levels of education.
Constraints across three main areas could make India miss its potential
demographic dividend:
•

Platforms for growth. Infrastructure needs are massive. Only 20 percent
of the national highway network is four-lane, ports and airports have
inadequate capacity, and trains move very slowly. One-third of the rural
population lacks access to an all-weather road. Road safety is a growing
concern in a country that is adding new drivers at a record pace. An
estimated 300 million people are not connected to the national electrical
grid, and those who are face frequent disruptions. The manufacturing
sector remains underdeveloped and has grown at a pace that is below
expectations. The size distribution of firms in India is characterized by a
“missing middle,” which is a source of concern given that small and medium
enterprises are typically an important source of wage employment.
Improving and maintaining a healthy investment and business climate is
also crucial to growth.

•

Managing spatial transformation. The number of urban centers has grown
from about 5,000 in 2001 to 8,000 in 2011, and 53 cities already have a
population in excess of one million. There is a need to accommodate
an additional 10 million urban dwellers every year and to provide them
with adequate basic services. Success at meeting this challenge has
so far been partial. The number of slum dwellers increased from 75
million in 2001 to 93 million in 2011—a quarter of the urban population.
The rural space is not well connected to cities, resulting in weak value
chains for agricultural products and an insufficient creation of off-farm
employment. Although half of the Indian population derives its income
from agriculture-related activities, agricultural output has grown below
government targets.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

•

Human development potential. Health outcomes compare poorly with
those of countries at similar levels of development. At 65.4 years, life
expectancy is more than 5 years lower than the world average. Malnutrition
rates remain high: 40 percent of the world’s malnourished children live
in India. Maternal and infant mortality as well as fertility rates remain
high compared with those of other growing economies in Asia. Out-ofpocket health expenditures are among the highest in the world and make
households, especially the very poor, highly vulnerable to health shocks.
Primary education has been largely universalized, but progress on learning
outcomes has been limited. Secondary education is the new bottleneck. At
4.4 years, educational attainment is low, and India still accounts for onethird of all illiterate people worldwide. Enrolment rates for grades 9–12 are
just 40 percent; of those enrolled, approximately 15 percent drop out and
one-third fail their examinations. Inequity in all dimensions, including caste
and gender, is a major concern.

The development
of a vibrant
manufacturing sector
requires reforming
outdated labor laws,
improving access
to land, removing
pervasive red tape
and increasing access
to finance.

The World Bank Group program
To help India address these challenges, the CPS will contribute to three
main engagement areas: integration, transformation, and inclusion. Effective
engagement will require actions at the national level, at lower levels of government,
and through partnerships with the private sector, civil society and development
partners.
•

Integration. The focus is on physical connectivity and the strengthening
of market mechanisms. India’s infrastructure needs cannot be addressed
through public investments alone. A tested model for private participation
exists for highways and electricity generation, but elsewhere failures are
many, suggesting that more needs to be done to assess viability gaps
and identify adequate risk-transfer mechanisms. Reforms are needed
in the power sector, where low energy prices, expensive coal (central
to producing electricity in India), and inefficiencies in transmission and
distribution are crippling the system. The development of a vibrant
manufacturing sector requires reforming outdated labor laws, improving
access to land, removing pervasive red tape and increasing access to
finance. Greater regional and global integration is critical to open up
market opportunities and foster competition. Intraregional trade would
increase from the current $5 billion to $20 billion if restrictions to trading
with neighbors were removed.

•

Transformation. The goal is to reap the benefits from agglomeration in
parallel with raising agricultural productivity. India’s urban development
is hampered by the fragmentation of service delivery across a range of
uncoordinated agencies. Local bodies in urban areas need to become
institutionally stronger and increase their capacity to mobilize financial
resources. In rural areas, stressed natural resources, inadequate technology,
underdeveloped extension services, and limited access to credit contribute
to the lackluster performance of the agricultural sector. At present, in urban
areas, poverty is highest in secondary cities, where the growth of wage

7

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

A special effort should
be made to ensure
access to education
for underprivileged
children, retain
girls in secondary
education, and open
opportunities in
higher education for
all youth.

employment has been disappointing. But if they were properly developed,
secondary cities could become the linchpin between urban and rural
areas. Spatial transformation also implies an efficient use of India’s limited
resources, in particular land, forests, and water, as well as a shift towards
climate resilience.
•

Inclusion. The ambition of the program is to promote human development
and strengthen social programs, so that economic integration and spatial
transformation generate inclusive growth. In relation to health, this requires
better accountability arrangements in service delivery, adequate regulation
and oversight of private health care providers, and expanded coverage of
health insurance among disadvantaged groups. In education, incentives and
community participation are needed to reduce absenteeism. A special effort
should be made to ensure access to education for underprivileged children,
retain girls in secondary education, and open opportunities in higher education
for all youth. A focus on learning outcomes is warranted across all levels of
education. Meanwhile, social programs should be better targeted and delivered
in ways that improve coverage and efficiency. Improving access to finance and
social protection can also help households, especially the poor, benefit from
economic growth.

Across all three areas of engagement, a focus on improved governance,
environmental sustainability, and gender equality is envisioned. IFC’s efforts to
strengthen India’s private sector also cuts across all three areas.
The implementation of the CPS program will be guided by the Government’s
approach to working with multilateral institutions: “Innovation Impulse with
Investment” (see Annex 8). The approach lays out the Government’s vision of
how best to use the financing and expertise from multilateral institutions to
address India’s development challenges and places significant importance on
the value-added of the World Bank’s program that goes well beyond financing.
The Government wants World Bank support for projects that have a systemic or
transformational impact, those that help innovate and pilot new approaches,
and finally those that introduce innovative financing instruments and leverage
resources. The approach provides an impetus towards working together
to shape a pipeline of projects that takes advantage of the World Bank’s
international expertise, while addressing financial sustainability and overall
funding for the CPS program. Adherence to these principles will result in greater
country-led program selectivity.
Guided by this approach, the World Bank will rebalance its portfolio toward
state-level activities and, within that segment, toward low-income and special
category states. Delivering on the overarching goals of the CPS also requires
a strong focus on low-income states, where a majority of the poor and the
vulnerable live. Other major economic powers, such as the United States
and the European Union, have experienced an unambiguous long-term
convergence in living standards across their constituent parts. In India, by
contrast, divergence across the states has remained the norm. Convergence
is supported by economic integration, and this in turn requires policies at
the national level. But it can also be supported through a greater emphasis
on policy reforms and investments in the low-income states themselves.

8

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Moreover, India’s seven low-income states are now growing faster than the
average. Investments in those states thus have higher economic returns than
investments elsewhere. The impact is even greater when considering the
payoffs in poverty reduction. IFC will continue to expand its investments and
advisory program in the low-income and northeast states. Engagement under
the CPS will focus on extensive capacity building, technical assistance, analytical
work, and knowledge exchanges that underpin lending operations.
The World Bank Group can help India realize the CPS vision to 2030, building
on a strong partnership in development stretching back 60 years. Since the
first IBRD loan to the Indian Railways in 1949, India has made extensive use
of financing, knowledge, advisory services, and technical assistance from the
World Bank Group. Over these six decades, IBRD, IDA, and IFC financing to India
reached approximately $160 billion at 2010 prices—far more than any other
country. But the World Bank Group has also benefitted enormously from the
partnership. India has been home to major innovations in development, from
the Green Revolution to the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee program to the promotion of the right to information. There is
growing demand to learn from India’s diverse development experience. India
is emerging as a key provider of development experience in South–South
knowledge exchange and investment capital.

There is growing
demand to learn
from India’s diverse
development
experience. India
is emerging as
a key provider
of development
experience in South–
South knowledge
exchange and
investment capital.

Although the World Bank Group’s contributions to the government’s overall
development financing is small, its support can be catalytic and transformative
when financing is combined with knowledge and experience. To make a
meaningful contribution on the assault on poverty, especially in low-income
states where over 200 million of India’s poor reside, the volume of support from
the World Bank Group should be about $5 billion per year. However, World
Bank Group estimated financing levels could average about $4 billion annually
during the CPS period, when one includes India’s purchase of Special Private
Placement Bonds, IFC financing and assumes that India receives transitional IDA.
At their first IDA17 replenishment meeting in Paris, IDA Deputies broadly agreed
with the proposal that India receive transitional support after it graduates from
IDA; a final decision will not be taken until the end of 2013, including on the
volume and terms of transitional support. While transitional IDA support would
help boost World Bank Group financing, it still falls short of levels needed and
net flows from IDA and IBRD combined turn negative by FY2018.

9

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

2. Introduction
The overarching goals of the World Bank Group India Country
Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17) are to help India accelerate poverty
reduction and increase shared prosperity, so that more and more people,
regardless of gender, caste, or whether they live in villages or cities, or in lowincome or more advanced states, can enjoy the benefits of more balanced
growth and development. With one-third of the world’s poor people, India
is central not only to the World Bank Group’s goal of reducing poverty and
boosting shared prosperity, but also to the world’s progress toward achieving the
Millennium Development Goals.
India has made significant progress in reducing absolute poverty during
the last two decades. It has already achieved the first Millennium Development
Goal by halving (to less than 30 percent) the proportion of people whose income
is less than $1.25 a day. The less well-off are increasingly reaping the benefits of
shared prosperity, with a considerable narrowing of the gap between average
consumption growth and growth of the bottom 40 percent. Most notably, rural
poverty has decreased by 14.5 percentage points. Given that India is predominantly
rural, however, a huge concentration of the nation’s poor people (four out of every
five) still live in rural areas.

10

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Poverty remains widespread. With population growth, it has proved difficult to
reduce the number of poor at a rapid pace; 400 million Indians still live in poverty.1
Poverty rates also vary significantly across and within states. Each of the seven lowincome states2 has poverty rates that are two to three times higher than those of
the more advanced states. Poverty reduction in the poorest states—which are also
the most populous—has been slow (Annex 3). Higher-income states also have
pockets of extreme poverty; Karnataka’s per capita income, for example, varies
nearly five-fold across districts.
India’s rapid growth in the last decade has not benefited everyone
uniformly. India’s consumption inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient is
0.34 and is on the rise, with widening disparities between urban and rural areas.
Despite accelerated social mobility and urbanization, Indian society remains
exclusionary, and income inequality alone does not reflect the depth and range
of social inequities. Structural and persistent inequalities by gender, caste, and
tribe persist, and indicators of poverty and human development for these groups
lag behind those of the general population. Poverty rates are especially high
among scheduled tribes (46.1 percent in 2009–10), and scheduled castes (40.8
percent). Literacy rates for males and females from scheduled castes are 67 and
42 percent respectively, compared to the all India average of 82 and 65 percent.

Gender inequality
remains high
despite progress in
education, health,
maternal mortality,
and fertility. The ratio
of girls to boys has
decreased steadily
over the last 50 years
and is particularly low
in some of the more
advanced states and
urban areas.

On a range of human development indicators, India lags behind
world averages. The country ranks 134 out of 187 on the UN’s 2011 Human
Development Index. At 65.4 years, life expectancy is more than 5 years lower
than the world average, and persistently high rates of malnutrition contribute
to other health problems and undermine productivity. At 4.4 years, educational
attainment is low, and India still accounts for one-third of the globe’s illiterate
people. Gender inequality remains high despite progress in education, health,
maternal mortality, and fertility. The ratio of girls to boys has decreased steadily
over the last 50 years and is particularly low in some of the more advanced states
and urban areas.3
Lifting people out of poverty is not enough. Even above the threshold for
the World Bank’s global indicator of shared prosperity (defined as consumption
growth of the bottom 40 percent of the population), a large number of people,
especially in rural areas, have consumption levels that are very close to the
poverty line. These vulnerable people live on more than $1.25 and less than $2.50
per day or between one and two official poverty lines.4 Minor shocks—illness,
poor crop yields, indebtedness, high inflation—can easily push them below
the poverty line. Poverty reduction efforts need to be accompanied by social
protection initiatives to protect people from falling back into poverty. The end
goal is to increase shared prosperity—that is, to increase the number of people
who are not poor, who are socially included, and who are reasonably secure.

1.
2.
3.
4.

World Bank estimate of people living on $1.25 or less per day in PPP terms.
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh.
The so-called child sex ratio measures the number of girls per 1,000 boys aged 0–6. In India the ratio has decreased steadily over the last three
decades from 962 in 1981 to 914 in the 2011 census.
The official poverty line for India (currently under revision) is set at the equivalent of $1.17 per person per day in PPP terms. The unofficial lower
bound of prosperity is set at two poverty lines. This choice is based on two independent but coincident local criteria. The National Commission for
Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector classifies all population groups in five categories, and those between one and two poverty lines are considered
“vulnerable”. The threshold to pay personal income tax is such that a family of five, with one taxpayer, would also be close to two poverty lines.

11

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

3. Achievements
Despite the large remaining challenges, India’s development is one
of the most significant global achievements of the 20th century. Over
the last two decades, progress toward many of the Millennium Development
Goals has been creditable given the sheer scale of the challenge. In addition
to halving poverty (MDG1), India has universalized primary education
(MDG2). By 2015, India is also likely to halve the number of people without
sustainable access to safe drinking water and achieve gender parity at all
levels of education, while also making strong progress in fighting infectious
diseases, such as AIDS, tuberculosis, and polio and achieving environmental
sustainability. India has been free of polio for two years now. Life expectancy
has more than doubled from 31 years in 1947 to 65 years in 2012 but remains
low compared with other countries. Adult literacy more than quadrupled from
18 percent in 1951 to 74 percent in 2011. Widespread famines are a thing of
the past, even when the monsoon fails, although chronic malnutrition remains
pervasive. While maternal mortality has been reduced by 33 percent over ten
years, almost 20 percent of all maternal deaths worldwide still occur in India,
and much faster progress on the MDGs pertaining to child mortality and access
to sanitation facilities (Annex 2).
The WBG has contributed to India’s development achievements,
contributing where and when it was most needed. Since the first IBRD loan to
12

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

the Indian Railways in 1949, India has made extensive use of WBG financing,
knowledge, advisory services, and technical assistance to tackle fundamental
developmental challenges and build a modern economy (box 3.1). Over
60 years, India has benefited from approximately $160 billion IBRD/IDA/
IFC financing at 2010 prices)—far more than any other client country. In the
process, the WBG has learned a lot. Many of its current policies, practices, and
thinking about development have been influenced by its experience in India.

In the last decade,
India grew faster than
92 percent of the
world’s nations. Real
GDP expanded by 1.5
percentage points per
year during 2005-10.

Rapid economic growth over the past ten years has contributed to
this substantial reduction in poverty and progress on MDGs. In the
last decade, India grew faster than 92 percent of the world’s nations. Real
GDP expanded at an average annual rate of 7.3 percent between FY2003
and FY2012, helping the country reduce poverty (at the official poverty line)
by 1.5 percentage points per year during 2005–10. India also weathered the
2008–09 global crises relatively well, with GDP growth slowing somewhat to
6.7 percent in FY2008–09 and rebounding strongly to 8.4 percent in the two
subsequent years. Although growth in FY2011–12 slowed to a nine-year low of
6.5 percent, India remains one of the fastest-growing economies in the world.
Recent reforms of diesel pricing, foreign direct investment in the retail sector,
and public sector disinvestment plans have helped to improve the investment
climate.
Growth has been in double digits for some states—well above the
all-India average. Under the 11th Five-Year Plan, some of India’s lowincome states grew at a record pace, with Bihar (one of the poorest states)
outperforming even the most advanced states. Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and
Uttar Pradesh—all low-income and highly populous states—have also grown
rapidly, with their gross state domestic product growing significantly faster than
India’s overall GDP.
Recent Government policy reforms are intended to translate economic
growth into palpable improvements in living standards. The Government
has promoted rights-based development policies through the 2005 Right to
Information Act, a 2005 right-to-work measure (part of the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act), and the 2009 Right to Education
Act. The roll-out of the Unique Identification Document will give a legal identity
for all residents of India and improve the delivery of social services. The Right to
Public Service Act, which grants citizens recourse when the state fails to deliver
basic services in a timely fashion, has been enacted in several states, and similar
legislation is being prepared at the national level.
More and more Indians participate in the democratic process. The 73rd
Amendment Act of 1993 introduced wide-ranging reforms of panchayati raj
institutions (local governing bodies) that play a central role in India’s efforts
at democratic decentralization and rural self-government. The measure
reserved seats in panchayati raj institutions for women and people from
scheduled castes and tribes. More recently, the Government empowered
women politically by expanding to 50 percent the number of seats for women
in local governments and state assemblies. India’s civil society is vibrant
and very active, with aspirations to play a greater role in policy making and
implementation. Each year the Right to Information Act generates several
13

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Box 3.1.
India and the World Bank Group: A unique relationship spanning six decades
The International Development Association (IDA) has contributed to improving outcomes in health, education, and rural development, with cumulative assistance totaling close to $43.5 billion since 1961 (current prices). It supported India’s efforts to tackle
polio, tuberculosis, leprosy, river blindness, and HIV/AIDS, improving the lives of millions of people and contributing immensely
to global efforts to control these diseases.a WBG financing (particularly credits from IDA) and technical assistance played a key
role in the Green Revolution—a landmark in India’s development that freed the country from dependency on food imports,
turning it into a net food exporter and helping millions escape poverty. And in education, IDA together with the European Union
and United Kingdom’s Department for International Development played an important role in universalizing primary education.
Likewise, both IBRD and IFC have contributed to the development of India’s financial sector. The Housing Development Finance
Corporation—India’s leading source of housing finance, has now mainstreamed long-term financial instruments for the middle
class. India is now one of the few developing countries where a middle-class family can borrow long-term (up to 25 years) for
housing without government subsidy. IBRD/IFC financing of more than $4 billion, coupled with capacity building, has helped
PowerGrid evolve into the world’s third largest transmission utility.
a.

A Collaborative Partnership: India and IDA, Government of India (2013)

Accountability
institutions have
become more
assertive, as indicated
by their active
role in uncovering
instances of fraud
and corruption. And
the general public is
increasingly vocal in
demanding enhanced
accountability.

million requests for information disclosure from ordinary citizens, media,
and research scholars; it has proved to be an effective instrument in fighting
corruption and red tape.
The Government has pushed forward on the governance agenda,
recently introducing a series of reforms and programs. Corruption in
India remains a concern, according to a draft national anticorruption strategy
released by the Central Vigilance Commission.5 Since 2009, the Government
has rolled out a performance management system under which each ministry
or department has to prepare and disclose a results framework. The system
has already been replicated in six states. The national e-governance program
will improve the accessibility of government services for everyone and at
affordable costs. Corporate governance has been enhanced through the 2010
mandatory guidelines for central public sector enterprises, and public financial
management is being strengthened by the newly introduced Central Plan
Scheme Monitoring System—a real-time tracking system for plan expenditures,
and by initiating electronic transfer of funds for social protection programs.
The Government has introduced a national public procurement bill, and across
India e-procurement is being rolled out aggressively. Accountability institutions
have become more assertive, as indicated by their active role in uncovering
instances of fraud and corruption. And the general public is increasingly vocal
in demanding enhanced accountability.
India is an emerging global power and a prominent voice for
development. India is an important player in the global informationtechnology revolution, and is on the frontier of using IT for e-government
and for the delivery of services. It is home to globally recognized companies
that have become global industry leaders in pharmaceuticals, steel, and
space technologies. India has become a prominent voice in global forums,
advocating for the establishment of a new “BRICS Bank,” as well as increased

5.

14

Central Vigilance Commission. Draft National Anti-Corruption Strategy (2010).

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

capital to enable multilateral development banks to meet the infrastructurefinancing needs of the developing world. Recently, India has been one of the
most vocal advocates for expanding the role of multilateral institutions to help
countries reach the MDGs, finance developing countries’ infrastructure and the
development of human resources, manage global financial crises, and ensure
a balanced, prosperous, and inclusive economy. With the ratification of the
UN Convention on Anti-Corruption in 2011 and full membership in the OECD
Financial Action Task Force on money laundering in 2010, India is increasingly
active in the global governance agenda.
The world continues to learn from India’s remarkable development
experience. India has been an important source of learning and innovation
for other countries (developing and industrialized alike), for development
practitioners and policymakers, and for multilateral institutions such as IDA.
Governments in developing countries have been keen to learn from India’s
successful experience in public policy, social and development programs,
local governance for improved accountability and services, and building an
enabling framework for private sector–led growth. Rural livelihood projects,
for example, have been replicated in other parts of the world. There is growing
demand to learn from India’s thematically diverse and tested development
practices, and India is emerging as one of the main providers of development
experience in exchange of South–South knowledge and investment capital. In
the past four years, India has shared its development experience in agriculture,
education and skills development, health care, information and communication
technology, inclusive business models, and public-private partnerships.

Governments in
developing countries
have been keen to
learn from India’s
successful experience
in public policy, social
and development
programs, local
governance
for improved
accountability
and services, and
building an enabling
framework for private
sector–led growth.

15

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

4. Vision: India in 2030
Before the industrial revolution, India was one of world’s wealthiest
countries, contributing 27 percent to global GDP.6 On gaining independence
after two centuries of colonization, however, India’s economy was stagnant.
During the ensuing 65 years it worked to escape from the low “Hindu rate of
growth,” to rebuild the foundation of a modern economy, and, in recent years,
to become one of the fastest-growing economies in the world.
Today India is among the largest economic powers in the world. At market
exchange rates, its share of world GDP has increased by 50 percent in the past 30
years from 1.8 to 2.7 percent and is expected to reach 11 percent by 2050. India is
also a net contributor to global demand. India’s economic growth over the past
30 years, at 6.2 percent, has been twice that of the world. Its ratio of exports to
GDP has tripled since 1990 to 21 percent, and its share of world imports has more
than doubled over the past decade. India is the fourth-largest destination for FDI
among developing countries, with net FDI inflows at 1.7 percent of GDP. Looking
forward, the national vision for development is detailed in the 12th Five-Year Plan
(FY2013–17) (box 4.1).

6.

16

Angus Maddison, The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: OECD, 2004.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Box 4.1.
Government vision: India’s 12th Five-Year Plan
Faster, sustainable, and more inclusive growth is the overarching objective of the Government’s development strategy.
Faster growth. Topping the Government’s agenda is to remove domestic constraints to growth so as to spur investment and
reverse the recent downward trend. Under the 12th Plan, India aims to increase its GDP at an average annual rate of 8.2 percent,
while aspiring to return to its full growth potential of 9 percent per year by the end of the Plan period. Annual growth rates of 4
percent in agriculture and 10 percent in manufacturing—both important sources of employment and livelihood—are required
to achieve the target. Productivity increases in the public and private sector, in micro, small and medium enterprises, among
farmers, and in large companies are expected to help India realize its potential. Growth will also benefit from improvements
in the business climate and in governance at all levels, from a massive increase in infrastructure investment (power,
telecommunications, roads, airports, railways, ports), and from better use of technology for innovative solutions to the country’s
most daunting development challenges. All states are expected to contribute. It is envisioned that on average each state will
grow at a rate higher than that achieved under the 11th Plan. Urbanization is also central to India’s inclusive growth objective, as
it is an important source of economic efficiencies and employment. The urban development strategy focuses on strengthening
five “enablers of urbanization”: governance, planning, financing, capacity building, and innovation.
Sustainable growth. Staying on a high growth trajectory will require more effective management of natural resources, as rapid
growth continues to put pressure on India’s water, land, and forests. Management of India’s dwindling water resources is
especially critical and requires measures to induce industry, farmers, and households to use water more efficiently. Rational
pricing, especially for commercial, industrial, and agricultural purposes, is necessary, as are regulatory measures and their
enforcement to limit water pollution. Effective land management and acquisition is a major bottleneck for the development of
industry and infrastructure. The Plan recognizes that environmental sustainability is no longer a peripheral issue and must be
mainstreamed and “addressed squarely.” A land-management strategy will be developed to strengthen land acquisition and
resettlement and rehabilitation processes, rationalize land use in urban areas, and promote farmland titling and leasing. The
Government is also committed to reducing the intensity of greenhouse gas emissions by 20–25 percent by 2020 against a 2005
baseline, and to adding 30,000 MW of renewable energy capacity.
Inclusive growth. Inclusiveness has many dimensions. It is as much about ensuring that growth benefits the very poor and
socially excluded groups (women, scheduled castes and tribes, and the disabled), as it is about more-balanced growth across the
country to help low-income states catch up with their more advanced neighbors. Inclusiveness also involves empowerment and
participation. It means greater attention to inequality—both in outcomes and opportunities—and ensuring access to goodquality education and healthcare. In education, the mean years of schooling are targeted to increase to seven years, and higher
education will be expanded and better aligned to the skills needed in a fast-growing and fast-changing economy. Jobs are
central to the inclusion story, and 50 million new work opportunities in the non-farm sector are envisioned under the 12th Plan.
Efforts will be made to eliminate gender and social gaps in school enrolment at all levels. On health, the infant mortality ratio
is targeted to decrease to 25 per 1,000 live births and the maternal mortality rate to 100 per 100,000 live births, while the ratio
of girls to boys is expected to rise 914 to 950. By the end of the Plan period, undernutrition of children up to three years of age
should decrease to 27 percent from the 2005–06 level of 40 percent.

India has the potential to—once again— become one of the largest
economies in the world, while reducing poverty and vulnerability,
by increasing shared prosperity. The dependency ratio will fall from
55 percent of the working-age population in 2010 to 47 percent in 2030,
allowing for a higher output per capita even if output per worker was to
remain constant. Savings rates are likely to rise as the relative share of the
working-age group expands, allowing for faster capital accumulation. (Annex
B6, Figure B6.1) Even in the aftermath of the global crisis, gross domestic
capital formation has been sturdy, never falling below 34 percent of GDP. The
average schooling of the population aged 25 years and above is expected to
increase from 4.4 years in 2010 to 6.0 years in 2030. Total factor productivity
has grown by around 2.5 percent per year, and this rate could increase as
markets integrate further and workers shift from low- to high-productivity
jobs. While less than 30 percent of the population lived in cities in 2010, the
17

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Figure 4.1.
Poverty and prosperity in India in 2030
a. Base scenario

b. Ambitious scenario

100

100

90

90

80

80

70

70

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

2010

2015
Non-vulnerable

Ensuring that
growth benefits
all will require
strengthening the
implementation of
economic and social
programs to better
target the very poor
and excluded, propoor policies across
a range of issues,
and accelerated job
creation.

2020
Poor

2025

2030

0

2010

2015
Non-vulnerable

2020

2025

2030

Poor

ratio is expected to attain 40 percent in 2030. Combining all these trends,
an average growth rate around 8.2 percent per year could in principle be
sustained over the next two decades.
The realization of this potential cannot be taken for granted, however,
as it will critically depend on decisions to be made in the coming
years. Maintaining high rates of growth will require continued efforts to
remove key structural constraints to growth and increase public investment
in infrastructure, education and health. The ongoing structural transformation
of an economy from agriculture to manufacturing, and from rural to urban
employment, has to be managed effectively; product markets have to be
further liberalized, and flexible labor laws introduced. Ensuring that growth
benefits all will require strengthening the implementation of economic and
social programs to better target the very poor and excluded, pro-poor policies
across a range of issues, and accelerated job creation. Finding an approach that
combines recent rapid growth and inclusiveness of Rajasthan and Karnataka
may hold the key to faster poverty reduction and increased prosperity.
What would it take for India to accelerate poverty reduction, decrease
vulnerability, and increase shared prosperity by 2030?
In the base scenario7, India would continue on its trajectory of 2005 to 2010,
during which it has been one of the most rapidly growing economies in the
world. Its economy would grow at 8.2 percent per year, and by 2030 income

7.

18

The base and ambitious scenarios developed for the India CPS provide a numerical illustration to a long-term vision for India. The objective of
these scenarios is to provide some back-of-the-envelope estimates of the likely impact of the continuation of India’s recent performance on
growth and poverty reduction through 2030. Because the scenarios seek to extend the historical performance into the future, they are not
driven by any explicit assumptions about the rest of the world, the types of policies pursued by the authorities, or the specific pattern of growth.
However, given that India’s recent success in achieving high growth and rapid poverty reduction demonstrated a clear break from history, the
scenarios implicitly assume that the external and internal enabling environment which was conducive to these developments in 2005-10 will
continue to be equally stimulating in the future.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

per capita would reach $5,283 (at 2010 prices), more than triple the 2010
level of $1,375. The impact on poverty of such a rate of growth would be
significant: just one percentage point increase in growth per capita would
result in a 0.6 percentage-point decrease in poverty, and a 0.4 percentage-point
increase in the share of the population not vulnerable to falling into poverty.
Approximately 12 percent of the population would live under the official
poverty line, compared with 30 percent in 2009–10, and the percentage of
people who were neither poor nor vulnerable would increase from 19.1 percent
to 33.6 percent (figure 4.1).
What would it take for India to “bend the curve”—to decrease poverty
and increase shared prosperity at a rate significantly above current
averages?

The India of 2030,
therefore, would
have 5.5 percent
of its people living
in poverty and a
significant increase
in the share of the
population (41.3
percent) no longer
vulnerable to falling
into poverty.

In the ambitious scenario, India would continue to grow rapidly at 8.2 percent
per year. The ambitious scenario would also aim to reduce poverty and
vulnerability at a rate close to that of Rajasthan and Karnataka between 2005
and 2010. Growth elasticity of reducing poverty would double to 1.2 percent,
and elasticity of escaping vulnerability would rise to 0.6 percent. The India of
2030, therefore, would have 5.5 percent of its people living in poverty and a
significant increase in the share of the population (41.3 percent) no longer
vulnerable to falling into poverty.
The implications for the rest of the world would be significant. India is central to
global prospects for “bending the arc of history” and rapidly reducing poverty
and increasing shared prosperity. The global benchmarking exercise estimates
that poverty in India has fallen by 7.2 million people per year8, placing India in
the 63rd percentile of the distribution of poverty reduction across countries. If
India were to move to the 70th percentile, poverty would decline by 9.2 million
people per year. Under the base scenario, this would mean that 191 million
people would be lifted out of poverty and 277 million people would escape
vulnerability. Under the ambitious scenario, the corresponding figures would
be 304 and 394 million, raising to prosperity the equivalent of the combined
population of France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and United Kingdom today.

8.

World Bank staff calculations.

19

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

5. Challenges
Achieving this vision of India in 2030 will require addressing a wide range
of development challenges. For India to realize its growth potential of $5,283
per capita GDP by 2030, it will be necessary to address even more forcefully than
in the past key structural constraints such as inadequate and poorly maintained
infrastructure (especially transport and energy), an underperforming manufacturing
sector, below-target growth in agricultural productivity, and inefficient land use and
natural resource management.9 With its declining dependency ratio and 8 million
people entering the workforce annually, India stands to benefit exponentially from
a demographic dividend. To collect that dividend, however, significant obstacles
will have to be overcome. India’s rate of job creation is low. Half of the population
derives its income from agriculture and only 16 percent from wage employment.
The government estimates that 93 percent of Indian workers are informally
employed, with limited or no job security and no benefits. Female labor participation
has decreased and, at 24 percent, remains low compared with other emerging
economies. To exploit its demographic advantages and attain the ambitious vision
of India 2030, three broad categories of challenges will have to be addressed: (i)
strengthening India’s platform for growth; (ii) managing the spatial transformation;
and, (iii) realizing human potential. A sluggish global economy and the domestic
economic slowdown may hinder India’s efforts to address some of these issues, but
only in the short- and medium- term (box 5.1).

9.

20

$93 billion worth of investments was shelved during 2011–12, mainly due to difficulties in obtaining land (CMIE CapEx database).

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Platform for growth
Creating a stronger platform for faster, socially and regionally inclusive, and
sustained growth will require India to tackle a range of constraints.
India’s infrastructure gap remains massive and is one of the most
significant impediments to growth and poverty reduction. Although
India’s transport network is one of the most extensive in the world, accessibility
and connectivity are limited. Only 20 percent of the national highway network
(which carries 40 percent of traffic) is four-lane, and one-third of the rural
population lacks access to an all-weather road. It is estimated that the transport
sector alone will require an investment of nearly $500 billion (3.6 percent of
GDP) over the next 10 years.10 Ports and airports have inadequate capacity
and often poor transport connectivity. Trains move very slowly owing to poor
maintenance, and the entire railway system is grappling with issues of financial
sustainability. Poor transport safety, especially road safety (133,000 road fatalities
recorded in 2010), is a growing concern in a country that is adding new drivers
at a record pace.
Despite significant achievements in the energy sector, key challenges
remain. Over the past decade, India has nearly doubled installed generation
capacity, become a global leader in renewable energy, improved its
transmission network, developed electricity exchanges, and enacted major
energy-related legislation. Despite these achievements, an estimated 300
million people do not have access to electricity, while those who are connected
to the grid must cope with unreliable supply. Sixty percent of firms resort to
costly backup power generation. The sector continues to be hobbled by a
range of problems—among them energy demand that far outstrips supply,
below market pricing of electricity, constraints in coal and gas supply that force
generation stations to operate below capacity, and high rates of loss (technical,
commercial, and financial) in distribution. The continued unreliability and poor
quality of electricity supplied to firms and households sap investment and
growth and reduce India’s competitiveness.

Over the past decade,
India has nearly
doubled installed
generation capacity,
become a global
leader in renewable
energy, improved
its transmission
network, developed
electricity exchanges,
and enacted major
energy-related
legislation. Despite
these achievements,
an estimated 300
million people do
not have access to
electricity, while
those who are
connected to the
grid must cope with
unreliable supply.

Manufacturing remains underdeveloped and has grown more
slowly than expected. Accounting for just 15 percent of GDP, India’s
manufacturing sector is small compared with that of the other BRICS. China’s
manufacturing, for example, accounts for 34 percent of that nation’s GDP.
Under the 11th Plan, annual manufacturing growth was only 7.7 percent,
far below the target of 11 percent. Inadequate infrastructure, which
disproportionately penalizes small- and medium-scale enterprises, is one of
the main constraints to growth in the sector. The size distribution of firms in
India is characterized by a missing middle that, in most developing countries,
accounts for a significant share of wage employment. Whereas large firms
can internalize the costs of dedicated infrastructure (e.g., captive power or
water treatment plants, or even rolling stock), small and medium-size firms
have no access to the financing that would make it possible to develop their

10

The National Transport Development Policy Committee.

21

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Box 5.1.
India’s economic outlook
Real GDP growth is likely to slow further in FY2012–13 to under 6 percent, significantly below the 9–10 percent growth rates
recorded just before the financial crisis. Given the continued weakness in high income economies, India’s growth will increasingly
have to come from domestic sources, which will require resolving key supply-side bottlenecks—among them banks’ high
exposure to delayed power projects, financially struggling utilities, delayed mining projects, and the cancellation of telecom
licenses. With a gradual improvement in the global economy and progress on the domestic reform agenda, growth is expected
to recover to close to 7.1 percent by FY2014–15.
Key Economic Indicators
2006/
07
Real Income and Prices
(% change)
Real GDP (at factor cost)
Agriculture
Industry
Wholesale Price Index
Consumption and
Investment (% of GDP)
Consumption
Public
Private
Investment
Public
Private
External Sector
Current Account Balance
(% of GDP)
Foreign Exchange Reserves
(US billion) 1/
General Government
Finances (% of GDP)
Revenue 2/
Expenditure
Deficit 3/
Total Debt

2007/
08

2008/
09

2009/
10

2010/
11

2011/
12

2012/
13

2013/
14

2014/
2015/
15
16
Projections

2016/
17

9.6
4.2
12.2
6.6

9.3
5.8
9.7
4.7

6.7
0.1
4.4
8.1

8.6
0.8
9.2
3.8

9.3
7.9
9.2
9.6

6.2
3.6
3.5
8.9

5.4
1.0
3.0
7.4

6.4
2.0
5.2
7.0

7.1
2.0
7.0
6.5

7.3
2.0
7.5
6.0

7.5
2.0
8.0
5.5

72.6
10.3
62.3
31.3
7.9
23.4

72.4
10.3
62.1
32.9
8.0
24.9

71.8
10.9
60.9
32.3
8.5
23.8

73.7
11.9
61.8
31.7
8.4
23.3

72.5
11.4
61.0
31.7
7.8
24.0

72.8
11.6
61.2
30.6
7.4
23.2

75.3
13.8
61.5
32.0
7.4
24.6

73.1
13.0
60.1
33.1
8.4
24.7

72.2
12.8
59.4
33.3
8.5
24.8

72.9
12.8
60.0
32.1
8.5
23.6

72.9
13.0
59.9
31.2
8.5
22.6

-1.0

-1.3

-2.3

-2.8

-2.7

-4.2

-4.5

-4.0

-3.6

-3.2

-2.9

191.9

299.2

241.4

254.7

274.3

260.1

238.5

255.9

308.4

340.5

381.9

20.0
25.4
5.4
77.2

21.0
26.0
5.0
74.1

19.4
27.8
8.4
74.6

18.2
28.0
9.8
72.5

18.6
27.7
9.1
67.7

18.4
26.6
8.2
65.9

18.1
26.3
8.2
66.7

18.5
26.1
7.6
66.2

18.5
25.7
7.2
65.3

19.0
26.0
7.0
64.4

19.5
26.0
6.5
63.3

Notes: 1/ Excluding gold, SDR and IMF reserve position.
2/ Excludes receipts from 3G spectrum auctions.
3/ General government deficit, including center and states.
Sources: Central Statistical Organization, Reserve Bank of India, and World Bank Staff Estimates.

Although depreciation of the rupee and pressure from food and fuel prices could add to the inflation momentum in the near
term, inflation and the current account deficit are likely to moderate over the medium term. Owing to softer import demand and
improving export performance, the current account deficit is expected to decline to 3.6 percent of GDP by FY2014–15.
Although the total subsidy bill exceeded the budgeted amount despite recent reductions in fuel subsidies, the authorities were
able to limit the central government deficit to 5.2 percent of GDP in FY2012-13, better than the (revised) target of 5.3 percent.
While the pace of fiscal consolidation remains behind the adjustment path recommended by the 13th Finance Commission, the
authorities are committed to bringing the deficit down further to 4.8 percent of GDP in FY2013-14 and 3.0 percent by FY201617. However, as deficits remain elevated, debt sustainability could come under pressure. The debt-to-GDP ratio fell from nearly
80 percent in FY2002–03 to 66 percent in FY2011–12 owing to high nominal GDP growth, fiscal consolidation, and declining
real interest rates on government debt. Maintaining that ratio in an environment of slower growth and a possible uptick in real
interest rates will require sustained reductions in fiscal deficits.
India’s long-term prospects remain bright owing to favorable demographics, rising average educational attainments, and
high savings rates. However, near- and medium-term downside risks are high. During the global financial crisis, higher public
spending set in at exactly the right time, largely because of the implementation of recommendations of the 6th Pay Commission,
and the Reserve Bank of India was able to lower policy rates significantly when inflation fell in line with international commodity
prices. Should India face another global shock in the near future, room for a similar policy response would be much more limited.
Continued progress on the domestic reform agenda is critical to supporting domestic drivers of growth and returning the
economy to a high growth trajectory.

22

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

own dedicated infrastructure and, in any case, the scale of their operations
does not make it economically feasible. Outdated labor laws, inadequate
access to land, and a dearth of skilled workers all have contributed to slow
manufacturing growth. Those manufacturing entities that are trapped in
the informal sector have difficulty raising finance and are constrained in
their productivity. The plethora of necessary forms, licenses, inspections,
and clearances especially hinders the growth of small and medium-size
enterprises—which, if unleashed, could be a key driver of India’s economic
growth and an important source of jobs.
Improving and maintaining a healthy investment climate is crucial for
India’s development. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, India’s
gross domestic savings rate declined significantly to around 32 percent of
GDP, constraining much-needed investment to address the infrastructure
gap, alleviate capacity constraints, and raise potential output. The reduced
availability of domestic financing sources, combined with the need to
maintain high investment rates to support and accelerate economic growth,
highlights the importance of a healthy investment climate that creates
opportunities for domestic and foreign investors. Policies that distort key
markets (e.g., agriculture, land, food retail, fuel, and so on) have a significant
impact on India’s investment climate. Net inflows, after peaking at 1.8
percent of GDP in FY2008–09, have averaged about 1.0 percent of GDP since
then and have further weakened by 22 percent (year-on-year) because of
global uncertainties. Recent reforms to promote FDI (e.g., a relaxation of
limits on foreign ownership in airlines and media, clarification of rules for FDI
in single-brand retail, and allowing FDI in multi-brand retail in September
2012) are likely to raise investor appetites and could lead to a strengthening
of FDI inflows.

To benefit from
economies of scale,
sharpen India’s
international
competitiveness, and
improve economic
growth and income
levels, there is a need
for better integration
of markets in goods
and services, labor,
and finance.

India is a diverse country, with poorly integrated markets. To benefit
from economies of scale, sharpen India’s international competitiveness,
and improve economic growth and income levels, there is a need for better
integration of markets in goods and services, labor, and finance. At present,
the efficient functioning of India’s domestic markets is impeded by physical
and policy barriers. Poor infrastructure—a limited national highway system,
insufficient air and water transport—translates into higher transport costs.
A cumbersome and multilayered system of taxation across states further
impedes the flow of goods, as do state-specific restrictions on agriculture
trade. A new goods and services tax, proposed in 2010 but not yet approved,
is a major Government effort to streamline the unwieldy tax system.
Experience among states in the United States and among countries in the
European Union—the ultimate “income convergence machine”—shows the
strong link between economic integration among confederated states and
income convergence.11 The more integrated the country, the more balanced
the growth.

11

Robert Barro and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (“Convergence,” Journal of Political Economy, 100:2, April 1992) find
strong convergence among states in the United States, while a 2012 World Bank study finds that economic
integration has led to convergence among countries in the European Union (see Golden Growth: Restoring
the Luster of the European Growth Model, Washington DC, World Bank, 2012).

23

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Although some
progress has been
made, South Asia
remains one of the
least integrated
regions in the world
with regard to
policy, trade, and
infrastructure. This
lack of integration
directly affects
India’s economic
development
and hampers
management of
shared natural
resources, such as
cross-boundary river
basins.

Faster economic growth has accelerated the degradation of the
environment and the depletion of scarce natural resources that are
essential for sustaining growth and eliminating poverty. India’s long-term
growth is predicated on its ability to address environmental problems such as
soil erosion, water and air pollution, growing water scarcity, and the declining
quality of forests. In Northern India the aquifer is receding by an alarming 4 cm
annually. The challenge is further exacerbated by environmental stresses resulting
from urbanization processes that are often chaotic, and from development of the
private sector. The cost of environmental degradation in India was estimated in
2009 to be 6.6 percent of GDP.12
India and its neighbors have not fully realized their potential for growth
derivable from further regional and global integration. Although some
progress has been made, South Asia remains one of the least integrated regions
in the world with regard to policy, trade, and infrastructure. This lack of integration
directly affects India’s economic development and hampers management of
shared natural resources, such as cross-boundary river basins. It aggravates the
isolation of the underdeveloped northeastern states from trade and transit routes
and limits access to necessary energy resources, such as oil and power. Estimates
show that intraregional trade would increase from the current $5 billion to $20
billion if restrictions on trading with neighbors were removed. India could also
do more to tap into global markets and better explore the potential for increased
trade with East Asia and Africa.

Spatial transformation
India is undergoing a massive rural-urban transformation—one of the
largest of the 21st century. For the first time since Independence, India has
seen a greater absolute growth in urban population. The number of towns
increased from about 5,000 in 2001 to 8,000 in 2011, and some 53 cities now
have a population exceeding 1 million. Today, 31.1 percent of the population
lives in cities, and the share is expected to rise to 50 percent in the next 20 years.
Accelerating urbanization is central to India’s growth, development, and poverty
reduction (figure 5.1), but it cannot be done without an equally pronounced
focus on rural development. Rural areas are often poorly connected to cities,
resulting in weak value chains for agricultural products and slow rates of off-farm
job creation. While agriculture remains the main source of livelihoods for half the
population, annual agricultural growth has been below the government target.
Accommodating the needs of an additional 10 million urban dwellers each
year will be a strategic policy issue for many years to come. Providing them
with adequate services such as water, sewerage, drainage, and transportation, and

12

24

World Bank estimates, 2009.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

GDP per capita annual growth rate (percent)

Figure 5.1.
Correlates of fast economic growth: the rate of urbanization

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

0

10

20

30

40

Rural areas are often
poorly connected to
cities, resulting in
weak value chains for
agricultural products
and slow rates of
off-farm job creation.
While agriculture
remains the main
source of livelihoods
for half the
population, annual
agricultural growth
has been below the
government target.

50

Urbanization rate

creating opportunities for further economic development will be a challenge. The
needs are particularly dire in India’s growing slums. (The population of slum dwellers
swelled from 75 million in 2001 to 93 million in 2011,13 accounting for a quarter of the
urban population.) Investments—both public and private—have not kept up with
demand. Weak urban planning, ineffective regulations governing land management
and use, and distorted land markets hinder the development of vibrant, livable
cities. Urban governance is a major issue across all states and cities. Local urban
bodies are weak and financially unsustainable, with limited capacity to raise their
own financial resources. Urban service delivery institutions have limited autonomy,
accountability, and incentives or client orientation. Furthermore, the responsibility
for financial management and delivery of basic services is fragmented across a
range of agencies that often are not held accountable and have few incentives to
perform on a sustainable basis. The linkages between institutions at different levels
of government—center, state, and local—are weak, resulting in duplication and
sometimes an inefficient division of labor. For example, investment decisions and
implementation of urban infrastructure projects are frequently made at the state level,
while the liabilities (including debt incurred) and responsibility for operations and
maintenance are left to the local bodies.
The rapid expansion of cities beyond current municipal boundaries is
a particular concern. The peri-urban areas of the larger Indian cities have
grown at a faster pace than cities themselves—both in terms of population
and manufacturing. In addition to the challenges faced by most urbanizing
areas, the largely unplanned development of city outskirts involves changes
in land use from agricultural to residential and industrial/commercial,
changes in the use of natural resources (deforestation, water depletion and
pollution), and land degradation. Urban sprawl has also had a negative
impact on abutting agricultural land and livelihoods. Prospects for a more
systematic development of these areas are limited, as many lie beyond

13

Committee on Slum Statistics, Planning Commission (2011).

25

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Urban sprawl has
also had a negative
impact on abutting
agricultural land and
livelihoods. Prospects
for a more systematic
development of these
areas are limited,
as many lie beyond
urban administrative
authority. Secondtier cities face a
serious lack of
basic municipal
infrastructure, such
as adequate safe
drinking water,
drainage and
sewerage, and paved
roads.

urban administrative authority. Second-tier cities face a serious lack of basic
municipal infrastructure, such as adequate safe drinking water, drainage and
sewerage, and paved roads.14
India’s spatial transformation is likely to result in larger disparities in
welfare levels—between the rich and the poor, and between rural and
urban areas. Consumption inequality is on the rise, with widening disparities
between urban and rural areas. Disparities in human development indicators,
especially as they relate to socially excluded groups are also pronounced.
While urbanization is inevitable, the persistence of these gaps and inequalities
is not. The challenge for India will be to develop policies and programs to
ensure that a large part of the population—especially the most vulnerable—
is not left behind. India’s spatial transformation also requires the effective
development of the rural economy through the expansion of farm and nonfarm employment and income opportunities (figure 5.2). Despite the injection
of huge resources, mainly through centrally sponsored flagship schemes, such
as the Mahatma Gandhi National Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) and
the National Rural Livelihoods Mission, rural incomes have not grown apace
with urban incomes, and job creation in the nonagricultural has been slow.
Figure 5.2.
Correlates of shared prosperity: off-farm employment in rural areas

Change in vulnerability
(annual percent of the population)

0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Off-farm employment (percent of total employment)

India is highly vulnerable to climate change because of high levels of
poverty, high population density, heavy reliance on natural resources,
and an environment already under stress. Under a moderate climatechange scenario (an increase in mean annual temperatures of 1.1 to 2.3º
Celsius), the risk of increased frequency and severity of natural hazards is
likely to increase, and densely populated cities will be at extreme risk. Kolkata
is among the six fastest-growing cities worldwide that are classified to be at
extreme risk, whereas Mumbai, Delhi, and Chennai are among the ten that
are classified as high risk. Overall, India is ranked the second most vulnerable
14

26

Small and medium-size cities are home to 80 percent of India’s poor, and access to services tends to be far more limited than that in India’s large
cities. Perspectives on Poverty in India: Stylized facts from Survey Data, World Bank (2010).

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

country in the world.15 Institutions and mechanisms for enhanced disaster
risk management and climate resilience, especially in agriculture and waterintensive sectors, are either weak or nonexistent.
While India has a relatively low-carbon economy today, greenhouse gas
emissions are projected to grow over the next decade. India’s GHG emissions
proportional to GDP are on par with the global average, and its per capita
emissions are among the lowest in the world. However, due to the size of its
economy, India is the third-largest emitter in the world, and its GHG emissions
are projected to grow. Energy is key to India’s climate-change challenge, as
well as its ambition to sustain high growth. The demand for energy, however,
far outstrips the domestic supply in a country with a poor natural resource
endowment and foreign sources are costly. To keep emissions from increasing
at a fast rate, India will have to maximize the use of clean energy and improve
energy efficiency, taking into account higher relative costs. Although densely
populated areas are often associated with congestion, pollution, and a high
level of emissions, with potentially significant adverse impact on public health,
greater concentration of people and economic activity in and around India’s
large cities can also have a positive impact on the environment and climate
change because cities are an important source of efficiencies. If managed
systematically and with long-term planning in place, cities can help hold down
India’s emissions and improve air quality.

Greater concentration
of people and
economic activity in
and around India’s
large cities can also
have a positive impact
on the environment
and climate change
because cities are
an important source
of efficiencies.
If managed
systematically and
with long-term
planning in place,
cities can help
hold down India’s
emissions and
improve air quality.

Agriculture has grown below Government targets. India remains
predominantly rural, and about half of its population derives its income
from agriculture or related activities. Government stepped-up efforts to
develop agriculture are slowly yielding results; between 2000-01 and 201011 agriculture grew at an average rate of 3.1 per annum. The target for
the last two five-year plans was 4.0 percent. Stressed natural resources,
poor rural infrastructure, inadequate technology, limited access to credit,
underdeveloped extension and marketing services, and insufficient
agricultural planning at the local level contribute to the lackluster
performance. Ongoing global food security concerns, pronounced food-price
volatility, and concerns about climate change all highlight the urgency of
boosting India’s agriculture productivity.

Human potential
As a country with a population of 1.2 billion people (projected
to increase to 1.5 billion by 2030), India has tremendous human
potential—a source of immense creativity and innovation. To take full
advantage of its demographic dividend and to unlock the human potential of
all its people, India needs to overcome daunting challenges across a range of
sectors, including health and nutrition, education, social protection, and skills
development. Poor access to water and sanitation puts a huge burden on
people (particularly women and children), who spend a good portion of each
day securing sufficient water for the household.

15

Maplecroft’s Climate Change Risk Atlas, 2011. Available on www.maplecroft.com

27

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Although public
financing for health
is expected to
double under the
12th Plan, increased
public funding is
not enough; it must
be accompanied
by improved
effectiveness of
spending at all levels,
greater access to
quality health care,
and more effective
delivery of health
services.

Although India’s health indicators have continued to improve,
progress has not matched the country’s economic growth over
the past decade. Despite increasing rates of decline, maternal and child
mortality rates remain on par with rates in much poorer countries, and
malnutrition is among the highest in the world. India faces an unfinished
agenda of tackling childhood and infectious diseases and malnutrition, as
well as an emerging and rising burden of non-communicable and chronic
diseases (India and China vie for the largest number of diabetics in the world).
Progress on tackling communicable diseases such as AIDS, tuberculosis,
and polio has been significant, but continued attention is needed to secure
the gains. Poor people are highly vulnerable to health shocks, with medical
expenses contributing to household poverty and compromising efforts to
improve health outcomes.
Despite the central government’s increased focus on and financial
commitment to health issues, a major challenge is to implement the
funding effectively. Although public financing for health is expected to
double under the 12th Plan, increased public funding is not enough; it must
be accompanied by improved effectiveness of spending at all levels, greater
access to quality health care, and more effective delivery of health services.
The many systemic constraints include weak accountability arrangements
and incentives for performance, weak quality assurance, a largely unregulated
private health care sector, limited mechanisms for financial protection, and
weak information and surveillance systems, combined with inadequate
use of evidence-based planning, programming, and management. Out-ofpocket health expenses are high (on average accounting for 70 percent of
total health spending) and affect poor households disproportionately. New
government-sponsored health-insurance schemes, especially those aiming to
reach people living below the poverty line, may make a difference.
Improving the nutritional status of India’s children is particularly
important. Child malnutrition remains high, and widespread. India accounts
for 40 percent (217 million) of the world’s malnourished children. The
variation across states is particularly striking: The percentage of malnourished
children under five years of age varies from 23 percent in the more advanced
state of Kerala to 60 percent in the low-income state of Madhya Pradesh.
Despite India’s impressive economic growth in the past decade, malnutrition
has declined very little. Stunting rates in India are two to seven times
higher than those in other BRICS countries. While nutrition has recently
received increased attention with the restructuring of the Integrated Child
Development Services scheme, there remain very significant programmatic,
institutional, technical, implementation, and capacity constraints. An effective
multisectoral response is critically important and has to go beyond the health
sector to include agriculture, education, industry, water, and sanitation.
Access to adequate water and sanitation is critical to improving the
quality of life and economic potential of all Indians. Although the
government at the national and state level spends $4 billion annually on
improving access to rural water supply and sanitation, only one-third of rural

28

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

households have access to piped water and sanitation.16 The economic impact
of inadequate sanitation in India is estimated at $54 billion or 6.4 percent of
GDP in 2006. Most of that cost is attributed to premature mortality and healthrelated costs. The opportunity cost for women and children who spend an
inordinate amount of time securing water for their household each day is huge
and takes away from time that could be spent on more productive economic
activities or study.
India’s efforts to improve access, equity, and quality of education at
the primary, secondary, and tertiary levels remains a work in progress.
Now that access to primary education has been largely universalized, the
challenge ahead is to improve quality, learning outcomes, retention, and access
to education by underprivileged children, often in very remote areas. As the
success of elementary education has resulted in demand for education beyond
elementary level, there is increasing focus on improving access to secondary
education. Of those children who finish primary education, 83 percent
transition to the next level. Enrolment rates for grades 9–12 are just 40 percent
and of those enrolled, approximately 15 percent drop out and one-third
fail their examinations. While inequities are declining in terms of access and
participation at all levels of education for all socioeconomic and ethnic groups,
manifold inequities persist in the type of education facilities and exposure to
and availability of modern techniques of education. Girls make up 45.6 percent
of secondary students.

Access to primary
education has been
largely universalized,
the challenge ahead
is to improve quality,
learning outcomes,
retention, and
access to education
by underprivileged
children, often in very
remote areas.

Jobs are an important component of poverty reduction and a
cornerstone of development. Over the last two decades, 8 million people
annually entered the labor force in India. Job creation, which has remained
relatively flat over a long period, will continue to be a tremendous development
challenge as India grapples with how best to provide opportunities to its
burgeoning young workforce. At present only 16 percent of the workforce
derives its income from regular wage employment, and more than half are
engaged in agriculture. The female labor force, decreased from an already small
34 to 29 percent of the total labor force between 2000 and 2010. The drop was
particularly pronounced among women with higher levels of education.
India’s continued economic growth demands more skilled workers
across many sectors, higher rates of employment, and higher wages.
The country now faces a massive shortage of skilled labor, which stymies
productivity. Less than 10 percent of the working population has completed
secondary education or above, and too many secondary graduates have skills
and knowledge that are poorly matched with the needs of the labor market.
The extent and quality of higher-education opportunities need to be scaled
up urgently to sustain high growth of the economy and make it inclusive.
Empowering youth, especially in rural areas, with skills that are better matched
with the demands of the labor market—informal or formal—will also help
facilitate migration to city centers where wage jobs are more readily available.

16

Indian National Census 2011.

29

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

6. World Bank Group India Country
Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17)
| Integration | Transformation | Inclusion
A vision of the nation
as a global economic
powerhouse where no
more than 5.5 percent
of the population
lives in poverty and
41.3 percent of the
population are no
longer vulnerable to
falling into poverty.
It sets out a program
of engagement—
and makes key
strategic shifts—
that are designed to
contribute to India’s
transformation into
the India of 2030.

30

The World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17) will
support the Government’s development goal of growth that is faster,
more socially and regionally inclusive, and more sustainable as detailed
in the 12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013–17). The strategy helps India lay the
foundation for a longer-term vision of India in 2030—a vision of the nation
as a global economic powerhouse where no more than 5.5 percent of the
population lives in poverty and 41.3 percent of the population are no longer
vulnerable to falling into poverty. It sets out a program of engagement—
and makes key strategic shifts—that are designed to contribute to India’s
transformation into the India of 2030. The strategy builds on India’s recent
achievements, but also incorporates lessons learned from WBG’s longstanding
engagement in the country, to develop transformational and innovative
solutions to tackle India’s most pressing development challenges, especially
in the poorest, least developed, and most isolated states. It takes into account
lessons learned under the previous CAS (FY2009–12) (Annex 2), and is informed
by findings from multistakeholder consultations, as well as a client-perception
survey (Annex 9). And finally, the strategy is aligned with the WBG regional
strategy for South Asia.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The strategy’s overarching goal of rapid poverty reduction and
increased shared prosperity will be achieved by focusing on three
broad engagement areas: (i) integration; (ii) transformation; and (iii)
inclusion (figure 6.1). A focus on improved governance, environmental
sustainability, and gender equality runs across all three engagement areas.
On governance, many of the actions required to foster economic integration
concern public investments and government regulation. Institutional
development plays a key role in the case of spatial transformation, whereas
strengthened accountability is critical for social inclusion. More specifically,
the World Bank will work with counterparts at the national and state levels to
scale up support in performance-based public management, e-governance,
public procurement and financial management, M&E, implementation of the
right to service law, strengthening India’s anti-corruption framework, and
supporting social accountability mechanisms. On environmental sustainability,
economic integration has important implications for natural resource
management, whereas the priority in relation to spatial transformation is to
minimize congestion, improve resource use efficiency, and reduce pollution
impacts, including greenhouse gas emissions. Efforts to improve disaster risk
management help households cope with natural disasters, reducing their
chance of falling back or deeper into poverty. Finally, economic integration and
spatial transformation should lead to greater paid employment opportunities
for women, whereas social inclusion can be promoted by enhancing voice and
tackling discrimination

The World Bank
will work with
counterparts at
the national and
state levels to
scale up support in
performance-based
public management,
e-governance,
public procurement
and financial
management, M&E,
implementation of
the right to service
law, strengthening
India’s anti-corruption
framework, and
supporting social
accountability
mechanisms.

A range of high-level intermediate development objectives provide
both the rationale for the content of the World Bank Group program as
well as a clear line-of-site to higher order country goals. Analytical work
underpinning this CPS shows a strong correlation between select development
outcomes: human development (infant mortality), gender equity (female
job participation), jobs (off-farm employment), urban development, policies
(business climate) and transfers (public spending) and the three overarching
goals. The rate of urbanization (as measured by population growth of secondary
cities) is correlated with economic growth, while creation of jobs (more
specifically off-farm employment) is correlated with increased shared prosperity.
Both these aspects are addressed through activities under the rural-urban
transformation engagement area. Similarly, human development (education,
health, nutrition and especially, infant mortality) is strongly linked to rapid
poverty reduction. Support under the third engagement area of inclusion will
aim to help the Government of India ensure inclusive growth by improving
human development outcomes as well as gender parity.

31

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Figure 6.1.
India CPS results chain: engagement areas and outcomes

Overarching goals:
Economic growth
Poverty reduction
Shared prosperity

Engagement area: 3
Inclusion

• Increased GSDP growth
in low-income& special
category states
• Increased trade and
investments in the region

• Increased population of
secondary cities
• Increased off-farm
employment

• Improved access to services
to excluded segment of
population
• Increase female labor force
participation
• Decreased infant mortality

Outcomes:

Outcomes:

Outcomes:

• Improved transport
connectivity
• Improved inter-regional
power transmission
• Improved market-driven
skills for productive
employment
• Enhanced private
investment in low-income
states
• Strengthened regional
integration

• Strengthened institutional
capacity of urban
government
• Improved urban transport
services
• Improved access water
supply and sanitation services
• Increased agricultural
productivity
• Improved environment
protection and biodiversity
conservation
• Reduced Greenhouse Gas
emissions through energy
efficiency and renewable
energy production

• Improved access to
electricity
• Strengthened public &
private health-delivery
systems
• Improved child nutrition
delivery systems
• Improved access & quality of
education
• Increased coverage of social
protection programs
• Enhanced rural livelihood
opportunities
• Increased access to financial
services
• Enhanced disaster risk
management system

*Analytical work completed as part of the CPS indicates strong correlation between these country long-term objectives and economic integration,
spatial transformation and social inclusion.

32

CPS Outcomes

Engagement area: 2
Transformation

Country Long-Term
Objectives*

Engagement area: 1
Integration

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Strategic engagement area 1

Integration

Enhanced efforts to increase India’s market integration can significantly
boost India’s economic growth. Better integration would result in morebalanced growth among Indian states, helping low-income states converge
more quickly with their faster-growing neighbors. To benefit from economies
of scale and increase competitiveness, there is a need to remove physical and
policy barriers across states (notably the multilayered system of taxation) that
impede markets from functioning efficiently. India’s massive infrastructure
gap must be bridged so that people can get to jobs and goods to markets.
Reforms in the power sector are also needed to rationalize energy pricing
and improve the capacity and reliability of the generation, transmission, and
distribution system. Efficient intermediation to channel household savings into
infrastructure finance is critical to achieving investment targets in infrastructure.
Mobilizing financing for public-private partnerships (PPPs) through innovative
structures and appropriate government support is needed to attract investors.
The development of a vibrant manufacturing sector—especially small and
medium-size enterprises—will require reforming labor laws, improving land
access and management, cutting bureaucratic red tape, and better access to
financing. As jobs are created, India’s youth will need skills and knowledge that
are better tailored to the needs of a fast-growing economy.

To benefit from
economies of
scale and increase
competitiveness,
there is a need to
remove physical
and policy barriers
across states (notably
the multilayered
system of taxation)
that impede markets
from functioning
efficiently.

33

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The capacity of India’s
railways, especially
for freight, will be
expanded in an effort
to accommodate
increasing demand
and to promote the
use of rail for freight
transport, thereby
reducing India’s
carbon footprint.

As the largest and most-populous country in the region, India is central
to many efforts toward regional economic integration and cooperation.
Despite steady and unprecedented progress, South Asia remains one of
the least economically integrated regions in the world. Further integration
with neighbors in South Asia and beyond can contribute exponentially to
India realizing its 2030 growth potential, while also greatly benefiting other
countries in the region.17 Possible areas for increased regional collaboration
include management of common natural resources (most importantly water),
transport, and power. Supporting the Government to help states converge and
grow more evenly through improved market integration is one of the main
development objectives of the WBG strategy for India.
Infrastructure remains a priority for the Government. The 12th Plan’s
strategy is to develop a more balanced multimodal transport network that
links the northeast and special-category states to the rest of the country.
Where possible, public-private partnerships (PPPs) will be pursued to develop
national highways and rural roads. The capacity of India’s railways, especially
for freight, will be expanded in an effort to accommodate increasing demand
and to promote the use of rail for freight transport, thereby reducing India’s
carbon footprint. The Government will strive to improve asset management
and increase efficiency by encouraging competition in the provision and
maintenance of infrastructure and services. Higher emphasis will be placed

17

34

A World Bank study shows that both India and Bangladesh would gain from improve access. World Bank. 2012. Unlocking Bangladesh-India Trade:
Emerging Potential and the Way Forward.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

on safety (including making transport safer for women), energy efficiency,
environmental conservation, and social impacts. By the end of the 12th
Plan, all villages will be connected to an all-weather road, most national
and state highways will be upgraded to a two-lane standard or better, and
the flagship projects—the eastern and western freight corridors—will have
been completed. On energy, the Government’s priority is to ensure energy
availability, promote energy efficiency, and significantly expand and strengthen
the transmission network for electricity and oil and gas. The Plan envisions
increasing energy capacity by an additional 88,000 MW. To do this, sources
of energy will have to be expanded, notably through the exploration of
renewable energy (wind and solar) and the implementation of critical corrective
policies to improve the financial sustainability and efficiency of the system,
promoting increased investment in domestic hydrocarbon production and
the implementation of critical corrective policies to improve the financial
sustainability and efficiency of the system.

The potential for
India to reap returns
of increased regional
trade is great, as
shown by recent
export growth. India’s
exports to its South
Asian neighbors
increased from $4.6
billion in FY2005
to $11.7 billion in
FY2011.

The Government’s regional economic integration goal is focused on
seizing opportunities for increased trade and investment in South Asia,
but also in emerging East Asian economies. The potential for India to reap
returns of increased regional trade is great, as shown by recent export growth.
India’s exports to its South Asian neighbors increased from $4.6 billion in
FY2005 to $11.7 billion in FY2011. Progress has been incremental. For example,
in 1996 India granted MFN status to Pakistan, which was reciprocated in 2011,
but still awaiting formalization and a September 2012 India-Pakistan agreement
to reduce tariffs to no more than 5 percent and to remove all nontariff barriers
by 2020. In the global arena, the Government aims to engage more proactively
with the global community at the bilateral, regional, and multilateral levels. The
Plan notes that energy security and the need to develop long-term and stable
energy sources are key considerations of India’s engagement with the rest of
the world.
Outcome 1.1 Improved transport connectivity
The WBG’s support for the transport sector will focus on the reform and
development of railways, highways, and rural roads, and on improving road
safety and ensuring asset sustainability. Engagement will be informed by
lessons learned from the Bank’s support of ongoing transformative projects
and in state-level interventions in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Punjab and
Tamil Nadu. The Bank’s contribution to rural connectivity will come mainly
through its support for the Government’s flagship roads program, the Pradhan
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY),18 which now focuses on six low-income
and special category states, as well as Punjab. Support is likely to evolve into a
more broad-based engagement that aims to strengthen the overall rural road
system for the expansion of all-season rural roads. Strengthening institutions,
enhancing accountability, and building capacities among the various state
and national highways agencies will be a strategic priority of the Bank. This will
be accomplished through ongoing state highway improvement projects and

18

PMGSY highlights the importance that India’s Government gives to reducing disparities in physical access, encouraging economic and social
development in rural areas, and adequately funding rural road maintenance.

35

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Through its proposed
transmission
investments in the
low-income states
of Bihar and Uttar
Pradesh and through
the Northeast Power
Transmission Project,
the Bank will help
improve overall
electricity services
in states and regions
with the lowest access
levels in the country
and significantly
increase the power
exchange between
states and regions of
the country.

technical assistance to national highway agencies. The WBG will also look for
opportunities to support projects that focus on the integration of low-income
states, as well as those supporting shifts to more efficient modes of transport,
including ports.
Outcome 1.2 Improved inter-regional power transmission connectivity
The WBG will support the Government in promoting financially
sustainable access to electricity by addressing bottlenecks in
generation, transmission, and distribution at both the state and
national levels. It will support Government and private sector efforts to
(i) increase access to modern energy, particularly in low-income states;
(ii) increase the availability of power to underpin growth while balancing
sustainability and climate change concerns; and (iii) strengthening institutions
and financial sustainability in the sector. Three ongoing projects (Rampur
Hydropower, Haryana Power, and Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydroelectric) support
the provision of sustainable energy by strengthening transmission and
investing in clean energy. Through its proposed transmission investments in
the low-income states of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and through the Northeast
Power Transmission Project, the Bank will help improve overall electricity
services in states and regions with the lowest access levels in the country and
significantly increase the power exchange between states and regions of the
country. Technical support for rural feeder segregation will inform Government
efforts to design a centrally sponsored scheme on improved rural power
services. The WBG’s knowledge and advisory work will play a prominent role,
especially technical assistance to strengthen institutional capacity to manage
the planned five-fold increase in infrastructure investments, and improve
service delivery.
Outcome 1.3 Improved demand-driven skills for productive employment
The WBG will contribute to the 12th Plan target of providing vocational
training to 500 million workers by 2022. The ongoing Vocational
Training and Improvement Project—the largest vocational training project
in the world—will continue providing training to post-secondary and
pre-employment–level youth. Assistance for implementing reforms and
development of the technical vocational education and training sector in
West Bengal will continue, with replication expected in other states. The
Technical Education and Quality Improvement Project II (TEQIP-II), is helping the
Government reform a large number of institutions. A multiyear programmatic
analysis of skills will explore new models for PPPs in technical and vocational
education. This work will feed into a multi- sectoral engagement, including IFC,
to help India scale up its work on building skills for the new economy. Analytical
work on financing, equity, quality, and governance in higher education at the
national and state level are also being undertaken. Bank-supported livelihood
projects at the state and national level focus on skills training for rural youth and
connecting young people to jobs, often in small and medium-sized cities. IFC is
partnering with the National Institute of Entrepreneurship and Small Business
Development to develop and deliver a country-wide ‘training of trainers’
program to address the pressing lack of quality trainers. The program will
establish a new standard of excellence for entrepreneurship and business skills

36

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

training by improving skills and knowledge transfer from trainers to MSMEs.
IFC is also working with larger private sector firms to impart business skills to
MSMEs in their supply chain.
Outcome 1.4 Enhanced private investment in low-income states
Enhancing private investment is important for WBG strategy and is
at the center of IFC’s engagement in India’s low-income states. IFC
investments will leverage these states’ strong growth rates, pent-up demand
and natural resource advantages to address their many development
challenges—massive poverty, weak investment climate, low FDI, and
inadequate infrastructure. Low-income states have high economic potential,
which makes them attractive to private sector investors, but often weak
business climate hinder significant levels of private investment. IFC’s advisory
service will help catalyze growth in low-income states by improving investment
climate such as those highlighted in the Doing Business report, PPP regulatory
frameworks and sector-specific policy reform. Two state-level engagements--in
Odisha and Rajasthan--support Government efforts to improve the investment
climate to increase private investment in the states. In terms of investments, IFC
will invest from its own account and mobilization, in areas such as innovative
renewable and green projects, processed food, logistics and infrastructure,
agribusiness, and MSME finance and insurance. Support to the Government
of Meghalaya will help improve access to finance to households, farmers, and
micro and small businesses. Ongoing support to the Government of Bihar
and local tourism investors will improve tourism in the Buddhist Circuit, which
includes major Buddhist sites and pilgrimage destinations in India and Nepal,
and generate increased revenue.

The program will
establish a new
standard of excellence
for entrepreneurship
and business skills
training by improving
skills and knowledge
transfer from trainers
to MSMEs. IFC is also
working with larger
private sector firms to
impart business skills
to MSMEs in their
supply chain.

37

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The WBG will continue
to support regional
trade in power
between India and
Pakistan and India
and Nepal as well
as inland water
transport between
Bangladesh and India.

38

Outcome 1.5 Strengthened regional integration
The WBG will promote regional integration, especially in (i) the integrated
management of natural resources and regional public goods (such as river
basins, ecosystems, and wildlife preserves); (ii) the pooling of power resources;
(iii) trade and transport regional facilitation; and (iv) business dialogue. In
particular, the WBG will continue to support regional trade in power between
India and Pakistan and India and Nepal as well as inland water transport
between Bangladesh and India. Analytical work will underpin dialogue on
critical regional issues. IFC will help facilitate trade between Bangladesh, India
and Nepal by strengthening chambers of commerce and associations of
truckers and freight forwarders and standardize and harmonize procedures
and documentation, introduce risk management, automation, and create
opportunities for regional peer-to-peer exchanges (through the South Asia
Regional Integration in Trade and Investment Project). IFC will promote reforms
to increase intra-regional and global FDI flows, financial infrastructure, trade
finance, and South–South investments by helping to build partnerships
between strong players in emerging economies. The Nepal-India Power
Transmission and Trade Project (financed by IDA and IFC) finances construction
of a cross-border transmission line to increase the trade of electricity between
these two neighboring countries. MIGA may support critical cross-border
infrastructure investments.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Finally, the World Bank Group will focus on facilitating the exchange
of knowledge and experience in a more systematic manner, in the
region and beyond, so that international good-practice examples can inform
India’s development while showcasing India’s development successes to the
rest of the world. The work will involve facilitating knowledge exchanges
(particularly South–South) in which India is increasingly the knowledge
provider. Three regional pieces of analytical work—on overcoming barriers
to trade and cooperation, commodity price transmission, and manufacturing
competitiveness—will be instrumental in sharing knowledge across the
countries in the region. IFC will provide sector-specific knowledge to Indian
companies in sectors such as infrastructure, banking, and microfinance to
help them better understand the opportunities and risks of investing in other
emerging markets.
Domestic market integration is a new area of focus under the CPS, and
will expand to include analytical and technical assistance as well as
financing in three areas: taxation, procurement, and labor markets. The
successful implementation of the long-delayed Goods and Services Tax (GST)
is central to Government efforts to integrate the domestic market. Building on
the implementation of the GST, the WBG is ready to provide policy advice and
facilitate knowledge exchange with countries, such as Brazil, that have been
successful in tackling the same issue. On the fiscal front, the WBG will provide
analytical support and non-lending technical assistance to state governments
and third-tier local governments, especially local urban bodies, to expand
their revenue bases. Labor laws that facilitate the movement of people to jobs,
without discrimination based on location or industry, are important. And, as
workers move across state boundaries and from villages to cities, the portability
of social security benefits (made easier with the introduction of the unique
identification number) will assume great importance. A multiyear study on
growth, inclusion and global competitiveness will address issues related to
the labor market, while parallel programs to support implementation of the
national manufacturing policy and improvements in the business climate will
drill deeper. Ongoing technical assistance to the planning commission on
manufacturing competitiveness will help inform the national manufacturing
policy and underpin possible state-level operations in the future. As the public
sector is a major consumer of goods and services produced in the domestic
economy, reform and standardization of the procurement system at the
national and state levels are key measures to foster domestic market integration
and competition. The World Bank will help develop public procurement
certification courses and procurement-related management information
systems, facilitate networking among public procurement resource institutions,
and engagement with audit institutions to undertake procurement audits.

The WBG will provide
analytical support
and non-lending
technical assistance
to state governments
and third-tier local
governments,
especially local
urban bodies, to
expand their revenue
bases. Labor laws
that facilitate the
movement of people
to jobs, without
discrimination
based on location
or industry, are
important.

39

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Strategic engagement area 2

Transformation

Accomplishing
that acceleration
will require a focus
on both rural and
urban development,
on improving the
livability of cities
and villages, on
creating more jobs
in manufacturing
and more off-farm
jobs in rural India,
and on improving
agricultural
productivity,
especially among
smallholders.

40

The faster a country urbanizes, the faster it grows—and, with the
right policies in place, the faster the same country can reduce poverty and
increase shared prosperity. An acceleration of India’s ongoing transformation
from a largely agrarian economy to one that depends on an ever-expanding
manufacturing sector, and from a predominantly rural to an increasingly urban
population, would significantly boost India’s potential for growth and poverty
reduction. Accomplishing that acceleration will require a focus on both rural
and urban development, on improving the livability of cities and villages, on
creating more jobs in manufacturing and more off-farm jobs in rural India, and
on improving agricultural productivity, especially among smallholders.
Effective, flexible, and accommodating urban planning, land
management, and land-use regulations are essential to addressing
the urbanization challenge. Improving the investment climate to induce
increased private sector investment (from domestic and foreign sources) and
improving access to credit will allow small and medium-size enterprises—an
important growth engine in India—to flourish. This transformation also calls
for further empowering local governing bodies—Panchayat Raj institutions
in rural areas and local urban bodies in cities across India—so that they are
able to identify and respond to local needs and to plan long-term for a more

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

systematic rural-urban transformation. If developed and managed well, cities
in India can be a source of greater efficiencies—resulting in more-efficient use
of natural resources and lower carbon intensity.
By 2031, it is projected that 600 million people will live in India’s cities.
Current and future needs and challenges of India’s cities and their burgeoning
populations, figure prominently in the 12th Plan. Government priorities
include increasing investment in new urban infrastructure (e.g., expanding
the metro rail network and the bus rapid transit system); strengthening urban
governance; strengthening human and organizational capacities; developing
long-term, strategic urban planning capacities; addressing the needs of the
urban poor and improving slums; and raising environmental sustainability.
On urban transport, the Government’s goal is to increase the share of public
transport to at least 50 percent of all motorized trips. Private, and often very
expensive, urban transportation exacts a huge cost on the urban population,
especially the very poor. Universalizing safe drinking water and sanitation
remains a priority, as is ensuring that all Indian cities are free of open
defecation—a contributor to malnutrition, as well as a major public health
risk. The Government strives for 100 percent metering of water supply and
24-7 access where possible and feasible. The Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban
Renewal Mission (JNNURM) remains the main vehicle for the Government’s
urban development and reform. State governments also have their own
urban development plans. The 12th Plan calls for a series of reforms at the
national and state level, as well as interventions to strengthen the institutional
framework.

Universalizing safe
drinking water and
sanitation remains
a priority, as is
ensuring that all
Indian cities are free
of open defecation—a
contributor to
malnutrition, as well
as a major public
health risk.

The Government recognizes the need for an equally strong focus on
agricultural and rural development. Under the 12th Plan, agricultural
productivity is targeted to grow by 4 percent annually, and irrigated areas
are expected to increase from 90 million to 103 million hectares. Income
opportunities in agriculture, which includes horticulture, animal husbandry
and fisheries, are expected to expand, while simultaneously creating more
off-farm employment. Strengthening the implementation of major centrally
sponsored schemes that cover everything from rural employment and social
security to rural sanitation and water supply is central to the Government’s
rural development strategy. Environmental sustainability and the sound
management of natural resources—air, water, forests, and biodiversity—is
rapidly emerging as the next major development and policy challenge for
India, and it is central to the 12th Plan. The Government and organized citizens
recognize that sustaining a high annual growth rate of 8.2 percent under
the 12th Plan and beyond will require placing environmental and resource
management issues front and center in India’s development.
The WBG’s focus on the rural-urban transformation—and particularly
on urbanization—represents a significant shift in its strategy, and
engagement in this area is expected to intensify over the CPS period and
beyond. The strategy will focus on supporting the efforts of national, state,
and city governments to improve the management and livability of secondtier (medium-sized) cities as well as larger metropolises. As 85 percent of
the urban poor live in small and medium-size cities across India, efforts are

41

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The Bank is currently
developing with the
Ministry of Housing
and Urban Poverty
Alleviation an
Informal Settlements
Improvement Project
that will incentivize
in situ upgrading of
slums and thereby
encourage private
investment in
the incremental
improvement of the
existing housing
stock.

42

likely to contribute to the ambitious scenario’s poverty reduction target. The
multi-sectoral engagement will focus on urban management and planning,
infrastructure and service delivery, financing systems and frameworks, and
capacity building at the national, state and city levels. Analytical work to inform
urban sector policy and initiatives will supplement a growing operational
engagement.
Outcome 2.1 Strengthened institutional capacity of urban government
The WBG’s work will focus on (i) strengthening urban management,
infrastructure, and service-delivery systems across the urban hierarchy; (ii)
in situ slum upgrading; and (iii) selective developments in metropolitan
cities. The Bank is currently developing with the Ministry of Housing and
Urban Poverty Alleviation an Informal Settlements Improvement Project that
will incentivize in situ upgrading of slums and thereby encourage private
investment in the incremental improvement of the existing housing stock.
The project will aim to improve basic services (water, sanitation, sewage,
electricity, paving, and street lighting), connect neighborhoods to trunk
infrastructure, and mobilize community support and participation. IFC’s work
on affordable housing—a relatively new focus of its engagement in India—
entails collaborating with regulators, financial institutions, and developers
to explore business models that will enable growth and profitability of the
industry, including supporting governments with the structuring of housing
projects on a PPP basis particularly in low income states.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Supporting PPPs will be central to IFC’s urban work, particularly to address the
solid waste management challenges faced across most cities, as well as to help
government improve its energy efficiency and climate change profiles through
for example improved street lighting systems and increased renewable energy
generation. IFC will explore the use of new technologies to address challenges
in India’s cities through: (i) information technology applications for enhancing
efficiency in the power, water, solid waste, and gas sectors; (ii) e-governance
software for public sector and SMEs; (iii) mobile payment and e-payment
solutions; (iv) smart metering; and (v) e-learning systems and improve digital
inclusion to benefit more people. In the telecom and information technology
sectors, IFC will extend selective support to companies offering solutions
targeted at SMEs, banks, financial companies, and educational institutions.
Lastly, IFC will continue its dialogue with the Government on direct financing
for credit-worthy municipal entities through the WBG sub-national lending
program.19
Outcome 2.2 Improved urban transport services
Public transport in Indian cities is predominantly run by public sector
transport monopolies and suffers from poor service quality, inefficient
operations, deteriorating finances and dramatically declining mode shares.
Supporting the modernization of city bus services including improved fuel
efficiency, rehabilitation of infrastructure, use of new technology initiatives and
technical assistance for greater operational and financial viability, institutional
and capacity development will be a key aspect of the Bank’s urban transport
strategy. The Global Environmental Facility’s Efficient and Sustainable City
Bus Services Project currently under preparation underlies these principles of
improved efficiency.

Supporting the
modernization of
city bus services
including improved
fuel efficiency,
rehabilitation of
infrastructure, use
of new technology
initiatives and
technical assistance
for greater
operational and
financial viability,
institutional and
capacity development
will be a key aspect
of the Bank’s urban
transport strategy.

Outcome 2.3 Improved access to water supply and sanitation services
Making India’s cities more livable will require improvements in
the reliability, financial and environmental sustainability, and
affordability of water supply and sanitation services. Although more
than 90 percent of the urban population has access to drinking water and
more than 60 percent to basic sanitation, piped water is only available for
a few hours per day and raw sewage often overflows into open drains. The
already stressed water supply and sanitation delivery system will have to
be revamped to respond to the urbanization challenge—an additional
250 million people will migrate to cities in the next 20 years. To improve
service delivery, the WBG’s work will focus on strengthening governance
and institutional arrangements for water supply and sanitation services;
piloting service delivery models that are efficient, accountable, and customeroriented (incorporating best practices from well-run public companies);
and improving financial sustainability of providers. A successful 24-7 water
supply pilot will be scaled up in three cities in Karnataka. IFC will help address
efficiency and conservation issues in municipal, agricultural and industrial
water. For example, a new program will focus on water-use efficiency in major
19

Financial capacity of urban local bodies, however, is comparatively very weak, with total revenue amount to less than 1 percent of the GDP (as
compared to 6 percent in South Africa and over 7 percent in Brazil).

43

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The overall emphasis
will be on innovative
approaches
and systems
strengthening.
Strengthening
collective action
(especially
among women) to
facilitate access to
better economic
opportunities, and
key services will
remain a hallmark of
Bank engagement
in India’s rural
development.

water-intensive commodities such as rice, and will also help private sector
partners adopt water efficient technologies. Advisory and implementation
programs plan to support water audits, business systems diagnostics,
footprint assessments, risk filters, cost-effective water technology solutions
and benchmarking with industry good practices. Investment opportunities
in water-saving, harvesting and treatment technologies, service delivery and
improving operational efficiency will be also explored. Lastly, MIGA stands
ready to support investors into municipal services either directly or through
local and foreign financial intermediaries.
Engagement in rural areas will include the Maharashtra Rural Water
Supply and Sanitation Project using the new performance for results
instrument and a multistate Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (RWSS)
project focused on low-income states. In addition to supporting the
decentralization of programs and policies under ongoing RWSS projects, key
strategic shifts under this CPS include: (i) piloting an array of management
models for large or multi-village schemes; (ii) supporting sustainable RWSS
programs by linking Gram Panchayats with higher levels of government and
strengthening the capacity of Panchayati Raj institutions; (iii) integrating water
supply and sanitation interventions into catchment-protection schemes,
household and village environmental sanitation programs, solid waste
management, and health and hygiene awareness promotion; (iv) piloting
the use of PPP models for efficient and accountable service provision, and (v)
institutionalizing and scaling up proven policies and strategies demonstrated
through various Bank-supported projects.
Outcome 2.4 Increased agricultural productivity
The WBG will engage across five operational business lines: (i) inclusive
agricultural and rural growth; (ii) technology development and low-carbon
and climate-resilient agriculture; (iii) food and nutrition security; (iv) agricultural
markets; and (v) water and natural resources management; Engagement will
be underpinned by increasingly deeper and broader analytical work, guided
largely by findings from the on-going India agriculture productivity study. The
overall emphasis will be on innovative approaches and systems strengthening.
Strengthening collective action (especially among women) to facilitate access
to better economic opportunities, and key services will remain a hallmark of
Bank engagement in India’s rural development.
With 65 percent of India’s agriculture relying solely on rainfall,
improving the productivity of country’s rain-fed agriculture remains
a challenge. To this end, the Bank will support the National Integrated
Watershed Management Program in eight states. On irrigated water, the Bank’s
strategy is to focus on increasing agricultural water use efficiency through
support to ongoing implementation of state level efforts in Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. More emphasis will be
placed on strengthening water-related institutions, and building the state and
national capacity for the management of irrigation systems and decentralized
management of irrigation tanks.

44

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Ongoing implementation of state-level agricultural competitiveness
projects in Assam, Rajasthan and Maharashtra are instrumental in
translating increased demand for agriculture products into improved
farmers’ income. A new approach to develop the agriculture value chain
using a PPP mode will be explored as part of the Ministry of Agriculture’s Million
Farmer Initiative. IFC advisory services will work towards promoting sustainable
and inclusive economic growth in the agribusiness sector. To build farmers’
capacity, IFC will prioritize demonstration projects in the value chains of private
sector players in key commodities. IFC supported the government of Punjab
in pioneering the first grain silos infrastructure on a PPP basis and plans to
further support the government’s food security agenda through the scaling up
of the Food Corporation of India’s silos PPP program across eight to ten states.
IFC will also provide patient capital to agribusinesses, strengthen agriculture
products, logistics infrastructure (e.g. warehousing), and promote best practices
in sustainable farming.

A new approach
to develop the
agriculture value
chain using a PPP
mode will be explored
as part of the Ministry
of Agriculture’s
Million Farmer
Initiative.

The WBG will help India develop and disseminate agricultural
technology. New methods of disseminating technology to the farming
community, with a greater emphasis on women, will be explored. This may
require forms of farmer collective action as well as outsourcing of publicly
funded agricultural advisory services to private sector providers. Analytical
work will be undertaken on the likely impact of climate change on India
agriculture. This will support India’s efforts at preparing and implementing
approaches towards achieving greater agriculture resilience towards climate

45

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

On pollution
management, Bank’s
ongoing Ganga Basin
Project will help
build the capacity of
the National Ganga
River Basin Authority
to pilot wastewater
collection and
treatment, and adopt
river conservation
measures.

change (adaptation) as well as towards reducing the carbon growth intensity of
agricultural growth (power consumption and fertilizer use (mitigation)).
Outcome 2.5 Improved environmental protection and biodiversity
conservation
The WBG will focus on developing effective systems and institutions
to enable more efficient environment management and reduction
of resource degradation. This would include interventions in three key
areas: (i) coastal management; (ii) industrial pollution management; and (iii)
natural resources (particularly water), ecosystems and biodiversity. Efforts to
integrate sustainability considerations and lower carbon approaches in project
design across sectors, but especially in infrastructure, will intensify. On coastal
management, the Bank will support the simultaneous economic development
of India’s extensive coast line and preservation of its fragile ecosystems with
pilots in Gujarat, Odisha, and West Bengal. The new coastal disaster risk
reduction project in Puducherry and Tamil Nadu will also pilot improvements to
marine fisheries, particularly in inshore coastal areas. On pollution management,
Bank’s ongoing Ganga Basin Project will help build the capacity of the National
Ganga River Basin Authority to pilot wastewater collection and treatment, and
adopt river conservation measures. The Capacity Building for Industrial Pollution
project is helping deploy technologies and management practices for cleaning
up toxic legacy sites.
Outcome 2.6 Reduced Greenhouse Gas emissions through energy
efficiency and renewable energy production
The WBG will continue to promote low-carbon growth. The Bank will
support Himachal Pradesh’s inclusive green growth strategy through a
series of development policy loans—one of which is expected to be funded
through the Clean Technology Fund. In line with its Climate business strategic
priority, IFC investments will continue to support private companies to move
to lower carbon growth paths through renewable energy, and energy and
resource efficiency In recent years, IFC’s innovative PPP advisory work in
India has supported India’s first solar roof-top project (Gujarat) and the first
street lighting energy efficiency project in the low income states of Rajasthan
and Odisha. IFC has also partnered with financial institutions to expand the
availability of capital for renewable energy and energy financing. Through its
Clean Technology Innovation Fund, IFC will be able to invest in clean-tech
companies, including seed investments in higher risk sectors and locations.
On the advisory front, IFC will help financial institutions to expand their focus
on clean energy financing by promoting improved access to finance for lowincome households, strengthening microfinance networks, and introducing
financial products that enable access to clean energy, water and sanitation
products.
Green cities can also be a source of efficiencies. A series of CTF-funded
projects in India aim to improve energy efficiency of equipment, buildings,
and industry which improve cities. The proposed projects aim to reduce the
growth of emissions from energy consumption in the country. Carbon finance

46

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

operation as well as market-based energy efficiency projects such as the Super
Energy-efficiency Equipment Program (SEEP) support Government efforts
to scale up energy efficient programs. The SEEP will create implementation
structures and undertake a pilot to introduce higher efficiency appliances,
using market-based approaches. The main aim of the project is to reduce
energy consumption associated with the rapidly growing number of consumer
electrical appliances over the next decade. Under SEEP sales-based incentives
for manufacturers to introduce and promote appliances that are 50 percent
more efficient than currently available alternatives will be provided. The initial
focus will be on ceiling fans—the second-largest selling appliance in India, with
annual sales of more than 30 million units, increasing at 6-9 percent per year.
This program will help create the systems and structures that can be used for
other appliances and other applications, promoting private sector-led efficiency
improvements. Based on an ESCO (energy service company) model, IFC’s
municipal level energy efficient street lighting projects in two cities aims to
deepen the market and demonstrate successful models designed city-wide.

The South Asia
Infrastructure
Facility, which
helps governments
design projects that
attract private sector
participation and
investments, will
focus on renewable
energy, as well
as water, health
and agribusiness,
especially in the lowincome and Northeast
states.

IFC’s support for the power sector will be guided by its overall strategic
focus on climate change and GHG emission reductions. To date, IFC
has made its largest number of renewables investments in India, including
“first-of-their-type” investments in companies with limited renewable energy
experience. This will be done by providing them with targeted equity
investments and debt lines, sharing global expertise, developing suitable
E&S standards, and advisory support. Future engagements could support: (i)
innovative clean technology investments with potential for demonstration
impact and/or scaling up; (ii) financial sustainability; (iii) cross-border and SouthSouth investments (potentially partnering with MIGA); (iv) renewable energy,
new business models and new technologies; (v) gas-powered generation; and
(vi) reduction of transmission and distribution losses through efficiency-linked
investments. The South Asia Infrastructure Facility, which helps governments
design projects that attract private sector participation and investments, will
focus on renewable energy, as well as water, health and agribusiness, especially
in the low-income and Northeast states. In the oil and gas sector, IFC will
continue to provide support for the development of: (i) domestic hydrocarbon
resources to help lower the dependence on imports; (ii) gas transmission to
facilitate end-user access to gas; and (iii) capacity enhancement for domestic oil
and gas companies.

47

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Strategic engagement area 3

Inclusion

Economic integration
and rural-urban
transformation can
benefit a large share
of India’s population,
but only if there is
a stronger focus on
human development
and on policies that
help make growth
inclusive.

48

Inclusive growth is a key priority for the Government, as detailed in
the 12th Five-Year Plan. Ensuring that everyone reaps the benefits of faster
growth, regardless of social grouping, age, gender, or place of residence
will require significant improvements in education, health (notably progress
toward universal health coverage), access to water and electrical power, and
the creation of meaningful employment and livelihoods opportunities. The
Government’s 13 large, centrally sponsored schemes for inclusiveness—
covering rural and agricultural development, health and nutrition, education,
power, water, and urban development—will have to be reformed to drastically
improve implementation performance, reduce duplication, create convergence,
and most important, to improve development outcomes. Economic integration
and rural-urban transformation can benefit a large share of India’s population,
but only if there is a stronger focus on human development and on policies
that help make growth inclusive. For example, a growth strategy that focuses
on labor-intensive sectors, rather than on skill- and capital-intensive ones, and
on the development of small and medium-size enterprises will help create
productive employment opportunities for India’s poor people and make growth
more inclusive.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

India’s weak health system and poor nutritional outcomes undermine
its competitiveness. The growing burden of non-communicable diseases
increases disability among the working-age population; malnutrition reduces
lifetime productivity; unmanaged health care costs displace more-productive
investments by the state and by households; and high fertility rates keep
women out of the workforce. The main health-related target of the 12th
Five-Year Plan is greatly reduced rates of maternal and child mortality. Other
necessary changes include improving delivery systems by strengthening
accountability, providing regulation and oversight of private providers of health
care, and ensuring insurance coverage for more people, especially the very
poor.
Outcome 3.1 Improved access to electricity
Despite increasing dependency on commercial fuels, more than 60
percent of Indian households depend on traditional sources of energy—
fuel wood, crop residue, biomass, and animal waste. Providing modern energy
services for lighting and cooking is thus widely recognized as an important
step to ensure energy access, especially in the rural areas. Existing activities will
support replicable and sustainable business models for off-grid generation and
supply models in lagging states. The ongoing India Power Sector Diagnostic
will review progress on access to power over the last decade, including an
assessment of why household electrification lags behind village electrification,
and the implementation and financial barriers to executing rural-electrification
projects. The study will also provide a detailed examination of the consumption
subsidies given to India’s domestic consumers (who represent 25 percent of
total electricity consumption) through tariffs, and focus on subsidy targeting
and cost (in terms of fiscal burden). The potential for state-level engagements
in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar to develop business models of generation that
connect very poor areas to off-grid power will be explored. IFC is undertaking
a partnership with the governments of US and Italy, the Lighting Asia’s India
program, which was launched in February 2012. This program is expected to
provide safe, clean and affordable off-grid lighting to two million people in rural
India by December 2015. IFC is also supporting SEWA to promote usage of solar
lanterns and energy efficient cook stoves; these are key livelihood tools for rural
households and increase their productivity in their occupations, in addition to
mitigating climate change.

Providing modern
energy services for
lighting and cooking
is widely recognized
as an important step
to ensure energy
access, especially
in the rural areas.
Existing activities will
support replicable
and sustainable
business models for
off-grid generation
and supply models
in lagging states. The
ongoing India Power
Sector Diagnostic
will review progress
on access to power
over the last decade,
including assess
why household
electrification lags
behind village
electrification, and
the implementation
and financial barriers
to executing ruralelectrification
projects.

Outcome 3.2 Strengthened public and private health-delivery systems
A larger share of interventions in the health sector will be at the
state level and focus on strengthening institutions and accountability,
developing local systems and capacities, and addressing government and
market failures. The ongoing Uttar Pradesh Health System Project aims to
strengthen planning, human resource management, monitoring, supply
chain management, quality enhancement, and asset management to enable
better service delivery for the entire population of Uttar Pradesh—one of
the poorest states in the country. The project demonstrates the potential for
Bank support to raise the impact of public and private health expenditures

49

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The objective of
WBG engagement
is to address issues
constraining the
development of
accessible and
affordable health
care facilities,
including access to
capital for healthcare
organizations, limited
tertiary healthcare
facilities outside of
Tier I cities, a shortage
of human resources
with healthcare skills,
lesser access and
awareness about
medical insurance,
limited adoption of
quality programs and
standard protocols.

50

and defines a strategy for future state-level lending. A joint IFC-Bank initiative
(Health in India, box 6.1) will focus on improving poor people’s access to
quality health care and reducing out-of-pocket expenditures in two lowincome states. IFC is pursuing both investment and advisory projects in the
health-care industry, with investments supporting the expansion of private
hospital chains in the country. It focuses on niche areas such as medical
instruments and devices, vaccines, biotechnology products, and
generic drugs.
The objective of WBG engagement is to address issues constraining the
development of accessible and affordable health care facilities, including access
to capital for healthcare organizations, limited tertiary healthcare facilities
outside of Tier I cities, a shortage of human resources with healthcare skills,
lesser access and awareness about medical insurance, limited adoption of
quality programs and standard protocols. An innovative IFC advisory project in
Bihar is supporting automation of Government-to-Person payments to enhance
efficiency of health workers and doctors by 10-15 percent. Once implemented,
the project could be replicated across India. IFC is also assisting states to plan
and prioritize state-wide programmatic initiatives through PPPs in the health
sector, particularly in the areas of payment insurance, health networks by
clubbing primary, secondary and tertiary services, and diagnostic platforms for
state-wide roll out.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Box 6.1.
Health in India
The WBG is working to increase poor people’s access to high-quality health care and to reduce out-of-pocket expenditures in two
low-income states. This effort, which exemplifies the approach recently adopted by the joint IFC–World Bank management team,
recognizes the critical role that the private sector plays in health care in India. While the joint engagement began with exploring
opportunities to work together, it has since evolved into a more systematic approach that is identified upfront, planned and
sequenced over a period of time, drawing on respective advantages of each institution, with clear expected results. Examples of
current engagement include supporting the state of Meghalaya in implementing a health insurance scheme. The states selected
for further action will be low-income states in which the World Bank Group is already engaged.
The building blocks for influencing health outcomes include: service delivery; financing; governance; medical products and
technologies; the health workforce; and information systems and analytics. Working with the public and private sectors, the
intermediate outcomes of Health in India focus on improving access, affordability, equity, and quality, with the overall goal of
improving health-related outcomes.
The program’s joint business plan identifies priorities based on a three-dimensional framework: impact, feasibility, and expected
timelines. Its scope is driven by client delivery capacity and resources. The strengths of each institution have been clearly
identified and a list of proposed joint and complementary interventions drawn up, with appropriate time horizons and results
indicators (e.g., two pilot PPP transactions, accreditation of ten public and five private hospitals, reductions in out-of-pocket
expenditures by income and caste levels, and so on).

Outcome 3.3 Improved child nutrition delivery systems
The Bank will—through lending, analytical work and technical
assistance—support the national government and states in
strengthening the nutrition policy framework as well as systems and
capacities to improve nutrition. Although restructuring and strengthening
the ICDS will be a prime focus, Bank efforts will also include support for
multisectoral nutrition actions, both through Government programs and
through Bank operations in different sectors. Examples include the Bank’s
ongoing support for the National Rural Drinking Water Program and a series of
state-level rural water supply and sanitation projects, including a new operation
in low-income states. Improved provision of drinkable water and particularly
sanitation in rural (as well as urban) areas is likely to have a large impact on
health and nutrition. The Bank-supported National Rural Livelihoods Mission
aims to contribute to India’s efforts to combat high rates of malnutrition by
setting up a network of nutrition centers that cater to pregnant women and
children up to five years of age and by ensuring that households get access to
food.

The Bank-supported
National Rural
Livelihoods Mission
aims to contribute
to India’s efforts to
combat high rates
of malnutrition by
setting up a network
of nutrition centers
that cater to pregnant
women and children
up to five years of age
and by ensuring that
households get access
to food.

Outcome 3.4 Improved access and quality of education
The Bank will support Government efforts to improve education
mainly at the secondary and tertiary levels, with a more pronounced
focus on quality. Lessons learned from the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan Educationfor-All Program will inform this engagement. At the secondary level, the
implementation of the Rastriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan will support
Government efforts to universalize secondary education by 2017. With financial
and managerial contributions, the Bank will help expand access to, and
strengthen delivery systems for, quality secondary education, with an eye to

51

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

A final round of
support to the
Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan program
from the Bank and
its development
partners will help
improve educational
quality and student
learning outcomes
at the primary level,
incorporating greater
involvement of the
private sector.

improving on labor-market entry for young adults. Greater attention will be paid
to teacher training, performance, and accountability—a prime determinant
of quality. Using new ICT technologies, the Bihar Teacher Education Project
will help pilot innovative approaches to teacher education and professional
development. A final round of support to the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan program
from the Bank and its development partners will help improve educational
quality and student learning outcomes at the primary level, incorporating
greater involvement of the private sector. IFC’s education sector strategy
supports the “skills for competitiveness” agenda, especially education projects
with strategic clients—predominantly larger, for-profit providers with potential
to grow and operate in several markets move down-market to reach lowerincome households, create centers of excellence, and provide employment
opportunities for skilled professionals. One of the innovations supported by IFC
to open up new markets for the private sector is the implementation of PPPs
for a medical college—500 bed teaching and 100 seat medical—in Meghalaya
which also has a large replication potential.
Outcome 3.5 Increased coverage of social protection programs
More than 90 percent of the labor force is in the informal sector,
with inadequate mechanisms to absorb and manage economic risks
and shocks. The Bank will work to enhance social protection coverage for
this population, including for health and disability insurance, job transition
insurance, and protection in old age. Because many programs do not reach all
of their intended beneficiaries, with significant variation, particularly in lowincome states, the Bank will work with states to expand coverage. Increased use

52

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Box 6.2.
Addressing gender issues
Various social and economic indicators in India show significant and persistent gender inequalities. Beginning with the child sex
ratio and progressing through secondary schooling, labor market participation, marriage, fertility and maternal mortality, Indian
women and girls fare considerably worse than men and boys. The recent brutal gang rape and death of a 23 year old student in
Delhi has raised international attention to the pervasive and extreme nature of gender-based violence in India.
The Bank Group continues to address gender issues across its lending, investment and knowledge activities. The National Rural
Livelihoods Project mostly targets women, and gender has been included in work on suburban transport, adaptation to climate
change, employment, and health. The design of the Coastal Zone Management project, for example, was informed by an analysis
of the issues faced by women and men in fishing communities and other coastal dwellers. Knowledge work included a study
on social exclusion, which examined the unique disadvantages faced by tribal and scheduled caste women. Work on gender
inequalities in labor outcomes, and access to and use of infrastructure and services is also ongoing. The Bank will also strengthen
its gender-based M&E. IFC’s support to microfinance institutions predominantly benefits women, who account for 90 percent
of borrowers. IFC’s work on Government-to-Person (G2P) payment projects improve women’s access to healthcare services and
individualized payment services through direct money transfers to their accounts. IFC’s support to the SEWA Bank – owned and
operated by women for the welfare of self-employed women—enabled it to expand its operations and new products. IFC also
aims to work with private sector banks to develop and launch financial schemes targeting women owned businesses. The World
Bank Group is adding new gender initiatives to its operations, including in the micro, small and medium enterprise sector.
But much more can be done by the Bank to engender its investments and empower women economically, socially, and in
government. Under this CPS, more emphasis will be placed on two “inclusion” priorities: (i) reducing gender disparities in labor
force outcomes; and ii) strengthening women’s leadership in local government. On female labor force participation much of the
focus will be on skills development and higher education. Issues related to gender-based violence will be addressed through
regional work as well as through collaboration with development partners who have extensive experience and knowledge
in this area. The Bank will expand its analytical work on gender equality, most importantly by preparing the India Economic
Development Report (InGender) in FY2013, as a follow on to the 2012 World Development Report on Gender Equality and
Development. Findings from this gender analysis will be instrumental in strengthening the Bank’s work on gender issues during
this CPS and beyond and will support the Government of India’s National Mission for the Empowerment of Women in its analysis
of the gender impacts of government programs.

of ICTs in program delivery and management will form a cornerstone of this
work, together with capacity building and enhancement of human resources
at local levels. An example of this approach is the Bihar Integrated Social
Protection Project, which aims to modernize service standards and operational
processes in order to deliver better services to more people, while also reducing
duplication, encouraging the development of harmonized procedures, and
introducing transparency. Ongoing NLTA supports the Government’s efforts
to covert many in-kind subsidies and support programs to cash assistance
through it new Direct Benefits Transfer initiative.
Outcome 3.6 Enhanced rural-livelihood opportunities
To accelerate India’s efforts toward inclusive rural growth, the Bank will assist
national and state authorities in implementing rural-livelihood projects
across 16 states under the National Rural Livelihood Project (NRLP) as well
as ongoing state projects in Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
and four Northeastern states. NRLP and state-level interventions (with some
variation across states) entail a three-pronged approach: (i) improving existing
livelihoods (working with farmers to help them diversify products, lower cost
of production, and identify stable markets for their goods); (ii) identifying selfemployment opportunities and providing both access to credit and technical
assistance for business development; and (iii) developing skills that are better

To accelerate India’s
efforts toward
inclusive rural
growth, the Bank will
assist national and
state authorities in
implementing rurallivelihood projects
across 16 states
under the National
Rural Livelihood
Project (NRLP) as
well as ongoing state
projects in Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Tamil
Nadu, and four
Northeastern states.

53

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The Bank will
help microfinance
institutions integrate
responsible
microfinance
principles into their
work and develop
new financial
products for the
poor such as micropensions and microhealth insurance.

54

matched to the needs of the market. Women are the main beneficiaries of the
projects, a good example of the WBG’s emphasis on gender in India (box 6.2).
Livelihoods will continue to be a main source of off-farm job creation in rural
India.
Outcome 3.7 Increased access to financial services
The WBG will promote integrated approaches to financial inclusion
by facilitating access to credit and other financial services to farmers
and households. Two ongoing lending operations (rural credit coops and
scaling up of sustainable and responsible microfinance) and two planned
operations (low-income housing finance and agriculture insurance) will
be central to the Bank’s response in this area. The low-income housing
finance project will provide informal housing finance for people without
documented income and property rights, while the agricultural insurance
project will ensure that a greater number of farmers have crop insurance. The
Bank will help microfinance institutions integrate responsible microfinance
principles into their work and develop new financial products for the poor
such as micro-pensions and micro-health insurance. The rural livelihood
programs described in the previous paragraph will continue their focus
on expanding poor households’ access investment and savings. IFC’s key
objective will be to improve the depth and quality of financial services
through: (i) financial product diversification; (ii) responsible finance i.e.
promoting financial awareness among clients and transparent reporting
by financial institutions; and (iii) supporting delivery channels using new
technology and agents. New approaches to delivery of financial services will

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

be key in coming years to expand the last mile reach. IFC has already begun
work in this regard with Government-to-Person payments and will continue
to work on innovation in payments systems, alternative delivery channels,
remittances, and government payments.
Outcome 3.8 Enhanced disaster-risk management system
The Bank’s work in this area has two strands: (i) helping build institutional
capacity to prepare for and manage the impact of natural disasters and (ii)
helping people protect themselves from natural disasters and recover quickly
from them. The National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project helps strengthen
the capacity of state disaster-management agencies to mitigate the impact
of and respond to cyclones in vulnerable coastal states. The second phase
of the project will focus on Gujarat, Kerala, Maharashtra, and West Bengal.
Technical assistance helps build Government capacity to conduct risk
assessments for geophysical hazards and vulnerabilities, establish building
and planning standards, and pilot innovative approaches to risk mitigation.
To mitigate risks of and vulnerability to natural disasters, especially in coastal
areas, the Bank focuses on access to emergency shelter and on evacuation
and protection against wind storms, flooding, and storm surges in high-risk
areas.

The National Cyclone
Risk Mitigation
Project helps
strengthen the
capacity of state
disaster-management
agencies to mitigate
the impact of and
respond to cyclones
in vulnerable coastal
states.

55

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

7. Implementing the WBG
Country Partnership Strategy
Guiding principles of engagement
In addition to India’s 12th Five-Year Plan, the World Bank’s engagement
is guided by the Government’s “Innovation Impulse with Investment”
approach, which lays out the Government’s vision of how best to use the
financing and expertise of multilateral institutions to address India’s development
challenges. Support should be focused on projects that transform and modernize
policies and institutions, leverage resources, and pilot new and innovative
development approaches. Special emphasis will be placed on multi-sectoral
projects and programs, as well as on creating synergies with existing Government
programs across sectors. Although access to financing remains important to
India’s development, the services that come with that financing are particularly
valued. Those services include the transfer of knowledge and international good
practices, guidance on reforming processes and systems, and the building of
capacity for improved service delivery. These principles will be applied jointly by the
Government and the World Bank to manage the program described in this CPS.

56

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The Government’s approach to working with multilaterals calls for
a rebalancing of the World Bank portfolio toward more state-level
activities, particularly in low-income and special category states (table
7.1). Overall, the aim of that rebalancing will be to raise the share of the Bank’s
commitments devoted to direct financing of state projects to 60 percent, of
which half (30 percent of total lending) will go to low-income and special
category states. Under the previous CAS, 18 percent of the Bank’s total lending
went to these states.20 Under this CPS, the approach for engaging low-income
and special category states will build on lessons learned from successes and
failures over the last four years. Initial engagement will include holding highlevel multi-sectoral discussions at the state level, together with the IFC, to
identify synergies among programs and the mix of instruments that best suits
the particular circumstances of each state. Specific activities will build on the
successful approach already adopted in Bihar, which combines extensive
capacity building, technical assistance, and analytical work that underpins
lending operations. Past experience also shows the relevance of local knowledge,
particularly in the context of state-level political economy.
IFC is also intensifying its program in low-incomes states. Its strategy aims
to ensure that people at the “base of the pyramid” gain greater access to finance,
infrastructure, and markets, while working to formalize the private sector in
these states. IFC is in the process of expanding its program in Bihar, Odisha, and
Rajasthan by increasing investments and improving business-climate reforms
(with a special emphasis on small and medium-size enterprises), enhancing
certainty and transparency, and reducing business risks. Twenty-two percent of all
investments and 31 percent of all projects in India were in LISs in FY2009-13YTD.
The share of IFC advisory services in LISs tripled from 21 percent in FY2009 to 66
percent as of February FY2013. Currently, 44 out of 66 advisory projects in India
involve at least one low-income state. By the end of this CPS period, IFC aims
to invest approximately $2.3 billion, and facilitate another $1.4 billion in private
investment in low-income states.

The approach for
engaging low-income
and special category
states will build
on lessons learned
from successes and
failures over the last
four years. Initial
engagement will
include holding
high-level multisectoral discussions
at the state level,
together with the IFC,
to identify synergies
among programs
and the mix of
instruments that best
suits the particular
circumstances of
each state. Past
experience also
shows the relevance
of local knowledge,
particularly in the
context of state-level
political economy.

Table 7.1.
Low-income and special category states (US$)
Low-income States
Population
(mn)
Bihar

Special Category States

% Poor

GSDP per
capita

103.8

53.5

294 Assam

Chhattisgarh

25.5

48.7

695 Himachal Pradesh

Jharkhand

33.0

39.1

589 Manipur

Madhya Pradesh

72.6

36.7

Odisha

41.9

Rajasthan

68.6

Uttar Pradesh
Total

Population
(mn)
31.2

% Poor

GSDP per
capita

37.9

536

6.9

9.5

1,267

2.7

47.1

569

555 Meghalaya

3.0

17.1

866

37.0

676 Mizoram

1.1

21.1

883

24.8

666 Sikkim

0.6

13.1

1,715

199.6

37.7

436 Uttarakhand

10.1

18.0

1,233

545.1

39.5

494 Total

55.5

29.5

792

Notes: GSDP PC has been converted from INR to USD using the period average exchange rate. Total for population weighted average of the group. Total % of
poor is the HCR for the group. Special category states are mostly northern mountainous states, sparsely populated, and those with high transport costs leading to
high delivery cost of public services. (as defined in the 13th Finance Commission). IFC also includes West Bengal, but excludes Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand.
Sources: Census 2011, Planning Commission, poverty figures 2009-10, CSO GSDP, 2010-11, MF-IFS exchange rate

20

Low-income states and special category states also benefit from IDA/IBRD support to multistate projects and centrally sponsored schemes.

57

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Sharing knowledge
and international
good practices
can help leverage
public financing by
improving design,
implementation,
and monitoring on
a national scale.
The core concept
in World Bank
support for centrally
sponsored schemes
will be to support
the Government
in scaling up
successful state-level
interventions into
national programs.

Lending to more advanced states will predominantly focus on activities
that are innovative and transformative. Projects in more advanced
states can test second-generation approaches, which then can be applied
to low-income states that often have limited capacity. For example, the pilot
Beneficiary Verification System for health services, which produces timely
data, is serving more than 3,000 beneficiaries in Karnataka and may now be
replicated in the low-income state of Uttar Pradesh. IFC, having led many
innovative renewable-energy investments in India, will promote the replication
of its solar rooftop pilot in Gandhinagar in five additional cities in Gujarat and
develop solar policy recommendations to engage other state governments.
Support for centrally sponsored schemes and national projects will
focus on capacity and institution building. Sharing knowledge and
international good practices can help leverage public financing by improving
design, implementation, and monitoring on a national scale. The core concept
in World Bank support for centrally sponsored schemes will be to support the
Government in scaling up successful state-level interventions into national
programs. The World Bank has played an important role in such efforts; in the
process, it has learned that success is not always guaranteed. Support for the
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan Education-for-All Program, for example, has shown
that successful scaling-up requires significant upfront inputs into improving
management and fiduciary systems, building national institutions, careful
supervision, and adjustments along the way. Increasingly, projects will focus
on helping states implement programs supported by central schemes. The
complex challenges of bringing development solutions to national scale in a
large and diverse country like India require a learning partnership.
Given the size, diversity and magnitude of India’s development
challenges, selectivity principles are central to World Bank Group
engagement under this CPS. Selectivity in the India context is primarily
about the “where” and “how” of WBG engagement, the former guided by the
Government’s “Innovation Impulse with Investment” approach and the latter
by management and staff’s understanding that better collaboration across the
WBG and sectors is likely to result in improved development outcomes. Unlike
previous CAS periods, country-led selectivity principles are being applied
more systematically upstream by Government, and internally by the India
management team. Such a concerted effort is needed to intensify engagement
in low- income and special category states. Selectivity principles will also be
applied to IFC’s engagement in low-income states. IFC will aim to support
projects/programs that offer scope for scalability. For example, alongside a
growing number of business and development partners, IFC is supporting
inclusive business models to expand access to goods, services, and livelihood
opportunities for those at the “base of the pyramid” in commercially viable and
scalable ways. Such models have huge potential for scale up, and contribute to
the goals of reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity.

58

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Lessons from country strategy 2009-12
The FY2009–12 CAS Completion Report (CASCR) drew implications and
highlighted recommendations for this CPS21. First, India’s complex and dynamic
development environment demands a full and integrated toolkit of the WBG’s
analytic, advisory, convening, and financial instruments. There is ample scope
for proactive management of knowledge work, including project-embedded
knowledge and impact evaluations, to ensure continuous innovation and
learning and to fully integrate and build positive interactions between
knowledge products and financing. This includes not only bringing global
best practices to India, but pollinating Indian expertise through South–South
knowledge exchange.
Second, the synergy between state and national interventions can make
significant contributions to enhanced leverage and enhance the impact
of Bank-supported activities. For example, experience gained at the state
level (e.g., in programs in education and rural livelihoods) can provide valuable
design inputs, increasing the relevance of national schemes to varying state
circumstances while helping to strengthen management systems at both the
state and national levels. However, the CASCR also found that direct lending to
low-income and special category states requires long-term support for capacity
and institution building and underscores the importance of local knowledge
as well as analytic and advisory support. Moreover, replicating successful state
projects at the national level is more than just scaling up: Upgrading or creating
new institutions and fiduciary systems at the national level takes time as well as
willingness to learn and adapt.

The FY2009-12 CAS
Completion Report
found that direct
lending to low-income
and special category
states requires
long-term support
for capacity and
institution building
and underscores the
importance of local
knowledge as well
as analytical and
advisory support.

Third, the CASCR identified two collaboration challenges that must be
addressed in the CPS. First, although the need for multi-sector approaches
is increasingly important if the WBG is to help India make inroads into key
challenges (e.g., urban, nutrition, water resources), multi-sector activities
fell short under the FY2009–12 CAS. Second, despite recent improvements,
collaboration between IBRD, IDA, IFC, and MIGA will have to be deepened if
the potential impact of WBG efforts is to be fully realized. Such collaboration
can yield most when all components of the WBG pursue common strategic
objectives (e.g., a joint approach in a low-income state or on a particular
issue, such as increased investment in climate-change adaptation). Effective
collaboration should reflect each institution’s relative operational strengths,
thereby producing a result greater than what each institution could achieve
independently. PPPs are one area in which experience under the FY2009–12
CAS demonstrated clearly differing institutional strengths, with IFC’s transaction
and business climate experience complementing the policy orientation of
the World Bank. Given India’s own extensive experience with PPPs, this is a
promising area for enhanced collaboration.

21

The full FY2009-12 CAS Completion Report is available online at: www.worldbank.org/en/country/india.

59

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The current IBRD/IDA
portfolio includes
net commitments of
$23.7 billion across 78
projects. At the end
of January 2013, IFC’s
committed portfolio
contained 219
projects amounting
to $4.8 billion,
including $564
million syndications.
MIGA has no
existing exposure
in India, but may
support investments
into critical areas
during the CPS
period through the
provision of credit
enhancement.

Current WBG portfolio
The CPS builds on a large current portfolio, which will be the main
source of development results under this CPS. The current IBRD/IDA
portfolio includes net commitments of $23.7 billion across 78 projects. Of that
amount, $16.7 billion is undisbursed, reflecting a relatively young portfolio
(38 percent of the total undisbursed amount is for projects approved by the
Board in the last two years). At the end of January 2013, IFC’s committed
portfolio contained 219 projects amounting to $4.8 billion, including $564
million syndications. MIGA has no existing exposure in India, but may support
investments into critical areas during the CPS period through the provision
of credit enhancement. Portfolio performance has varied. The growth of
the portfolio in recent years is reflected in the portfolio performance as
measured by standard metrics. The average portfolio age has gone down
with the attendant impact on the portfolio disbursement ratio. The IDA/IBRD
disbursement ratio22 dropped in FY2012 to 13 percent after peaking at 27.6
percent in FY2010, reflecting the retirement of well-disbursing projects and
the inclusion of new projects into the portfolio. Disbursements are generally
expected to be low in the first two years, while project implementation is being
launched. At the same time—and in some cases—the World Bank may have
underestimated the implementation challenges of large national and multistate projects.
Lessons from implementation show that starting with smaller initial
commitments to each program might be better. Experience also suggests
the wisdom of taking earlier action to readjust, restructure, “right-size,” or cancel
operations that are not performing well. Teams must be realistic, and willing to
change course early on in project implementation.
During the last CAS period, IFC delivered a strong program. During
FY2009–12, IFC committed $4.5 billion in total financing (including its own
account and mobilized funds), with nearly 34 percent supporting infrastructure.
Through end February 2013, IFC has committed $822 million in total financing.
Thirty-four percent of IFC’s own account commitments were in equity and
63 percent were in loans. IFC’s India portfolio is performing well. Investments
in low-income states have grown from $60 million in FY2009 to $265 million
in FY13 as of end of February 2013, an increase of 342 percent. The advisory
portfolio has grown from $30 million over 42 projects in FY2009 to $55 million
in 66 projects by end February 2013.
The World Bank and the Government of India are working together to
improve portfolio management. To address the recent decline in portfolio
performance parameters and accelerate implementation, the Government
of India and the World Bank have identified major bottlenecks and are
working with project authorities to remove them. Sector- and state-specific
portfolio reviews, undertaken in cooperation with relevant line ministries, as
well as reviews of risky and slow-disbursing projects, are held regularly, with
time-bound action plans, agreed disbursement targets, and close follow up.
Project restructurings are being carried out more frequently, with around 30

22

60

The ratio of the amount of disbursements in a given fiscal year to the undisbursed balance at the beginning of the fiscal year.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

restructurings, including partial cancellations, completed in FY2012 alone.
Discussions are ongoing to “right-size” a few national level operations. New
projects are being subjected to more-rigorous readiness criteria by the World
Bank and the Government to ensure improved implementation. In the short
term, these measures have meant that new lending has dropped to allow
teams to focus on making the existing portfolio perform better. Continued
proactive portfolio management will be needed to turn the performance of the
portfolio around.
A focus on governance and public financial management will also
help improve the design and implementation of Bank-supported
projects. Under the CPS, efforts will be made to integrate India’s public
financial management systems and accountability mechanisms (budgeting,
accounting, public expenditure management, external auditing, corporate
governance, right to information, and redressal of citizens’ grievances) and
tools (social audits, e-project management, and e-monitoring) into Bank
operations. The Bank’s technical support will aim to strengthen programlevel budgeting and implementation of a new chart of accounts to improve
linkages between spending and performance. The Bank will also help
strengthen and scale up the government’s Central Plan Scheme Monitoring
System (CPSMS), monitoring of central plan funds by enabling real-time
tracking of expenditures. Procurement and financial management capacity
building components in WBG-financed projects will aim to strengthen and
mainstream country systems. Governance and accountability action plans—
required for all Bank operations in India—will continue to help mitigate
fiduciary risks while promoting institutional effectiveness for better service
delivery.

Under the CPS,
efforts will be made
to integrate India’s
public financial
management systems
and accountability
mechanisms
(budgeting,
accounting, public
expenditure
management,
external auditing,
corporate
governance, right
to information,
and redressal of
citizens’ grievances)
and tools (social
audits, e-project
management, and
e-monitoring) into
Bank operations.

The knowledge portfolio will complement and underpin lending
operations, especially in low-income and special category states, and
in relatively new areas of engagement. In a country as sophisticated
and diverse as India, there is no dearth of knowledge providers. The WBG’s
value lies in its ability to focus on long-term, complex, multisectoral issues;
to bring together experience from across the world; and engage deeply in
policy, program, and project implementation. Its knowledge is conveyed
through analytical and advisory services, impact evaluations, and research
and embedded in operations and lending. The World Bank Group also acts as
a convener, bringing together Indian and foreign policymakers on key policy
issues, such as clean energy, job creation, and informality, and facilitating
exchanges of South-South knowledge. The Bank and the Indian Government
regularly review the knowledge portfolio to maximize the strategic relevance
and timeliness of knowledge products.
The World Bank Group’s knowledge agenda for FY2013–17 will be guided by
(i) focusing in-depth analytical work on a few key cross-sectoral questions
(e.g., growth and inclusion, energy, and urbanization), carried out in
partnership with local and international institutions; (ii) informing design and
implementation of future interventions by drawing on impact evaluations
(e.g., on rural livelihood programs); (iii) responding quickly and flexibly with
demand-driven technical assistance and just-in-time knowledge support to
help reform and implementation; (iv) brokering South-South and across-state

61

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The end goal is to
deliver an integrated
package of support,
especially to lowincome and special
category states
that combines
financing instruments
knowledge and
advisory services
best suited to the
development needs
of the each state,
while building on
the comparative
advantage of both the
World Bank and IFC.

knowledge exchanges; (v) developing flexible programmatic approaches
to develop analytic and advisory activities; and (vi) scaling up training
capacity. Under the CPS, dissemination of knowledge across government and
nongovernment stakeholders will be enhanced.
At the heart of the World Bank Group knowledge agenda will be a series of
stand-alone analytical products that aim to inform public debate around key
reforms critical to India’s continued high economic growth, poverty reduction
and increased prosperity. Topics for such work will be identified over time,
although work on PPPs, nutrition and acceleration poverty reduction and
shared prosperity is likely to commence at the beginning of the CPS period.
Efforts will also be made to link country-specific work to regional flagship
reports in areas that support the CPS. The regional flagship on jobs (FY12)
would support economic integration, upcoming flagship on inequality (FY14)
will likely feed into work that is relevant to the inclusion engagement area,
and finally the regional flagship on urbanization (FY15) could inform countryspecific analytical work on India’s rural-urban transformation.

Collaboration and partnerships
Exploiting “synergies by design” versus “synergies by chance” will
enhance the development impact of the WBG’s program. Experience
during the previous CAS period has shown that effective and planned
collaboration between the World Bank and IFC is possible in India. A notable
example of this is the joint financing of the $270 million loan/investment for
the PowerGrid Corporation of India, which supports PowerGrid’s access to
international commercial banking markets and leverages the IBRD’s 18-year
partnership. Collaborative work is also underway in the health sector in two
low-income states (see box 6.2). Under this CPS, collaboration will increase
significantly through closer interactions at all staff levels and across all relevant
sectors. As a first step, sessions on operationalizing the CPS across the three
engagement areas, as well as in focus low-income and special category states
will be organized. Using the model developed for expanded engagement in
Uttar Pradesh—one of India’s poorest states—efforts will be made to identify
synergies early in the project identification and preparation process, so that
collaboration is better planned. The end goal is to deliver an integrated package
of support, especially to low-income and special category states that combines
financing instruments knowledge and advisory services best suited to the
development needs of the each state, while building on the comparative
advantage of both the World Bank and IFC. The proposed state-level
infrastructure program—identified as one of the five programs for increased
collaboration—will focus on expanding infrastructure in two states.
In addition to increased collaboration in focus states, two areas are likely to
benefit from the “synergies by design” approach: investment climate and
public-private partnerships. The World Bank and IFC will work together to help
the Government to improve the investment climate, where joint economic
and sector work could be pursued. Similarly, on PPPs, where the World Bank
(through its economic and sector work and technical assistance) and IFC
(through its advisory services) could help government and quasi-governmental

62

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

agencies carry out regulatory reforms in sectors where IFC’s investments
(and possibly MIGA credit enhancement) could significantly boost private
participation. Opportunities for increased collaboration with MIGA, the World
Bank Institute, and the Water and Sanitation Program will also be explored.
The WBG will continue to work in partnership with many bilateral
and multilateral donors to help India address its most-pressing
development challenges. Partnerships take many forms, including the
pooling of financial resources, knowledge creation and dissemination, capacity
building, and support for the supervision and implementation of Bank
operations. Opportunities to take further advantage of synergies between
the Bank Group and other development partners will be pursued in areas
of mutual interest, such as regional integration, infrastructure financing,
climate change, and governance. Several Bank operations are co-funded by
external donors: Primary and secondary education projects have benefited
from co-financing from the U.K. Department for International Development.
The Japan International Cooperation Agency has supported the Dedicated
Freight Corridor Project and urban development in Karnataka and Tamil
Nadu. For the Asian Development Bank, the Government of India follows an
essentially geographic approach to come to a division of labor. The objective is
to maximize the support from both major MDBs across a range of sectors but
minimize transaction costs at State level. This approach has worked well and
given both institutions’ capital limitations, it is really the only viable choice for
now. Portfolio reviews of lending and AAA benefit from ADB participation.

Opportunities to take
further advantage of
synergies between
the Bank Group and
other development
partners will be
pursued in areas
of mutual interest,
such as regional
integration,
infrastructure
financing, climate
change, and
governance.

The WBG India program has benefited from trust funds. Trust funds
focusing on global partnerships and public goods have supported many
activities in India, most prominently in health. The Global Fund for AIDS,
Tuberculosis, and Malaria has disbursed almost $800 million in India since
its inception in 2003. Two donor trust funds—from DFID and AusAid—have
supported analytical work and capacity building efforts. In 2009, DFID renewed
its support, with a contribution of £20 million, increasing that by £6.5 million
in 2012. Funding has helped leverage the World Bank’s support to improve
service delivery, address climate change, and promote inclusive growth and
governance in low-income states such as Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,
and Odisha. AusAid is providing $3.4 million through its South Asia Region
Infrastructure for Growth trust fund to support project preparation. Sixty
percent of IFC’s advisory program in India is supported by donor trust funds.
The US Department of State and Government of Italy contributed a total of $4
million to the “Lighting Asia India Program. The Netherlands and Japan are other
major donors. In an effort to diversify funding sources, IFC advisory is working to
engage with new partners such as the Gates Foundation on improving health
services and promoting financial inclusion in Bihar.

63

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

8. Financing the strategy
Financial support for this CPS should be commensurate with the scale
of the challenge of helping India to accelerate poverty reduction and
boost prosperity. Although the World Bank Group’s contribution to the
government’s overall development is small, the government’s “Innovation
Impulse with Investment” approach means that World Bank Group’s
involvement can be catalytic and transformative when financing is combined
with knowledge and experience. Supporting the government’s objective of
faster and more inclusive growth are three project selection filters: (i) systemic
or transformational impact; (ii) innovation and piloting of new approaches; and
(iii) financial leveraging. Government expects World Bank commitments to be
distributed among low-income and special category states (30 percent), other
states (30 percent) and national programs and centrally sponsored schemes
(40 percent). Making growth more inclusive also entails targeting pockets of
poverty in more advanced states, where innovative approaches can be piloted
and later replicated in poorer states. National projects that make substantial
investments in energy and transport, for example, help generate more growth.

64

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

To make a meaningful contribution to the assault on poverty, the
Government of India is seeking about $5 billion annually in support
from the World Bank Group. However, the WBG’s ability to provide such
levels of financing is uncertain due to two main factors: India approaching
its Single Borrower Limit (SBL) for IBRD exposure, currently at $17.5 billion
and India’s graduation from IDA at the end of FY14. The SBL prevents IBRD
from being able expand lending to make up for the loss of IDA resources at
graduation to IBRD-only status. Beginning in FY15, support to India would
drop precipitously to an annual average of about $600 million IBRD for FY15FY17. Looking at the full CPS period (FY13-17), annual levels of IDA/IBRD would
average only $1.4 billion. Moreover, total net flows from IBRD/IDA turn negative
in FY18 due largely to India’s graduation from IDA. (Figure 8.1) Graduation
also triggers contractual accelerated credit repayments on a large share of
outstanding IDA debt.23
To ease the hard constraint of the SBL, India has agreed to use its own
resources to purchase Special Private Placement Bonds (SPPBs). In 2012,
the Board approved the use of SPPBs by India of up to $4.3 billion. Beginning
in FY14, this additional headroom would enable India to borrow an annual
average of $2.4 billion of IBRD/IDA over the CPS period, an additional billion per
year.

Although the
World Bank Group’s
contribution to the
government’s overall
development is small,
the government’s
“Innovation Impulse
with Investment”
approach means
that World Bank
Group’s involvement
can be catalytic and
transformative when
financing is combined
with knowledge and
experience.

Figure 8.1.
Impact of IDA Graduation on India, by IDA Replenishment, IDA15-19
(in ‘000 US dollars)
(no SPPBs, no IDA transitional support)
IDA and IBRD lending to India
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
-1,000

IDA15
(ave.)

IDA16
(ave.)

IDA17
(ave.)

IDA18
(ave.)

IDA19
(ave.)

-2,000
-3,000
IBRD Commitments
IDA Commitments
IBRD/IDA Total Net Flows w/o Transitional Support
Sources: World Bank data (actuals); staff estimates for projections.

23

India’s graduation from IDA also has implications on net flows because of the contractual IDA credit acceleration clause which would be triggered.
Due to India’s high outstanding IDA credit balance ($26.4 billion as of December 2012) there will be a significant increase in principal repayments
by $0.5 billion a year in FY2015-FY20 from $1.2 billion under the current repayment schedule to $1.7 billion. Although transitional IDA support
would help offset the overall reduction in net flows during the CPS period, they are estimated to become negative in FY18.

65

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Transitional IDA
support would be
used to tackle India’s
unfinished poverty
agenda as laid out in
this CPS.

Although India will graduate from IDA at the end of FY14, it is being
proposed as a candidate to receive transitional IDA support for the
IDA17 period. Transitional IDA support would be used to tackle India’s
unfinished poverty agenda as laid out in this CPS. The terms for transitional
IDA financing would be harder than those of IDA hard-term lending, but less
than the fixed rate equivalent of an IBRD loan. Although a final decision on the
volumes and terms of transitional support will not be reached until late 2013,
IDA Deputies were broadly supportive of the proposal to provide transitional
IDA support to India presented at the first IDA17 replenishment meeting.
With the combination of SPPBs and assuming transitional IDA support
at the levels proposed to Deputies in the March IDA17 replenishment
meeting, annual commitments for IBRD/IDA could average about $3
billion over the CPS period. (Figure 8.2). SPPBs would be purchased in FY14
when India hits the SBL and be used to help finance the lending program laid
out in Annex B3. IDA levels in FY14 are low because of India’s frontloading
of IDA and utilizing the remainder of the IDA16 envelope. And, even with
transitional IDA support, net flows turn negative in FY18.
IFC investments are expected to be around $1 billion annually. IFC
will maintain its focus on private sector development through multiple
engagements focusing on inclusion and improving access, enhancing regional
and global integration, and mitigation of and adaptation to climate change.
During the CPS period, IFC expects to invest approximately $2.3 billion in the
low-income states. IFC also expects to invest around $350-400 million direct
and mobilized financing per annum in infrastructure water, transport, telecom
and IT and IT-enabled sectors.

Figure 8.2.
Annual IDA and IBRD lending to India, FY09-24
10,000
CPS Period
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0

FY9

FY10

FY11

FY12

FY13

FY14

FY15

FY16

FY17

FY18

FY19

FY20

FY21

FY22

FY23

FY24

-2,000
-4,000
IBRD Commitments

IDA Commitments

IBRD through SPPBs

Possible transition support

IBRD/IDA Net Flows

IBRD/IDA Total Net Flows w/o Transitional Support

Sources: Actuals through FY12 and Staff estimates for projections.

66

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Overall average annual WBG financing is estimated to be about $3
billion from IBRD and IDA (assuming transitional support from IDA and
use of SPPBs) and $1 billion from IFC. This is still short of India’s expressed
borrowing needs of about $5 billion. Although hypothetical, the impact of
additional IBRD headroom would help ease the hard constraints of the SBL. If
management were to recommend, and the Board were to approve, say a $1
billion increase in the SBL for India, additional lending space of about $500
million a year for three years would be created. World Bank Group support
for an ambitious engagement in India would necessitate the development
of innovative solutions to leverage higher levels of financing consistent with
India’s “Innovation Impulse with Investment” approach.
To maximize potential financing for India, the World Bank is also
exploring ways of restructuring poorly-performing projects in the
portfolio. “Right sizing” or cancelling part and restructuring the remainder of a
poorly-performing operation can free up resources in the short-term, allowing
for the commitment of resources to higher impact activities. An example is
the proposed cancellation of the $1 billion IBRD-financed India Infrastructure
Finance Company, Ltd. (IIFCL), and using the tied up capital for a similarly-sized
infrastructure project.

World Bank
Group support
for an ambitious
engagement in India
would necessitate
the development of
innovative solutions
to leverage higher
levels of financing
consistent with India’s
“Innovation Impulse
with Investment”
approach.

The WBG can play an important catalytic role beyond its own resources to
help India mobilize long-term financing. To complement existing World Bank
Group’s existing financial instruments, innovative means to mobilize long-term
financing can respond to India’s expressed need for help to fill its infrastructure
financing gap. Strengthening India’s capital markets, developing a long-term
corporate bond market and enabling securitization of assets are additional
avenues to explore.

67

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

9. Monitoring of results
The CPS results framework will be the key instrument for monitoring
the implementation of the WBG country program in India (Annex 1).
The results matrix presents the priority outcomes of the WBG in India, which are
aligned with the objectives of the Government’s 12th Five-Year Plan. The country
program aims to support the Government in areas where the WBG has a clear
comparative advantage. It includes ongoing and indicative lending, advisory
an analytical activities, technical assistance, and key trust-funded activities for
FY13-14. The matrix comprises 19 outcomes, expected to be achieved through
mostly ongoing WBG engagements at the national, state, and local levels. A
total of 33 indicators—all linked to the ongoing lending and AAA portfolio—
will be monitored throughout the CPS period. The achievement of CPS results
will depend to a large extent on ongoing activities and the speed at which new
programs are developed and implemented.
The three overarching goals of the CPS: reduced poverty, increased
shared prosperity and rapid economic growth reflect the CPS vision for
India in 2030 under the ambitious scenario, a country gradually regaining
the economic status it once had in history. As such, these are the long-term
goals, to which the WBG program will strive to contribute in the short term or
over the next five-years. Activities in three broad areas of WBG engagement:

68

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

integration, transformation and inclusion will in turn contribute to one or more
of the overarching goals.
While most activities in the current WBG portfolio contribute to one or
more of the three overarching goals, the main linkage is through the
WBG’s increased support to India’s low-income and special category
states (see Table 7.1). Combined, these fourteen states account for about
half of India’s population, of which 38.6 percent are poor. The WBG financing,
analytical work and advisory services will therefore aim to contribute to two
specific high-level country outcomes: increased economic growth as measured
by GSDP per capita (on average $512.5 in 2011), and decrease in poverty
(in 2011 38.6 percent of the total population in 14 LIS and Special Category
States were poor). Analytical work underpinning this CPS also clearly indicates
that economic integration across states and countries leads to per capita
income convergence. Guided by the Government’s “Innovation Impulse with
Investment” approach, the CPS therefore, focuses on India’s low-income and
special category states in an effort to contribute to a more balanced growth
across the country.

The WBG financing,
analytical work and
advisory services
will therefore aim
to contribute to two
specific high-level
country outcomes:
increased economic
growth as measured
by GSDP per capita
(on average $512.5 in
2011), and decrease in
poverty (in 2011 38.6
percent of the total
population in 14 LIS
and Special Category
States were poor).

The results framework will mainly monitor outcomes and indicators at
the program level. Directly mapped to the WBG program, these outcomes
(18 in all) and indicators will be tracked and used mid-and end-CPS period to
assess WBG performance. Each outcome supports relevant Government goals
as defined in the Government’s 12th Plan. A significant departure from past
practice and reflection of continued efforts at improved collaboration across
the WBG is the inclusion of common indicators that aggregate IDA, IBRD and
IFC contributions and program toward program level outcomes.
CPS program implementation will be tracked and reviewed on a
regular basis. The CPS results framework will also be reviewed in the context
of periodic country portfolio reviews, where progress on—as well as risks
to—achieving CPS outcomes will be assessed. The Results Integration and
Monitoring System, a web-based application recently improved and relaunched, will be used to monitor progress towards achieving CPS outcomes.
The system will be updated every six month, and updates will be shared with
Government counterparts. A CPS progress report will be prepared at midterm
in FY15 to evaluate progress, assess relevance of CPS outcomes to longer-term
objectives. The matrix will be adjusted as needed, and new activities will be
added in response to Government’s demand throughout the CPS period, but
especially for FY15 and FY16 activities.

69

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

10. Managing risks
Achieving the ambitious vision of India in 2030 entails mitigating significant
potential economic and political country level risks. Although India’s GDP
growth is forecast to strengthen modestly to 6.4 percent in the 2013 fiscal year, and
rise to 7.3 percent in 2015,24 elevated inflation and large fiscal and current account
deficits will remain concerns. Continued sluggishness of the global economy is
likely to affect India’s growth prospects in the short-term. Although recent policy
announcements have helped improve investors’ confidence, the Government will
need to break the current policy logjam and push through deeper and more difficult
reforms needed to improve the business climate, increase tax efficiency, and improve
the efficiency of public expenditures. While general elections will be held in 2014, it
will be important to recognize that continued progress on the reform agenda will be
critical to the country’s progress toward the vision of India in 2030—a country that
triples its per capita income in just one generation, reduces poverty to 5.5 percent,
and increased shared prosperity.
By focusing on economic integration, spatial transformation and social
inclusion, the CPS mitigates the risk that growth will slow down and
progress on poverty reduction and human development will be stalled.

24

70

Global Economic Prospects, 2013.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Realizing India’s economic potential requires seizing the demographic dividend
and this in turn will critically depend on job creation. New entrants to the labor
force need to find gainful employment for lower dependency ratios to actually
lead to higher output per capita. Greater economic integration, through physical
connectivity and the removal of inefficient regulations, is key to boost the creation
of jobs by the private sector. A successful spatial transformation, including
agricultural modernization and rapid urbanization, is needed for jobs to become
more productive. Progress in social inclusion, providing opportunities for everyone
to live a healthy life, acquire new skills, and access gainful employment, is a prerequisite for shared prosperity. The choice of areas of engagement in the CPS is thus
well geared towards helping India realize its potential.
At the same time, by shifting the focus to low-income and special category
states, the CPS assumes a higher operational risk. The CPS assumes a much
higher level of operational risk than did the previous CAS. But higher risks often entail
greater payoffs, as reflected in the ambitious India 2030 scenario outlined here, one
of rapid inclusive growth and equally rapid poverty reduction. A more pronounced
shift to working in low-income and special category states—states that often have
weak, systems, capacities and institutions; difficulties in adequately staffing project
units; poor data collection—may have the effect of delaying project preparation and
implementation. However, many low-income states are now growing faster despite
having lower levels of capital than more advanced states. This in turn translates
into higher marginal returns to investment over time. Low-income states also have
the highest poverty rates, and some of the lowest human development indicators,
so that poverty reduction payoffs from successful interventions will be high. The
“Innovation Impulse with Investment” principles of working on transformational,
innovative projects and those with high potential for leverage are also inherently
risky. Compounding that risk, a few areas where the Bank Group has been asked
to contribute—nutrition, urban development, higher education, and education
quality—have proven difficult in the past. As the CPS is implemented, it will be
important to build on the lessons learned from both past successes and failures so as
to better respond to India’s challenges. Better and planned collaboration across WBG
and with development partners will help us better identify areas where the WBG can
add value and put together a mix of instruments that is suited to the needs of India.

The CPS assumes a
much higher level of
operational risk than
did the previous CAS.
But higher risks often
entail greater payoffs,
as reflected in the
ambitious India 2030
scenario outlined
here, one of rapid
inclusive growth and
equally rapid poverty
reduction.

Improving portfolio performance will be a key challenge under the CPS and
of utmost important for overall discussion on India’s financing needs. Efforts
will be made to raise portfolio indicators to levels closer to Bankwide averages. Of
particular concern is the IBRD disbursement rate, which remains low. Throughout
the CPS, more emphasis will be placed on accurately identifying risks using existing
tools (e.g., Governance and Accountability Action Plans and the Operational RiskAssessment Framework), proposing mitigating measures, and jointly monitoring
the portfolio to address problems proactively as they arise. An effort to customize
solutions (in the form of integrated packages of support) to better meet the needs
of each borrower will help in the management of a riskier portfolio. Ongoing
Government-WBG efforts to strengthen portfolio performance will have to be
sustained throughout the CPS period to ensure results of the WBG program and
its contribution to accelerating poverty reduction and boosting shared prosperity
across India.

71

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

72

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

ANNEX 1

INDIA CPS Results Framework
Overarching Goals
Economic Growth * Poverty Reduction * Shared Prosperity
High level Country Outcomes
Low-income States + Special Category States (Total population: 600 million)
Baseline (2011): GSDP per Capita: US $ 512.5; Percent Poor: 38.6%
Government
Strategic Objectives
(12th Plan Goals)

Issues and
Obstacles

CPS Outcomes and
Indicators

Upgrade national
and state highways
to the minimum
two-lane standard

Most national
highways need
upgrading and
maintenance
work

1.1 Improved
transport
connectivity in
targeted States

Indicative
Milestones

World Bank Group Program (Ongoing
and Indicative)

Engagement Area 1: Integration

Complete Eastern
and Western Freight
Corridors

Low freight
train capacity;
inadequate asset
maintenance

• 9000 Km of additional
State highways
upgraded and
maintained in good
condition in targeted
states by 2017

Generation of at
least US$300 million
in new private
sector capital for
Core Road Network
improvement and
management
340 km of the
Eastern rail corridor
(Khurja and Kanpur
section) completed

• Rail transport capacity
on Eastern Freight
Corridor increased from
20 (in 2011) to 22 (NTKM
bn ton-km) by 2017
Strengthen India’s
electricity supply
and transmission
system in order to
increase availability
and reliability of
power for economic
development

1

Electricity
transmission
capacity
between
regions and
states is low
Generation
stations
operate below
capacity (60%
of firms rely on
costly back-up
generation)

1.2 Improved
inter-regional
power transmission
connectivity
• Power exchange
between regions and
States increased from
46,027 Gwh in 2009 to
60,000 Gwh by 2017

At least 5,000
circuit kilometers
of transmission
capacity added by
2015

Ongoing financing: Assam State Roads;
Odisha State Roads; Punjab State Roads;
Karnataka State Highway Improvement
II; Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor
Indicative financing: Rajasthan Rural
Road Connectivity; Tamil Nadu Roads II;
Kerala Transport II; National Highways
Interconnectivity; Gujarat Highways II;
Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor II
Knowledge activities1: Transport
Policies and Reform Activities

Ongoing financing: Coal-Fired
Generation Rehabilitation; Vishnugad
Pipalkoti Hydroelectric; Haryana
Power Sector Improvement;
Rampur Hydropower; Power Sector
Development IV&V; IFC investment in the
transmission sector (Nepal-India Power
Transmission Project)

At least 412 MW
of hydro power
generation capacity
constructed by 2017 Indicative financing: Northeast Power
Transmission; Luhri Hydropower
630 MW of CoalFired generation
Knowledge activities: Concentration
Solar Power; Program for Market
plant rehabilitated
Readiness; Rural Feeder Segregation;
Private Sector Participation in
Hydropower

Knowledge activities include advisory services, technical assistance, impact evaluations, and economic and sector work.

73

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Develop demand
driven, skilled
workforce by
providing increased
opportunities skills
training

Skills mismatch
in the job
market.
Poorly trained
labor force (29%
not literate and
another 24%
with primary
education).
Low female
labor force
participation
(29% of total).

Increase private
Low private
sector investment in sector
lagging regions
investment in
Low-income
States

1.3 Improved
demand-driven
skills for productive
employment

5 Institutes of
training of trainers
(ITOT) established
by 2014

• Graduates of Industrial
Training Institutes
employed within 1st year
of completing training
increased from 60%
(Female 38%) in 2012
to 70% (Female 50%) by
2015

At least 3000
new and current
instructors given
entry-level or
refresher/specialized
instructors courses
annually by 2015

• At least 17,000 youth
(including more than
50% women) from the
supported SHGs and
CDOs are placed in
appropriate jobs
1.4 Enhanced private
investment in low
income States

At least 33,000
SHGs are provided
with job placement
training

IFC’s technical
assistance and PPP
advisory projects in
low-income states,
which include

• Additional US$ 2.3
billion private investment
- 8 IFC led technical
facilitated in LIS States
by 2017
advisory and/or PPP
projects in by 2015
- 23 IFC led
investment projects
by 2015

Integrate regional
market in trade,
infrastructure
(power and
transport), and
investment

74

Below potential
levels of regional
trade and
investment;
poor
connectivity
between India
and neighboring
countries

1.5 Strengthened
regional trade
and infrastructure
integration
• 150 MW of electricity
traded between India
and Nepal by 2017

Construction
of Indo-Nepal
transmission line
has commenced
in accordance with
the tender package
awarded by 2014

Trade information
• Border crossing time
portal and single
between India and Nepal window system
reduced by 20 % by 2017 developed by 2015
(3-4 days in 2012)
Narayanghatmugling road
upgraded by 2016

Ongoing financing: Vocational
Training Improvement; Second Technical
Engineering Education Quality; National
Rural Livelihoods; State Livelihood
Projects (Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, and Northeast)
Indicative financing: Andhra Pradesh
Rural Inclusive Growth; IFC investments
in competitive, employment generating
industries
Knowledge activities: Migration
and Remittances; Higher Education;
Small and Medium Enterprise Capacity
Building; IFC Farmer Training/GAP
Program, India Sugar Program and Farm
Forestry Project; TVET; West Bengal Skills
Development
Ongoing financing: IFC investment
to support enabling environment and
mobilize private sector resources for
investments and PPP projects in Bihar,
Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, and West
Bengal
Indicative financing: IFC investment
to support enabling environment and
mobilize private sector resources for
investments in Uttar Pradesh
Knowledge activities: IFC’s programs
on Health for All, Buddhist Circuit,
Rajasthan IC
Indicative operations: Nepal-India
Trade and Transport Facilitation Project;
IFC South-South investments
Knowledge activities: BangladeshIndia Inland Water Transport; TA for
knowledge exchange across SAR
countries on performance management

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Engagement Area 2: Transformation
Improve longterm planning for
sustainable and
inclusive urban
development;
strengthen
governance
and financial
sustainability of
urban local bodies
(ULBs)

Low urban
planning
capacity, weak
governance,
and financially
unsustainable
ULBs, with
limited capacity
to raise own
resources

2.1 Strengthened
institutional capacity
of urban government
in targeted states

Increase public
transport; expand
metro rail and
bus system; and
improve road safety

Poor or nonexistent urban
transport
planning

2.2 Improved urban
transport services

Supply of public
transport has
not kept up with
demand
Improve access to
water and sanitation
services in rural and
urban areas

Raise agricultural
productivity to 4%
per annum
Strengthen irrigated
water resource
management

Limited access
to piped water
supply services
and sanitation
systems in rural
and urban areas

Low agricultural
productivity
Outdated
agriculture
technology and
practices
Inefficient and
unsustainable
use of water
resources
in irrigated
agriculture

• At least 220 cities (ULBs)
with new/updated
urban management
systems (in planning,
financial management,
citizen-interface, etc. ) to
improve service delivery
in targeted states by 2017

• Modal share by public
transport in targeted
cities increased from 4 %
in 2010 to 8% by 2017

2.3 Improved access
to water supply and
sanitation services

At least 20 cities
with new/revised
city development
plan in targeted
States by 2015

Ongoing financing: Capacity Building
for Urban Development; Andhra Pradesh
Municipal Development ; Third Tamil
Nadu Urban Development; Karnataka
Municipal Reform

230 cities with new
e-governance and/
or GIS mapping
system in Karnataka
State by 2016 (0 in
2012)

Indicative financing: Informal
Settlements; West Bengal Secondary
Cities

6 Cities developed
urban transport
investment plans by
2016

Ongoing financing: Mumbai Urban
Transport; Sustainable Urban Transport

• Cereal yield for
beneficiaries farmers
(tons/hectares)
- Paddy increased from
2.9 in 2012 to 3.5 by
2017
- Wheat increased from
2.8 in 2012 to 3.5 by
2017

Indicative financing: Efficient and
Sustainable City Bus Service

7 additional electric
EMU train (12-car
train) added in
targeted cities by
2017
Additional
18,000 water
supply systems
rehabilitated or
extended across
states by 2017

• Additional 34 million
people provided with
access to improved water
sources by 2017
Additional 10,000
sanitation systems
• Additional 12 million
rehabilitated or
people provided with
extended across
access to improved
states by 2017
sanitation system by
2017 (Urban: 1.2 million;
Rural: 10.8 million)
2.4 Increased
agricultural
productivity in
targeted areas

Knowledge activities: Social
Dimensions of Urbanization; National
Land Records Modernization
Implementation Support; Inclusive
Heritage Based City Development
Planning; IFC’s advisory assistance to
governments to structure PPP

Ongoing financing: Tamil Nadu
Urban III; Andhra Pradesh Municipal
Development; Karnataka Municipal
Reform; Karnataka RWSS II; Punjab
RWSS; Uttaranchal RWSS; Andhra
Pradesh RWSS; Kerala RWSSP II; IFC’s
Waste to Energy Investment Project; IFC
investment in water treating utilities
Indicative financing: Karnataka Urban
Water Modernization; Maharashtra Rural
Water and Sanitation III; Rural Water
Supply in Low-income States
Knowledge activities: IFC’s India
E-Waste Advisory

Ongoing financing: National
Agriculture Innovation; Maharashtra
Agriculture Competitiveness; Assam
Competitiveness; National Dairy
Support; Andhra Pradesh Community
Tank Management; Tamil Nadu Irrigated
At least 1 million
Agriculture; Uttar Pradesh Sodic Land
farmers adopting
Reclamation; Water Sector Restructuring
improved crop
(Andhra Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh);
production
Odisha Community Tank Management;
techniques and
Rajasthan Water Sector; West Bengal
practices in targeted Minor Irrigation; IFC’s investments in
areas by 2017
diary/oilseed/poultry sector and in
fertilizers and pesticides production
Additional 1.1
million hectares of
improved irrigation
in targeted areas by
2017

75

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

- Sugarcane increased
from 55 in 2012 to 63
by 2017
• Milk production
(kg/day/animal) for
beneficiaries farmers
increased from 4 kg in
2012 to 4.4 kg by 2017

Improve
management of
natural resources
by introducing
regulation to limit
water pollution,
improving sewerage
treatment system,
and protecting
biodiversity

Deteriorating
environmental
quality due to
water pollution
Unsustainable
exploitation
of natural
resources and
degradation of
biodiversity.

2.5 Improved
environment
protection and
biodiversity
conservation
• 160 million liter per
day of untreated
municipal and industrial
wastewater prevented
from entering the
National Ganga River
by 2017
• Additional 500,000
hectares brought under
enhanced biodiversity
protected area
management

At least 500,000
farmers adopting
improved livestock
production
techniques and
practices in targeted
areas by 2017

Indicative financing: Uttar Pradesh
Water Sector Restructuring II; Northeast
Water Resources; National Watersheds;
Uttarkhand Watersheds II; Himachal
Pradesh Mid-Himalayan Watersheds-AF;
Northeast Water Resources

Environmental
Compliance
Assistance Center
to promote
measures for
voluntary industrial
compliance
established by 2015

Ongoing financing: National Ganga
River Basin; Capacity Building for
Industrial Pollution Management;
Integrated Coastal Zone Management;
Biodiversity Conservation and Rural
Livelihood Improvement; Sustainable
Land Management

Additional 200
million liter per
day of wastewater
treatment capacity
created in the
National Ganga
River basin by 2017
Institutional and
methodological
framework
and guidelines
for landscape
conservation
approaches
developed in
high biodiversity
landscapes
Additional 500
million liter of water
saved or harvested
as a result of IFC’s
engagement

76

Knowledge activities: Enhancing
Agriculture Productivity: Policy
and Investment Priorities; Capacity
Development for Integrated Water
Resource Development; IFC India Sugar
Program & Farmer Training/GAP

Indicative financing: Himachal
Pradesh Watershed-AF; Karnataka
Watershed; Sustainable Livelihoods
and Adaptation to Climate Change;
Sundarbans Biodiversity Conservation
Integrated Coastal Zone Management II
Knowledge activities: Green Growth
in Himachal Pradesh; IFC Agri-water
efficiency program and industrial water
reuse project

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Reduce the intensity Lack of
of greenhouse gas
awareness about
emissions
energy saving
technologies
and measures to
reduce Ozone
Depleting
Substances

2.6 Reduced
Greenhouse Gas
Emissions through
energy efficiency and
renewable energy
production
• Additional 1.5 million
(tCO2e) GHG emissions
reduced per year by 2016

Additional 4,000
MW of energy
saved via supported
energy efficiency
measures by 2017
Additional 3000
Gwh of renewable
energy capacity
developed by 2017
80 CFC-based
centrifugal chillers
replaced by the
CEEP

Ongoing financing: Coal-Fired
Generation Rehabilitation; Vishnugad
Pipalkoti Hydroelectric; IFC Renewable
Energy and Energy Efficiency PPP;
IFC’s Equity/Debt Investment in
Renewables, Energy Efficiency projects in
Manufacturing Sector, and wholesaling
through financial institutions
Indicative financing: Himachal
Pradesh DPL II; CTF-Energy Efficiency
Partial Risk Sharing Facility; CTF-Super
Efficient Equipment Program
Knowledge activities: IFC Lighting
Asia: India Program

Construction and
operation of 13 solar
and wind stations
by 2017
Engagement Area 3: Inclusion
Universalize access
to electricity,
focusing on
electrification of all
villages
Increase household
access to clean and
environmentally
sustainable energy

Improve efficiency
of health delivery
systems by
converging health
programs under
the National Rural
Health Mission

30% of rural
households
lack access to
electricity;
High reliance
on traditional
sources of
fuel in rural
households,
with deleterious
health impact

Limited capacity
of statelevel health
institutions (low
accountability,
inadequate
financial
management,
poor quality
assurance,
poorly trained
health workers),
resulting in
inefficiency
delivery of
health services

3.1 Improved access
to electricity in
targeted states
• Additional 300,000 of
connections to Below
Poverty Line households
by 2017 in North Eastern
Region
• Additional 220,000
households with off-grid
connections

Ongoing financing: Power System
Development IV; Coal-Fired Generation
Rehab; Rampur Hydro Power;
Haryana Power System Improvement;
PowerGridV;Vishnugad Pipalkoti; IFC
Investment in private sector generation,
At least 412 MW
transmission and distribution; IFC
of hydro power
supported direct lines with banks/
generation capacity infrastructure finance companies to
constructed by 2017 support renewable energy;
At least 10,000
circuit kilometers
of transmission
capacity added by
2015

630 MW of CoalFired generation
plant rehabilitated

3.2 Strengthened
public and private
health delivery
systems

At least 40
health facilities
assessments
completed and
action plan
• Below Poverty Line (BPL) developed in the
and other vulnerable
targeted states by
households covered
2017
under Government
Sponsored Health
At least 50 PPPs
Insurance Schemes
performance-based
increased from 180
contracts in health
million in 2011 to 350
facilities in targeted
million by 2017
states by 2017
• Additional 9.4 million
patients reached in
supported private health
facilities by 2017

Indicative financing: Northeast Power
Transmission
Knowledge activities: IFC Lighting
Asia: India Program and Rooftop Solar
Program.
Ongoing financing: Uttar Pradesh
Health System Strengthening; Karnataka
Health System – AF; IFC’s Investment in
private health facilities; IFC’s Jharkhand
Hospital PPP
Indicative financing: National AIDS
Control Support Project
Knowledge activities: Service
Delivery and Public Spending on
Health; Government-sponsored Health
Insurance Schemes; IFC’s Meghalaya
Health for All; IFC’s Shillong Medical;
Karnataka RBF Hospital Care

Additional
21 private
health facilities
strengthened
through IFC
engagements

77

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

• Public sector hospitals
that have achieved entry
level-pre-accreditation in
the three sates (UP, Tamil
Nadu, and Karnataka)
increased from 6 in 2011
to 50 by 2017
Reduce undernutrition among
children aged 0-3
from 40% (2005-06)
to 27%

Inadequate
systems/
institutions to
address high
levels of child
malnutrition
(40% of
the world’s
malnourished
children live in
India)

3.3 Improved child
nutrition delivery
systems in targeted
States
• 246,000 Anganwadi
Centers conducting
inter-personal counseling
to improve Infant and
Young Child Feeding
practices
• 400,000 additional
Below Poverty Line
(BPL) households with
access to community
management nutrition
centers

Universalize access
to secondary
education by 2017

Poor quality of
education at all
levels

3.4 Improved access
and quality of
education

Improve quality at
all Education levels
and align programs
to market needs

Low learning
outcomes,

• Enrolment of students
in Secondary (Grade IX
and X) increased from
28 million in 2012 to 40
million by 2017

Low retention
rates and
enrollment at
the secondary
level
Limited access
to education for
underprivileged
children/youth

Implement direct
cash transfer for
major subsidies
and welfarerelated beneficiary
payments

78

Limited
state-level
institutional
capacity and
systems to
implement
social protection
programs
(including
beneficiary
awareness,
enrollment,

• Gross Graduation rate
increased from 78% in
2010 to 88% by 2017
• Gender Parity Index
(GPI) in secondary
schools increased from
94% in 2010 to 98% by
2017
3.5 Increased
coverage of social
protection programs
in targeted States
• Coverage of program
beneficiaries in targeted
districts increased from
18% in 2012 to 25% by
2017

Multi-sectoral
nutrition action
plans developed
and implemented in
targeted districts in
6 states
Inter-personal
counseling
guidelines and
tools material for
promoting positive
IYCF behaviors
developed and
adopted by 8 states

Ongoing financing: ICDS Systems
Strengthening and Nutrition
Improvement
Knowledge activities: Multisectoral
Nutrition Action in Bihar; Social
Observatory for Rural Food & Nutrition
Security in National Rural Livelihoods
Mission; Community Food and Nutrition
Initiatives in High Poverty States

10,000 additional
community service
delivery centers
organized by 2017
New system
of National
Assessment
of Student
Performance
developed and
implemented (for
grade X) by 2014
Proportion of
schools with all core
subject specific
teachers available
increased from 20
% in 2010 to 40% by
2017

IT application
to track benefit
payments
established in at
least one state by
2015
State disability
and older persons
policies developed
for at least one state
by 2015

Ongoing financing: RMSA Secondary
Education; IFC Investment in education
infrastructure
Indicative financing: Bihar Teacher
Education and Training; SSA—Education
for All
Knowledge activities: Teachers
Education; Secondary Education;
Teacher’s Education and Professional
Development- International Best
Practice; IFC’s Gujarat University PPP and
Meghalaya College PPPs

Indicative financing: Bihar Integrated
Social Protection Strengthening Project
Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth
Knowledge activities: Social
Pensions; Jharkhand Social Protection;
Chhattisgarh RSBY/PDS Evaluation

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

benefits
payments and
tracking and
accountability)
Create economic
opportunities
to improve rural
livelihood of poor
households

Improve financial
Services
Provide access to
banking services
to 90% of Indian
households

Limited
livelihood
opportunities
(farm and nonfarm) for rural
poor, especially
women

At least 50 social
protection service
centers established
by 2017
3.6 Enhanced
rural livelihood
opportunities in
targeted States
• Additional 500,000
supported poor
households report
a minimum of 20%
increase in income by
2017

40% of
3.7 Increased access
households do
to financial services
in targeted states
not avail any
banking services
• Additional one million
households with access
Organized
to formal financial
financial sector
services by 2017.
does not reach
out to a large
segment of the • Additional 20 million
loans provided to micro-,
population
small-, and mediumenterprises in targeted
states by 2017 (including
0.5 million to femaleowned microenterprises)

At least 50,000
additional Self Help
Groups (SHGs)
have been formed,
including poor
women SHGs

Ongoing financing: National Rural
Livelihood Project; State Rural Livelihood
Projects (Bihar, Odisha, Rajasthan, and
Northeast states); Scaling-up Sustainable
and Responsible Micro-Finance

10 additional
number of lenders
for low-income
housing finance
created in target
States by 2017

Ongoing financing: National Rural
Livelihood Project; State Livelihood
Projects (Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, and states in the
Northeast); IFC investments in MFIs; IFC
equity in banks and long-term finance
institutions; IFC’s short-term trade
finance and liquidity to banks.

27 MFIs supported
through IFC’s
engagement

Weak or
non-existent
institutions and
mechanisms
for enhanced
disaster risk
management
and climate
resilience,
especially in
agriculture and
water-intensive
sectors

3.8 Enhanced
disaster risk
management system
• At least 3 states have
installed an operational
Early Warning
dissemination Systems
(EWDS)in targeted
vulnerable communities
by 2017

Indicative Financing: IFC Low-income
Housing Finance
Knowledge activities: Rural Credit
Cooperatives; Financial Literacy and
Education; IFC Micro-and small and
medium enterprise access to finance:
Capacity Building Programs with Banks
and NBFCs; IFC work to facilitate G2P for
health services

• Additional 750,000
payment accounts
opened by 2017
Strengthen
natural disaster
management/
resilience

Indicative financing: Andhra Pradesh
Rural Inclusive Growth Andhra Pradesh:
Rural Poverty Impact Evaluation Food
Security in Tribal and Conflict Affected
Areas Strengthening Implementation of
Rural Livelihood Program

Master plan for
Flood Management
prepared for Kosi
river basin by 2015
Multi-hazard risk
and vulnerability
assessment
prepared for India’s
coastal areas by
2015

Ongoing financing: National Cyclone
Risk Mitigation I; Bihar Kosi I; Global Fund
for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
Indicative financing: Bihar Flood
Rehabilitation II; Tamil Nadu and
Puducherry Disaster Risk Reduction;
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Phase
II & III

Knowledge activities: Bihar Kosi
Flood and Climate Adaptation; Support
400 Cyclone shelters to National Cyclone Risk Mitigation
completed in
Program
targeted coastal
areas by 2017
900 Remote
Public Alert
Communication
System installed by
2015

79

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

ANNEX 2

India’s Progress towards the
Millennium Development Goals1
India has or is on track to achieve some of
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
by 2015. Extreme poverty—the proportion of
people living on less than $1.25 a day—has been
halved (MDG1) to under 30 percent, and halve the
number of people without sustainable access to
safe drinking water (MDG7). In addition, 96 percent
of Indian school children—boys and girls alike—will
complete a full course of primary education (MDG2)
and India will likely eliminating gender disparity in
primary and secondary education (MDG3).
At least three MDGs are off track in India.
Although much progress has been made since
1990, under-five and infant mortality rates remain
high. According to 2010 data, 63 children under
age five out of 1,000 and 48 infants out of 1,000 live
births die. Although both rates have been halved, it
is unlikely that India will meet the target of reducing
them by two-thirds. Reducing the target on
maternal mortality (MDG5) by three-fourths is also
likely to be missed, even though it has decreased
from 570 out of 100,000 live births in 1990 to 230

in 2010. Although India has almost doubled the
share of the population with access to improved
sanitation facilities (MDG7)—from 18 percent in
1990 to 34 percent in 2010, it is unlikely to achieve
the target of halving it by 2015 (table 1).
From a global perspective and for most
MDGs, India is making more progress than
the rest of the developing world (figure 1). For
primary education completion, India has already
achieved 96 percent of the required target, whereas
developing countries, as a group, have achieved
87 percent. This is also the case for health-related
MDGs, even though more progress is needed, and
particularly relevant for maternal mortality. Recent
estimates indicate that although the country may
not reduce by three-quarters the maternal mortality
ratio between 1990 and 2015, it has already
achieved 75 percent of the target, far above the 46
percent reduction observed in developing countries
as a whole. Increased efforts are nonetheless
required in terms of access to improved sanitation
facilities, where progress is significantly lower

Table 1.
India’s Performance on MDGs
MDG

Performance

1 Extreme poverty

Achieved

2 Primary education completion rate

On track

3 Gender parity in primary and secondary education

On track

4 Child mortality

Off track

5 Maternal mortality

Off track

7a Access to improved water source

Achieved

7b Access to improved sanitation facilities

Off track

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the World Development Indicators database.

1

80

Based on Global Monitoring Report 2012: Food Prices, Nutrition, and the Millennium Development Goals.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Figure 1.
India’s MDG performance in the global context
100%

Progress toward 2015

90%

100%

96%

96%

87%

100%
92%

80%

75%

70%
60%

52%

72%
62%

59%

50%

46%

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

MDG 1a.
MDG 2a.
Extreme
Primary
poverty
completion
(% of
rate, total (%
population of relevant
below $1.25 age group)
a day in
2005 PPP)

MDG 3a.
MDG 4a.
Ratio of girls
Mortality
to boys in rate, under-5
primary and
(per 1,000
secondary
live births)
education
(%)

Developing countries

MDG 5a.
Maternal
mortality
ratio
(modeled
estimate,
per 100,000
live births)

MDG 7c.
Improved
water
source (% of
population
without
access)

MDG 7c.
Improved
sanitation
facilities
(% of
population
without
access)

India

Note: a value of 100% means that respective MDG has been reached. Values denote present progress as illustrated by most recent available data:
Extreme poverty-Global: 2010, India: 2008; Primary completion rate-Global: 2009, India: 2008; Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary-Global:
2009, India: 2007; Mortality rate, under 5-2010, Global: 2010, India: 2009; Maternal mortality ratio-2010; Improved water source-2010; Improved
sanitation facilities-Global: 2008, India: 2010.
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the World Development Indicators database.

(62 percent of the target) than the 72 percent
achieved in the rest of the developing world.
India’s contribution to meeting global MDGs
is significant, especially for MDGs that are
furthest away from meeting global targets
(table 2). India’s contribution to lowering the
maternal mortality ratio (MDG5) was 33 percent
between 2005-2010 while for the mortality rate
of children under five (MDG4) it was 28 percent.
For Improved Sanitation (MDG7), not only does
India still have a way to go (currently at 62 percent
of the target), but progress is much slower as

shown by the ratio of India’s performance relative
to global performance (83 percent). (figure 2) For
many other MDGs, India was one of the leaders.
For example, India’s primary education completion
rate improved by more than 3 times with respect
to all developing countries between 1990 and
2009. Given India’s track record and its continued
and focused attention to addressing the MDG
challenge, India has the potential to contribute
even more to global targets. Without India
making further and faster progress in on child and
maternal mortality and sanitation, global MDGs
are unlikely to be achieved.

81

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Table 2.
India’s contribution to improvement in selected MDGs, 2005-2010 (%)
Access to
Sanitation

Access to
Water

Maternal
Mortality

Infant
Mortality

Under-5
Mortality

India

15%

46%

33%

32%

28%

South Asia excluding India

17%

7%

12%

13%

10%

East Asia & Pacific

52%

16%

8%

18%

19%

6%

4%

2%

3%

3%

Middle East & North Africa
Latin America & Caribbean

2%

4%

2%

7%

4%

Sub-Saharan Africa

12%

29%

43%

25%

35%

Europe & Central Asia

-5%

-7%

0%

2%

2%

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

Total Improvement

Figure 2.
Improvement in MDG indicators relative to global performance, 1990-2009

MDG 7c. Improved sanitation facilities
(% of population without access)

0.83

MDG 7c. Improved water source
(% of population without access)

1.52

MDG 5a. Maternal mortality ratio
(modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)

2.00

MDG 4a. Mortality rate, under-5
(per 1,000 live births)

1.44

MDG 3a. Ratio of girls to boys in primary and
secondary education (%)

2.11

MDG 2a. Primary completion rate, total
(% of relevant age group)

3.17

MDG 1a. Extreme poverty (% of population
below $1.25 a day in 2005 PPP)

1.47
0.00

0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
Improvement in India / Improvement at the Global level

Note: Chart depicts the ratio of absolute regional improvement to global improvement by MDG. Improvement is measured as the difference between
latest available value (see note figure 1) and starting value circa 1990.
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the World Development Indicators database.

82

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Millennium Development Goals – India
With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015 (estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and
malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary
schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)
Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and
empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of
nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized,
%)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live
births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS
and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable
access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil
equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Computer users (per 100 people)

1990

India
1995

2000

2010

53.6
..
8.8
59.5

49.4
45.3
9.1
41.1

..
..
..
44.4

32.7
37.2
8.6
43.5

..
64
37
62

..
74
46
..

79
71
45
76

92
96
60
81

68
13

75
14

79
17

92
18

5

7

9

11

115
81
56

100
72
72

86
63
55

63
48
74

570

470

390

230

..
45

34
41

43
47

53
54

0.1
216
80

0.3
216
58

0.4
216
49

0.3
185
59

69
18
21.5
4.7
0.8
3.3

75
21
..
4.9
1.0
3.5

81
25
22.0
5.0
1.1
3.9

92
34
23.0
5.0
1.5
5.1

0.6
0.0
0.0
..

1.2
0.0
0.0
..

3.1
0.3
0.5
..

2.9
61.4
7.5
..

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available. Development Economics, Development Data Group
(DECDG)

83

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year olds)

100

100

75

75

50

50

25

25

0

2000

2005

0

2010

1990

1995

India

Primary net enrollment ratio

2000

2010

South Asia

Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary education
ICT indicators (per 100 people)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

2000

2001

2002

Fixed + mobile subscribers

84

2003

2004

2005
Internet users

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex 3

Poverty in India
India has made significant progress in reducing
absolute poverty in the last two decades: it has
already achieved MDG1 in halving the proportion
of people whose income is less than $1.25 a day, to
under 30 percent. The percentage of people living
below Government of India’s official poverty line
has declined from 45 percent in the early 1990s to
30 percent in 2009-10 (table 1).1 Most notably rural
poverty has decreased by 16.3 percentage points.
Given that India is predominantly rural, however, a
huge concentration of the poor people (four out of
every five) still live in rural areas.

benefits for its poor from growth. Even with recent
improvements, at the $2 a day poverty line, the pace
of poverty reduction is still about 2 percentage points
per year below what a model based on international
cross-country regressions would predict for India.2

The pace of poverty reduction picked up significantly
in the latter half of the 2000s, reflecting faster
economic growth and greater inclusiveness of
growth during this period. The poverty rate declined
by 1.5 percentage points a year between 2004-05
and 2009-10, relative to 0.8 percentage points a year
in the previous two decades. Shared prosperity –
defined as the growth rate of the bottom 40 percent
of the population – improved, with the gap between
growth rates of the less well-off and average growth
narrowing considerably between 2005 and 2010.

But poverty remains widespread. With population
growth, it has proved difficult to reduce the number
of poor at a rapid pace; 400 million people still
live in poverty.3 India and poverty in India remain
predominantly rural: nearly four out of every five
poor persons live in rural areas. Wide disparity in
poverty rates across the states is a key feature of
poverty in India. For example, poverty reduction in
some of the poorest—and most populous States—
has been slow. Each of the seven of the low-income
states4 have poverty rates that are two to three
times higher than those of the more advanced
States. Accelerating progress in the poorest states is
important as they are the states where fertility rates
are particularly high. Higher-income States also
have pockets of extreme poverty; Karnataka’s per
capita income, for example, varies nearly five-fold
across districts.

However, comparisons with other fast growing
countries such as China, Vietnam and Thailand
suggest that India is not reaping comparable

Given such intra-India disparities, an obvious
but important fact is that where people live is
important: location-specific features are important

Table 1.
All-India Poverty Rates
Rural

Urban

Total

1993-94

50.1

31.8

45.3

2004-05

41.8

25.7

37.2

2009-10

33.8

20.9

29.8

Source: Government of India, 2012.

1
2
3
4

India revised its poverty line upwards in real terms in 2011 based on recommendations of the Tendulkar Committee. Results reported in this
annex are based on the revised official poverty lines, or based on the World Bank’s international ($1.25 per day and $2 per day) lines.
A large and (until recently) growing gap between mean consumption per person from the National Sample Surveys (NSS) and the private
consumption component of the National Accounts Statistics (NAS) confound efforts to provide a definitive assessment of the responsiveness of
poverty reduction to growth in India.
World Bank estimate of people living on US$1.25 or less per day.
Rajasthan, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, and Uttar Pradesh.

85

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

parts of the overall experience of poverty. States
matter. India’s states are so different in their
poverty levels that they range from the best in the
developing world to the worst. As shown in figure
1, India’s poorest states have poverty rates that are
at the high end of the distribution of all countries,
while the poverty rates of Goa and Himachal
Pradesh are considerably better – towards the low
end of the distribution. When urban and rural rates
are analyzed, the contrast between the low and
high poverty areas is even more striking.
India’s high growth in the last decade has not
benefited everyone uniformly. India’s consumption
inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient
is 0.37. Inequality is on the rise, with widening
disparities between urban and rural areas. Further,
income inequality does not reflect the depth and
range of social inequities. Structural inequalities
by gender, caste, and tribe persist, and indicators
of poverty and human development for these
groups lag behind those of the general population.
Poverty rates are especially high among Scheduled
Tribes (46.1 percent), and Scheduled Castes (40.8

percent) in 2009-10. Female disadvantage in India
continues, despite high rates of growth, and women
die both in infancy and in motherhood, with poorer
outcomes for women from scheduled castes and
tribes. Economic and social outcomes for women
are underpinned by low levels of security within
and outside their home. Caste remains a potent
indicator of labor market outcomes and social
status, but positive signs of dynamism are also
appearing within the caste hierarchy. Indicators
that India’s educational expansion is leaving
scheduled tribes behind, especially at the secondary
school and higher levels, are worrying. Scheduled
tribes have shown the least improvement in
intergenerational mobility in education and also
display the worst indicators of child nutrition and
mortality.
Lifting people out of poverty is not enough.
Even above the threshold for the World Bank
Group’s indicator of shared prosperity (defined as
consumption growth of the bottom 40 percent of
the population), a large number of people have
consumption levels that are precariously close to

Figure 1.
Poverty rates in Indian States span a wide range of the distribution across all countries
80

Bihar
Chhattisgarh

70
Poverty Rate

60

Jharkhand
Odisha

50
40
30

Punjab

20

Goa

10

Himachal
Pradesh

Bulgaria
Malaysia
Turkey
West Bank and Gaza
Croatia
Slovenia
Belarus
Jordan
Czech Republic
Lithuania
Uruguay
Seychelles
Thailand
Romania
Estonia
Argentina
Chile
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Dominican Republic
Iraq
Mexico
Ecuador
Peru
Brazil
Goa
Panama
Algeria
Paraguay
Guyana
El Salvador
Bhutan
Belize
South Africa
Punjab
Nicaragua
Suriname
China
Yemen, Rep.
Philippines
Gujarat
Pakistan
Delhi
Tamil Nadu
Mauritania
Turkmenistan
Ghana
Rajasthan
Botswana
Namibia
West Bengal
Gambia, The
Papua New Guinea
Timor-Leste
Togo
D & N Haveli
Swaziland
Bangladesh
Kenya
Uttar Pradesh
Burkina Faso
Jharkhand
Mali
Bihar
Mozambique
Central African Republic
Tanzania
Zambia
Madagascar
Liberia

0

Legend
Countries

Indian States

Note: At $1.25 a day, constant 2005 PPP, US$; for countries, figure indicates poverty rates for the latest year available in POVCALNET; for Indian states data
is from 2009/10
Source: POVCALNET

86

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

the poverty line. These “vulnerable” people live
between one and two official poverty lines.5 In
2009-10, half of India’s people (51 percent) lived on
consumption levels in this vulnerability band. Minor
shocks—illness, poor weather and poor crop yields,
indebtedness, high inflation—can easily push them

5

below the poverty line. Although the number of
poor has been declining, the number of vulnerable
people has steadily risen to 600 million people. The
end goal is to reduce extreme poverty and reduce
vulnerability: the number of people that are not
poor, socially included and reasonably secure.

The official poverty line for India is set at the equivalent of US$1.17 per person per day in PPP terms. For the purposes of the India CPS, the
vulnerable are defined as those living between one and two poverty lines. This choice is based on two independent but coincident local criteria.
The National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector classifies all population groups in five categories, and those between one and
two poverty lines are considered “vulnerable”. The threshold to pay personal income tax is such that a family of five, with one taxpayer, would also
be close to two poverty lines.

87

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex 4

IFC Indicative Non-Lending
Activities
Business Line

No. of projects

Funds Managed
by IFC ($ mn)

Access to Finance

31

21

Sustainable Business
Advisory

12

16

Investment Climate

3

6

Public Private Partnerships*

17

8

Total Non Lending
Activities

63

52

Project Description

Expected End
Date

Project Name

Access to Finance
Microfinance Knowledge
Management

Project focusing on: (i) LIS focus to expand access to finance;
(ii) Microfinance (MF) product diversification beyond microdebt;
(iii) e-payments linked to bank and MFI accounts; (iv) sustainable energy finance
linked to MF; (v) micro insurance.

FY13

E-Banking South Asia Link
to Global Initiatives

Working towards improving access to banking services for low-income
households by using innovative business models for payments services

FY13

Belstar Investment and
Finance Private Limited

Phase I: Working to determine how Hand-in-Hand (HiH), an NGO working with
SHGs in S.India, can successfully promote a commercially run microfinance
institution.
Phase II: Provide assistance to Belstar to strengthen operations and monitoring
systems.

FY13

Intellecash Micro Finance

Support start-up MFIs to establish and grow their operations in underserved
areas and LIS through the Intellecash Network Program franchising model.

FY13

Capacity Building of
Utkarsh

To support Utkarsh to develop and grow its operations through improved
product diversification, development of sound internal systems and processes,
and the introduction of a Social Performance Management System.

FY13

India SME Banking
Knowledge Management

To design an SME Banking program through gathering of market information,
holding discussions with internal and external stakeholders, and conducting
studies and workshops.

FY13

Microfinance Risk
Management India

To contribute to strengthening risk management systems and practices in the
MF sector in India by providing a framework for risk assessment.

FY14

Technical Assistance to
FINO Phase II

To enhance the access to financial services of low income population through
technology platform, by supporting FINO to scale up and become sustainable.

FY14

Sustainable Energy Finance To provide technical assistance to Regional Rural Banks for developing a clean
- Micro Energy Credits
energy lending portfolio and serve the demonstration effect of successful clean
energy interventions for low income population.

FY14

Capacity Building of
Ananya

FY14

88

To support Ananya to expand outreach, build capacity and diversify the
product base offered to lower income population.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Project Name
Microfinance Credit
Reporting Phase II

Project Description

Expected End
Date

To take forward and build upon the achievements of Phase I by including
outreach to MFIs currently not members of CIB and enabling them to integrate
with CIBs. The project design also incorporates awareness raising of end
borrowers as well as a study of the impact of credit bureaus on MFI borrowers’
behaviour and dissemination of results.

FY14

Sustainable Energy Finance To build the capacity of MFIs to undertake sustainable finance in a way that
- Dia Vikas
helps them manage their own risks and contribute to climate mitigation.

FY14

Sustainable Finance Maanaveeya

FY15

Responsible Finance
Sectoral

To contribute to strengthening of the MF sector in India by promoting
initiatives aimed at bringing greater customer centricity to the sector, and
raising awareness among decision makers to better address the issues facing
the sector.

FY15

SEWA Livelihood Finance

To assist SEWA in launching a Livelihood Finance Business by evaluating the
feasibility, preparing the business plan and providing handholding support.

FY15

Technical Assistance to
Swadhaar

To enhance access to finance for the urban population by supporting SFPL
through TA jointly with Accion International.

FY15

Axis Bank Alternative
Delivery Channels

To enhance the access to financial services for low income population in India
(such as migrants), using alternative delivery channels. The project will use
remittance as an entry product to increase access to other banking services
using this channel. It will support Axis Bank to pilot a new agent banking
channel to prove the commercial viability of this model and help them scale it
up.

FY15

Aadhar Responsible
Finance

To support the partner organisation in launching new housing finance
products, capacity building and development of sound internal systems and
processes and introduction of a Responsible Finance framework.

FY15

Equitas Housing
Microfinance
Janalakshmi Financial
Services

FY15
FY15

Health Payment

To launch an automated G2P payment system in Bihar, linking payments made
to health workers and program participants to bank accounts.

FY15

The Andhra Pradesh State
Cooperative Bank

To assist AP Coop Bank to reach an expanded customer base of farmers, to
build an expanded product base of both credit and non-credit offerings, to
improve its overall systems and to engage in responsible finance practices.

FY15

Ujjivan Microfinance

To support Ujjivan in launching new products and scale-up of operations,
reducing operating costs through process improvements and incorporating
Responsible Finance principles in operations.

FY15

Equitas Microfinance

To support Equitas in scaling up its operations in under-banked areas and LIS,
and incorporating Responsible Finance principles in their operations.

FY15

MicroInsurance VimoSEWA

To develop a new microinsurance product for Self Help Groups (SHGs) to be
piloted among selected financial institutions.

FY15

Responsible Finance
Accion

To assist the MF sector in India to refocus on a client- centric approach by
organizing responsible finance programs at client, institutional, and sectoral
levels leveraging on existing industry, lender and investor

FY16

Sustainable Energy Finance To build capacity of GTN to undertake sustainable finance in a way that helps it
- Grassroots Trading
to manage risk and contribute to climate change mitigation.
Network

FY16

Housing Regional

To conduct market assesment, develop tools for capacity building, raise
stakeholder awareness and pilot innovative business models in the mortgage
and housing markets across SA.

FY16

Grameen Koota Housing
Microfinance

To assist Grameen Koota in introduction of new products, capacity building to
scale up and development of Responsible Finance Management Framework.

FY16

89

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Project Name

Project Description

Expected End
Date

Technical Assistance to
Collateral Registry in India

To increase access to credit for MSMEs in India by providing support to CERSAI
in developing a sustainable business model and expanding its remit to include
movables.

FY15

Arohan Pensions

To support Arohan, an MFI working in West Bengal, Bihar and Assam to offer
pension product to the low income segments by leveraging their brand and
branch network.

FY16

Investment Climate
India Rajasthan Investment To assist the Government of Rajasthan (GoR) in increasing the level of
Climate Reform
private investments in the State through (i) proactive investor targetting
and investment generation, including increased investments by IFC; and (ii)
improving its business environment with a focus on easing the regulatory and
non-regulatory constraints.

FY13

Bihar Tax Simplification
Program

To increase regulatory compliance by reducing compliance costs and increased
formalization of businesses in Bihar.

FY13

Buddhist Circuit Tourism:
Facilitating Growth
Corridors in UP and Bihar

A two-phase project that aims to facilitate the upgrading of tourism services in
the Buddhist Circuit.

FY15

Green Power for Telecom

To facilitate two mobile operators / telecom tower companies / energy service
providers to implement two viable business models (pilot projects) using RE /
hybrid to reduce GHG emissions and increase RE.

FY13

CTI TurboTech

To catalyze growth in TurboTech by increasing the Company’s manufacturing
capabilities and address the market barrier of access to financing for early-stage
cleantech companies.

FY13

Agribusiness - APPL

To scale-up dairy and aquaculture in APPL’s tea estates and its surrounding
areas and to strengthen the supply chain and market linkage for dairy,
aquaculture and other agro-produce.

FY13

2011 India Development
Marketplace

To monitor and document the evolution of the 13 winning social entrepreneur
and to oversee the management of a grant pool and award a portion to each of
the 13 social enterprises that want to scale or replicate their inclusive business
models in the states of Bihar, Orissa, and Rajasthan.

FY13

Tata Water Sustainability
Program

To support 11 Tata facilities in developing a set of detailed water response
strategies and build awareness within the broader community for water
sustainability and water footprinting.

FY14

Sustainable Business Advisory

Cleaner Production
To support CP assessments with IFC pipeline and portfolio clients and
Technical Advisory Services specifically target large energy intensive companies, to reduce manufacturing
costs and potentially lead to additional CP related investments.

FY14

SME Management
Solutions India

To scale up the Business Edge model in India by customizing for the local
market and building capacity of local service providers to deliver Business Edge.

FY14

India Farm Forestry
Advisory Program Phase II

To increase tangible benefits from sustainable forestry and productive land use
to rural landowners.

FY14

Lighting India

To focus on addressing systemic market failures in the off-grid renewable
energy market in India by working at the company/sector level with the
objective to provide renewable energy lighting access. LI will seek to replicate
the Lighting Africa program.

FY15

South Asia Farmer
Training/GAP

To facilitate development/application of farmer training tools and techniques
and uptake of improved good agricultural practices (GAP).

FY15

India Sugar Advisory

To design, implement and scale-up pilot projects (which can be taken to scale)
with leading sugar mills in India. These pilot projects will focus on sustainable
sugarcane and work predominantly with small and marginal landholders.

FY15

India E-Waste Advisory

To demonstrate a sustainable business model of integrating and formalizing
the informal sector players in the E-waste supply chain of Attero.

FY16

90

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Project Name

Project Description

Expected End
Date

PPP
Gujarat University PPP
Universal Health Insurance,
Meghalaya Project 1
Shillong Medical College &
Teaching Hospital PPP

The PPP business line provides assistance to governments in structuring and
implementing public-private partnerships (PPPs) to improve infrastructure and
public services, with the benefit of private-sector expertise, management, and
finance. We are currently advising various state government on the following
projects across sectors:

FY13
FY13
FY13

Kerala Port, Vizhinjam

FY13

Chennai Metro

FY13

Vadodara Rooftop Solar

FY13

Orissa SWM PPP Berhampur

FY13

Surat Rooftop Solar

FY13

Rajkot Rooftop Solar

FY13

Mehsana Rooftop Solar

FY13

Bhavnagar Rooftop Solar

FY13

FCI Silos

FY14

Jharkhand Diagnostics

FY14

Rajasthan Public Street
Lighting

FY14

Bhubaneswar Public Street
Lighting

FY14

* For PPP, currently 15 projects but two of the projects (Jharkhand diagnostics and FCI Silos) are split into two projects each making the total project
count as 17.

91

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex 5

Overview of Main Trust Funds
Activities
Trust Funds are a diverse instrument used mainly for
two purposes: (a) to implement global conventions
and support global partnerships/global public
goods, and (b) to support activities in country
programs that implement country, regional, and
sector priorities.
Global Partnership Trust Funds: Trust Funds in
support of global partnerships/public goods with
significant activities in India are mostly focused
on the environment, and include the following
programs:1
•

The Ozone Trust Fund, which assists countries
in phasing out Ozone Depleting Substances
as agreed under the Montreal Protocol for the
Protection of the Ozone Layer, with funding
from the Multilateral Fund of the Montreal
Protocol;
The Global Environmental Facility, which
provides funding for projects that improve the
global environment;
The Carbon Finance Program, which uses
money contributed by governments and

•
•

•

companies in OECD countries to purchase
project-based greenhouse gas emission
reductions in developing countries, within
the framework of the Kyoto Protocol’s Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM);
IDA grants, which help low-income countries
to restore or maintain their external debt
sustainability; while India is not eligible for IDA
grants, one such grant was approved in the
aftermath of the Indian Ocean Tsunami.

These Trust Funds often complement IBRD/IDA
project funding and are normally executed by
recipient agencies.2 Disbursements over the last CAS
period were $41.7 million (equivalent to 0.4 percent
of IBRD/IDA disbursements over the period) (see
table 1).
In some respects the use of funds from global
programs in India is different than that in other
countries. For example, the Ozone Depletion
Program is larger in East Asian countries, and Carbon
Finance is significantly larger in China.3

Table 1.
Global Partnership Trust Funds in India, FY2009-12
Trust Fund

Disbursements (US$, mn)*

Ozone Trust Fund

22,425,798

Global Environmental Facility

13,632,004

Carbon Finance

3,327,801

IDA Grant--Tsunami

2,300,000

Total

41,685,604

* FY12 data up to April 2012.

1
2
3

92

This note covers only trust funds administered by the World Bank. The World Bank also operates as the Trustee for other global institutions such
as the Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria (GFATM), but these are not covered here, although the GFATM has disbursed $788 million in
India since its inception in 2003.
Both Ozone and Carbon Finance projects are often free-standing—not linked to a World Bank-supported project.
For example, over FY2010 to the first half of FY2012, the Carbon Fund disbursed $408 million, GEF $96 million, and Ozone $28 million in China.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Looking forward, while some programs such as
Ozone are phasing out, others are expected to
play an increasingly important role. Most notably,
the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) Trust Fund
Committee agreed in May 2012 to provide an
initial allocation of around $263 million to India
to fund its Climate Investment Plan. Lending
constraints in the next four years call for the
leveraging of significantly higher amounts of trust
resources, including through global partnerships.
Phase II of the Himachal Pradesh Green Growth
Development Policy Loan is expected to be
financed by the CTF.
Country, Region, and Sector Trust Funds:
Trust funds also support activities in country
programs that help implement country, regional,
and sector priorities. During FY2009-12, 51 such
TF programs4 were active in India, of which the 15
largest accounted for more than 80 percent of total
disbursements ($44.8 million) (see table 2). In all
394 activities were funded in India, with an average
disbursed amount of about $100,000. More than
two-thirds ($32.6 million out of $44.8 million) of the

activities were World Bank executed. The remainder
($12.2 million) was recipient-executed.
Some trust funds are only or primarily recipientexecuted (Policy and Human Resource
Development (PHRD), Japan Social Development
Fund (JSDF), Cities Alliance, the Development
Marketplace, Institutional Development Fund (IDF),
Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest (CGAP),
the Statistical Capacity Building Trust Fund, and
Independent Evaluation Group’s CLEAR initiative).
In cases, where World Bank-executed funds are
provided alongside recipient-executed funds, the
former supports supervision and implementation
activities of recipient agencies. Certain trust fund
programs can be executed by the Bank or by
the Recipient depending on the objective of the
activity. This is the case for (DFID, Output-Based
Partnership, Public Private Infrastructure Advisory
Facility (PPIAF), Global Facility for Disaster Reduction
and Recovery (GFDRR), and South Asia Food and
Nutrition Security Initiative (SAFANSI) (see table 4).
All Recipient-executed trust funds require approval
by the Government of India.

Table 2.
Country, Region, Sector Trust Funds, FY2009-12
Program

Name

Total

DFIDIN

DFID India III

7,326,037

16

33

222,001

INFGRW

AusAid Infra

4,578,265

27

29

157,871

PHRD

PHRD

3,195,235

34

20

159,762

PPIAF

PPIAF

3,152,994

41

30

105,100

SPTF

DFID TF II

2,867,551

47

37

77,501

JSDF

JSDF

2,549,884

53

8

318,736

ESMAP

ESMAP

2,254,167

58

13

173,398

TFESSD

TFESSD

2,055,138

62

19

108,165

FTIE

Education for All

1,802,713

66

8

225,339

CITIES

Cities Alliance

1,419,605

70

13

109,200

GPOBA

GPOBA

1,411,650

73

7

201,664

FS-SP

Swedish Social Development

1,326,520

76

10

132,652

SA-DSD

South Asia Decentralization

1,063,634

78

24

44,318

GFDRR

GFDRR

1,021,023

80

9

113,447

BNPPRF

BNPPRF

1,019,145

83

16

63,697

OTHER

Other TFs

7,832,515

100

118

66,377

Total

4

44,876,076

Cum share
(%)

No.
Activities

Ave. size

394

All programs excluding the Water and Sanitation Program and global programs such as Ozone Trust Fund, GEFIA, Carbon Finance Program,
CDCFTA, and TRF

93

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

All other trust fund programs are only World Bankexecuted (see table 4 for the 11 largest). These trust
funds are linked to activities in the India program,
which have been requested by the Government
of India (as are projects under preparation or
implementation and knowledge activities), and
are in line with the country strategy, South Asia
Regional (SAR) Strategy, and sectoral priorities
that are endorsed by the Board of Executive
Directors. For example, the SAR strategy stresses
the importance of reducing malnutrition in the

region; accordingly, a large the South Asia Food and
Nutrition Security Initiative or SAFANSI trust fund
has been mobilized with contributions from DFID
and other donors to support initiatives to reduce
malnutrition.
Another way to look at trust fund programs is by the
level at which they are managed: country, region
(South Asia), sectoral anchors or global. Trust funds
managed at the level of the country program (the
second and third DFID Trust Funds, for example)

Table 3.
Trust Funds with recipient-executed activities, FY2009-12 (US$)
Trust Fund

Recipientexecuted
Disbursement

Bank-executed
Disbursement

Total
Disbursement

Share RE/Total
Disbursement (%)

Type

PHRD

2,927,082

268,153

3,195,234

92

Mostly RE

JSDF

2,403,691

146,192

2,549,884

94

Mostly RE

Cities Alliance

1,202,933

216,672

1,419,605

85

Mostly RE

DFID TF II

1,188,859

1,678,691

2,867,551

41

Both

DFID TF III

1,043,294

6,282,743

7,326,037

14

Both

977,663

433,987

1,411,650

69

Both

GPOBA
Dev. Marketplace

586,491

0

586,491

100

Only RE

IDF

463,561

0

463,561

100

Only RE

CGAP-T

333,639

44,840

378,479

88

Mostly RE

PPIAF

317,078

2,835,916

3,152,994

10

Both

StatCap

307,313

0

307,313

100

Only RE

GFDRR

234,610

786,413

1,021,023

23

Both

SAFANSI

200,000

23,636

223,636

89

Both

54,304

0

54,304

100

Only RE

IEG’s CLEAR Init.

Table 4.
World Bank-executed (BE) trust funds cumulative disbursements above $500,000, FY2009-12
Program

Name

BE Disbursements

INFGRW

AusAid Infrastructure

4,578,265

ESMAP

ESMAP

2,254,167

TFESSD

TFESSD

2,055,138

FTIE

Education for All

1,802,713

FS-SP

Swedish Social Development

1,326,520

SA-DSD

South Asia Decentralization

1,063,634

BNPPRF

BNPPRF

1,019,145

WPP

Water Partnership Program

756,951

SIEF

Spanish IE TF

753,097

SAWI

SAWI

584,387

GENTF

Gender TF

520,827

94

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Table 5.
Trust Funds by Level of Management, FY2009-12 (US$)
Level of management

Disbursement

Country

10,193,588

23

Region

10,345,827

23

Sector or global

24,390,127

54

Total

44,929,542

disbursed about a fourth of the total; regionallymanaged trust funds, another fourth; and sector/
global ones accounted for the remainder.5
Over time, the World Bank, donors, and recipients
have striven to manage trust funds in a more strategic
and less fragmented way, with the 2009 Trust Fund
Reform representing an important step forward in
this direction. For the trust funds managed by the
India program, the DFID-World Bank Partnership
Trust Funds for India II and III, a tripartite structure
in which the Government of India (Department of
Economic Affairs), DFID, and the World Bank jointly
endorse activities has been put in place to ensure
greater client ownership. For trust funds managed at
the regional or sectoral level, government approval
is needed for all recipient-executed activities, in line
with Government of India procedures.
Other Trust Funds: In addition to the two categories
of TFs discussed so far, both the Water and Sanitation
Program (WSP) and IFC manage large trust fund
resources. WSP-managed trust funds disbursed $12.3
million and IFC-managed trust funds disbursed $31.8
million over FY2009-12. IFC mobilized significant
amounts of trust fund resources for its advisory
services, from less than $1 million in FY2008 to $9.5
million in FY2011.

5

Disbursement Share (%)

100

The Government of India as a Trust Fund
Donor: An important development over the
past CAS period has been India’s increasing role
as a donor in various trust funds. India is now
a member of ten trust funds and contributes
to six of them (the Afghanistan Reconstruction
Trust Fund, Africa Cooperation Building, Avian
and Human Influenza, GEF, GFATM, South-South
Experience Exchange Facility (SSEEF), Cultural
Heritage) and the Government of India envisages
contributing to a few additional ones. India is a
contributor and provider of experience to the
SEETF, and SEETF resources will continue to be
mobilized to foster experience sharing regionally
and beyond on various development issues
including decentralization and delivery of public
services.
Government of India’s Concerns on Trust
Funds: The Government of India has taken a
strategic stance on trust funds as a whole and
expressed a major concern about the overall
increase of trust fund funding in World Bank
Group activities, stating that trust fund donors’
contributions do not have any leveraging impact
financially, contrary to what would happen if the
same funds were provided as IBRD or IFC capital
increase.

Excluding WSP $12,300,658 and Global Partnerships (OTF, GEFIA, Carbon, CDCFTA, and TRF)

95

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex 6

India
Country Financing Parameters
Date: March 24, 2005
The country financing parameters for India set out below have been approved by the Regional
Vice President, South Asia Region and are being posted on the Bank’s internal website. These
parameters would be applied within the overall framework of the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy for
FY05-08 (see India: Country Assistance Strategy, R2004-0170/3, IDA/R-2004-0208/3, September 17,
2004).
Item

Parameter

Remarks/Explanation

Cost sharing. Limit on the
proportion of individual project costs
that the Bank may finance

Up to 100%

Cost sharing arrangements in individual projects would be managed to stay
within the aggregate lending envelope; the Bank’s overall financing share
is not expected to change significantly. The Bank’s financing percentage
in each project may vary from project to project, depending upon project
type, sector etc. Some level of counterpart financing however is expected
to continue in many projects. The Bank may selectively finance 100% of
project costs e.g., social sector projects and projects in poor and remote
areas. In individual projects, cost sharing arrangements would take into
consideration the characteristics of the project and sector-specific aspects
(e.g., based on the CAS ‘guidelines for Bank lending in key sectors’) In
national-level projects, where the Bank’s envisages cofinancing with other
development partners under common arrangements, including sectorwide approaches, the Bank’s financing share is expected to be relatively low.

Recurrent cost financing. Any limits
that would apply to the overall amount
of recurrent expenditures that the Bank
may finance

No country
level limit
on
recurrent
cost
financing

In determining Bank financing of recurrent costs in individual projects the
Bank will take into account sustainability issues at the sector and project
levels including sustainability of the project/ program achievements/
outcomes, and implied future budgetary outlays. Sector-specific
considerations (e.g., based on the CAS ‘guidelines for Bank lending in key
sectors’) would also be taken into account.

Local cost financing. Are the
requirements for Bank financing of
local expenditures met, namely that:
(i) financing requirements for the
country’s development program
would exceed the public sector’s own
resources (e.g., from taxation and other
revenues) and expected domestic
borrowing; and (ii) the financing of
foreign expenditures alone would
not enable the Bank to assist in the
financing of individual projects

Yes

India meets the criteria for Bank’s financing of local costs. Therefore, the
Bank may finance local and foreign costs in any proportion as needed in
individual projects.

Taxes and duties. Are there any taxes
and duties that the Bank would not
finance?

No

Current levels of taxes and duties are reasonable. At the project level, the
Bank would consider whether taxes and duties constitute an excessively
high share of project costs.

96

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex 7

Government of India Project
Screening Criteria1
In 2011, the Department of Economic Affairs, as the
nodal agency for posing projects to the World Bank,
Asian Development Bank (ADB), and International
Fund for Agricultural Development, has decided
to institute a new set of screening principles to
govern the selection of projects to be posed to
these agencies. The goal of instituting this screening
criteria is to maximize access and leverage of
Multilateral Financial Institution/Multilateral
Development Banks’ (MDBs) knowledge base,
international experience and familiarity with best
practices, making the best use of limited external
resources available. This selection criteria will form
the main approach for accessing assistance from the
World Bank, ADB and the IFAD.
Central to this new approach are two principles:
1) size of external assistance will be up-to a
maximum of US$500 million from MDBs for any
project inclusive of any technical assistance for
project preparation and 2). Overall portfolio will be
progressively re-balanced towards State Projects
and amongst the States towards the lagging and
the special category States.

4.

5.
6.
7.

8.

Systemic or transformational impact
1. Does the proposal have elements of sustainable
systems re-engineering and or sustainable
process re-engineering which would lead
to improved systems, business processes or
delivery mechanisms?
2. Does the proposal involve capacity and
institution building that can foster better
outcomes on a long-term sustainable basis?
3. Does the proposal have focus on service
delivery/improvement (rather than only asset

1

9.

10.

creation) in a sustainable manner - which other
wise has not been the norm in the projects
implemented in the sector - e.g. focus on levels
of reduction of water loss, focus on number
of hours power/water is available per day,
reduction in waterborne disease?
Does the proposal bring together otherwise
disparate attempts/ schemes to one synergetic
platform which has not been possible hitherto
(e.g. nutrition, gender issues, livelihoods)?
Does the proposal seek to create additional
choice for the citizens to access required
service/entitlements?
Does the proposal involve energy efficiency
and environmental benefits without making the
project/ outcomes expensive?
Are knowledge transfer, technology transfer
and best practices transfer from international
experience envisaged with adequate long
term engagement for ensuring sustainability in
Indian context?
Does the proposal have institutional
improvement measures: e.g. (a) Accounting
Reforms (moving from single entry cash
based accounting system to double entry
accrual system of accounting (b) Ring
fencing of finances/activities including
corporatisation wherever needed c) creation
and implementation of appropriate revenue
models e.g. tariff reforms or alternative revenue
structuring.
Does the proposal address issues of real sector
reforms e.g. Development of sectoral policies,
development of institutional structures, setting
up of regulatory framework/ regulators?
Does the proposal have elements that
are transformational in nature - which if

Based on Government of India circular (F.No. 3/2/2010-FB.II), issued on September 1, 2011, outlining a country-led screening criteria for projects
posed to the World Bank, ADB and IFAD.

97

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

implemented could transform the way systems
function or the way delivery of services are done?
Innovations and piloting of new approaches
1. Does the proposal have innovative elements and
new approaches that have not been tried in the
sector and have reasonable chance of changing
for the better the way things are done in the sector
and have some chance of scalable replication?
2. Does the proposal look at financial sustainability
and O&M related issues which otherwise has
not been the norm in the sector?

98

Innovations in financing and leveraging
1. Does the proposal use different/ innovative
financing products /modalities?
2. Does the proposal involve co-financing from
other financing agencies?
3. Does the proposal catalyze private sector
financing in different ways and especially to
create leverage?
4. Does the proposal involve CDM and accrual
of carbon credits as natural by­product of core
development projects which can be a way of
financing the project?

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex 8

Consultations Held to Inform the
Preparation of the CPS
World Bank FY2011 Client Survey for India
Background. In order to develop more effective
strategies for its work in the country, the World
Bank in India conducted a stakeholder perception
survey in May–June 2012 to gauge how its work
was perceived. The survey covered a wide range
of questions about India’s development priorities,
perceptions about the Bank in India, the Bank’s
perceived strengths and weaknesses, the relevance
and quality of its research and knowledge, the ease
of access and usefulness of its information, and its
future role in the country.
Process. The survey was conducted by the market
research firm AC Nielson through mailed and online
questionnaires, as well as face-to-face interviews.
It covered a fair mix of think tanks, central and
state government bodies, development agencies,
civil society, media, the private sector, and project
beneficiaries. About half of the respondents worked
professionally with the World Bank. The survey
covered the states of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
and Himachal Pradesh, as well as the cities of Delhi
and Mumbai.
Results. Most stakeholders expressed confidence
about the World Bank Group’s effectiveness and
felt the institution had the financing, knowledge,
and skills to help India solve complex development
challenges. Better development results could be
achieved if the WBG increased its collaboration
with local governments, academia, think tanks,
and research institutes in India. Going forward,
respondents felt the World Bank had a significant
role to play in the country; that value would be

greater, however, if its experts improved their
knowledge of India’s specific challenges, reduced
the complexity of obtaining financing, and offered
more innovative knowledge products.
Areas of focus. Stakeholders were of the opinion
that rural development, agricultural development,
and food security were the most important areas
for reducing poverty (tables A9.1 and A9.2).
Education, job creation, and economic growth
were also believed to be critically important. Rural
development, governance, and energy were seen
to be the key drivers of economic growth, and
stakeholders wanted the WBG to remain engaged
in these areas. On the global development
agenda, respondents wanted the WBG to
engage on issues related to climate change,
communicable diseases, international financial
systems, and trade. Areas for future research
included rural and agricultural development,
food security, education, poverty reduction,
governance and water and sanitation.
Value to clients. Financing, particularly investment
lending, was considered the Bank’s most effective
instrument in support of the development agenda
(table A9.3). This was followed by the Bank’s
technical assistance and advice and its ability to
strengthen institutions. Bank research was perceived
to be relevant and accessible. However, there were
some concerns about the extent of the Bank’s
inclusiveness and openness, the accessibility of its
staff, and its linkages to non-Bank expertise (table
A9.3). Selective concerns were expressed about the
Bank’s effectiveness in governance, job creation, and
natural resource management.

99

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Table A9.1.
What would contribute most to reducing poverty?
Percentage of Respondents (N=269)
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

Rural development/agricultural
development/ food security

60%
52%

43%

Education
Job creation/employment

38%

Economic growth

34%

Governance/anti-corruption/law and
justice

25%
21%

Equality of opportunity
Health

19%

Water and sanitation

17%
8%

Social protection
Transport

7%

Other

6%

Gender/social intrusion

6%

Energy

5%

Natural resource management

5%

Urban development

5%

Environment

3%

Conducive environment for private
sector development and FDI

3%

“Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which three areas of development listed below do
you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in India?” (Respondents chose from a list. Responses combined.)

100

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Table A9.2.
Where should the World Bank focus its resources?
Percentage of Respondents (N=269)
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

Rural development/agricultural
development/ food security

50%

60%
52%

Education

32%

Governance/anti-corruption/law and
justice

26%

Water and sanitation

25%

Poverty reduction

25%
24%

Transport
20%

Health
Energy

17%

Job creation/employment

15%

Economic growth

15%
11%

Urban development
Environment

9%

Conducive environment for private
sector development and FDI

5%

Equality of opportunity

5%

“When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in India, in which sectoral areas do you
believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in India? (Choose no more than THREE)”
(Respondents chose from a list. Responses combined.)

101

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Table A9.3.
What is the greatest value of the Bank?
Percentage of Respondents (N=264)
0%

10%

20%

Financial resources

40%

42%

Institutional strengthening

14%

Technical assistance

13%

AAA, studies/reports/policy notes

11%

Training/capacity building

5%

Policy advice

6%

Studies/analyses

3%

Mobilizing third party financial resources

30%

14%

17%
8%
8%

9%

19%

11%

50%

60%
51%

33%
27%

22%
22%

14%
11%

3% 4% 7%

Linkage to non-Bank expertise
Donor coordination

4% 5%
2% 4%

Other

2%

Data

2%

Convening/facilitating

Greatest value

1%

Second greatest value

“When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second great
value in India?” (Respondents chose from a list.)
Notes: In the previous FY2004 country survey, more than two-thirds (68%) of all respondents indicated that providing loans to finance development
projects was the greatest value of the Bank.

102

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Table A9.4.
What is the Bank’s greatest weakness?
Percentage of Respondents (N=264)
0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

Too bureaucratic in its operational
policies and procedures

27%

Too influenced by developed countries

27%

Not adequately sensitive to political/
social realities in India

18%

World Bank processes too slow and
complex

16%

Imposing technocratic solutions
without regard to political realities

15%

Not collaborating enough with
non-state actors

14%

Not exploring alternative
policy options

13%

Not willing to honestly criticize policies
and reform efforts in the country

12%
12%

Not enough public disclosure of
its work
9%

Not aligned with country priorities
Other

8%
6%

Not client focused

5%

Staff too in accessible
Arrogant in its approach

3%

Not aligned with other donors’ work

3%

The credibility of its knowledge/data

1%

“Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in India? (Choose no more than TWO)”
(Respondents chose from a list. Responses combined.)
Notes: Respondents in the previous country survey (FY2004) indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses were imposing technocratic solutions
without regard to political realities (24%), not considering alternative policy options (21%), and being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
procedures (20%).

103

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

World Bank Group CPS multistakeholder
consultations
In the summer of 2012, the Bank team held
multistakeholder consultations to identify priorities
for the new CPS. Consultations were held with a
broad range of stakeholders to tap their experience
and knowledge and hear their ideas about how
the Bank could help India meet its long-standing
development agenda as well as the new challenges
thrown up by unprecedented economic growth
and the recent slowdown.
Process. In mid-May 2012, a draft concept note
was prepared by the WBG, outlining initial thoughts
on its strategy for 2013–16. This was followed by
discussions with the Ministry of Finance and line
ministries to assess the central government’s views
on India’s challenges and to identify key areas
where the WBG assistance could have the greatest
impact. To capture the diversity of development
challenges facing India today and the views of
state governments, further consultations were held
with officials in four states: Assam, Chhattisgarh,
Karnataka, and Uttar Pradesh.
These early consultations were accompanied by
parallel consultations with civil society organizations
in the state capitals of Assam, Chhattisgarh,
Karnataka, and Uttar Pradesh, as well as in Delhi and
Mumbai. Ahead of the consultations, all participants
received a presentation in both English and Hindi
that spelled out the main thrusts of the previous
CPS, opportunities and challenges both within and
outside India, and India’s own future direction as
articulated in the approach paper to the 12th Five
Year Plan. This was followed by a paper presenting
the WBG’s initial thoughts on its new strategy, based
on early deliberations.
Participants were asked to express their views
candidly on what they felt should be the
development priorities for India (and their state),
and whether the CPS captured those priorities. They
were also asked what role they envisaged for the
WBG in support of those priorities, in which sectors
that support would be most effective, and what
form the support should take (finance, knowledge,
experience sharing, and so on). After feedback from
the Bangalore consultations, a section was added
on the lessons learned from earlier Bank projects.
104

To reach a much wider audience, the details of the
discussions were shared on the Bank’s external
website, with comments and suggestions invited
from the public at large.
Results. Despite the diversity of development
challenges raised during the consultations,
participants identified a few key areas where the
WBG could play a catalytic role:
Agriculture
Agriculture was repeatedly identified as an
overarching concern, given the importance of
food security for the country and the fact that
the majority of India’s rural poor depend on
agriculture for at least a portion of their income.
Participants strongly felt that the WBG could help
increase agricultural productivity by supporting the
development of agriculture-related infrastructure
and services. Ideas included support for low-cost
irrigation, improved access to credit, the provision
of adequate warehousing and storage facilities,
bringing the benefits of research to farmers,
upgrading technological interventions, providing
crop insurance, developing village roads, and
building primary-level processing and marketing
capacity at the grass roots. The improvement of
livestock, particularly for dairy farming, was also
seen as important. Participants felt that the creation
of one-stop facilities for farmers should be a priority.
Other matters of perceived importance were
the proper management of the country’s water
resources and strengthening agriculture’s resilience
to climate change.
Health
Health and malnutrition were also high priorities.
Participants pointed out that only a small
percentage of the population had access to formal
health care. Public sector services were beset
with poor management and leakages, and some
80 percent of health spending occurred in the
private sector. An average family spent more on
health care than on education, with the high cost
of treatment often leading to impoverishment.
The sector faced a critical shortage of human
resources, especially in rural areas, making it
necessary to train local people as paramedics.
Some participants suggested that a public-

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

private-partnership model in health care could be
promoted, with targeted subsidy for the poor. The
World Bank could help in providing technical and
managerial assistance to the sector, along with
capacity building at various levels. Bank support
could also be expanded to include the promotion
of preventive and alternative medical systems.
Education and skills
Education was another area of concern. Participants
highlighted the poor quality of elementary
education, which laid a weak academic foundation
that made it difficult for students to cope at higher
levels, with direct effects on the quality of human
resources. Moreover, the emphasis on enrolment
numbers created an erroneous impression of
universal schooling. Several speakers emphasized
the need for meaningful skills training for youth to
enable them to set up microenterprises and small
businesses, thereby slowing the migration of rural
youth to urban areas. There was also a perceived
need to increase the number of seats available
in institutions providing technical and vocational
education, and increase resources allocated to such
institutions.
Urbanization
Discussions also focused on the challenges created
by India’s rapid urbanization. It was observed that
$1 trillion would be needed for urban development
over the next two decades to meet the needs of
India’s rapidly urbanizing population. However,
it was also suggested that allocations should
go primarily to local governments, and that
transparency in public expenditures should be
strengthened. Some participants recommended
that the WBG support the planned development
of the rapidly growing second- and third-tier cities,
especially by providing technological and scientific
solutions for public transportation, waste disposal,
and other urban problems. Several participants
expressed apprehension that rapid urbanization,
especially through rural-urban migration, was
creating pockets of urban poverty that were likely
to deepen unless the skills of rural migrants were
developed to improve their employability. Facilities
in rural areas also needed to be improved to halt
migration to urban centers.

Governance
The importance of good governance was
repeatedly emphasized, particularly the need
to tackle corruption. It was felt that improving
governance should be a focus area of the Bank’s
new strategy. Participants expressed the need for
greater transparency and disclosure regarding
the use of public funds and the outcomes of
publicly funded programs. They also cited a need
for independent monitoring at the block, district,
and state levels. The Bank, they said, could provide
technical assistance and expertise in this area. To
support decentralized planning, participants saw it
as important to strengthen grassroots institutions
(Panchayati Raj institutions, or PRIs) and to build
their capacity by sharing examples of successful
community-driven projects, the more because the
PRIs provided the only institutional encouragement
to women’s political empowerment in the country.
Convergence of government programs was also
needed through greater interministerial and
interdepartmental coordination. Several speakers
pointed out the need to develop a current database
of critical indicators—such as population, maternal
health, education, location of resources, and so
on—to improve development planning at the
grassroots and to allocate resources wisely.
Environment
Participants highlighted the environmental cost of
high growth as manifested in rampant water, air and
soil pollution. It was emphasized that development
programs should factor in environmental
sustainability to ensure holistic development in
addition to the creation of wealth creation and
the stimulation of economic growth. It was also
suggested that the Bank help the government to
come up with a climate-change response for the
medium and long terms.
Infrastructure
Discussions also centered on the need for
strengthening infrastructure, particularly transport,
communications, and power. Several participants
felt that growth in sectors such as water, energy,
roads and rail was needed if the manufacturing
sector was to develop to its full potential.

105

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Small business
Several participants said that the informal sector
needed to be recognized as the biggest trigger
for growth as it generated far more employment
than the formal sector. However, productivity in
small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) needed
to be improved and such enterprises integrated
with markets across the country. Given the sector’s
enormous potential, it was suggested that SMEs
(including microenterprises) should be served
by dedicated financial institutions that provided
expertise together with financial support. It was
observed that the World Bank could act as a catalyst
and counselor for this sector; moreover, deeper
research on the sector’s considerable untapped
potential was needed.
Regional imbalances and the unique characteristics
of some of India’s regions were also discussed. For
instance, in the northeast, development projects
needed to take into account the region’s unique
ecological characteristics, and more research was
required to understand the richness of the resource
base. The World Bank could play an important role in
Assam by supporting small farmers; strengthening
transportation (including river transportation on
the Brahmaputra), communications, and power;
and expanding microfinance and vocational
training. In Chhattisgarh, while highlighting the

106

difficulties of working in Maoist-dominated areas,
participants pointed to the plight of farmers and
forest-dependent people and the need to improve
primary health care and education, upgrade the
delivery of government programs, and ensure the
judicious use of the state’s natural resources.
Other areas of focus
Children, the disabled, the elderly, and agri-business
were identified as sectors that required specific
mention in the strategy. It was mentioned that
senior citizens—whose number is expected to rise
to about 340 million by 2050 according to a United
Nations estimate—required special focus as they
were excluded from most development programs.
Further, in many rural areas, young people were
migrating to urban centers, leaving their elders
behind to fend for themselves without a support
system. In the absence of a clear agenda to address
this issue seriously, a major problem was bound to
appear.
CPS Formulation and Consultation Process
A more detailed version of the CPS consultation
process, with the names of participants, details of
discussions, and other information, is available on
the World Bank’s India website:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/india.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex 9

The Indian Statistical System
India has been a pioneer in the collection and use
of statistics for national development and has one
of the largest and most complex statistical systems
in the world. The complexity derives from the size
of the economy and the population, the great
variety of economic activities and social conditions,
the variability in natural endowments and
environmental conditions and the constitutional
structure of a federal state. While national statistics
are the responsibility of the central government,
state and local governments have formal
responsibility for the collection of the basic data
which make up the national estimates.
The Indian Statistical System (ISS) is the responsibility
of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation (MOSPI). The Statistics Wing of
the Ministry – also called the National Statistical
Office (NSO – includes the Central Statistics Office
(CSO), responsible for the compilation of national
statistics and statistical standards, the National
Sample Survey Office, responsible for sample surveys
throughout India, and the Computer Center. At
the Center statistical work is also carried out in a
number of ministries coordinated by the CSO. At
the state level and below, statistical activities are
the responsibility of state governments and most
states have a department of Economics or Statistics,
or its equivalent, to coordinate activities. Statistical
activities also take place in districts and panchayats
(local levels). To oversee and promote coordination of
the ISS, in 2005 the Government set up a permanent
National Statistical Commission (NSC). The NSC
works to promote coordination, improve standards
and to ensure that the ISS as a whole meets the
needs of the nation to support economic, social and
environmental development.

1
2
3

A strong history of statistical development:
Significant development of the ISS and its related
institutions took place in the first decades after
Independence. The Indian Statistical Institute, for
example, was responsible for the development of
many of the statistical procedures and techniques
that are widely used today throughout the world.
The National Sample Survey, which is now in its
68th round, has collected and disseminated an
enormous amount of extremely valuable data
about the economic activity and social conditions
of households throughout the country. It represents
the pre-eminent source of data for micro-economic
research in India and a very important resource for
historical analysis.
In many respects, the Indian statistical system
in 2012 is sophisticated and well-resourced. For
example, India was one of the first subscribers to
the IMF’s Special Data Dissemination Standard
(SDDS) and has been in compliance with the
standard since 19961. The most recent IMF Article IV
staff report states that “Macroeconomic statistics are
adequate for surveillance, but weaknesses remain
in the timeliness and coverage of certain statistical
series. India has an elaborate system for compiling
economic and financial statistics and produces
a vast quantity of data covering most sectors of
the economy.”2 The World Bank’s Bulletin Board
on Statistical Capacity (BBSC)3, indicates that the
Statistical Capacity Indicator for India is significantly
higher than for other IDA countries and for other
countries in the South Asia region. At the national
level, the statistical system is able to call upon a
cadre of highly skilled and experienced statisticians
and there is an extensive education and training
system in place to replace those who leave.

http://dsbb.imf.org/images/pdfs/AnnualReports/2010/IND_SDDS_AR2010.pdf
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2011/cr1150.pdf
http://go.worldbank.org/QVSQM1R6V0

107

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

The statistical system under pressure: Despite
significant progress, by the end of the twentieth
century, the Indian statistical system as a whole
was under considerable pressure. As demand for
statistics increased generally and as new concerns
and problems led to demands for new data. To
a large extent, however, both overall coverage
and the quality of data also declined as financial
resources were limited under general fiscal
pressures and as Government policies turned away
from central planning towards greater private
sector involvement in national development. By
the time of the Millennium there was widespread
concern that the system had been increasingly
unable to respond as economic reforms,
deregulating private investment, and promoting
the market economy kicked in and as more powers
were devolved to the states. To help understand
the problems, in 2000 the Government set up a
National Statistical Commission (NSC), to carry out
a comprehensive examination of the statistical
system and to make recommendations on how it
could be improved.
The 2001 NSC report identified a number of
deficiencies in administrative statistics as well as
censuses and surveys, including: a) gaps in the
availability of needed information; b) delays in the
publication of results; c) large and frequent revisions
of published results; d) gross discrepancies between
official statistics from different sources; and e) lack
of transparency in statistical operations. At the same
time, quality assurance processes were ineffective
and significant sets of data especially at the state
level were judged to be of poor quality. The report
also noted the absence of effective coordination
to promote efficient production of comparable
statistics, inadequate technical knowledge of staff,
inadequate numbers of statistical staff in place
and inadequate information and communications
technology and physical infrastructure. In addition,
it was found that variations in the capacities of
state Statistical Bureaus had had a major effect on

108

the quality and consistency of state and national
statistics.
The World Bank’s involvement in statistics in
India: The World Bank has been in a dialogue with
the Government on statistics for more than fifteen
years. This engagement has been based on three
arguments. First, it supports a program of reform
which the Government of India itself has identified
as a priority. The importance of good statistics to
provide the evidence base for socio-economic
development has long been recognized in India.
An efficient and effective national statistical system
in India is seen as a core function of Government
at all levels and an integral component of the
accountability and transparency framework.
Second, good statistics are an integral part of
the development results agenda and support
development efforts at all levels and in all sectors.
Third, an efficient and effective statistical system
is essential not only for the proper operation of
government at all levels but also for the World Bank
Group’s own lending and non-lending operations in
India.
World Bank support to statistics was initiated in
1996, and a draft project was prepared in 1999,
but it did not proceed until after the NSC issued
its report. The engagement was re-started in 2005
with a number of technical studies, including an
assessment of the requirements to strengthen
state statistical systems. In 2010, Statistical
Strengthening Loan for India (a development
policy loan for $107 million) was approved by
the Board. It supported a program of reform and
capacity strengthening that the Government
had initiated in 2006, largely in response to the
recommendations of the 2001 NSC Report. In
particular, the Government established a centrally
sponsored scheme to support a process of reform
and statistical capacity building in the 35 States
and Union Territories. Under this scheme states
undertook to invest in their statistical systems in

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

line with the needs for both national and state
level statistics, setting their own priorities and
timetable for reform. In return, the centre provided
grants, training and technical support.
What has been achieved? Although the Loan
closed in 2011, the process of reform and capacity
building continues. The centrally sponsored
statistical strengthening scheme, which was set up
under the 11th Plan will continue through the 12th
Plan and possibly beyond. Thirty-three out of 35
States have signed up to participate in the scheme,
nine states have completed their strategic plans,
and most are now implementing the reforms and
building capacity. A monitoring system has been
established and progress reports are produced

regularly. After a slow start, progress is now picking
up and MOSPI anticipates that significant additional
funds will be needed in the 12th Plan beyond
the initial allocation. Building on lessons learned
from the Statistical Strengthening Loan, the World
Bank will explore options for further engagement
under the new CPS. An important part of the
engagement for the Government was to gain
access to experience and knowledge of statistical
capacity building programs and good practice
elsewhere. It is clear that success requires careful
and sustained follow up of the reform and capacity
building process, and that all states would benefit
from additional technical assistance and capacity
building efforts both to prepare strategic plans, and,
more importantly, implement them.

109

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex A2

India at a glance
Poverty and Social
India

South Asia

Lower- middleincome

1,241.5

1,657

2,533

1,410

1,299

1,760

1,746.5

2,151

4,458

Population (%)

1.4

1.5

1.5

Labor force (%)

0.2

1.1

1.4

Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)

30

..

..

Urban population (% of total population)

31

31

39

Life expectancy at birth (years)

65

65

66

Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)

47

48

46

Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

44

33

24

Access to an improved water source (% of population)

92

90

87

Literacy (% of population age 15+)

63

62

71

116

106

104

Male

116

107

106

Female

116

105

102

2011
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
Average annual growth, 2005-11

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 2005-11)

Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)

Development diamond*
Life expectancy

GNI
per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source
India

Lower-middle-income group

Notes: 2011 data are preliminary estimates.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will be
incomplete.

110

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Key Economic Ratios and Long-Term Trends

GDP (US$ billions)

1991

2001

2010

2011

274.8

492.4

1,684.3

1,848.0

22.5

25.7

35.8

36.6

Gross capital formation/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP

8.3

12.4

22.8

24.6

22.5

24.2

31.7

31.1

..

..

..

..

Current account balance/GDP

-0.4

0.7

-2.7

-4.2

Interest payments/GDP

1.7

0.9

0.3

0.4

Total debt/GDP

31.6

20.2

17.2

18.1

Total debt service/exports

33.4

18.0

6.3

7.1

Present value of debt/GDP

..

..

..

15.3

Present value of debt/exports

..

..

..

68.7

Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

(average annual growth)
2010

2011

GDP

1991-01
6.2

7.9

9.6

6.9

7.0

GDP per capita

4.2

6.4

8.0

5.4

5.6

12.3

15.1

22.7

15.3

21.8

Exports of goods and services

2001-11

2011-15

Economic ratios*
Trade

Domestic
savings

Capital
formation

Indebtedness
India

Lower-middle-income group

Notes: 2011 data are preliminary estimates.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will be
incomplete.

111

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Structure of the Economy
(% of GDP)
1991

2001

2010

2011

Agriculture

29.4

23.0

17.7

17.2

Industry

25.4

25.2

27.1

26.4

Manufacturing

15.2

14.7

14.5

13.9

Services

45.2

51.8

55.1

56.4

Household final consumption expenditure

65.9

63.4

56.5

57.2

General gov’t final consumption expenditure

11.6

12.4

11.9

11.7

8.3

13.2

26.9

29.8

2001-11

2010

2011

Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
1991-01
Agriculture

3.3

3.2

7.0

2.8

Industry

6.2

8.4

7.2

3.4

Manufacturing

6.9

8.6

7.6

2.5

Services

8.0

9.6

9.3

8.9

Household final consumption expenditure

5.9

6.4

7.0

7.5

General gov’t final consumption expenditure

6.9

7.3

7.8

5.1

Gross capital formation

8.0

13.2

11.1

11.1

13.5

16.9

15.6

18.5

Imports of goods and services

Growth of capital and GDP (%)

Growth of exports and imports (%)

20

40

15

30

10

20

5

10

0

06

07

08

09

11

0

06

07

08

09

-10

-5
GDP
Notes: 2011 data are preliminary estimates.

112

10

GCF

Imports

Exports

10

11

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Prices and Government Finance
1991

2001

2010

2011

Consumer prices

13.5

4.3

10.4

8.2

Implicit GDP deflator

13.8

3.2

8.5

8.0

Current revenue

18.6

16.2

20.2

18.7

Current budget balance

-5.4

-6.9

-4.1

-4.8

Overall surplus/deficit

-8.6

-9.7

-7.9

-8.3

Domestic prices
(% age)

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)

1991

2001

2010

2011

17,865

43,827

251,136

309,843

Tea

492

361

691

853

Iron

135

230

639

789

13,148

33,370

168,098

207,393

19,411

51,413

369,769

499,533

..

..

..

..

Fuel and energy

5,325

14,000

106,068

143,291

Capital goods

4,233

9,882

71,627

96,763

Export price index (2000=100)

..

..

..

..

Import price index (2000=100)

..

..

..

..

Terms of trade (2000=100)

..

..

..

..

Manufactures
Total imports (cif )
Food

Inflation (%)

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

14

600,000

12

500,000

10

400,000

8

300,000

6

200,000

4

100,000

2
0

06

07

08

GDP deflator

09

10
CPI

11

0

05

06
Exports

07

08

09

10

11

Imports

Notes: 2011 data are preliminary estimates.

113

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

1991
23,288
24,879
-1,591
-3,830
4,243
-1,178
4,563
-3,385

2001
61,843
70,093
-8,250
-4,206
15,856
3,400
8,551
-11,951

2010
382,280
464,054
-81,775
-17,308
53,140
-45,958
59,008
-13,050

2011
450,777
576,439
-125,662
-15,987
63,494
-78,180
65,349
12,831

9,220
24.5

54,106
47.7

396,666
45.6

414,136
47.9

1991
86,864
8,459
14,203
7,858
1,170
242

2001
99,499
7,009
19,458
11,770
1,091
570

2010
290,351
11,180
25,888
24,407
625
1,024

(US$ millions)
2011
334,331
11,524
26,605
29,177
740
1,101

565
2,897
1,476
74
5

557
363
-1,444
5,472
2,950

1,007
5,400
18,989
26,502
30,442

..
2,631
17,958
32,190
-4,137

2,861
2,184
669
1,515
744
772

2,582
1,997
1,152
845
508
337

4,348
4,401
1,374
3,027
275
2,752

7,144
2,683
1,534
1,149
308
841

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

Current account balance to GDP (%)
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5

114

05

06

07

08

09

Composition of 2011 debt (US$ mill.)
10

11
IBRD
11,524

IDA
26,605

Short-term
78,052

IMF
6,108
Other multilateral
10,711
Bilateral
26,870
Private
174,461

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex B2

India - Selected Indicators* of
Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
As of Date January 24, 2013
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousand)
Average Supervision (US$ thousand/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
*

2010

2011

2012

2013

75
3.7
9.3
11.2
10.7
11.8
27.5

81
3.9
8.6
12.0
9.9
12.4
16.9

76
3.8
7.9
12.1
10.5
13.4
13.0

77
4.2
19.5
27.2
20.8
29.8
4.3

yes
14,390
192

yes
12,199
151

yes
16,243
214

yes
14,318
186

Since FY 80
350
49,161
25.8
23.2

Last Five FYs
19
5,359
15.8
11.4

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank’s country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank’s portfolio at the beginning of the year: Investment projects
only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, which includes all active projects as well as
projects which exited during the fiscal year.

115

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex B3A

CAS Annex B3A - IBRD/IDA
Program Summary: India
As of March 31, 2013

Fiscal
Year

Project Name

IBRD
US$ M

IDA a/
US$ M

GEF/MP/
CTF US$ M

TOTAL
US$ M

INTEGRATION
2013
2014

61.7

61.7

Kerala Transport II

216.0

216.0

National Highways Interconnectivity

500.0

500.0

Gujarat Highways II

350.0

350.0

1,200.0

1,200.0

Northeast Power Transmission I

425.0

425.0

Tamil Nadu Roads II

300.0

300.0

Himachal Pradesh State Roads - Additional Financing b/

Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor II
2015

Implementing Perform, Achieve, Trade - CTF

50.0

50.0

100.0

AP Rural Roads

120.0

120.0

Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor III

525.0

525.0

Northeast Power Transmission II

500.0

500.0

Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization

325.0

Luhri Hydro

325.0

650.0

Sub-total by engagement area

4,897.7

650.0
325.0

50.0

5,272.7

TRANSFORMATION
2013

Karnataka Watersheds II b/
HP Mid-Himalayan Watersheds - Additional Financing
Himachal Pradesh DPL Green Growth

b/

b/

60.0

60.0

37.0

37.0

100.0

100.0

Super Efficient Equipment Program for Egy Effcy - CTF

2014

50.0

Maharashtra Rural Water and Sanitation III

290.0

290.0

Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring II

300.0

300.0

Rural Water Supply and Sanitation for Low-income States

500.0

500.0

Karnataka Urban Water Modernization

190.0

Uttarakhand Watersheds II

190.0
100.0
25.0

25.0

Efficient and Sustainable City Bus Services - GEF

10.1

10.1

Himachal Pradesh DPL II Green Growth - CTF
Sustainable Livelihoods & Adaptation to Climate Change GEF
Informal Settlements Improvement Project

Sub-total by engagement area

10.0

10.0

100.0

100.0

8.8

8.8

500.0

Neeranchal National Watersheds

116

100.0

Partial Risk Sharing Facility in Energy Efficiency - CTF
Facility for Low Carbon Technology Deployment - GEF

2015

50.0

500.0
245.0

790.0

1,532.0

245.0
203.9

2,780.9

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Fiscal
Year

Project Name

IBRD
US$ M

IDA a/
US$ M

GEF/MP/
CTF US$ M

TOTAL
US$ M

INCLUSION
2013

ICDS System Strengthening & Nutrition Improvement b/
Karnataka Health Systems - Additional Financing
Bihar Panchayati Raj Institutions

b/

b/

HIV AIDS IV

2014

2015

106.0

106.0

70.0

70.0

84.0

84.0

255.0

255.0

Bihar Social Protection

70.0

70.0

Low-Income Housing

100.0

100.0

Tamil Nadu & Puducherri Disaster Risk Reduction

202.5

202.5

AP Rural Inclusive Growth

150.0

150.0

Teacher Training in Bihar

200.0

200.0

SSA (Elementary Education) IIII

400.0

400.0

Bihar Flood Rehabilitation APL II

250.0

250.0

ICDS System Strengthening & Nutrition APL II

344.0

344.0

National Cyclone Risk Mitigation APL II

250.0

250.0

40.0

40.0

250.0

250.0

3,016.5

3,061.5

Kerala Health Systems
Bihar Flood Rehabilitation APL III
Sub-total by engagement area
Total by
FY
2013

377.7

2,074.50

50.0

2,502.2

2014

2,665.0

1,100.0

153.9

3,918.9

2,645.0

1,454.0

50.0

4,149.0

2015

c/

a/ $2.73 billion IDA16 committed in FY12
b/ approved
c/ project preparation underway; assumes transitional IDA17 financing

117

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex B3B

India: IFC Investment
Operations Program
2010

2011

2012

2013*

1130

421

789

653

806

401

789

468

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only
Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
Agriculture and Forestry

2

0

0

13

Chemicals

4

10

15

11

Collective Investment Vehicles

2

6

15

4

Electric Power

14

14

8

35

Finance & Insurance

25

55

31

26

0

2

Education Services

7

Food & Beverages
Health Care

7

Industrial & Consumer Products

4

Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing

9

Oil, Gas and Mining

31

9

4
0

0

0

0

8

2

0

0

Plastics & Rubber

4

Primary Metals

3

Professional, Scientific and Technical Services

0

0

Textiles, Apparel & Leather

0

0

Transportation and Warehousing

1

Utilities
Total

9

0

3

2

0

0

2

0

0

100

100

100

100

15

36

34

10

1

0

9

4

83

58

47

62

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC
Accounts only
Equity
Guarantee
Loan
Quasi equity

0

0

0

Quasi loan

1

6

11

25

100

100

100

100

Total
* Data as of Jan 17, 2013

118

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex B4

Summary of World Bank
Knowledge Services - India
As of January 23, 2013

Product Name

Product

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

Macro Brief

ESW

2012

172

G

KG

Policy Brief on Indian Power Sector

ESW

2013

12

G

PS

Orissa: Institutionalizing PSIA Capacity

TA

2012

138

G

PS

Issues in Employment: Global & Country Perspectives

TA

2012

408

G

KG, PD

Review of Regulatory Framework: Ports & Airports

TA

2012

65

G

PS

Visiting Scholars Program

TA

2012

89

B, G

KG

Manufacturing Plan Implementation

TA

2013

45

G

PS

Bihar Growth Assessment

ESW

2013

G

KG

Financial Sector Assessment: Supplementary Studies

ESW

2013

G

KG

Experience with PPPs in Infrastructure

ESW

2013

G

KG

Policy Notes on Power

ESW

2013

G

KG, PS

India Economic Update

ESW

2013

G

KG, PD

Skills Development

ESW

2014

G

KG

States Report

ESW

2014

G

KG

Options Study for Growth on Eastern Dedicated Freight
Corridor

ESW

2014

G

KG

Growth, Inclusion & Competitiveness

ESW

2014

G

KG

Mobilizing Financing for Infrastructure PPPs

ESW

2014

G

PS

Manufacturing Plan Implementation II

TA

2013

G

PS

Solar Power: Renewable Energy Market Transformation
Initiative

TA

2014

G

PS

Transport Policies & Reform Activities

TA

2014

G

PS

Orissa Mining & Inclusive Growth

TA

2014

G

PS

Partnership for Market Readiness in Renewable Energy

TA

2014

D

PS

Financial Sector Assessment Follow-up: RBI Banking SPN

TA

2015

G

PS

INTEGRATION
Recent completions (FY12-13)

Underway (FY 13-14)

119

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Product Name

Product

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

TA

2012

73

G

KG

Urbanization Review

ESW

2012

241

G

KG

Evaluation of National Rural Employment Guarantee
Program

ESW

2012

239

G

KG

Urban Institutional Strengthening & Capacity Building

TA

2012

92

G

PS

Strengthening Institutions for Mgmt of Land Acquisition
and R&R

TA

2012

1178

G

PS

Facilitating PPPs for Urban Infrastructure Development

TA

2012

62

G

PS

Impact Evaluation of Rural Credit Cooperatives Project

Impact Eval

2013

350

G

KG

Social Dimensions of Urbanization

ESW

2013

G

KG

Enhancing Agricultural Productivity: Policy & Investment
Priorities

ESW

2013

G

KG

Rural Road Development - Benefits Impact of PMGSY
Project

ESW

2014

G

KG

National Land Records Modernization Implementation
Support

TA

2014

G

PS

Inclusive Heritage-Based City Development Planning

TA

2014

G

PS

Food Security in Tribal & Conflict-affected Areas

TA

2014

G

PS

Cap Dev for Integrated Water Resources Development
& Mgmt

TA

2015

G

PS

Madhya Pradesh Pilot on Integrated Child Development

Impact Eval

2012

569

G

KG

Teacher Accountability & School Outcomes

Impact Eval

2012

1011

G

KG

Health Insurance System of India

Impact Eval

2012

142

G

KG

Financial Literacy & Education

Impact Eval

2013

478

G

KG

Sundarbans Climate Change Mitigation & Disaster Risk
Mgmt

TA

2012

1765

G

KG

Implementation Support for India Disaster Risk
Mitigation Program

TA

2012

204

G

PS

Bihar: Immediate Relief Support & Disaster Risk
Management

TA

2012

297

G

PS

Capacity Building in Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR)

TA

2012

286

G

PS

Consultations on Human Development

TA

2012

242

B

PD

Health Policy Notes & Client Engagement

TA

2012

628

G

KG

Growth & Inclusion Workshop

TA

2013

121

G

PD

TRANSFORMATION
Recent completions (FY12-13)
PPP Options Study for Waste Water Management

Underway (FY 13-14)

INCLUSION
Recent completions (FY12-13)

120

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Product Name

Product

Completion
FY

Human Resources for More Effective Health Systems

ESW

Service Delivery & Public Spending in Health

Cost
(US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

2013

G

KG

ESW

2013

G

KG

Institutional Arrangements for Nutrition

ESW

2013

G

PS

Madhya Pradesh Higher Education

ESW

2014

G

KG

Andhra Pradesh: Teacher Accountability & Student
Achievement

Impact Eval

2013

G

KG

Andhra Pradesh: Rural Poverty Impact Evaluation

Impact Eval

2014

G

KG

Karnataka Results-based Financing Hospital Care

Impact Eval

2014

G

KG

Strengthening Implementation of Rural Livelihoods
Programs

TA

2013

G

PS

Improving Technical & Vocational Education & Training
in West Bengal

TA

2013

G

PS

Improving Social Inclusion in India's Health Ins Scheme
for the Poor

TA

2014

G

PS

Teacher Education & Professional Devmt -Int'l Best
Practices

TA

2014

G

PS

National Unique Identification System

TA

2014

G

PS

Multi-sectoral Nutrition Action in Bihar

TA

2014

G

PS

Community Food & Nutrition Security Initiatives in HighPoverty States

TA

2014

G

PS

Bihar Kosi Flood Recovery & Climate Adaptation
Program

TA

2014

G

PS

Social Pensions for Ministry of Rural Development

TA

2014

G

PS

Foundation for Corporate Social Responsibility

TA

2014

G

PS

Higher Education

TA

2014

G

KG

Strengthening Institutional Capacity of RSBY

TA

2015

G

PS

Social Observatory for Rural Food & Nutrition Security
in NRLM

TA

2015

G

KG, PS

ESW

2012

446

G

KG

TA

2012

55

G, D

PS

Underway (FY 13-14)

ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Recent completions (FY12-13)
Environmental Challenges of India's Rapid Growth
Climate Investment Plan

121

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Product Name

Product

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

TA

2012

327

G

PS

ESW

2013

G

PS

Procurement Capacity Building

TA

2013

G

PS

Chattisgarh Capacity Building Program

TA

2014

G

PS

Bihar Capacity Building Program

TA

2014

G

PS

Karnataka Performance Management

TA

2014

G

PS

E-Governance in the Northeast

TA

2014

G

PS

Karnataka PFM Reform Action Plan

TA

2014

G

KG

Support for Performance Management Initiatives

TA

2014

G

PS

Uttar Pradesh Capacity Building

TA

2015

G

PS

Jharkhand Capacity Building

TA

2015

G

PS

ESW

2014

G

KG

GOVERNANCE
Recent completions (FY12-13)
Constraints to Project Preparation & Implementation
Underway (FY 13-14)
Introduction of e-tools in Mgmt of Construction Projects

GENDER
Underway (FY 13-14)
Gender and Development
a.
b.

122

Government, Donor, Bank.
Knowledge Generation, Public Debate, Problem-Solving.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex B5

India Social Indicators
Latest single year
1980-85

1990-95

Same region/income
group
2004-10

South Asia

Lowermiddleincome

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)

784.5

964.5

1,224.6

1,633.1

2,518.7

2.3

2.0

1.4

1.5

1.6

Urban population (% of population)

24.3

26.6

30.1

30.1

39.4

Total fertility rate (births per woman)

4.3

3.5

2.6

2.7

2.9

..

45.3

37.2

Urban headcount index

..

31.8

25.7

Rural headcount index

..

50.1

41.8

290

360

1,270

1,176

1,623

24

57

152

148

140

31.1

30.8

33.4

Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)

8.7

9.1

8.6

Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

40.1

40.1

42.4

Growth rate (% annual average for period)

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)

..

1.2

1.4

1.3

1.7

3.2

..

3.1

2.5

4.0

..

..

92

86

85

Male

..

..

92

89

87

Female

..

..

89

84

83

Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total

Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total

..

75

92

90

87

Urban

..

90

97

95

93

Rural

..

70

90

88

83

1

72

74

77

80

18

71

72

76

79

Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT

123

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Latest single year
1980-85

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)

1990-95

Same region/income
group
2004-10

South Asia

Lowermiddleincome

..

51

44

33

25

57

60

65

65

65

Male

57

59

64

64

64

Female

57

61

67

67

67

91

72

48

52

50

130

100

63

67

69

Male (per 1,000 population)

261

236

253

239

244

Female (per 1,000 population)

Life expectancy at birth (years)
Total

Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
279

241

168

166

175

Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)

..

470

230

290

300

Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

..

34

53

48

57

Notes: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to change from ISCED76 to
ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one year of age or at any time before the survey.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 17 April 2012.

124

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex B6

India - Key Economic Indicators
Indicator

Actual

Estimate

Projected

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Agriculture

18

18

18

18

17

17

16

15

15

Industry

29

28

28

27

26

25

25

25

25

Services

53

54

55

55

56

58

59

60

60

Total Consumption

66

70

69

68

69

77

73

72

73

Gross domestic fixed
investment

33

32

32

30

30

27

30

30

29

8

9

8

8

8

8

8

8

8

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta

Government investment
Private investment

25

24

23

22

22

19

22

22

21

b

Exports (GNFS)

20

24

20

23

25

27

31

36

41

Imports (GNFS)

24

29

26

27

30

34

37

41

46

Gross domestic savings

34

30

31

32

31

23

27

28

27

Gross national savings

37

34

34

34

33

26

29

30

29

1238700

1224097

1361057

1684324

1847982

1967881

2113579

2295980

2475905

960

1030

1160

1280

1410

1540

1660

1770

1890

c

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas
method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 93 prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices

9.8

3.9

8.2

9.6

6.9

5.1

6.4

7.1

7.3

Gross Domestic Income

9.8

5.3

7.7

10.0

7.1

2.8

5.4

6.0

6.7

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 93 prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices

8.2

2.4

6.7

8.0

5.4

3.7

4.9

5.6

5.8

Total consumption

5.7

9.6

4.8

5.7

7.5

20.0

-6.3

0.9

7.5

Private consumption

5.3

9.7

3.3

5.6

8.3

19.6

-7.1

0.1

7.9

256504

294964

277991

382280

450777

529513

659244

822528

1012629

166162

189001

182262

250627

309843

369430

458868

580173

723648

309119

360568

360181

464054

576439

670761

787609

942151

1127393

257629

308520

300644

381061

499533

586140

693201

837620

1008240

-52615

-65604

-82190

-81775

-125662

-141247

-128366

-119624

-114764

Net current transfers

41945

44799

52045

53140

63494

70275

65674

70810

76008

Current account balance

-15737

-27914

-38435

-45958

-78180

-87279

-79974

-69623

-63409

Net private foreign direct
investment

15893

22372

17966

9360

22061

20000

26500

40000

40000

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)

b

Merchandise FOB
Resource balance

125

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Indicator

Actual

Estimate

Projected

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

24724

10303

5792

17145

11592

7245

18423

19437

-2608

Official

2272

2896

3039

5400

2631

6631

6254

5656

1348

Private

22452

7407

2753

11746

8961

614

12168

13781

-3955

67284

-24840

28118

32503

31696

49689

49936

59989

61495

-92164

20079

-13441

-13050

12831

10345

-14885

-49802

-35479

-4.2

-5.4

-6.0

-4.9

-6.8

-7.2

-6.1

-5.2

-4.6

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Primary

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Manufactures

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Long-term loans (net)

Other capital (net, incl. errors &
ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates
(YR93 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)

Merchandise imports (CIF)

..

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)

e

Current revenues

21.0

19.4

18.3

18.9

18.7

18.7

19.0

19.2

19.2

Current expenditures

21.2

23.8

24.2

24.4

23.5

23.8

22.8

22.4

22.2

Current account surplus (+) or
deficit (-)

-0.2

-4.4

-6.0

-5.5

-4.8

-5.1

-3.7

-3.2

-3.0

4.8

4.0

3.9

3.8

3.5

3.6

3.8

3.9

3.9

..

..

..

..

..

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

M2/GDP

23.3

22.5

23.1

21.4

19.6

19.6

20.0

20.0

20.0

Growth of M2 (%)

19.3

8.9

18.2

10.0

5.8

12.9

15.9

14.1

13.7

Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

86.2

53.6

54.9

70.3

65.2

57.9

57.3

50.2

66.4

Merchandise export price
index

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Merchandise import price
index

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Merchandise terms of trade
index

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

108.5

97.8

94.7

102.0

99.1

102.5

102.2

101.8

101.8

Consumer price index (%
change)

6.4

9.0

12.4

10.4

8.2

7.4

7.0

6.5

6.0

GDP deflator (% change)

5.8

8.7

6.0

8.5

8.0

7.4

7.0

6.5

6.0

Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators

Price indices (YR93 =100)

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

126

GDP at factor cost
“GNFS” denotes “goods and nonfactor services.”
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
“LCU” denotes “local currency units.” An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Table B6.1.
India’s Demographic Transition
India Male and Female Population by Age, 2009-10
90 and above
85 to 90
80 to 84
75 to 79
70 to 74
65 to 69
60 to 64
55 to 59
50 to 54
45 to 49
40 to 44
35 to 39
30 to 34
25 to 29
20 to 24
15 to 19
10 to 14
5 to 9
Under 5
60

50

40

30

20

Millions
Males

20

30

40

50

60

40

50

60

Females

Source: NSS 66th round.

India Male and Female Projected Population by Age, 2030
90 and above
85 to 90
80 to 84
75 to 79
70 to 74
65 to 69
60 to 64
55 to 59
50 to 54
45 to 49
40 to 44
35 to 39
30 to 34
25 to 29
20 to 24
15 to 19
10 to 14
5 to 9
Under 5
60

50

40

30

20

Millions
Males

20

30

Females

Source: NSS 66th round & UN Population division.

127

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

15 to 19
20 to 24
25 to 29
30 to 34
35 to 39
40 to 44
45 to 49
50 to 54
55 to 59
60 to 64
65 and above

-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

Average savings rate by average age of the adults in the household (%)

128

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex B7

India - Key Exposure Indicators
Indicator

Actual

Estimate

Projected

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

204005

227043

256229

290351

334331

370576

401250

431936

439329

Net disbursements (US$m)a

83365

41064

29587

56064

55916

16745

30673

30687

7392

7307

7287

5532

5392

7039

39013

43689

53912

62034

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb

..

..

80.2

69.3

67.9

64.4

56.4

49.0

40.7

TDO/GDP

16.5

18.5

18.8

17.2

18.1

18.6

18.6

18.5

17.4

..

..

1.7

1.3

1.4

6.8

6.1

6.1

5.8

21.8

20.8

18.8

17.4

15.6

14.8

14.0

12.9

12.2

6.8

4.7

10.0

10.0

9.3

6.8

8.0

7.9

12.2

19.5

14.0

30.7

32.7

28.7

26.1

29.5

28.1

40.0

..

..

0.2

0.1

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

IBRD TDO (US$m)
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)

6404

7187

7868

10755

11386

11654

12370

13560

15246

Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

5

6

7

10

11

14

18

23

23

25319

25365

26050

25888

26605

26584

26907

27076

27083

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
d

IDA TDO (US$m)

d

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
“XGS” denotes exports of goods and services, including workers’ remittances.
Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for International Settlements.
Includes present value of guarantees.
Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

129

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex B8A

India - Operations Portfolio
(IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of January 24, 2013
(in US dollars)

Closed Projects: 470
IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)

6,957.0

of which has been repaid

230.6

Total Disbursed (Closed)

16,588.1

of which has been repaid

15,354.1

Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)

23,545.1

of which has been repaid

15,584.7

Total Undisbursed (Active)

16,179.8

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

61.5

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

16,241.3

Active Projects:
Project ID

Project Name

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal
Year

Original Amount in US$ Millions

IBRD

P102771

IN: IIFCL - India
Infras Finance Co
Ltd

U

MU

2010

P101650

IN: A. P. RWSS

S

MU

2010

P100789

IN: AP
Community Tank
Management Proj

S

MS

2007

95

P071250

IN: AP Municipal
Development

S

MS

2010

P096021

IN: AP Road Sector
Project

S

MU

P100954

IN: AP Water
Sector
Improvement Proj

S

P084792

IN: Assam Agric
Competitiveness

P096018

IDA

Undisb.

GRANT

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/
Orig.

Frm
Rev’d

1,172

813

150

130

77

95

93

90

300

276

62

2010

320

257

101

S

2010

451

354

5

S

S

2005

68

11

IN: Assam State
Roads Project

S

S

2012

320

12

P122096

IN: Bihar Kosi
Flood Recovery
Project

MS

MU

2011

220

194

53

P102627

IN: Bihar PRI

MS

MS

2013

84

86

1

130

1,195

Cancel.

204
320

-3

-1

-9

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Project ID

Project Name

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal
Year

Original Amount in US$ Millions

IBRD

IDA

Cancel.

Undisb.

GRANT

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/
Orig.

Frm
Rev’d

P090764

IN: Bihar Rural
Livelihoods
Project

S

S

2007

163

98

-58

P088520

IN: Biodiver Cons
& Rural Livelihood

S

MS

2011

15

14

1

P088598

IN: Biodiver
Cons & Rural
Livelihoods

S

MS

2011

7

1

P091031

IN: CBldg for Indus
Poll Mgt

S

S

2010

39

58

8

P099979

IN: CBldg
for Urban
Development

MS

MS

2012

60

57

3

P100584

IN: Chiller EffcyGEF

#

MS

2009

6

5

P102790

IN: Chiller Energy
Efficiency - MP

MS

MS

2009

1

1

P100531

IN: Coal-Fired
Generation
Rehabilitation

MS

MU

2009

45

45

32

P100101

IN: Coal-Fired
Generation
Rehabilitation

MS

MU

2009

180

180

120

P089985

IN: Dam
Rehabilitation &
Improvement

S

S

2010

175

347

95

P114338

IN: Eastern
Dedicated Freight
Corridor-I

S

MS

2011

975

972

127

P100530

IN: Egy Effcy at
SMEs

S

MS

2010

11

7

P110051

IN: Haryana Power
System Improv
Project

S

MS

2010

330

215

202

P96019

IN: HP State Roads
Project

MS

MS

2007

282

132

70

P084632

IN: Hydrology II

MS

MS

2005

105

43

43

43

P121731

IN: ICDS Syst
Strength & Nut
Imp Prog

#

#

2013

106

102

P097985

IN: Integrated
Coastal Zone
Mgmt Project

S

MS

2010

222

196

57

37

P079675

IN: Karn Municipal
Reform

S

MS

2006

97

97

23

P122486

IN: Karn Wtrshed II

S

S

2013

60

60

0

P071160

IN: Karnataka
Health Systems

S

S

2007

212

98

15

8

25

175

11

216

7

4

15

-115

6

131

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Project ID

Project Name

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal
Year

Original Amount in US$ Millions

IBRD

IDA

P078832

IN: Karnataka
Panchayats
Strengthening

MS

MS

2006

120

P050653

IN: KARNATAKA
RWSS II

S

MS

2002

302

P121774

IN: Kerala RWSSP II

S

MS

2012

P073370

IN: Madhya
Pradesh Water
Sector Restruct

S

S

2005

394

P084790

IN: MAHAR WSIP

MS

S

2005

325

P120836

IN: Maharashtra
Agric.
Competitiveness

S

S

2011

P119043

IN: Microf-Scaling
Up Sustnble &
Resp

S

S

2010

P093720

IN: Mid-Himalayan
(HP) Watersheds

S

S

2006

P102331

IN: MPDPIP-II

S

S

2009

P113028

IN: Mumbai Urban
Transport Project2A

S

MS

2010

P092735

IN: NAIP

S

MS

2006

P112060

IN: National
Agricultural
Innovation&SLM

S

MS

2010

P119085

IN: National
Ganga River Basin
Project

MU

MU

2011

P104164

IN: National
Rural Livelihoods
Project

MS

MS

2012

P121515

IN: NHAI Technical
Assistance Project

MU

MU

2011

P102330

IN: North East
Rural Livelihoods
Project

MS

MU

2012

130

P094360

IN: Ntnl VBD
Control & Polio
Eradication

MS

MS

2009

521

P085345

IN: ODS IV-CTC
Sector Phaseout
Project

HS

MS

2005

P093478

IN: Orissa Rural
Livelihoods
Project

MS

U

2009

P096023

IN: Orissa State
Roads

MU

MU

2009

250

P124639

IN: PMGSY Rural
Roads Project

MS

MU

2011

500

132

Cancel.

GRANT

17

Frm
Rev’d

14

-9

96

-67

50

151

1

175

181

11

61

61

-6

100

90

-5

100

167

59

97

45

4

7

100
430

200
7

801

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/
Orig.

155

200

Undisb.

48

32

375

116

56

39

4

2

199

943

20

1,000

959

203

40

16

124

3

124

247

14

3

61

50

222

147

1,341

349

45

160

53

82

1,000

16

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Project ID

Project Name

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal
Year

Original Amount in US$ Millions

IBRD

IDA

Cancel.

Undisb.

GRANT

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/
Orig.

Frm
Rev’d

P101653

IN: Power System
Development
Project IV

HS

S

2008

1,000

138

-262

P115566

IN: POWERGRID V

S

MS

2010

1,000

727

235

P090592

IN: Punjab Rural
Water Supply &
Sanitation

MS

MS

2007

79

65

19

P090585

IN: Punjab State
Road Sector
Project

MS

MS

2007

105

105

2

P040610

IN: RAJ WSRP

MS

S

2002

159

37

5

-4

P124614

IN: Rajasthan ACP

S

S

2012

109

107

2

P102329

IN: Rajasthan
Rural Livelihoods
Project

MS

MS

2011

163

150

4

P095114

IN: Rampur
Hydropower
Project

MS

MU

2008

82

65

P118445

IN: Secondary
Education
Program

S

S

2012

497

8

P086518

IN: SME Financing
& Development

S

MS

2005

520

20

-380

P102768

IN: Stren India’s
Rural Credit Coops

MS

MS

2007

300

164

163

P110371

IN: Sustainable
Urban Transport
Project

S

MU

2010

105

87

68

P100589

IN: Sustainable
Urban Transport
Project

S

MU

2010

P102549

IN: Tech Engr
Educ Qual
Improvement II

S

S

2010

300

235

115

P079708

IN: TN Empwr &
Pov Reduction

S

S

2006

274

130

-31

58

P075058

IN: TN Health
Systems

S

S

2005

229

53

-49

20

P090768

IN: TN IAM WARM

S

MS

2007

335

237

209

P083780

IN: TN Urban III

S

MS

2006

300

56

57

P100304

IN: UP Health Sys
Strengthening
Project

S

S

2012

152

137

18

P112033

IN: UP Sodic III

S

MS

2009

197

144

9

P083187

IN: Uttarakhand
RWSS Project

S

S

2007

120

41

32

P112061

IN: Uttarakhand
Watershed Mgmt.
SLEM

S

S

2010

154

0

250

26

400

500

300

20

-7

20

17

20

150
1

7

137

34

8

1

133

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Project ID

Project Name

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal
Year

IBRD

P096124

IN: Vishnugad
Pipalkoti HEP

MS

U

2011

P099047

IN: Vocational
Training

MS

S

2007

P105311

IN: WB Minor
Irrigation Project

S

S

2012

P105990

IN: West Bengal
PRI

S

S

2010

P107649

IN:Karnataka State
Highway Improv
Pro II

S

MS

2011

P102624

IN:Kerala Local
Govt. & Service
Delivery

S

MS

2011

P092217

IN:National
Cyclone Risk
Mitigation Proj

S

MS

2010

P100735

IN:Orissa
Community Tank
Management Proj

MU

MU

2009

P107648

National Dairy
Support Project

S

S

2012

Overall
Result
a.

134

Original Amount in US$ Millions

IDA

Cancel.

GRANT

-2

280

136

107

125

244

4

200

134

-12

323

47

200

133

3

255

225

125

65

53

336

7

16,285

4,267

56

35

352
13,302

Frm
Rev’d

646

350

56

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/
Orig.

648

125

Undisb.

10,185

Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

160

265

17

385

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

Annex B8B

India: Committed and Disbursed
Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of December 31, 2012
(In USD Millions)
FY
Approval

Company

Committed
Loan

2007

ABC Coffee

2005/
2008/
2009

Equity

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

5

4

0

0

0

5

4

0

0

0

ADPCL

52

12

0

0

0

52

12

0

0

0

2006/
2009/
2012

AHEL

63

25

0

0

0

63

25

0

0

0

2005

AP Paper Mills

9

0

0

0

0

9

0

0

0

0

2005

APIDC Biotech

0

3

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2009

APPL

0

6

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2012/
2013

ATC India

50

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2013

ATG BV

0

10

0

0

0

0

10

0

0

0

2003/
2005/
2010/
2011

ATL

30

0

0

0

20

30

0

0

0

20

2010/
2012/
2013

AU Financiers

0

22

0

0

0

0

22

0

0

0

2010

Aadhar

0

4

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

2007/
2009

Aavishkaar

0

3

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2010/
2013

AavishkaarFundII

0

6

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2011

Aavishkaar MSME

0

15

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2008

Aloe 2

0

17

0

0

0

0

13

0

0

0

2008

Ambit Pragma

0

12

0

0

0

0

11

0

0

0

2012

Ambit Pragma II

0

20

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2008/
2012

Angel Global

0

18

0

0

0

0

18

0

0

0

135

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

FY
Approval

Company

Committed
Loan

Equity

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

2010/
2012

Applied Solar

8

6

0

0

0

5

6

0

0

0

2011

Attero Recycling

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

2006/
2010/
2011

Atul Ltd

23

0

0

0

0

23

0

0

0

0

2010

Auro Mira Energy

0

4

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

2008

Avigo Fund II

0

9

0

0

0

0

8

0

0

0

2009

Avigo Fund III

0

20

0

0

0

0

12

0

0

0

2012

Axis Bank

70

0

0

0

0

70

0

0

0

0

2010/
2013

Azure Power

0

5

7

0

0

0

5

7

0

0

2007

BHSIL

28

0

17

0

32

28

0

17

0

32

2001/
2004

BILT

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2003/
2007

Balrampur

18

0

0

0

0

18

0

0

0

0

2011

Bandhan

0

24

0

0

0

0

24

0

0

0

2012

Banyan Tree II

0

25

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2001

Basix Ltd.

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2010

Belstar

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2005

Bharat Biotech

0

0

3

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

2010/
2012

Bhilwara Energy

0

19

0

0

0

0

19

0

0

0

2012

Bhilwara Wind

13

0

0

0

0

10

0

0

0

0

1985/
1990/
1991/
1993

Bihar Sponge

4

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

0

2001/
2006/
2007/
2008/
2010/

CCIL

6

6

0

1

2

6

3

0

0

2

2008

CGPL Ultra Mega

447

0

0

0

0

344

0

0

0

0

2003/
2005/
2012

COSMO

10

0

0

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

2013

CapAleph

0

15

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2010/
2011

Chola

0

25

0

0

0

0

25

0

0

0

136

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

FY
Approval

Company

Committed
Loan

Equity

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

2009

Connectiva

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2010/
2012

Craftsman

0

13

0

0

0

0

12

0

0

0

2003/
2004

DQEL

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2005/
2006/
2009

DSCL

59

0

0

7

0

59

0

0

0

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

13

0

0

0

0

13

0

0

0

0

Dhunseri India
2009

Dishman

2012

Dunar Foods

0

14

0

0

0

0

12

0

0

0

2013

Ecolibrium

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

Educomp

30

14

10

0

0

30

14

10

0

0

2007

Electrotherm

13

0

10

0

0

13

0

10

0

0

2012

Equitas

0

16

0

0

0

0

16

0

0

0

2009/
2010/
2011

Exim India

150

0

0

0

0

150

0

0

0

0

2007/
2010

FINO

0

1

5

0

0

0

1

5

0

0

2006/
2008/
2010/
2011/
2012

Federal Bank

0

23

0

0

0

0

23

0

0

0

2008/
2013

Finechem

16

13

0

0

0

16

12

0

0

0

2012

Flareum

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

Forum Synergies

0

15

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2007/
2008

GSPL

49

13

0

0

0

49

13

0

0

0

2011

Gamesa India

15

0

0

0

0

15

0

0

0

0

1994/
1999/
2000/
2001

Global Trust

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2007/
2009/
2012

Granules

17

1

0

0

0

17

1

0

0

0

2013

Green Infra 20MW

8

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

0

2013

Green Infra 5MW

2

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

137

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

FY
Approval

Company

Committed
Loan

2007

HDFC Bank

2009

Equity

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

0

0

100

0

0

0

0

100

0

0

HIKAL

13

7

0

0

0

13

4

0

0

0

2008

HNGFG

6

4

0

0

0

6

3

0

0

0

2009/
2011

Himadri

11

0

7

22

0

6

0

7

0

0

2010/
2011

Husk Power

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2007

ICICI Bank

0

0

150

0

0

0

0

150

0

0

2011

ICM-INDIA

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1998/
2005/
2006/
2010

IDFC

79

3

0

0

0

79

3

0

0

0

2006

IHDC

4

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

0

IHDC - Ascent

3

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

0

2012

IMGC

0

5

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2008

Idea Cellular

98

0

0

0

0

98

0

0

0

0

2013

Inabensa Bharat

14

0

0

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

2006

Indecomm

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2008/
2013

India Infr. Fund

0

46

0

0

0

0

27

0

0

0

2009

India Agri Fund

0

19

0

0

0

0

13

0

0

0

2012/
2013

Infuse Capital

0

5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2013

Inox Rajasthan

50

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2006/
2009

JK Paper

10

2

0

0

0

10

2

0

0

0

2013

JMT Auto

9

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2008/
2009/
2010/
2013

Jain Irrigation

55

19

40

0

65

55

18

40

0

65

2007/
2010

KCIL

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2005/
2006

KPIT

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2011

Kaizen

0

10

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

2010

Kalyani Gerdau

25

0

0

0

0

25

0

0

0

0

2012/
2013

Kalkitech

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

138

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

FY
Approval

Company

Committed
Loan

Equity

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

2008

Kamani Oil

0

5

0

0

0

0

5

0

0

0

2005/
2007/
2010/
2011/
2012/

Kotak Mahindr...

0

0

45

17

0

0

0

45

17

0

2006

LGB

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

LGB FORGE

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

10

9

0

0

0

10

9

0

0

0

2012

Laxmi Organic

2006/
2008

Lok Fund

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2011/
2012

Lok Capital II

0

13

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

1990/
1993/
1995

M&M

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2007

MBPV

18

0

0

0

0

18

0

0

0

0

2010

MSETCL

45

0

0

0

0

45

0

0

0

0

2007

MSPL

8

0

0

0

0

8

0

0

0

0

2009

Macq-SBI Int F

0

149

0

0

0

0

96

0

0

0

2009

Macquarie IM

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2011

MagmaFincorp

0

23

0

0

0

0

23

0

0

0

2012

Mahindra Solar 1

5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2004/
2007

Max Healthcare

0

5

31

0

0

0

5

31

0

0

2009

Max India Ltd

0

28

0

0

0

0

28

0

0

0

2009

Midas

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2009

Modern Dairies

0

6

0

0

0

0

6

0

0

0

1996/
1997/
1999/
2000

Moser Baer

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2011

NCMSL

0

6

0

0

0

0

6

0

0

0

1993/
1996/
1997/
1998

NICCO-UCO

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

NSL Power

0

16

0

0

0

0

16

0

0

0

2012

Nereus Capital

0

20

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2007

OCL

23

0

0

0

0

23

0

0

0

0

139

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

FY
Approval

Company

Committed
Loan

2007/
2009

Ocean Sparkle

2007

Ocimum

2011/
2013

Equity

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

11

9

0

0

0

11

9

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

PTC Financial

80

0

0

0

0

50

0

0

0

0

2012

Paradeep Phosp

50

0

0

0

0

20

0

0

0

0

2006

Peepul CapFnd II

0

15

0

0

0

0

14

0

0

0

2007/
2010

Petronet

42

0

0

0

150

42

0

0

0

150

2011/
2012

Piaggio India

37

0

0

0

0

37

0

0

0

0

2009

Polycab

0

19

31

0

0

0

19

31

0

0

2004

Powerlinks

33

0

0

0

0

33

0

0

0

0

2013

Power Grid

100

0

0

0

120

100

0

0

0

120

2012

Pragati Fund

0

20

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2008

Punj Lloyd

18

0

0

0

0

18

0

0

0

0

2008

Punj Upstream

23

3

0

0

0

10

3

0

0

0

2013

RK Forgings

14

5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Rabo Equity Mgt.

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1996/
1998/
2005

Rain Calcining

0

0

0

47

0

0

0

0

8

0

2013

Religare

0

0

74

0

0

0

0

74

0

0

2012/
2013

Rhodia Inc.

25

0

0

0

0

25

0

0

0

0

2008

Rockland

0

14

0

0

0

0

9

0

0

0

2011

SAFAL Jain NBFC

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

SAME DEUTZ India

13

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

2009

SBI - Macq DM

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2012

SEWA

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

SPSL

9

0

0

0

0

9

0

0

0

0

2012

SRLL

0

25

0

0

0

0

21

0

0

0

2008

Samara Capital

0

10

0

0

0

0

8

0

0

0

2008

Samson Maritime

18

4

0

0

0

18

4

0

0

0

1996

Sara Fund

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2005

SeaLion

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

140

Country Partnership Strategy for India: 2013–17

FY
Approval

Company

Committed
Loan

Equity

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

2011/
2012

Shalivahana

0

5

0

14

0

0

5

0

0

0

2010/
2012

Snowman

5

5

0

0

0

3

5

0

0

0

2008/
2010

Soktas India

8

2

0

0

0

8

1

0

0

0

2007

Suguna

0

0

7

0

0

0

0

7

0

0

2010/
2012

Suvidhaa

0

7

0

0

0

0

7

0

0

0

2012

Tata Cleantech

0

3

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2011/
2012

Techno Wind

29

4

0

0

0

29

4

0

0

0

2012

Ujjivan

0

8

0

0

0

0

8

0

0

0

2010/
2011/
2012

Utkarsh

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2008/
2010

VPF

0

15

0

0

0

0

10

0

0

0

2009/
2010

VW-India

79

0

0

0

99

79

0

0

0

99

2010

VicatSagar

75

0

0

0

73

75

0

0

0

73

2011

Vinati

10

0

5

0

0

10

0

5

0

0

2011

Visakha Terminal

8

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2011

Vishwa Infra

3

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

2011

Vishwa Utilities

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

2011

Vivimed

13

0

8

0

0

13

0

8

0

0

2012

Vortex

0

2

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

2007

WCPM

33

0

0

0

0

33

0

0

0

0

2010

WEG S.A.

22

0

0

0

0

22

0

0

0

0

2009/
2010

WHI India

9

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

0

1998

WIV

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1998/
2000

Walden-Mgt India

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2012

YES BANK LTD

0

0

75

0

0

0

0

75

0

0

2010

Zephyr India II

0

9

0

0

0

0

8

0

0

0

2012

Zephyr India III

0

15

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2,460

1,083

631

109

561

2,099

781

630

25

561

Total Portfolio

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

141

THE WORLD BANK GROUP
70 Lodi Estate
New Delhi - 110003, India
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/india
Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/WorldBankIndia

