Document of

The World IBank

Report No. 25001-MAG

IINTERIM

COUNTRY ASSIESTANCE STRATEGY

FOIR TIHIE

REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR

cf¢tober 23, 2002

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Country IDelepartment 8
Africa IRegion

World Bamnk

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency Unit 
US$1 

= 

Malagasy Franc (FMG)
= 
FMG 6,734 (October 17, 2002)
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR

January 1 - December 31

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Agence fran,aise de Developpement
African Development Bank
Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere
Common Market for Eastem and South Africa
Catholic Relief Services
Emergency Economic Recovery Credit
Export Processing Zone
European Union
Food and Agriculture Organization
Fonds des Nations Unies pour la Population (United Nations Population Fund)
Fiscal Year
Goods and Non Factor Services
Gross Domestic Product
Gross National Product
Gesellschaft flier Technische Zusammenarbeit (German Technical Cooperation)
Hasy Malagasy (Cotton Madagascar)
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Human Inmmunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Interim Country Assistance Strategy
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Institut National des Statistiques
Jiro sy Rano Malagasy (Malagasy Water and Electricity Utility)
Non Govenmuental Organization
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Second Private Sector Development project
Central d'Achats des Medicaments (Central Drug Purchasing Agency)
United Nations Conference on trade and Development
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
United States Agency for International Development
Value Added Tax
World Food Program
World Wildlife Fund
World Health Organization

AAA 
AFD 
AfDB 
CARE 
COMESA 
CRS 
EERC 
EPZ 
EU 
FAO 
FNUAP 
FY 
GNFS 
GDP 
GNP 
GTZ 
HASYMA 
HIPC 
HIV/AIDS 
IBRD 
I-CAS 
IDA 
IFC 
IMF 
INSTAT 
JIRAMA 
NGO 
PRSP 
PSD-2 
SALAMA 
UNCTAD 
UNDP 
UNFPA 
UNICEF 
USAID 
VAT 
WFP 
WWF 
WHO 

Vice President: 

Country Director: 
Sector Manager: 
Task Managers: 

Callisto Madavo

Hafez Ghanem
Philippe Le Houerou
Jesko Hentschel / Maryanne Sharp

INTERIM

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE S .RATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. 

II. 

INTRODUCTION ............................................

THE POLITICAL CRISIS, JANUARY - JULY 2002 

III. ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL IMPACT OF THE CRISIS 

.2

.3

1

IV. GOVERNMENT'S RECONSTRUCTION STRATEGY AND MACRO-ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK 
.6

V. PLANNED INTERIM STRATEGY 

.11

Tables

Table 1: 

Selected Social Indicators ..................... 

.......................................... 1

Table 2: 
Income Poverty Developments 1993-2001 ....................... 
Table 3: Economic Performance, 2002 ....................... 
Table 4: Crisis Impact, Selected Sectors ....................... 
Table 5: Government Response 
to crisis ....................... 
Financing of the Recovery Program, August 2002 - December 2003. 
Table 6: 
Table 7: Madagascar: Key Macroeconomic Indicators .10
Table 8: Balance of Payments and the External Financing Gap .11
Table 9: Government Strategy and Bank Instruments .12
Table 10: Risks 
and Mitigating Efforts .19

2
3
5
7
9

Graphs
Graph 1: Developments of Paddy and Vegetable Oil Prices, Rural Madagaszar 

.

4

Selected Annexes
Annex A2:Madagascar at a Glance .21
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators .23
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators .25
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio .26
Annex Cl: Madagascar: Crisis Impact .28
Annex C2: Gov. Response, Donor Support and Suggested World Bank Activities .
Annex C3: Expenditure Accountability Assessment Update Table .30

29

I. 

INTRODUCTION

1. 
After having been one of the most rapidly growing African economies in recent years,
Madagascar plunged into a deep political crisis at the beginning of 2002. The crisis began
in December 2001. Mediation attempts of the
following contested first-round elections 
Organization of African Unity failed and the stand-off grew more and more tense as large parts
of the highlands were increasingly isolated from the coastal areas through road blockades and
destruction of bridges. Two parallel Govermments were established, each with its own central
bank, leading to a freezing of Madagascar's assets abroad, a suspension of foreign exchange
trading and a closure of the treasury bond market for several months. Economic activity fell
sharply and poverty increased. Achievement of the millennium development goals, already in
danger before the crisis, is now very unlikely (Table 1).

Table 1: Selected Social Indicators

Madagascar 
Earliest year 
Latest year
Available 
Available 

1996-2000 

Sub-Saharan Africa

Target Latest Single Year

1996-2000

(in percent, unless otherwise specified) 
Population, millions3 
Population growth 3 
GNP Per Capita in US$3 
GDP per capita, average growth 2

Millennium Development Indicators:

Extreme Poverty rate, headcount (percent of pop.)' 
Child Malnutrition, Weight for Age of under five pop." 3
Ratio female to male enrollment in prim. & sec. School2
Under 5 mortality rate per 1000 live birth2

Net primary school enrolment rate' 

Memorandum items:

HIV/AIDS prevalence rate, percent of pop. 12
Life Expectancy at birth in years 3
Illiteracy rate (1999), percent of adult Po p 1'3
Primary School Completion Rate2

Poverty rate, headcount, percent of pop. 

Access to improved sanitation source, percent of pop."l2

1990-1995 

11.7 
2.7 
230 
-1.6 

59 
50 

48 

-- 

170 

-- 

55 
39 

70 

34 

35 

15.1 
2.7 
260 
0.7 

62 
49 

72 

96 
144 

0.15 
55 
33 

71

27 

45 

2015 

30
25 

100 

100 

56 

642

2.4
470
0.4

33

---

80
162

8.4
47
39

51

55

Sources: I Madagascar: Poverty and Socio Economic Developments, 1993-1999, World Bank
2 African Development Bank et al (2002), Achieving the Millennium Development Goals in Africa, Global Poverty Report 2002.
For GDP per capita growth, period averages.
3 World Development Indicators 2000, World Bank

2. 
The political crisis ended in July, but the social and economic impact is extremely
pronounced, especially on a country with a GNP per capita of US$260 (in 2000), one of the
poorest in the world even before the current events commenced. The direct negative impact on
national income for 2002 is estimated at half a billion dollars. The total economic cost is much
larger, taking into account the loss of confidence, foregone direct investments, foregone exports
and physical destruction. Activity in several sectors, including tourism, transport and export
processing, came to an almost complete stop. About 150,000 workers lost their jobs in the

formal sector alone. Farm produce prices, especially in isolated areas of the country, were cut in
half, causing an unprecedented drop in rural incomes and putting future production at risk.
Poverty might well have increased to over 75 percent of the population since the beginning of the
year, a level higher than that a decade ago and halting the mild decline in poverty witnessed
during the period from 1997 to 2001 when economic growth averaged 4.6 percent (Table 2).
Early warning systems indicate a significant increase in malnutrition and infant mortality rates.

Table 2: Income Poverty Developments 1993-2001, percent of population

Poverty
(headcount index) National 
Urban 
Rural 

Extreme Poverty 
(headcount index) 

National 
Urban 
Rural 

1993 

70.0 
50.1 
74.5 

59.1 
37.6 
64.0 

1997 

73.3 
63.2 
76.0 

63.1 
54.0 
65.6 

Source: INSTA T. Cornell University and World Bank staff estimates.

1999 

71.3 
52.1 
76.7 

61.7 
43.2 
67.0 

2001

69.2
50.0
74.9

61.1
42.5
66.5

3. 
This interim Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) outlines the planned Bank response to
the post-crisis environment. The last CAS was presented to the Board in November 1997, and a
new CAS was initially planned for fiscal year (FY) 02 together with the presentation of the full
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). However, the completion of the PRSP was delayed
due to the crisis. Thus, an interim strategy is being put in place to assist in limiting the impact of
the crisis on the poor and to support Government's recovery program. A new CAS would be
prepared in consultation with the Government and development partners, to be presented to the
Board based on the full PRSP around September 2003.

II. 

THE POLITICAL CRISIS, JANUARY - JULY 2002

4. 
The political crisis began with first-round presidential elections on December 16, 2001.
According to most electoral observers, Mr. Ravalomanana, the mayor of Antananarivo, had won
a first-round victory with an absolute majority of votes. Former President Ratsiraka, however,
claimed that Mr. Ravalomanana's majority fell short of the necessary 50 percent required for an
absolute majority, and hence requested a second round of elections. This triggered mass
demonstrations and strikes which brought the country to a standstill. A first mediation attempt
by the Organization of African Union led to an agreement in Dakar on April 18, 2002. As
stipulated in the agreement, the High Constitutional Court organized a vote recount and declared
Mr. Ravalomanana winner, leading to his official investiture as president on May 6, 2002 and the
nomination of his full cabinet. However, Mr. Ratsiraka did not accept the results of the Court
and continued to press for a second round.

5. 
Mr. Ratsiraka's supporters organized an effective and devastating economic embargo of
Antananarivo with blockades on all roads and destruction of fifteen key bridges. Violent clashes
were rare but nonetheless claimed several hundred 
lives. Each side formed a separate
government - one in Antananarivo and one in the coastal city of Tamatave (Mr. Ratsiraka's

2

home town). Treasury bond trading was suspended in February 2002. Two Central Banks were
operating, both attempting to conduct business abroad, including continuing to issue payment
orders. Consequently and pending the resolution of the stand-off, foreign banks froze
Madagascar's assets abroad and the domestic foreign exchange market was suspended.
Economic activity, including foreign trade, came to an almost complete standstill.

6. 
Mr. Ratsiraka, a native of the coast, and his supporters tried to give an ethnic color to the
conflict, portraying it as a struggle between the coastal provinces and the highlands. The
governors of several coastal provinces, loyal to Mr. Ratsiraka, announced secession. However,
this attempt of dividing the country along ethnic lines did not work and Mr. Ravalomanana, a
native of the highlands, was able to maintain his support in the coastal areas. This could be
largely explained by the fact that economic development on the coast has continued to lag and
poverty has continued to increase during Mr. Ratsiraka's entire term. Ethnic tensions remain a
major threat to the future stability and prosperity of Madagascar.

7. 
As Mr. Ravalomanana's domestic support increased, his control of the country widened
and foreign governments that had initially taken a neutral position began recognizing him as the
In early July 2002, Mr. Ratsiraka left the country.
legitimate President by end-June 2002. 
President Ravalomanana now has full control over the entire country, having managed to restore
peace in all provinces. The economic embargo-of the highland areas during the crisis has ended.
Roads have been opened, ports are starting to operate, and destroyed bridges are being rebuilt.
The foreign exchange market has reopened and the treasury bond market is expected to do so
shortly. Integrity of the public financial system has been re-established and key public services -
at a standstill during the crisis - are being restored.

8. 
On July 26, the new Government presented its reconstruction and development program
to the 'Friends of Madagascar' conference organized by the United Nations Development
the European Commission and the World Bank at the Bank's Paris Office.
Program, 
Representatives of 17 countries and 19 organizations attended the conference. Donors expressed
strong support for the economic and social program of the Government of Madagascar and
underlined the importance of adhering to principles of good governance, promoting development
of a strong private sector, and reducing poverty. In addition, participants emphasized the
importance of fornulating a poverty reduction strategy in an inclusive way. To support these
objectives, donors pledged approximately US$2.3 billion over a period of four years.

III. 

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL IMPACT OF THE CRISIS

Economic Impact of the Crisis 

9. 

While 

recovery 

is 

starting, the economic and social costs

Table 3: Economic Performance, 2002
2002 
(planned) 

slowly 

of the six-month crisis are highly 
GDP growt, percent 
visible. National income is expected 
Inflation, percent 
tohv ltUS$500 Revenues and grants, % of GDP 
Public expenditures, % of GDP 

fallen by about US$500 

to have 

5.8 
4.0 
17.2 
21.0 

Source: Ministry of Finance, IMF and World Bank

million for 2002 alone. The total cost 

to the economy in terms of foregone

2002
(proj)

-11.9
13.7
9.3
14.8

3

economic activity resulting from the collapse in trade and overall confidence is undoubtedly
much larger. Inflation rose to 25 percent until July, largely driven by increasing prices due to the
road blockades. However, inflation is expected to come down by the end of the year because of
the Government's prudent monetary policy (see table 3). Similarly, while exchange rate trading
had been suspended for several months, the re-opening of the foreign exchange rate market in
August did not result in the feared weakening of the Franc Malagasy. The impact of the crisis on
government finance was particularly stark. As of August, domestic revenue collection was only
half the level of 2001.

10. 
Table 4 presents the main direct impacts of the crisis by sector and lists the likely short-
and medium-term consequences in the absence of Government action (see Annex Cl for a
complete sector analysis). The economic blockade of specific regions of the country led to an
almost complete collapse of trade in goods, both within the country and abroad. Transport,
tourism, construction and industrial production operated at less than a third of their capacity. In
particular, export processing zone (EPZ) enterprises, situated mostly in the highland area, were
unable to either import raw materials or export their finished products. Most EPZ firms declared
technical unemployment and shut down their plants. Firms expect that new orders will only
resume for the spring season of 2003. Until then, the EPZ sector is likely to operate at below 50
percent of capacity. Of the total loan portfolio of private banks, about 10 percent are estimated
to be unrecoverable and an additional 10 percent will have to be rescheduled. The private banks
have managed their operations and assets during the crisis well, though, and the deteriorating
loan portfolio does not fundamentally endanger their financial health. Meanwhile, to quickly
increase credit availability for the private sector, guarantee schemes are being considered to
share risks for new loans between enterprises, the commercial banks, and the Government with
the help of selected donors.

(petroleum prices 
increased by 500 

11. 
Farner's 
incomes 
were
significantly 
affected 
by 
price 
developments stemming from the crisis. 
With 
transport prices 
skyrocketing 
(petroleum prices 
increased by 500 
percent), producer prices were heavily 
depressed, up to 50 percent in isolated
communities. 
In parallel, prices for 
products of basic needs (salt, sugar, 
vegetable oil, lamp petroleum) increased 
drastically so that the agricultural terms- 
of-trade deteriorated strongly (Graph 1) 
with the effect increasing with distance 
from urban centers. As with industry, 
recovery 
risks 
for 
the 
sector are 
substantial.

Graph 1: Developments of Paddy and Vegetable

Oil Prices, Rural Madagascar

~~Vegetable oil price, July/Sept 2001 = 100

r

Farm qate Daddv Price. Julv/Sept 2001 = 100

l

July/Sept Oct/Dec 01 Jan/March April/Mai 
02 
02

01 

June 02

2.50)
2.0

2.00

1.50

1.00

0.50 -

0.00 

4

Table 4: Crisis Impact, Selected Sectors

Sector 

Agriculture/ Rural 

_______________________ 

Education 

Health, HIV/AIDS, 
nutrition 

Industry 

Mining 

Public sector 

Tourism 

Transport, trade 

Direct Crisis Impact 

* decrease of farm prices for traditional products 
* anti-locust campaign halted 
* harvest collection disrupted (no credits for 
collectors) 
* several agro business enterprises stopped 

production 

-

teaching interruption, teacher absenteeism, urban 
school drop-out 
* inability of families to pay for school material 

.

availability of basic medicines and immunization 
down, health utilization down (15%) 
* delayed epidemiological assessment of 
STI/HIV/AIDS and delayed effectiveness of anti- 
HIV/AIDS project 
a retail price increases for basic food stuff 

* 150.000 additional unemployed (of which 100.000 
in export processing zone) 
* delays in VAT reimbursement 

* illegal mining activity and export slows down 
somewhat 
* large planned mining investments put on hold 
* revenue collapse till July 2002 and public 
investment program at standstill till August 2002 
* treasury bond trading suspended 
* intergovemmental financial circuit interrupted 
* foreign exchange trading suspended by Central 
Bank till August, 2002 

* 95 percent collapse of tourist travel in 2002 until 

September 

* petroleum price in blockaded areas increased 500% 
* 23 bridges destroyed in crisis and due to cyclone 
Kesiny 
* 
lack of routine maintenance of roads, railways 
* Air Madagascar stopped most services 
* External trade down 50 percent 

Crisis Consequences if No Action Taken

a productivity decrease & lower output due to
lower agricultural input use and decayed
infrastructure
* locust invasion leading to widespread harvest
destruction

_ 

bankruptcy of agro-business

* no return of students to school due to low
family income
* parents cannot finance school material for next
school year
* low demand for health services due to lower
household revenues
* increased threats of (i) communicable diseases;
(ii) infant and matemal mortality; (iii) spread of
HIV/AIDS
* breakdown of generic drug distribution system
* increase in food insecurity
* lacking investor confidence
* further bankruptcies of firms in debt
* slow economic recovery, inducing low
investments
* large planned mining investments are
withdrawn
* delay in establishing good govemance in sector
* fiscal gap not financed leading to cuts in basic
social services and/or inflation/depreciation
* intemal revenues remain low
* absorption of public sector cannot be increased
in short run
* net withdrawal of treasury bonds by pnvate

banks

* slow restoration of oversees confidence

* Air Madagascar difficulties limit tourist travel

* slow reconstruction of vital infrastructure
* under-funding of road maintenance work
leading to further decay of infrastructure
* delays in finalizing concession of Northem
Railway
* increased isolation of rural communities

Social Impact Of The Crisis

12. 
The economic collapse and discontinuation of many public social services caused
widespread social suffering. Based on simulations using the results of the latest household
survey, UNDP estimate that that income poverty has risen sharply by as much as 6 percentage
points since 2001, reaching 75 percent of the population. School drop-out rates have risen to 14
percent during the past school year, and health service utilization declined by 36 percent in rural
areas and 14 percent in urban areas. Especially worrisome is the decline in assisted birth rates
(16 percent) and prenatal care for pregnant women (drop of 9 percent). 
In a survey conducted
during the crisis, both urban and rural families reported that they decreased food consumption,
reducing the intake of meat (up to two thirds for the extremely poor). Malnutrition rates of
children under five, already one of the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa, are in danger of climbing
even further.

5

13. 

The crisis had a particularly stark impact on three groups. First, rural poor farmers,

especially those isolated from markets: qualitative and focus group discussions have revealed

that rural incomes of communities far from the market have declined by as much as 50 percent
due to lower farm prices and a sharp reduction in informal sector activities in villages (16 percent
of rural communities report an entire collapse of non-agricultural activities). Additionally,
consumer prices of basic manufactured life necessities increased strongly, further reducing real
incomes. More and more families became heavily indebted during the crisis to finance family
expenses. During the crisis, the percent of families which could not finance even the most basic
food items, increased from 32 percent before the crisis to 42 percent. Communities also reported
that cattle and crop theft increased strongly in the first half of 2002. Second, those in extreme

poverty before the crisis in urban areas: the population that was in extreme poverty in urban

areas before the crisis was particularly hurt by lower demand for their informal sector activities,
like petty trade and contract work in the construction industry. Increases in prices of basic life
necessities including salt, sugar and rice reduced real incomes even further. Demand for public
water facilities as well as for basic health services dropped sharply as a consequence of this real

income reduction. Third, the newly unemployed in the formal sector: about 150,000 urban

workers lost their jobs, most of them in the export processing zone which had provided a high
number of jobs for the not formally skilled workforce. With 150,000 men and women losing
their work, about half a million members of the urban population were suddenly deprived of their
main family income source. Since the crisis ended, industry is slowly restarting production but
activity is far from pre-crisis levels.

IV. 

GOVERNMENT'S RECONSTRUCTION STRATEGY AND MACRO-ECONOMIC OUTLOOK

Government's Reconstruction Strategy

14. 
The new Government presented a short- and medium-term recovery plan 
to the
international community at a 'Friends of Madagascar' meeting in Paris in July 2002. Emergency
measures will (i) support the most vulnerable in society; (ii) assist private sector firms to restart
production and create employment; and (iii) ensure adequate public services. Good governance
is an important medium-term goal towards which Government has already started working.
Government response to the above identified consequences of the crisis is shown in Table 5 (see
Annex C2 for a matrix of Government response, donor support and mapped World Bank
activities for all sectors).

15. 
Supporting the Most Vulnerable. The emergency progran focuses on (i) free access to
basic social services, and (ii) targeted assistance to those affected by the crisis. 
In response to
the alarming reduction of social service delivery to the poor, the Government decided to
temporarily lift user charges in the social sectors. Since September, primary school student
matriculation fees have been suspended. Schools will get reimbursed for the revenue shortfalls
from the central budget in November, 2002. Also, those parent associations that pay teachers
salaries (FRAM schools) will get compensated for salaries paid since September. In the health
sector, the assistance focuses on the national generic drug distribution agency, SALAMA, which
distributes medicine to more than 2100 health centers in the whole country. The waiver of cost

6

recovery created a depletion of the health centers' medicine stock which was compounded by
government arrears to SALAMA. As a priority activity, SALAMA will be recapitalized, arrears
be cleared and additional transfers be made to ensure sufficient availability of medicines in the
county.

Table 5: Government Response to Crisis

Sector 
Agriculture/ 
Rural 

Education 

Health, 
HIVIAIDS, 
Nutrition 

Crisis Consequences if No Action Taken 

b. 

a. productivity decrease & lower output due to 
lower agricultural input use and decayed 
infrastructure 
locust invasion leading to widespread 
harvest destruction 
c. bankruptcy of agro-business w/ arrears to 
farmers
a. no return of students to school due to low 
famnily income 
b. parents cannot finance school material for 
next school year
a. low demand for health services due to lower 
household revenues 
b. increased threats of (i) communicable 
diseases; (ii) infant and maternal mortality; 
(iii) spread of HIV/AIDS 
c. breakdown of generic drug system 
d. 
increase in food insecurity 

Industry 

a. 
lacking investor confidence 
b. further bankruptcies of firms in debt 
c. slow recovery, inducing low investments 

Mining 

a. planned mnining investments are withdrawn 
b. delay in establishing good govemance in 

Government Response IStrategy

a. anti-locust plan developed, partly funded from HIPC
resources
b. agricultural inputs tax exempt; distribution of semen
planned; storage fund established
c. repayment of arrears to farmers in cotton and sugar
sector

a. fee waiver for primary schools (year 2002/2003),
partly financed from HIPC
b. school support in remote areas (nutrition, supplies)

a. cost recovery partially waived (medicines, services),
financed partly from HIPC
b. prioritization of budget to fully finance necessary
recurrent costs; speed-up of effectiveness of
HIV/AIDS project
c. SALAMA refinanced (HIPC, budget)
d. social safety net operations (HIPC, FID, AGETIPA,

SEECALINE)

a. promotion visits abroad, new public/private
cormmittee on private sector policy
b. guarantee fund
c. 
tax breaks, repaymnent of TVA arrears to enterpnses
a. promotion activities
b. illegal licenses withdrawn, mining governance project

sector 

prioritized

Public Sector 

a. fiscal gap not financed leading to cuts in 
basic social services and/or inflation 
b. 
internal revenues remain low 
c. absorption of public sector cannot be 
increased in short run 

d. withdrawal of bonds by private banks 

e. conimunities not receiving vital central 
transfers 

Tourism 

Transport, 

Trade 

a. slow restoration of oversees confidence 
b. Air Madagascar difficulties limit tourist 

travel 

a. slow reconstruction of vital infrastructure 
b. under-funding of road maintenance work 
leading to further decay of infrastructure 
c. delays in finalizing concession of railway 
d. increased isolation of rural communities

a. budget prioritization 2002/2003
b. collection of outstanding tax debt ongoing
c. emergency budget execution measures agreed on;
each ministry has coordinator for all projects and
programs to increase absorption

d. backing of treasury bond market by central Bank

credit
e. budget prioritization to at least partly compensate
communities
a. promotion trips abroad; join private/public sector
committee

b. management contract for Air Madagascar signed

a. priority reconstruction/ rehabilitation plan
b. funding of road maintenance fund through HIPC
c. railway concession agreement finalized and signed
d. speed-up of rural roads investment program

16. 
The emergency program also includes a number of measures to help those most in need.
First, with support from many of its development partners, the Government has set up social
safety net operations, especially for the extreme poor and newly unemployed in urban areas. The
safety net operation combines food/cash-for-work in labor-intensive construction with nutritional
in the remaining budget for 2002, the
supplementation 
in community centers. 
Second, 
Govemment will prioritize central Government transfers to poor rural communes which are

7

dependent on such transfers for maintenance of basic services. Third, the Government also plans
to pay the arrears of the public cotton and sugar enterprises to ten thousands of small-holder
farmers so that they can purchase needed inputs for the next agricultural season.

17. 
Restoring Public Services. The emergency program focuses on (i) the rehabilitation of
destroyed infrastructure, in particular roads and bridges, and (ii) the support of strategic public
enterprises which are now under management contract. The reconstruction of dynamited of
bridges and the rehabilitation of infrastructure destroyed by cyclone Kesiny has already been
completed. However, major efforts and investments are needed to maintain roads which were
poorly serviced before the crisis and received no maintenance during the crisis.

18. 
The priority program also includes support to the national airline and the northern railway
system. Air Madagascar had already been in serious financial difficulties before the crisis started
but the suspension of most services during the crisis, 
including the exclusion from the
intemational airline association IATA (due to non-payment of dues) brought the company to
near collapse. The new Govemrnment took the important decision to sign a performance-based
management contract with a reputable intemational consulting firm with the aim to restructure
Air Madagascar and bring it to the point of privatization within two years. An audit and business
plan have been established and a creditors conference will be convened in November, 2002, to
settle a minimum of debts of the company, for which financial support is necessary.

19. 
The rehabilitation of the northem railway, which has not been operational since 2001 is
key for further business development in Madagascar as it connects the industrial area around
Antananarivo with the major port of Tamatave. No planned maintenance and investment works
occurred during the crisis which have caused a further delay and additional costs until trains can
start running again. The Govemment signed a concessioning agreement in October and is
making priority payments to finance salary arrears, a social plan, and the first-year investments.

20. 
Assist Private Sector Recovery. The Govenmment progran includes a number of
measures to support the private sector in Madagascar, comprising (i) immediate tax relief and
delay of tax payments for value added tax and profit taxes; (ii) suspension of value added tax on
investment products, fertilizer and cement until the end of 2002; (iii) setting customs duties on
all textile inputs (used mainly in EPZ firms) at zero and setting up a system to allow EPZ firms
value-added tax credit against future exports; (iv) establishment of a guarantee fund operated by
private banks to provide new credits for the sector; (v) creation of a consultative committee
between the public and private sector to design business-friendly policies and monitor recovery;
and (vi) active promotion tours of the consultative committee abroad to attract potential
investors.

21. Macro-economic and fiscal policies. 
In addition to the above emergency measures, the
Govemment is committed to macro-economic stability through (i) prudent monetary and
exchange rate management; (ii) restraint in public expenditures while protecting anti-poverty
expenditures; and (iii) special efforts in tax recovery of previous year debt and new obligations.

22. 
Focus on Governance: the new Government will place specific emphasis on improving
govemance in the country. Over the past years, lacking or insufficient internal controls led a
significant number of public fiscal transactions to be non-regular. For example, a review of

8

budget expenditures in 2001 showed that significant overspending of the president's special fund
occurred (US$27 million compared to a budgeted amount of US$400,000). Similarly, an audit
by the European Commission in the year 2000 established that existing budget procedures and
laws were not consistently applied to public financial transactions. Perceived corruption in
In a survey conducted before the crisis, Transparency
Madagascar is extremely high. 
International (2002), ranked Madagascar ranked 9 8th of 102 in its Corruptions Perception Index.
Cumbersome budget procedures as well as a disparate budget planning process have remained
one of the key bottlenecks limiting Madagascar's capacity to effectively utilize available donor
support and local funds. In September 2001, an action plan was developed with Government as
part of the HIPC expenditure tracking assessment (see Annex C3). This action plan is about to
be implemented.
23. 
The new Government is moving ahead in implementing an anti-corruption agenda for
which it is seeking support from the Bank. An anti-corruption task force is being established
with terms of reference for a fully independent corruption investigating agency, development of
an ethics code and preparation of anti-corruption legislation. Further, public and elected officials

will be required to regularly declare all their assets

and those of their close relatives, regardless of 
where 
those 
assets are held. 
Lastly, 
the 

Government has announced its plans to reform 

budget procedures, financial controls and customs Madagascar 
administration. 

Table 6: Financing of the Recovery

Program, August 2002 - December 2003

(US$, million)

120.0
60.0

94.4
70.0

14.0

African Development Bank 
European Union 
France 
Germany 
IDA 

-1dusment 

24. 
Cost and Financing of the Reconstruction 
Program. 
The recovery program (presented 
in 
to cost around 
Annex Table C2) is estimated 
US$540 million between August 2002 
and 
December 2003. The expected financing of the 
program is shown in Table 6. 
Internal financing 
would amount to roughly US$120 million which 
would 
include 
re-prioritization of the budget, 
including support from debt service savings from 
the HIPC initiative. Donor support linked to the 
recovery program until December 2003 would 
amount to about US$420 million. Table 6 includes 
a breakdown of the programmed support by partner WFP 
country and organization. 
IDA's support for the 
program would
Government's 
reconstruction 
include one new project, the proposed Emergency Economic Recovery Credit (US$50 million)
and disbursements from the existing portfolio totaling US$67.2 million.

support 
- EERC 
- Project support after restrncturing 
Japan 
Switzerland 
UNICEF 
UNDP 
USA 
UNAIDS 
UNFPA 

117.2
42.2
25.0
19.0
9.0
8.5
9.0
5.0
2.0
3.5
8.4
540.0

TOTAL 

~~~~~~50.0

Macroeconomic Outlook

Implementation of the above strategy over the next year and beyond will crucially depend
25. 
on the maintenance of macro-economic stability. While the country is in a deep recession, an
adequate macro-economic framework is in place. The IMF visited Madagascar in October,
concurs with this assessment and is preparing a revised PRGF program with new benchmarks to

9

for IMF board presentation in December, 2002. Monetary management during the crisis was
prudent because neither of the two competing governments had access to the foreign reserves.
The current increase in the price level (around 25 percent since beginning 2002) is expected to be
reversed somewhat by year end (end-year inflation is expected to be around 14 percent). Before
reopening the foreign exchange market, the Central Bank devalued the Franc Malagasy by about
15 percent against the Euro, thus decreasing the gap between the official and the market
exchange rate to less than 5 percent. Since the reopening of the market, the exchange rate
appreciated slightly.

Table 7: Madagascar: Key Macroeconomic Indicators

(in percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

GDP growth, percent p.a. 
Primary sector growth, percent p.a. 
Secondary sector growth, percent p.a. 
Inflation, e.o.p., percent p.a. 
Gross Investment 
Gross National Savings 
Revenues and Grants 
Expenditures 
Overall Fiscal Deficit (cash basis)* 
Current Account Balance* 
* After 2001: not including post-crisis program financing
Source: Ministry of Finance, IMF, World Bank

2000 
4.8 
1.0 
5.6 
8.7 
15.0 
9.4 
15.3 
15.9 
-3.3 
-5.6 

2001 
6.0 
4.0 
7.6 
4.8 
15.5 
13.7 
14.0 
17.6 
-4.4 
-1.3 

2002 
(proj.) 
-11.9 
-1.4 
-25.1 
13.7 
11.5 
7.8 
9.3 
14.8 
-5.4 
-4.5 

2003
(proj.)
7.8
-1.8
24.3
6.2
14.8
9.7
14.5
17.6
-4.8
-5.7

26. 
The macroeconomic outlook for 2003 is positive but recovery will occur from a very low
base as GDP is expected to shrink by 11.9 percent in 2002. Table 7 includes key macro-
economic indicators for the years 2002 and 2003. 
Industrial activity is forecast to bounce back
next year but a negative production impact of the crisis in the forestry sector would likely lead to
a further decline in activity in the secondary sector. Both revenues and expenditures of the
public sector would be close to pre-crisis levels in 2003, as would the fiscal deficit.

27. 
Sufficient support to meet the external financing gap for both 2002 and 2003 has been
pledged during the Paris meeting. Table 8 shows that, due to the crisis, trade flows declined
strongly; compared to 2001, exports are set to shrink by 45 percent, imports by 35 percent.
Strong declines in project grants and project financing as well as a collapse of direct investment
flows results in an external financing gap in 2002 of US$117.8 million. The European Union,
France, Mauritius and the IMF are expected to provide balance-of-payments support. For IDA,
restructuring and disbursement of the Second Structural Adjustment Credit contributed US$42.2
million to closing the gap and the proposed Emergency Economic Recovery Credit would supply
another estimated US$20.0 million. 
For 2003, IDA's contribution would consist of the
remaining disbursement of the EERC (US$30.0 million) while other major contributors would be
the African Development Bank, the European Union, France, Japan and the IMF.

10

Table 8: Balance of Payments and the External Financing Gap

(in USD, million)

Exports (goods and services) 
Imnports (goods and services) 
Factor services, net (due basis) 
Current Transfers* 

Current Account Balance* 

Capital (project) Grants 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Long-term disbursements 
Projects 
Program (pre-crisis) 
Other 
Repayments (due) 
Net Flows on Long-term Debt (due basis) 
Other Private Flows and Reserve Accumulation 
Debt Relief (Paris Club) 

External Financing Gap* 
Post-crisis BoP support: 
IDA 
Third Tranche of Struc. Adjust. Credit II 
EERC 
IMF 
AfDB 
European Union 
Bilateral donors (including France, Japan,
Mauntius) 
* Not including/before post-crisis program financing
Source: Ministry of Finance, IMF, World Bank

2002
(originally
planned) 
1,262.0 
1,716.5 
-61.2 
166.1 

2001 
1,316.5 
1,462.1 
-59.5 
145.9 

2002 (proj.) 
759.1 
1,020.8 
-77.0 
96.5 

2003 (proj.)
1,026.8
1,414.0
-71.3
138.0

-59.1 

-349.5 

-242.1 

-320.4

112.8 
93.1 
114.8 
76.9 
34.1 
3.8 
87.4 
27.4 
-245.1 
71.0 

0.0 

192.7 
59.8 
180.9 
138.5 
35.8 
6.6 
122.4 
58.5 
-37.4 
75.8 

0.0 

52.3 
21.6 
99.2 
61.3 
37.9 
0.0 
103.1 
-3.9 
-20.0 
74.4 

117.8 
117.8 
62.9 
42.2 
20.7 
14.7 
0.0 
33.5 

6.7 

84.0
41.0
146.9
139.0
0.0
7.9
94.0
53.0
-67.4
66.4

143.5
143.5
29.3
0.0
29.3
30.0
20.0
33.6

30.5

V. 

PLANNED INTERIM SUPPORT STRATEGY

The Bank's objective is to assist the Government to mitigate the impact of the crisis on
28. 
the poor by supporting selected areas of the Government's program. Bank instruments used in
response to crises include: portfolio restructuring, new lending (including an emergency credit)
and policy dialogue. The mix of these instruments is determined by (i) the Bank's objective of
limiting the impact on the poor; and (ii) the activity of other partner organizations 
in
Madagascar. Table 9 outlines the planned instruments by objective.

Table 9: Government Strategy and Bank Instruments

Support to Most 
Vulnerable 

Assisting 
Ensuring 
Private Sector Minimum of 
in Recovery 
Public Service 

Improving Governance
and reducing
corruption

__________________ 

____________________ 

D elivery

Por(folio 
Restructuring 

New Lending 

Child Nutrition, 
Community 
Development, Micro- 

PSD-2, 
Transport 

Health, 
Second Structural
Education, Rural Adjustment Credit
Development

finance 

Rural Transport 
($80 million) 

I

EERC ($50 million) 

Mineral resource
govemance project ($30
niillion)
Country Procurement
Assessment, Country
Financial Accountability
Assessment

Policy Dialoguel 
ESW 

Rural Development and Tourism Sector 
Poverty, Poverty 
Note, EPZ study 
monitoy,ng w/ partyers 

Decentralization 
Study 

Impact of the Crisis on the Bank's Portfolio in Madagascar

29. 
The Bank's portfolio consists of 19 projects with total commitments of around US$816
million, of which about US$338 million was disbursed as of end-September 2002. Of total
commitments, 36 percent are in the social sectors, 20 percent in infrastructure, transport, energy
and mining, 16 percent in rural development and environment, 10 percent in institutional
development, and 18 percent correspond to macro-economic adjustment. In December 2001,
before the crisis started, implementation of all projects but one was rated satisfactory.

30. 
Portfolio implementation during the crisis greatly suffered because: (i) counterpart funds
were not available; (ii) procurement of certain goods and works was stopped due to problems
within the relevant Government agencies; (iii) decision-making authority was unclear; (iv) sector
ministries were unable to function; and (v) project activities could not be carried out in certain
areas of the country. As a result, by the end of July 2002, the implementation performance of 16
projects out of 19 was rated unsatisfactory, and among them, five projects were unlikely to
achieve their development objectives. 
In addition, two projects: (i) Second Private Sector
Development Project and (ii) Multisectoral HIV/AIDS Prevention Project failed to be made
effective due to unclear decision-making authority. Five projects - Capacity Building, Energy II,
Environrnent, Social Fund, and Urban Infrastructure - had to have their closing dates extended
so as to be able to complete implementation.

Restructuring Projects and Improving Implementation

31. 
Given the importance of the portfolio as an effective and rapid tool to support the
Government during the transition period the Bank, as the first step in its interim strategy, is
restructuring the country portfolio to reflect the country's new realities and emerging priorities.

32. 
Support to Most Vulnerable. Work began during the crisis with the use of the Nutrition
and Community Development projects 
to finance emergency social safety net activities
implemented by CARE and Catholic Relief Services. In addition, the Community Development
Project is being restructured to add a new component to provide a more permanent social safety

12

net mechanism. Under this new component, reputable NGOs could apply for financing to
undertake social safety net activities that create short-term employment and provide revenues for
poor families. The Second Community Nutrition Project has also been expanded to include
urban sites where focus will be placed on providing young children and pregnant and lactating
women in the hardest hit areas with supplementary feeding and counseling on more appropriate
coping mechanisms. In partnership with the health project, recuperation centers for severely
malnourished children are being improved and re-equipped as well as provided with food
supplies. The Micro-finance project is being restructured to provide support to networks facing
liquidity issues, with particular emphasis on the most vulnerable, mostly women unable to
initially access micro finance credit.

33. 
Public Service Delivery. The Second Health Sector Support project is being restructured
to put more emphasis on the development of health districts to improve service delivery, and on
the purchase of needed drugs and medical supplies. The Education Sector Development project
will finance supplemental nutrition to all children in primary schools on a regular basis.
Additionally, the project would provide school pedagogic grants to cover the daily schooling
costs of children, including supplies and books. In response to the declining rural incomes during
the crisis, the Rural Development Project will help farmers' groups obtain access to inputs
during the next agricultural season.

Private Sector Recovey. The Second Private Sector Development project will be
34. 
restructured to address not only the privatization agenda as originally envisaged, but also the
short-term requirements to re-launch private sector activity. Private sector activity is also being
hampered by weak transport infrastructure, as roads and bridges were destroyed during the crisis,
or were simply left to deteriorate for lack of maintenance. Hence, implementation of the
the
Transport Sector Reform and Rehabilitation Project will be accelerated 
to ensure 
rehabilitation of high priority roads.

35. 
Govemance and anti-corruption. 
The Second Structural Adjustment Credit was
restructured to reflect the new Government's emphasis on good govemance and fighting
corruption. The credit now focuses on a number of actions to improve the management and
control of public finances, and measures to deal with corruption. First, an anti-corruption task
force has been established which will develop an ethic code for public officials and prepare an
array of anti-corruption legislation. The task force will draft the terms-of-reference for a fully
independent corruption investigating agency. Second, the Government passed a decree which
will require public and elected officials to regularly declare all their assets and those of their
close relatives, regardless of where these assets are held. Third, in response to the significant
overspending of the president's special fund in 2001, the Govenmment has mandated the
Chambre de Compte to conduct regular, semi-annual audits of all public special funds. Fourth,
internal control organs are to be strengthened. To facilitate transparency and efficiency in
budget planning, the Govemment has merged the finance and budget ministries which had been
recommended by various partner organizations for several years. This will finally allow for
integrated planning of investments and operating expenses.
Increased use of credit funds through more efficient implementation. A key objective is
36. 
to accelerate implementation of project activities. The main constraint facing the Government
identified during the portfolio missions in July 2002 is the lack of counterpart funding caused in

13

part by cash flow problems. Lacking counterpart funding is not a new problem but has
substantially worsened during the crisis. In response, disbursement percentages for selected
projects are being raised to 100 percent of foreign expenditures and 100 percent of expenditures
net of taxes on an exceptional basis for a period starting now till end December 2003.1

37. 
Two other measures are being undertaken, where applicable. First, the special account
ceiling is being increased for some projects (e.g. the Second Community Nutrition project and
the Community Development Fund) in response to urgent needs, and thresholds for withdrawal
applications are being lowered to ease backlogs of expenditures. 
Second, 
in terms of
procurement procedures, thresholds for prior review are being adjusted in selected cases.

38. 

Seven projects in the portfolio are closing this fiscal year: Mining, the Capacity Building

Project, the Third Social Fund project, the Second Environment Project, the Second Energy
Project, the Second Structural Adjustment Credit and the Private Sector and Capacity Building
Project. Further, the Regional Development Learning and Innovation Loan, has as its objective

to assist the government and the country's economic regions in developing model methodologies
and tools to promote regional development and facilitate investment programming. This project
has not performed well since effectiveness and has disbursed little. The project will hence be
closed. A separate Memorandum of the President (Report No. P7561-MAG) on the specific
restructuring actions, project by project, is attached.

Policy Dialogue

39. 
The Bank is planning to support the new Government through analytical work and policy
dialogue in several areas. Most of the studies had already commenced before the crisis and are
now re-orientated to meet urgent information needs. Policy notes have already been produced on
recent poverty developments, the economic cost of the crisis and priorities for reconstruction, as
well as on short-term policy to strengthen communities. 
In addition to the ongoing work on
poverty monitoring, the Bank plans to continue working on six formal analytical studies which
will also feed into the preparation of the PRSP and will be future building blocks for a possible
next adjustment operation. The work includes a report on rural development and poverty
reduction, a decentralization study, a study on measures to revive the EPZ, a tourism study, a
financial management review, and a country procurement review. A report on poverty
developments was completed in FY02. Thus all of IDA's core economic diagnostic work is
expected to be up to date by the end of FY03 with the exception of a public expenditure review
and a Country Economic Memorandum which the Bank intends to carry out in FY04 and FY05
respectively. 
The program of analytical work also provides the basis for a future Poverty
Reduction Strategy Credit (PRSC) which is foreseen during the CAS period following this
interim CAS.

Projects benefiting from the increase in disbursement percentages include the Community Development Fund,
the Sector Health Sector Support Project, the Education Sector Development Project, the Second Commnunity
Nutrition Project, the Multisectoral STI/HIV/AIDS Prevention Project, Rural Development, Rural Water
Sector Pilot, Microfmance, Urban Infrastructure, Transport Reform and Rehabilitation, and the Second Private
Sector Project.

14

New Lending

40. 
For the period November 2002-June 2003, this interim CAS foresees three new lending
operations for a total of about $160 million. Two of the proposed lending operations, the
Emergency Economic Recovery Credit (Report No. PE-PO80345 MG) and the Rural Transport
Project (Report No. 23352-MG), are presented jointly with this interim CAS to the Board for
approval.

41. 
Emergency Economic Recovery Credit (US$50 million). To address urgent financing
needs for the next 12 months which cannot be provided through the existing Bank portfolio,
Bank management proposes to make available US$50 million to help Madagascar re-launch its
economy and support the country's most urgent needs. Disbursement will be against a positive
list of imports, and it is expected that about one-third of the credit will disburse in 2002 and the
remainder in 2003. The counterpart funds would be used to support the entire Government
reconstruction program. This credit complements balance of payments support in 2002 and 2003
from the African Development Bank, the European Union, France, Japan, the IMF and
Mauritius.

42. 
Rural Transport Project ($80 million). Poverty in Madagascar is more widespread in
rural areas and its incidence is closely linked to isolation from markets and social services. Rural
poverty worsened significantly during the crisis, largely driven by a worsening of the rural
terms-of-trade due to increasing transport costs. Focus group discussions carried out in every
community in Madagascar over the past months have shown that construction of roads is the
number one priority of the majority of rural communities. The project will help lower the access
costs of rural communities to markets, schools, health centers and other economic and social
infrastructure; and enhance the mobility of the rural population to improve their quality of life.
This will be done through rehabilitating rural roads, restarting the operation of the Southern
Railway, and introducing alternative modes of transport. This project is part of a sector-wide
program co-financed by the European Union, the African Development Bank and the Arab Bank
for Economic Development in Africa.

43. Mineral Resources Governance Project ($30 million). Severe govemance problems have
characterized Madagascar's mining sector for years but the crisis offers the possibility to
decisively reduce illegal activities in the sector. The country is very rich in minerals and
precious stones and 2300 operators are active in the sector today, generating direct and stable
employment for about 100,000 workers and an additional up to half a million seasonal jobs.
Since 1996, official mining exports have increased from US$16 million to US$37 million,
largely in precious stones trading. But poor governance and corruption in the sector have
discouraged many formal investors and have led to a smuggling of precious stones out of
Madagascar with very little value added being created in the country. 
Illegal exports are a
multiple of official exports and estimates put the value of trafficking in precious stones at a
minimum of US$500 million (or 10 percent of GDP) per year. As a result of the crisis as well as
anti-corruption announcements of the Government, illegal activities have slowed down and there
is now a short window of opportunity to reverse the situation. Quick action is necessary, though,
before the illegal activities restart in full strength. Also, improving governance in the sector, and

15

thereby formalizing mining operations, is one of the most important actions to improve internal
revenue generation in Madagascar, much needed to extend basic services and expenditures for
anti-poverty programs.

44. 
The objectives of the Mineral Resources Governance Project 
are to (i) strengthen
transparency and governance in the management of mineral resources, with special emphasis on
small-scale and artisanal mining, (ii) support key institutional reforms for the decentralized
management of mineral resources; and (iii) promote private investments and value-added in the
mining sector. Central to the idea of improving governance in the sector is to formalize trading
of precious stones. For this, much of the cutting and polishing of stones would need to be moved
to Madagascar, 
including quality certification. 
Further, the project would support local
management of mineral resources through the creation of 'Special Economic Zones' which
would seek to integrate mining exploitation in a local economic, social and environmental
development plan. The Zones would be administered locally and, among other tasks such as
helping communities to establish land demarcations, they would also oversee the trading of
precious stones. The operation 
is being prepared with support from USAID and the French
Cooperation.

Coordination with Partners, Monitoring and Preparation of a Full CAS

45. 
Coordination with Partners. During the crisis and in formulating the recovery program,
the Bank worked very closely with all the development partners. The Bank organized weekly
meetings with all multilateral, bilateral and NGO partners to assess the impact of the crisis and
debate post-crisis reconstruction tasks. Similarly, the Bank team participated in the UN working
groups to draft sectoral contingency plans in the event that the crisis worsened. The emergency
social safety net operation was financed and implemented jointly with the EU, Agence fran,aise
de Developpement, USAID, WFP, UNICEF, CARE and CRS. The Bank also co-organized the
'Friends of Madagascar' meeting jointly with the UNDP and the European Commission. The
representative of countries and organizations agreed that a number of follow-up roundtables
would be organized in Madagascar to coordinate Government and partner interventions at the
sectoral level.

46. 
This Interim Strategy has been developed 
in close cooperation with staff of the
International Monetary Fund, especially with regard to ensuring adequate financing of the
Government's recovery program. An IMF mission visited Madagascar in October and is
expected to present a reformulated Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility program to the IMF
Board in December 2002.

47. 
The International Finance Corporation has recently conducted a mission to Madagascar
to assess the post-crisis situation and needs of the private sector. Before the crisis, IFC had a
small but growing portfolio (US$7 million, 7 projects) in Madagascar and is actively seeking to
further expand its engagement. Several potential IFC projects which had been identified might
require additional capitalization, given the losses most private firms have endured for the year.

48. Monitoring of the Crisis and the Interim CAS. The objective of this interim CAS is to
assist the Government to limit, and if possible reverse, the impact of the crisis on the poor.

16

Given that the planned instruments cover most sectors, monitoring of the interim CAS is closely
linked to the monitoring of key poverty and social development indicators. The 
following
indicators will be reviewed during the I-CAS period:

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 
(vii) 

(viii) 

rate of school continuation at the beginning of the new school year (September/
October) for primary and secondary school children (target: 95 percent of all children
enrolled in first to third grade in June 2002 school year to continue schooling in
2002/2003 school year);
drop-out rate during the 2003 school year (target: less than 10 percent drop-out rate in
primary school during the year);
number of health consultations in formal health facilities (target: number of visits in
100 selected health facilities included in baseline survey of January 2002 which
averaged 50 per week and facility);
number of health facilities offering assisted birth and number of assisted births
(target: January 2002 availability in 100 selected health facilities which was 80
percent);
availability of basic medicines (target: January 2002 level of availability of 16 basic
drugs in 100 visited health facilities which was 89 percent);
formal industrial employment in export processing zone (target: 60,000 workers);
qualitative assessment of income development of rural households (target: focus

group discussions in 72 communities -- visited during the crisis -- report significant

rise in rural incomes compared to crisis period); and
rural terms-of-trade (relative price of farm produce to basic manufactured consumer
items as salt, sugar, lamp
items). Basic consumer items in the basket would be 
petroleum, and vegetable oil. Target: same relative price as in pre-crisis period.

49. 
The above mix of indicators would provide a good assessment of poverty and social
developments over the coming year. The Bank plans to monitor primarily these as opposed to
others (such as percentage of bad debts of private banks, growth of exports or industrial
production) since most of the above indicators will depend on household income developments
while this cannot be inferred directly from more structural or broader economic indicators.
Further, the Bank will not make a distinction between country and Bank perforrnance indicators
since the time period towards the full CAS is relatively short and our overall goal is to reverse
the crisis impact on the poor. In addition to the above, though, the Bank would assess macro-
economic developments together with the International Monetary Fund, concentrating on the
inflation rate, exchange rate developments and management of the public deficit.

50. 
The Bank has agreed with several institutions in Madagascar (the statistical institute
INSTAT, the agricultural research institute FOFIVA, USAID, Cornell and Oxford universities)
to monitor the recovery and social situation of the population closely. While fielding a full,
household survey would be very costly and time-consuming, the Bank will jointly prepare a
rapid survey, combining the assessment of key quantitative and qualitative indicators. This rapid
survey, to be undertaken in December 2002 and June 2003, would be comparable to a baseline
survey conducted in June 2002.

17

Status of HIPC initiative and PRSP

51. Madagascar reached the decision point of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries' (HIPC)
initiative in December 2000. Then, Executive Directors approved debt relief amounting to
US$252 (net present value) from IDA as part of a total debt relief of US$814 million (net present
value), subject to Madagascar satisfying the completion point conditions. The debt relief had
been calculated so as to bring the net present value of Madagascar's debt to export ratio to a
target of 150 percent. The Malagasy political crisis with its economic and social percussions will
have important consequences for the sustainable level of debt for the country. Reassessing the
sustainable path of new borrowing at this point is somewhat premature, however, since
macroeconomic projections as well as trade developments are very uncertain. A detailed
analysis of Madagascar's external debt situation will be presented at the time of the full CAS in
September 2003.

52. 
The new administration is committed to continuing the preparation of a full Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper. This process was started in the fall 2000 and an interim strategy was
presented to the Boards of the Bretton Woods organizations in December 2000. Building on the
I-PRSP, a large number of thematic and regional consultations took place in 2001 and a draft of
the full PRSP was widely distributed in December 2001. The new administration has announced
that it will continue the preparation of the PRSP but that it will, in view of the crisis and its
poverty impact, review important priorities contained in the strategy. A new budget and action
plan also needs to be drafted. This I-CAS supports the development of the PRSP, especially
through the planned work on poverty monitoring and the planned analytical work in several
sectors. The Government expects to present the full PRSP to the Bank and Fund Boards not later
than September 2003.

Risks

53. 
There are four key risks facing Madagascar that could adversely affect implementation of
this interim CAS: (i) renewed political instability following parliamentary elections scheduled
for December 2002; (ii) insufficient financing of the program which could lead to macro-
instability, large deficits and inflation; (iii) inability of Government to implement the proposed
program and reforns due to weak institutions and lacking implementation capacity; and (iv) lack
of private sector confidence which would delay the recovery. Table 10 outlines what efforts are
planned by the Bank and its partners to mitigate these risks.

54. While the new Government has widespread popular support and is in full control of the
national territory, the risk of renewed political instability cannot be ignored. Many members of
the elite who benefited under the previous administration have witnessed a decline in their power
and access to rents. Hence, it is conceivable that those associated with the previous regime will
try to destabilize the Government in an effort to regain past privileges. To reconfirm its
legitimacy, Government has called for early parliamentary elections, now set for December 15,
2002. 
It has prormised a transparent, democratic election, and is supported in its efforts by

18

technical and financial help from UNDP, the EU and a number of bilateral partners. Successful
completion of those elections should mark the end of Madagascar's transition to a new regime.

Table 10: Risks and Mitigating Efforts

Risk 

Renewed political instability following 
parliamentary elections in December 
2002. 
Insufficient financing of the progran. 

Inability of government to implement 
the program due to weak institutional 
capacity and lacking implementation 
capacity. 

Lack of private sector confidence 
which would delay the recovery 

Mitigating Efforts

* 

* 

* 

* UNDP, the EU and several bilateral partners are planning to support
Government in the preparation of legislative elections to ensure that
they are fair and transparent.
In October, IMF/Bank mission completed discussions with
Government and other donors and ensured adequate budgetary
support for 2002 and 2003.
EU/IMF/UNDP/Bank advice on simplified budgetary procedures in
post-crisis setting ongoing;
Cormpletion of Country Portfolio Performance Review in October
with decisions on disbursement percentages and
disbursement/procurement procedures.
* Government has created a consultative committee between the
public and private sector to design business-friendly policies and
monitor the recovery. (The committee will be supported by the
Second Private Sector Development Project). The committee holds
regular meetings to build confidence and has organized promotion
tours in France, Germany and the United States
The priority recovery program supported by the Emergency
Economic Recovery Credit supports actions to support private
sector recovery which, when materializing, are expected to raise

* 

I__ __ private sector confidence in the recovery program

55. 
The tight budgetary situation is another risk factor. Success of the economic recovery
program will depend on Government's ability to repay arrears to the private sector, finance much
needed public investments and safety net programs, as well as other priority expenditures, such
as the parliamentary elections. Low revenues, resulting from the depressed economy, and slow
donor disbursements could make it difficult for Government to honor its obligations, and result
in a failure of its program. In order to mitigate this risk, Government has worked with the IMF
on updating the PRGF. It has taken measures to improve revenue collection and cut non-priority
expenditures. 
It has also mobilized exceptional budgetary support from 
the African
Development Bank, the EU, France, Japan, Mauritius and the World Bank.

56. 
Inadequate administrative capacity and weak governance are very important risk factors.
While the recovery program is well conceived and there is a clear political will at the highest
levels of Government to implement it, it is not clear that Madagascar's administration which is
plagued by inefficiencies and corruption will be able to follow. This is particularly true in the
areas of executing the public investment program and providing an appropriate climate for
private sector development. To mitigate this risk, Government is working with support of
several partners on a program to streamline and improve budgetary procedures, and has launched
an anti-corruption campaign. Success in putting in place a system of good governance is a pre-
requisite for sustainable and rapid poverty reduction in Madagascar.

19

57. 
Resumption of growth can only occur if private sector investment, and particularly
foreign direct investment, return to Madagascar. Private companies operating in Madagascar
have lost important sums during the crisis and many of them have closed or have relocated
elsewhere. As part of the post-crisis emergency program, Government has provided a number of
fiscal incentives for private sector firms to return to Madagascar and it is seeking to expand and
extend such incentives. 
Schemes are also being considered to share risks between the
enterprises, private banks and the Government so as to facilitate the provision of credit to the
private sector. Finally, the Government plans to strengthen and institutionalize the cooperation
between the public and the private sector so as to obtain constant feedback and suggestions for
improving the private sector investment climate.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By Shengman Zhang

Washington, D.C.
October 23, 2002

Annexes

20

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Madagascar at a glance 

10/22102

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Low-
Income 

Madagascar 

Developmentdarnond-

2001
Population. mi-year (niftns) 
GN I per capita (Alias methfod USSJ 
GN I (Atas mnethod, US$ bilins) 
Average annual growth, 1995-01
Population (tj 
Labor force (%J 

16.0 
260 
4.2 

674 
470 
317 

2.511 
430
1,069

Lite pecptncy

3.1 
3.1 

2.5 
2.6 

1.9 
2.3 

GNI
GNI 
per 
capita 

Gross
prar
enrollment

Most recent estimate (latest year avaIlable. 199501) 
Poverty (3 ofpopuation below national poverty fine)
Urban population (I of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infanri mortality (per 1,000 lIve births) 
Child malnutrItion (3 of rchlidren under 5) 
Access to an Improved water sourae (36 ofpu oJaon) 
Ollteracy (3 ofpopulation age 154) 
Gross primary enrollment (% ofschool-age pouldation) 
Male 
Female 

30 
55 
92 
40 
47 
33 
102 
104 
100 

32 
47 
91 

31
59
76

.. 

.. 

Access to Improved water source

55 
37 
78 
85 
72 

76
37
96 
103 
88

kadagascar

Low4ncome group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981 

1991 
2.7 
8.2 
18.1 
-0.3 
0.1 
-7.1 
2.5 
147.3 
29.1

2000 
3.9 
16.2 
30.4 
6.5 
8.1 
-5.6 

2001
4.5
17.9
29.3 
10.6
125
-1.3 

Econoriic ratos'

GDP (US$ bilins) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exporlsofgoodsandservices/GDP 
Gross domestic savingslGDP 
Gross niaionat savings/GDP 
Cunernt account balance)GDP 
interest payments/GDP 
Tota) debtGDP 
Total debt servicetexports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debt/exPorts 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

Trade

.. 
.. 
.. 

Domestic 
sa 
savgs

Ie 
n
Investment

.. 

106.2 

91.5 

27.4 

.. 
..

Indebtedness

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

2001405

(average annual gowth)
GDP 
GOPpercapita 
Exports of goods and services 

1.8 
-0.9 
1.7 

2.9 
-0.2 
4.5 

4.8 
1.6 
15.4 

5.9 
2.8 
e.0

.
.

iMadagascar
L 
-Inconegroup

-

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Growth of Investment and GDP 1%)
25

(o dGOP) 
Agriculture 
industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private oDnsumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

33.1 
14.1 

29.7 
13.1 
11.0 
57.2 
91.5 
8.8 
26.7 

27.1 
121 
10.3 
60.9 
85.7 
7.9 
40.2 

25.2 
12.3 
10.2 
625 
80.8 
8.6 
36.5 

60 

_

IS.
1S0
5

.. 

52.8 
.. 
, 

go 

97 

go 

go 

0O 0

GD1 

-* GD
__

.. 

1981-91 

1991.01 

2000 

2001 

Grrth of exports and Imports I%)

(average arnnual gwtafh)

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemrnment consumption 
Gross domestic Investment 
impolts of goods and services 

Z7 
2.5 
1.5 
0.8 
0.1 
0.3 
6.8 
-3.3 

2.0 
3.2 
2.9 
3.3 
2.8 
1.3 
7.9 
6.6 

1.0 
7.1 
5.6 
4.8 
4.9 
4.6 
14.8 
21.9 

4.0 
7.4 
9.4 
5.9
3.7 
15.7 
226 
11.8

2520
1
is

-5 

99 

w o 

.ol

-

Exports 

ImpOrls

Nole: 2001 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) comnpared with its income-group average. if data are missing, the diamond wsil
be ircomplete.

21

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Madagascar

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflatlon l%)

Domestic prices 
(56 change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 
Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Curnentrevenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

8

so.
40

.. 
.. 

8.5 
12.9 

1 1.9 
7.1 

7.4 
7.4 

30

20

10

0

.. 
.. 
.. 

10.1 
-0.1 
-6.6 

12.4 
3.2 
-5.7 

11.6 
1.3 
-6.8

98 

97 

98 

99 
00 
- ^ CPI

01

-

GDP deflator 

TRADE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)

(USS mDllions)
Total exports (fob) 
Coffee 
Vantla 
Manufactures 
Total Imports (cif) 
Food 

313 
112 
9 

334 
28 
47 
153 
518 
35 
71 
165 
97 
89 
108 

829 
8 
58 
618 
1,098 
77 
212 
149 
108 
92 
117 

953 
3 
164 
557
1.118 
84 
168 
144 
132 
94 
140

1.200
1.000

am

.. 

608 
99 
127 
191 
123 

Soo

400
200

Fuel and energy 

Capital goods 
Export price index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Termsoftrade(1995=100) 

o

95 98 97 98 99 00 0
*Exports 
*npinons

.. 
.. 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 

1981 
394 
785 
-391 

1991 
480 
681 
-200 

2000 
1,186 
1,467 
-280 

2001 
1,317 
1,462 
-146 

Current account balance to GDP I%)
o
1
-2

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 
Net income 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 
Merno:
Reserves Including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, localUSS) 

N/A 
12 
N/A 

-167 
179 
-188 

-74 
135 
-219 

-59 
146
-59 

.4

-e

205 
-17 

247 
-28 

157 
-98 

8
9

N/A 

N/A 
271.7 

90 
1,835.4 

301 
6,767.5 

396
6,587.2

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

(USS millions) 
Totaldebtoutstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of 2000 debt (US$ mill.)

1,613 
31 
155 

3,908 
23 
881 

4,117 
0 
1,378 

4,147
0
1,409

Totaldebtservice 
IBRD 
IDA 
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 
World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayrnents 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

110 
3 
1 

161 
5 
9 

.. 

.. 

.378

2 
27 

0 
20

E: 1,534

59 
189 
63 

113 
161
-11 

147 

145

.. 

.. 

:105

..
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

D1,100

30 
34 
1 
34 
3 
30 

51 
106 
6 
100 
8 
92 

.. 

.. 

A -IBRD 
B -IDA 
C -IMF 

E - Bilateral
D -Other rrulblaleral F - nvate
G -Short-temn

94 
17 
77 
12 
65 

97 
10 
87
11
76

Development Economics 

10/22/02

22

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Madagascar - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
1997 

Estimate
2000 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

1996 

1998 

1999 

2001

100 
32 
14 
55 

100 
32 
13 
55 

100 
31 
14 
56 

100 
30 
14 
56 

100 
35 
13 
52 

100
35
13
52

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

93 
12 
7 
5 

95 
13 
7 
6 

93 
15 
8 
7 

93 
15 
7 
8 

92 
15 
7 
8 

92
18
8
10

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

20 
25 

22 
30 

22 
29 

24 
32 

31 
38 

24
34

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

7 
7 

5 
7 

7 
7 

7 
10 

8 
9 

8
10

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 
250 
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1984 prices)
Gross domestic product atmarketprices 
2.1 
Gross Domestic Income 
2.7 
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1984 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
-1.0 
0.5 
Total consumption 
-1.9 
1.0 
Private consumption 
-8.2 
2.6 

4001 

3546 

3739 

3721 

3878 

4523

250 

260 

250 

260 

270

3.7 
2.5 

3.9 
4.0 

4.7 
4.1 

4.8 
6.4 

5.9
7.7

0.8 
-1.5 
-1.0 

1.5 
0.8 
2.1 

1.6 
5.1 
5.4 

2.8
3.6
7.2

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports(GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Netcurrenttransfers 
Current account balance 
Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private
Other capital (ne, incl. errors & ommissions) 
Change in reservesd 

796 
512 
998 
629 
-202 
159 
-201 

774 
507 
1061 
682 
-286 
182 
-196 

805 
522 
1095 
672 
-290 
85 
-278 

910 
584 
1198 
742 
-288 
129 
-201 

1186 
829 
1467 
930 
-280 
135 
-219 

1321
947
1668
1067
-346
172
-265

10 

14 

16 

58 

70 

112

.. 

.. 

..

98 

219 

45 

-14

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

-134 

-54 

104 

-46 

-28 

-80

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR84 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-5.1 

-8.1 

-7.8 

-7.7 

-7.2 

-7.7

2.7 
3.4 
12.8 
16.7 

7.2 
-23.1 
11.2 
5.5 

-1.5 
-7.4 
17.9 
-14.4 

16.0 
25.0 
19.6 
19.9 

33.8 
-13.6 
-2.2
16.7 

13.9
-11.4

8.3

23

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Madagascar - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Indicator 

1996 

Actual 
1997 

1998 

1999 

Estimate
2000 

2001

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)"
Current revenues 
10.1 
Current expenditures 
14.4 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
-4.4 
Capital expenditure 
7.1 
8.5 
Foreign financing 

11.8 
10.9 
0.9 
6.5 
7.0 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
GrowthofM2(%) 
Private sector credit growth/ 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR84 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise imnport price index 
Merchandiseterrnsoftradeindex 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f 

Real interest rates
Consumerprice index (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

19.8 
18.1 
346.0 

21.3 
19.8 
196.6 

93.4 
54.4 
171.8 
53.9 

19.8 
17.8 

86.2 
54.5 
158.1 
48.5 

4.5 
7.3 

10.9 
10.5 
0.4 
9.4 
5.1 

20.5 
8.4 
1.7 

90.2 
62.8 
143.6 
48.9 

12.1 
9.3 
2.8 
8.5 
4.1 

21.3 
19.5 
-22.7 

86.9 
57.9 
150.2 
47.6 

12.4 
9.2 
3.2 
9.0 
5.6 

22.5 
18.8 
31.2 

92.2 
58.4 
157.8 
52.4 

6.2 
8.4 

9.9 
9.8 

11.9 
7.1 

11.6
10.3
1.3
7.3
4.6

24.7
24.4
36.9

92.5
57.4
161.3
56.7

7.4
7.3

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central govermnent.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

24

Madagascar - Key Exposure llndicators

Annex B7

.1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

; n N .! IS S J ° ie; 

I _ es ! ;1 , *;*. 

-

3 

-

-

.-. !.ff 

,¶-J*4-bJ-1f 

J 

,.a.*: 

,,2,7 

sr5 

-f'. 

.J'1

Total debt outstanding and disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a 

4433 3857 3983 4047. 4117 4147

Net disbursements (US$m)a (Due basis) 
Total debt service (TDS) due (US$m)a 
Adjustment to scneduled debt service (US$m)b 
Debt service paid 

-37 
338 
253 
85 

82 
218 
10 
207 

-31 
223 
68 
155 

14 
155 
60 
95 

70 
154 
69 
84 

6
144
71
73

Debt and debt brL vice indicators

(%)

TDO/XGSC 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS (Due basis) 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 

DS (%)d

IBRD DS/XON 
IBRD TDO (US$m)e 
IDA TDO (US$m)e 

551.1 485.8 480.7 434.8- 340.7 309.4
110.8 108.8 106.5 108;8 106.2 
91.5
42.0 27.5 
26.9 
16.7 
12.7 
10.7

5.9 
86.5 

1.9 
59.4 

1.4 
0.6
56.6 47.4

0.6 
0.5 
0.2 
0.1 
0.2 
0.0
7 
3 
1 
0 
0 
0
1147 1212 1317 1415 1378 1409

a. Includes pu1~lic and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. Includes debt rescheduling, changes in arrears, and other debt adjustments
c. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
d. Preferred credaitors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.

e. Includes present value of guarantees.

25

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Madagascar
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio

As of 6/30/2002
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval 
1991 
2000 

1983/89 

1990/91 
1997 
1995 
1992/93/95 

Cornpany 
BNI 
BOA-M 

Nossi-Be 

AEF FIARO 
AEF GHM 
AEF Karibotel 
AQUALMA 

Loan 

Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0 
2.61 
0 
0 
0 
2.61 
0 
0 
0.82 
0.56 
0 
0 
0.82 
0.56 

0 

0 
0.67 
0.22 
0.71 

0.14 

0.19 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 

0 
0 
0 0.67 
0 0.22 
0 0.71 

0.14 

0.19 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 

Total Portfolio: 

1.6 

3.76 

0.56 

0 

1.6 

3.76 

0.56 

0
0

0

0
0
0
0

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

2001 Besalampy 
2001 COTONA III 

Loan 
Equity Quasi Partic
15233.24 
0 
0 
7764.75 
0 
0 

Total Pending Comnmnitment: 

22997.99 

0 

0 

0
0

0

26

Madagascar 

Operadons Portfolio (IBRDIIDA and Grants) 
As of date 1U22/02

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Closed Projects 

69

IBRD/IDA 

Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Oosed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Actve + Cosed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Cosed) 

203.74

0.00

1,518.89
184.18
1,722.62
184.18
408.94
0.00
408.94

Active Prolects 

ProJectlID 

P040019 
P055166 
P001559 
P001537 
P040596 
P051922 
P001533 
P052186 
P056487 
P072987 
P001568 
P001555 
P001564 
P062628 
P051741 
P072160 
P052208 
P048697 
Overall result 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

OriaInal Amount In USS Millions 

DIfference Between
Expected and Actual
Dlsbursements

ProJect Name 
Development 
Implementation 
Project ID Project Name 
Oblectl~~~~~~~~~~misve-s 
Proaress
CAPACITY BUILDING 
S 
U 
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
S 
S 
EDUCATION SECTOR DEV 
S 
U 
ENVIRON. II 
U 
U 
ENVIRONMENT II 
U 
MG - Rural Development Support Project 
S 
MG ENERGY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT U 
MICRO FINANCE 
S 
MINING PROJECT 
S 
Multisectoral STI/lHIV/AIDS 
S 
NUTRITION II 
PRIV SECT DEV & C.B. 
RURAL WATER SEC.PILO 
Regional Development 
Second Health Sector Support Project 
Second Private Sector Development Projec 
Transport Sector Reform and Rehabilitat. 
URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE 

S 
S 
HU 
S 
S 
U 
S 

S 

U 
U 
U 
U 
S 

U 
S 
HU 
U 
U 
U 
S 

Fiscal Year 

IBRD 

IDA GRANT 

Cancel. 

Undlsb. 

Orig. 

Frm Rev'd

1997 
2001 
1998 
1997 
1997 
2001 
1996 
1999 
1998 
2002 
1998 
1997 
1998 
2000 
2000 
2002 
2000 
1997 
Result 

13.83 
110 
65 
30 

89.05 
46 
16.4 
5 
20 
27.6 
23.8 
17.3 
4.6 
40 
23.8 
65 
35 
632.38 

12.8 

12.8 

0.000404 
99.35171 
42.0622 
1.033319 
3.692312 
86.50417 
8.108937 
9.012426 
0.832409 
20.78131
9.289585 
1.240749 
10.38084 
4.077682 
29.47687 
25.23865 
44.32782 
17.21967 
412.6311 

0.9 0.8374077
7.3
43.7 5.5592411
3.4
1.8
-4.6
11.9
5
0.8 0.8482816

2.134881

4.3
2.2 
11
3.3
9.6
6.5
12
18.7
137.9 9.3798113

27

ANNEX Cl: MADAGASCAR: CRISIS IMPACT

Annex Cl

Education 

Sector 
Agriculture/ Rural 

Basic services 
(water, electricity, 
sanitation) 

* insolvency of JIRAMA
* increase of water-born diseases as fewer households
can afford to pay for water services / public latrines

* liquidity shortage if Central Bank maintains reserve
ratios
* high risk for new credit provision in current
economic situation
* increased incidence of water-bom diseases

Consequences if No Action Taken
* locust invasion leading to widespread harvest
destruction
* productivity decrease & lower output due to lower
input use and decayed infrastructure (due to revenue
loss for farmers and lacking credit)
* bankruptcy of agro-business

Direct crisis impact 
* production stable but significant decrease of farm prices for 
traditional goods (up to 50 percent in isolated communities) 
* disruption of maintenance of infrastructure (irrigation) 
* anti-locust campaign halted 
* harvest collection disrupted (no credits for collectors) 
* several agro business enterprises (e.g., in the cotton sector 
HASYMA) stopped production
* increase of crop and livestock theft
Banking and finance * deterioration of credit portfolio (10% unrecoverable, 10% in 
need of rescheduling) 
* no access to treasury bond holdings as bond trading suspended 
* unmet foreign exchange demand with closure of market 
* micro-finance institutions report significantly lower savings 
and credit repayment rates
* no major cuts in electricity and water supply but build-up of 
significant arrears of JIRAMA as local governments and 
universities could not pay water/electricity consumption 
* urban pay-for-water wells/latrines much less frequented
* water contamination in Toamasina after cyclone Kesiny
* teaching interruption: average 40 days urban, 26 days rural 
* no return of students to school year in
September/October due to inability of families to pay
* urban school drop-out increased, to 14 percent per class 
* teacher absenteeism increased, especially in rural areas where 
school fees
teachers paid by parents' associations 
* parents cannot finance school material for next
* inability of 17% of families to pay school material 
school year
* further de-forestation due to illegal wood export and
illegal logging license provision by sub-national govemments 
* illegal export of endangered species 
increased poverty
* 
increased production of charcoal 
* further threat to bio-diversity
* illegal license distribution by sub-national governments 
* over-harvesting of shrimps
* low demand for health services (in cost recovery
* availability of basic medicines of health centers down 15% 
* immunization service down 6%; interruption of cold chain 
setting) due to lower household revenues
* health utilization down 36% rural, 14% urban. Important drop 
* increased threats of (i) communicable diseases; (ii)
for prenatal care (9%) and assisted births (16%) 
(ii) infant and maternal mortality; (iii) spread of
* delayed epidemiological assessment of STI/HIV/AIDS and 
HIV/AIDS
delayed effectiveness of anti-HIV/AIDS project 
* breakdown of generic drug distribution system
* massive firm shut-down, 150.000 additional unemployed (of 
* slow pick-up of orders in EPZ
which 100.000 in export processing zone) 
* lacking investor confidence
* delays in VAT reimbursement 
* further bankruptcies of firms in debt
* accumulation of debt of firms towards private banks 
* slow economic recovery, inducing low investments
* significantly lower demand for informal services in urban areas * slow demand recovery for informal sector activities
* micro-finance credit dried up 
* slow recovery in trade and commerce
* collapse of rural informal sector in 20% of communities
* strong increase in illegal mining activity and export 
* large planned mining investments put on hold 
* transport and trade in basic foodstuff interrupted 
price increases: salt, sugar, vegetable oil: +100%, rice: +30% 
* for rural poor: meat consumption down 75%, rice 25%
large part of central government not working for three months 
* revenue collapse till July 2002: 50 percent 
* public investment program at standstill till August 2002 
* treasury bond trading suspended 
* financial circuit interrupted: US$15 million paid by Central 
Bank in Tamatave in non-regular way 
* foreign exchange trading suspended by Central Bank 
* 95 percent collapse of tourist travel in 2002 until July 

* large planned mining investments are withdrawn
* delay in establishing good govemance in sector
* increase in food insecurity
* increase in malnutrition rates

Environment / 
Forestry 

Fisheries 
Health, HIV/AIDS 

Industry 

Informal sector 

Mining 

Nutrition and Food 
Security 

Public sector 

.

* fiscal gap not financed (2002, 2003) leading to cuts
in basic social services and/or inflation/depreciation
* intemal resource generation remains low with trade
at low levels and company activity low (TVA, IBS)
* absorption of public sector cannot be increased in
short run
* net withdrawal of treasury bonds by private banks
* slow restoration of oversees confidence
a Air Madagascar difficulties limit tourist travel
* low confidence in future of Madagascar's exports
* slow economic recovery
* slow reconstruction of vital infrastructure
* under-funding of road mainter.ance work leading to
further decay of infrastructure
delays in finalizing concession of Northem Railway
* increased isolation of rural communities

.

Tourism 

Trade 

Transport 

* estimated reduction of 50 percent of trade till July 2002 
* no participation in COMESA's joint economic partnership 
* 90 percent of lorry fleet immobilized due to roadblocks 
* petroleum price in blockaded areas increased 500% 
* 15 bridges dynamited 
* lack of routine maintenance of roads, northem railway 
* Air Madagascar stopped most intemal and extemal services 
* cyclone Kesiny: 8 bridges destroyed; hundreds of landslides

28

ANNEX C'2: GOVERNMENT RESPONSE, DONOR SUPPORT AND SUGGESTED WORLD BANK ACTIVITIES

Amnex C2

__________________

a. IMF policy advice 
b. AFD/Europen Investment Bank 
supported loan guarantee scheme
a. 

--- 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~reconstruction 

of wells

b. AI'DB, USAID, UJNICEF 

Sector 
Agricukurel 
Rural 

Banking and 
finance 

Basic Services 
(Water, ELecS, 
Sanitation) 

Education 

Environmentl/ 
Forestry 

Fisheries 
Health, 
NW/IAIDS 

Industry 

Consequences if No Action Taken 
a. locust invasion leading to harvest destruction 
b. productivity deecrase & lower output due 
agriculture input use and decayed infr-astructure 
e. arrears build-up to farmers due to bankruptcy of agro- 

to 

lower 

business (HASYMA), 

a. liquidity shortage if Central Bank mnaintains reserve ratios 
b. high risk for new credit provision in current economic 
situation 
a. insolvency of JIRAMA 
b. increase of water-bomn diseases as less households can 
afford to pay for water / latrine 

_______________ 

a. students do not retumn to school 
b. parents cannot finance school mfaterial for next school year 

a. further de-forestation due to illegal wood export and 
increased poverty 
b. further threat to bio-diversity 
a. over-harvesting of shrinmps 
a. low demand for health serices (in cost recovery setting) 
b. breakdown of generic miedicine dist. (SALAMA) 
c. incretased threats of (i) conmmunicable diseases; (ii) infant 
and maternal mortality; (iii) spread of HIV/AIDS; (iv) 
breakdown vaccination campaign 

a. slow pick-up of industry, especially EPZ 
b. lacking investor confidence 
c. bankruptcies of firmis in debt without new credit 

________________ 

Informal sector 

a. slow demand recovery for informal sector activities 

mining 

Nutrition and 
Food Security 
Publicsedor 

Tourism 

Trade 

Transport 

_________________ 

a. withdrawal of large planned midning investmnents 
b. delay in establishing good governance in sector 
a. increase in food insecurity & and mialnutrition rates 

.

a. Fiscal gap not financed (2002, 2003) leading to under- 
financing of recovery program 
b. Internal resource generation remains low 
c. Absorption of public sector cannot be increased in short 
run 
d. Net withdrawal of treasury bonds by private banks 
e. Comimunities not receiving vital central transfers 

a. slow restoration of oversees confidence 
b. Air Madagascar difficulties limidted tourist travel 
a. low confitdence in future of Madagascar's exports 

a. slow reconstruction of destroyed infrastructure 
b. under-funding of road niaintenance work leading to 
further decay of infrastructure 
c. increase in isolation of rural communities 

Government Response/IStrategy 
a. locust plan developed, partly funded 
from HIPC resources 
b.ag inputs tax exemrpt; distrib. of semen 
planned; storage support (HIIPC) 

c. repayment of arrears to farmers 

a. Central Bank will lower reserve ratio 
b. Guarantee fund for private enterprises 
announced 
a. JIRAMA reported on debt tituation; 
Central Gov't debt will be repaid
b. Increased treatment of water, 

a. fee waiver for primary schools (HIPC) 
b. schools target assistance to poor 
children (supplies, nutr. supplements)
a. illegal licenses withdrawn 
b. forestry sector to establish trasparent 
license allocation 
a. illegal license withdrawn 
a. cost recovery partially waived, 
financed partly from HIPC resources 
b. SALAMA refinanced through HIPC 
c. prioritization of budget to fully finance 
necessary recurrent health costs 

_ 

a. promotion activities 
b. illegal licenses will be withdrawn 
a. social safety net (in part through 
NGOs) 
a. budget priofitization 2002/ 2003 
b. collection of outstanding tax debt 
c. cmcrg. budget execution guidelines 
d. backing of treasury bond marketb.-
through Cestral Bank credit 
e. prioritization of community transfers 

a. promotion trips abroad 
b. management contract Air Mad 
a. promotiOn trips abroad, completion of 
Integrated Framework report 
a. pri.ority reconstruction plan 
b. funding of Road Maintenance Fund 
(partly through HIPC) 
C. speed-up of rural roads investment 

29

a. financial tax breaks (TVA, IBlS) 
granted 
b. industry promotion visits abroad 

guaranitee fund announced 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~c. 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~preparation__ _ _ _ _ 

a. mnicro-finance guarantee fund in 

a. AfDB 

Partner Response (other than Bank) 
a. AfDB, FAO (TA), EU 
b. AFD (rice price financed for safety net), 
AfDB, FAO, Switzerland 

Planned World Bank Activities
a. TA on development of anti-locust plan
b. AAA work on rural development and poverty;
restructuring of Rural Developmeint Project
c. proposed Emergency Economic Recovery Credit

a.--
b.

a. technical advice through ongoing Energy Project

b.--

a. proposed Emergency Economic Recovery Credit
b. restructuring of Education Project

a. extension of of First Environmient Project;
ruralenvironment AAA
b. restructuring Second Struc. Adjustment Credit
a. restructuring Second Struc. Adjustment Credit
a. restructuring Health Project, proposed Emiergency
Economnic Recovery Credit
b. restructuring Health Project, proposed
Em'ergency Economic Recovery Credit
c. AAA work on health

a. proposed Emergency Economic Recovery Credit
b. restructuring Second Private Sector Developnmet
Project
c. AAA work on EPZ
a. restructuring Micro-Finance Project

a. proposed Mineral Resourees Governance Project
b. proposed Mineral Resources Governance Project
a. restructuring Commnunity Nutrition Project,
restructuring Commnunity Development Pro-ject
a. restructuring Second Structural Adjustment
Credit, proposed Emergency Economic Recovery
Credit

a. UNICEF 
b. AfDB, UfNICEF 

a. GTZ/WWP audit of forestry sector 
b. Donor group monitoring 

_ 

_______________ 

a. EUi, AFD monitoring 
a. AfDB, WHO (TA) 
b. EU (SALAMA), AfD)B, WHO, France, 
Germany, Switzerland (mned. distrib.) 
c. US (vacc., condom dist.), WHO (vacc.), 
UNICEF (nutri. monit., school suppl.), 
FNUAP (HIV tests, basic med.)
a. EU/IMF/France (budg. supp.) 
b. US. France (pr-omotion tours support) 
c. AFD, European Investment Bank 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

--

a. 
b. USAID TA,AFD (private sector) 
a. WFP, EU, USAID, AFD, UNICEF, 
CARE, CRS, Germany, Switzerland 
a. AfDB, EU, 
IMF, France, Mauritius, 
Japan: programmed budget support 
b. IMF (TA) 

C. --- 

d. IMF (policy advice) 
c.--c. 

c. Country Procurement Review
d. -
proposed Emergency Economic Recovery Credit,
decentralization and commune finance AAA
a. restrucutuing Sec. Private Sector Dev. Project
b. restructuring See. Adjust. Credit; AAA tourism
a~ UNDP, USAID, UJNCTAD: compl. of 
a. completion of Intcgratcd Framework report w/
Integrated Framiework report 
_partnrs (mansged by Bank)
a. EU, US (bridges), AfDB, AFD 
a. restructuring Transport Sector Project
b. EU (roads fund) 
b. proposed Emergency Economic Recovery Credit
c. AfDB 
c. proposed Rural Transport Project
____________________________________________

ANNEX C3: EXPENDITURE ACCOUNTABILITY ASSESSMENT UPDATE TABLE

Annex C3

BUDGET MANAGEMENT 
COMPREHENSIVENESS

.

W 

1. Budget reporting follows GFS definition of consolidated general government. 
2. Government activities are not funded through extra budgetary sources to a significant
degree.
3. Budget outturn data (levels, functional allocation) are quite close to that of the original
budget.
4. Budget includes capital and current expenditure financed by donors.
CLASSIFICATION
5. Budget classified on an administrative, economnic, functional basis,
6. Poverty-related expenditure clearly identified in the budget .
PROJECTION
7. Multi-year expenditure projections integrated into the budget cycle .
INTERNAL CONTROL

8. Small stock of expenditure arrears; little accumulation of new arrears over past year. 

9. 

Internal audit is active. 

>2 

10, Tracking surveys supplement internal control.

RECONCILIATION

11. Fiscal and banking reconciliation undertaken routinely.

aD 

Notes 

REPORTING
12. Internal budget reports from line ministries/Treasury received within four weeks of the end 
of the relevant period. 

13. Functional classification is reflected in the in-year budget reports. 

FINAL AUDITED ACCOUNTS

14. Closure of the accounts occurs within two months after the end of the fiscal year. 

15. Audited account presented to the legislature within 12 months of the end of the fiscal year. 
aiS. 

_______ 

t ,,,Ž 

Th.

30

Agreed 
Assessment 

Proposed Short-term actions (to be verified with new
administration - dates added after discussion)

Donor TA assistance on full GFS application, especially
integration of sub-national government units

B 

Incidence analysis 1999-2001; extend poverty classific.

C 

Draft plan on integrating medium-term budget planning

C 

B 

C 

C 

B 

c 

Review and simplify rules and regulations for the budgetary
cycle; consolidate all arrears; draft plan for arrears reduction
Validate report on strengthening control organs; adopt ethics
code and internationally accepted procedures for control
organs; increase staffing of control organs

Install computer system in all treasury offices; produce three-
monthly reports on budget execution along poverty classif.
I)Design and implement monitoring system along poverty
classification for six ministries

Gradually reduce current delay of 6 months
Gradually reduce backlog of Loi de Reglementation
presentation to parliament (currently 1999 discussed)

IMAGING

Report No.: 
Type: 

CAS

25001 MAG

