Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 25043-NI

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF NICARAGUA

December 18, 2002

Central America Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government Fiscal Year
January I - December 31

Currency Equivalents
Currency Unit 
Cordoba
US$1.00 
C$14.56

= 

WEIGHT AND MEASURES
Metric System

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Nicaraguan Bank for Industry and Commerce
Central America Free Trade Area
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Financial Assessment Paper
National Council for Social and Economic Planning
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Consumer Price Index
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Swiss Agency for Development
Education for All
Economic Management Technical Assistance Credit
Nicaraguan Power Company
Nicaraguan Telecommunications Company
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme
Economic and Sector Work
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Emergency Social Investment Fund
Free Trade Area of the Americas
Fast Track Initiative
Global Development Learning Network
Global Environment Facility
German Agency for Technical Cooperation
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
International Development Association
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Development Grant
Intemational Finance Corporation
International Labor Organization
Municipal Development Institute
International Monetary Fund
Nicaraguan Institute of Water Supply and Sewerage
Nicaraguan Institute for Agricultural Technology
Nicaraguan Institute of Social Security
Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Forestry
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
Ministry of Construction and Transport
Millennium Development Goals
Ministry of Finance and Public Credit

BANIC 
CAFTA 
CAS 
CEM 
CFAA 
CFAP 
CONPES 
CPPR 
CPI 
CPIA 
COSUDE 
EFA 
EMTAC 
ENEL 
ENITEL 
ESAF 
ESMAP 
ESW 
FLAS 
FISE 
FTAA 
FTI 
GDLN 
GEF 
GTZ 
HIPC 
IDA 
IDB 
IDF 
IFC 
ILO 
INIFOM 

IMF 

INAA 
INTA 
INSS 
KfW 
MAG-FOR 
MARENA 
MCT 
MDG 
MHCP 

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

FOR OFICIAL USE ONLY

MIGA 
MINSA 
PAHO 
PCU 

PER 

PRGF 
PRSC 
PRSP 
PSIA 
PSAC 
SETEC 
SIGFA 
SILAIS 
SME 

SMP 

SNIP 

SWAps 

UNDP 
USAID 

WBG 
WBI 
WFP 

-

-

-
-

-

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-

-

-

-
-

-
-
-

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

Ministry of Health

PanAmerican Health Organization
Project Coordinating Units

Public Expenditure Review

Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Poverty and Social Impact Assessment
Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit
Secretariat of Technical Cooperation
Integrated System for Financial Management and Auditing
System of Local Health Care Centers
Small- and Medium-Scale Enterprise

Staff-Monitored Program

National System of Public Investment

Sector Wide Approaches

United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International Development

World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
World Food Program

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Sector Manager: 
Task Manager: 

IDA 
David de Ferranti 
Jane Armitage 
Emesto May 
Ulrich Lachler 

Vice President: 
Director: 
Manager: 
Task Manager: 

IFC
Assaad J. Jabre
Bernard C. Pasquier
Toshiya Masuoka
Junko Oikawa

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

iv

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF NICARAGUA

Table of Contents

Executive Summary

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

A. Political and Social Context ......................
.
B. The Evolution of Poverty and Social Indicators ............ 
...................... 
C. Recent Macroeconomic Developments ........................................... 

.. 

-

II. NICARAGUA'S GROWTH AND POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY 

A. First Pillar - Broad-Based Economic Growth and Structural Reform ........ 
B. Second Pillar - Greater and Better Investment in Human Capital ....... 
..... 
C. Third Pillar - Better Protection for Vulnerable Groups 
.
D. Fourth Pillar - Good Governance and Institutional Development 
.
E. Cross-cutting Themes ............................................................. 
F. Economic Outlook .
............................................................. 

.

.

III. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

A. Progress since the Last CAS ........................................................... 
B. Portfolio Performance and Management ................ 
........................... 
C. The Process of CAS Formulation .................................................... 
D. The Proposed Assistance Strategy ........................... 
........................ 
E. Core Diagnostic Requirements for Moving Towards a PRSC Framework ... 
F. Institutional Arrangements ....................................................... ..... 
G. The IDA Assistance .............................................................. 
H. IDA Alternative Lending Scenarios ................................................ 
I. Bank Analytical and Advisory Services .................. 
........................... 
J. Coordinating with other donors ....................................................... 
K Program Monitoring ............................................................. 
L. CAS Risks ............................. 
...................................... 

1

1.- 
I

2

5

8

10
14
17
18

20
21

24

24
25
26
26

28

30

30

31
36
38
40
41

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

v

BOXES

Box 1: The Sub-Valuation of Nicaragua's GDP
Box 2: The World Bank's Response to Hurricane Mitch in Nicaragua
Box 3: The CFAA: An Example of Ongoing Fiduciary Work to Ensure a
Successful PRSC Framework

TEXT TABLES

Table 1: The Evolution of Poverty in Nicaragua, 1993-2001
Table 2: Nicaragua: Progress Toward Meeting the PRSP Targets and
Millennium Development Goals
Table 3: Nicaragua: Key Macroeconomic Indicators, 1994-2001
Table 4: Nicaragua: Projected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2002-2005
Table 5: The IDA Base Case Lending Program (FY03-05)
Table 6: IDA Assistance Scenarios for Nicaragua (FY03-05)
Table 7: Status of Core Diagnostic Work
Table 8: CAS Performance Targets and Indicators

ANNEXES

Al: Key Economic Program Indicators
A2: Country at a Glance

B1: Country Program Matrix 2003-05
B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
B3: Proposed IDA Base-Case Scenario Lending Program (FY03-05)
and IFC and MIGA Program FY99-2002
B4: Summary of Non-Lending Activities

B5: Nicaragua - Social Indicators
B6: Nicaragua - Key Economic Indicators
B7: Nicaragua - Key Exposure Indicators

B8: Status of Bank Group Operations/Status of IFC's Committed
and Disbursed Portfolio
B9: CAS Summary of Development Priorities
B10: Nicaragua - Key Environmental Indicators

C: 
IDA and IDB Support for Nicaragua's PRSP Objectives
D: CAS 1998-02 - Status of Advance in Implementing 1998 CAS
E: CAS Consultations with Nicaraguan Stakeholders
F: A Technical Note on Nicaragua's Fiscal Sustainability
G: Bank-Fund Relations Note

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

vi

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF NICARAGUA

Executive Summary

i. 
This is the third Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) prepared for Nicaragua since the end
of its civil war and the normalization of relations with foreign creditors in 1991. CAS
preparation was delayed to await the preparation of a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP),
presented to the Boards of the Bank and IMF in September 2001, and to work with the new
Presidential Administration following elections in November 2001. The new government has
confirmed its commitment to the broad principles and priorities expressed in that PRSP, which
serves as the basis for this CAS.

ii. 
Most of the priorities established and actions identified in the previous CAS were
pursued, in spite of hurricane Mitch. The Government succeeded in maintaining good portfolio
implementation. On the macroeconomic side, however, the record was mixed and the PRGF
arrangement negotiated with the IMF went off track in 2001. Efforts to strengthen the public
sector witnessed important successes, but also suffered a major setback in the wake of
constitutional reforms of 2000, which undermined the legitimacy of several key state institutions.
The new administration has begun to address these issues. The first PRSP Progress Report and
Joint Staff Assessment were reviewed by the IDA and IMF Boards in December 2002. A new
three year PRGF arrangement, designed to put Nicaragua's fiscal balances on a sustainable path,
was approved by the IMF Board in December 2002.

iii. 
This CAS presents a new framework for World Bank Group assistance, with the PRSP at
the center in terms of establishing the targets and objectives to be pursued. The planned IDA
assistance involves an increased reliance on program lending, beginning with a Programmatic
Structural Adjustment Credit (PSAC) and followed by Poverty Reduction Support Credits
(PRSCs) once the required environment for this type of assistance is in place, i.e. the public
expenditure program 
supports PRSP 
implementation adequately, and public 
financial
management and procurement systems ensure the transparent, economic and efficient use of
Government resources. Much of the required analytical work in this area has been completed,
and key fiduciary assessments are under preparation. Preliminary findings indicate that the
framework for providing financial assistance through a PRSC could be in place in FY04.
Complementing the PRGF arrangement with the IMF, the PSAC and PRSCs will provide
assistance that is conditioned on progress made in implementing specific measures contemplated
in the PRSP, which coincide with key actions broadly identified in the HIPC Completion Point
matrix.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

vii

iv. 
Under this new framework, the bulk of IDA financial assistance eventually would be
provided under the PRSCs. Remaining IDA operations would consist mainly of technical
assistance operations to help implement specific measures contemplated in the PRSP and
highlighted by the PSAC/PRSC policy matrix, as well as small, innovative projects of an
experimental nature or for which the institutional infrastructure needs strengthening. The
implementation of this new approach will also require important 
internal administrative
adjustments in the form of enhanced cross-sectoral task team coordination, more intense program
supervision, a greater focus on analytic and advisory services (AAA), and an enhanced IDA field
presence.

v. 
The FY03-05 IDA resource envelope for Nicaragua 
amounts to SDR90 million (or
approximately $120 million equivalent) in the base case. The high case would provide an
additional $40 million, and would be triggered on the basis of accelerated PRSP implementation
and good IDA portfolio performance, reflecting adequate institutional capacity to execute the
program. Key lending 
triggers also 
include maintaining satisfactory macroeconomic
performance, the quality of overall public spending on priority programs, implementation of a
transparent HIPC tracking mechanism and other institutional strengthening measures, and the
passage of key policy reforms required for the PRSP.

vi. 
In tandem with IDA, IFC and MIGA will support the four pillars of the PRSP, with a
particular emphasis on the first pillar-broad based economic growth. 
IFC and MIGA will
pursue their objectives in partnership with the private sector through investment and non-
investment vehicles. 
IFC's approach in Nicaragua is to support private sector development
through activities at both the individual country and regional levels. In support of Nicaragua's
PRSP agenda, IFC will continue supporting Nicaragua's private sector in priority areas such as
(i) strengthening 
the financial sector and capital market, 
(ii) promoting 
foreign private
investment in Nicaragua, 
(iii) broadening private participation 
in infrastructure, and (iv)
reactivating growth in agriculture and industry. The scope of IFC's future investments will
depend on the improvement in removing the structural obstacles identified in the 2001 PRSP,
such as the fragile banking systems and weak property rights, and progress in addressing the
fourth pillar-good governance and institutional development-which will be critical for
improving investor confidence and doing business in Nicaragua.

vii. 
The strategy faces several important political, institutional and economic risks. The
political risk relates to the possible difficulties in securing approval of key legislation needed for
the implementation of the PRSP. The weak judicial system and supreme audit agency pose an
important institutional risk which could undermine the private sector confidence needed to
restore vigorous growth. Weak financial management and institutional capacity limitations in
the line ministries also pose institutional risks to program implementation. Economic risks arise
from both external and internal sources. On the external side, Nicaragua remains vulnerable to
natural disasters and terms of trade shocks, either of which could derail its economic program.
On the internal side, a fragile banking system and high levels of domestic debt could undermine
the HIPC initiative, if timely corrective actions are not taken. As described in the final section of
the CAS, these risks appear to be manageable, as the Government has so far demonstrated strong
ability to address these risks and take actions to mitigate them, with the support of IDA and other
donors.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

viii

viii. 

* 

* 

* 
* 

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
Does the proposed strategy adequately address the main development needs articulated in
the PRSP? Do Directors consider that the proposed strategy fits appropriately within the
overall programs of multi-lateral and bi-lateral assistance to Nicaragua?
Is the proposed gradual shift to programmatic lending through PRSCs - accompanied by
small TA projects to support policy reforms and build institutional capacity, and a greater
focus on analytical and advisory services - appropriate?
Are the triggers to move to a high case for lending appropriate?
Are the political, institutional and economic risks set out in the CAS realistic and
acceptable?

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

1

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF NICARAGUA

1. 
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Nicaragua is dated March 18, 1998. A
new CAS had been planned for 2001, in line with the normal 3-year cycle, but was delayed to
await the preparation of the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The full
PRSP was presented to the Boards of the World Bank and IMF in September 2001. Presidential
elections were held in November 2001, and the new Government that took office in January
2002 has confirmed 
its commitment to the broad principles and priorities expressed 
in that
PRSP.

I. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT

2. 
Nicaragua is the largest country in Central America in terms of land mass, and the least
densely populated. Although more tnan half of the population now lives in urban areas, 
it
remains predominantly an agricultural country. The country's principal exports are coffee, beef,
sugar and shrimp/lobsters, maKing the country very vulnerable to terms of trade shocks. Non-
traditional, maquila exports (nainly 
in the textile/garment sector) are growing rapidly, currently
accounting for about 40% of total merchandise exports. Nicaragua's most important trading
partner is the United States, followed by the other Central American countries, with whom it
shares membership in the Central American Common Market.

3. 
Nicaragua is one of the poorest and least developed countries in Latin America, with an
income per capita officially valued at $420 in 2001. Most of the country's 5.2 million
inhabitants are concentrated on the Pacific seaboard and in the Central highiands, but high
population growth rates (2.7% p.a.) are pushing the agricultural frontier into the fragile lands on
the Atlantic side. This has accelerated 
deforestation, created environmental problems (bio-
diversity 
losses) and 
led 
to 
iningements on 
indigenous 
territories. 
The combination of
geography and inadequate natural resource management in the face of population pressures has
rendered Nicaragua very vulnerable to natural disasters. 
In the last decade alone, it has been
afflicted by a major hurricane 
in 1998 (Mitch), volcanic eruptions, numerous earthquakes, a
seaquake (tsunami) and several droughts (related to El Nifio).

Political and Social Context

4. 
Mr. Enrique Bolafios, of the Liberal Party, won the presidential elections in November
2001 by an unexpectedly wide margin, marking the third successive peaceful hand-over of

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

2

political power in Nicaragua since 1990.1 The elections allowed the Liberal party to retain an
absolute majority in the unicameral National Assembly, albeit not a qualified majority. 2
During
its 
first year 
in power, 
the new Administration's agenda has been dominated by a firm
commitment to root out corruption and to increase transparency in the use of public funds. This
effort has been widely recognized as an extremely 
positive 
impulse 
for 
the country's
development, but has occasioned some frictions with members of the previous Administration
that for a while led to an impasse in the National Assembly.

5. 
The 2001 elections bore witness to a consolidation of the democratic election process, but
marked a narrowing of political options: only 3 presidential candidates contested the presidential
elections in 2001, compared to 24 in 1996. 
The roots of this process date back to the
fragmentation of the political party system in 1992, when the coalition of anti-Sandinista parties
that won the 1990 presidential elections fell apart. This fragmnentation made it difficult to sustain
a broad consensus and often resulted in the paralysis of government decision making. The
reforms of the Constitution and of the Electoral Laws in 2000 responded to this paralysis by
raising barriers to the formation of small political parties, thereby encouraging the development
of a two-party system. These reforms were carried out as part of an anrangement negotiated by
the dominant Liberal and Sandinista parties, 
that 
is widely perceived as having 
further
"politicized" various public sector institutions, especially the Judiciary. Whereas the fragmented
political system of the early 1990s resulted in serious governance problems in terms of paralyzed
decision-making 
that frequently erupted 
in violent disturbances, 
the current system poses
governance problems in the form of reduced space for democratic participation, distrust of the
legal system, and inadequate controls on govenmment.

The Evolution of Poverty and Social Indicators

6. 
Nicaragua has made significant progress in reducing poverty over the last decade. The
Living Standards Measurement Surveys (LSMSs) carried out in 1993, 1998 and 2001 show a
continuous decline in the proportion of the total population living under the poverty line (Table
1). The decline in the share of the population living in extreme poverty is especially notable,
&fatlng from 19.4 percent in 1993 to 15.1 percent in 2001. The poverty declines were most
pronounced in the nrual areas, where most of the poor are concentrated, and especially in the
Pacific and Central regions. Poverty reduction in Nicaragua seems to be highly responsive to
economic growth: 
the latest Poverty Assessment calculates elasticities of poverty to growth at
1.5 for overall poverty and at almost 2 for extreme poverty for the entire 1993 to 2001 period.
The same analysis also suggests strongly that agriculture and agricultural policies over the last
decade were among the key forces driving both strong overall economic growth and poverty
reduction. One key reason that growth in agriculture was so effective at reducing poverty is the
fact that the vast majority of Nicaraguan agricultural producers are small-scale producers, many
of them currently poor. 
In fact, the agricultural sector's rapid broad-based growth in the 1990's
was possibly the single most important cause of the significant poverty reduction that occurred

The next Presidential and Congressional elections are scheduled for November 2006, and municipal elections are
scheduled for November 2004. Elections for the regional governments of the autonomous Atlantic regions
(RAAN and RAAS) were held in March 2002 and are scheduled next for March 2007.
2 The Liberal Alliance (comprising the Liberal, Christian Path and National Resistance parties) received 53 seats in
the National Assembly, the Sandinista party received 38 seats and the Conservative party has one seat. An
absolute majority requires 47 votes, while a qualified majority requires 62 votes.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

3

between 1993 and 2001. Urban poverty exhibited a more mixed performance; declining in the

Central region, but increasing 

in the Pacific and Atlantic regions3 .

The Atlantic region, 

in

general, experienced a deterioration in poverty indicators during 1993-1998, but this has been
partly compensated with improvements during 1998-01. Although hurricane Mitch caused major

human and physical damage, it did not significantly change Nicaragua's overall poverty profile.

7. 

If Nicaragua's poverty levels continue to decline at the same pace as during 1993-2001,

the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of cutting extreme poverty in half should be reached
well before the target date of 2015. There are concerns, however, about the country's ability to

sustain this pace. The decline in poverty from 1993 to 1998 was due mainly to extensive rural

sector growth, boosted by high export commodity prices, the availability of unoccupied land and
a return to normalcy after a decade of civil war. None of these factors can be expected to deliver
a sustained growth impulse indefinitely, and indeed, Nicaragua's main export prices already have
experienced a major deterioration since 2000.4 The fact that overall poverty has continued to

decline over 1998-2001 appears to lw due mainly to the post-Mitch reconstruction boom, which

also came to an end in 2001. This means that growth in the rural sector, where most of the poor
are concentrated, is likely to be short-lived in the absence of new stimuli to sustain agriculturl
output growth. Moreover, 
future growth needs 
to rely on productivity growth, since 
the
extensive growth pattem followed during the 1990s is reaching its natural limits and could result
in major environmental damage if continued.

Table 1: The Evolution of Poverty in Nicaragua, 1993-2001 (percentages)

Extreme Poverty Headcount Index 

Poverty Headcount Index

Change Change Change 

Change Change Change

Urban 
Rural 

7.9 
30.3 

17 
41.4 

13.1 
26.9 

9.1 
11.1 

-3.9 
-14.5 

5.2 
-3.4 

35.5 
_ 83.6 

44.4 
79.3 

Source: World Bank, Nicaragua: Poverty Assessment Follow-Up, 2002.

8. 
Over the past year, Nicaragua also has made significant progress in meeting its other
PRSP targets, which are closely linked to the MDGs (Table 2). This development reflects the
overall positive growth performance during the second half of the 1990s, the priority given by

the Govenmment to improving the coverage of basic social services and generous amounts of

donor assistance, especially ii the aftermath of hurricane Mitch in 1998. One exception to this
general improvement in social indicators pertains to the illiteracy rate which in Nicaragua, as

3 The deterioration of urban poverty may be explained by the evolution of the largely urban-based manufacturing
sector activity and Government employment, which slumped during the 1990s, in contrast to fie booming
agricultural sector. The evolution of poverty on the Atlantic coast appears to be more of a cyclical phenomenon.
4 Accordingly, poverty has increased again over 1998-2001 in the principal coffee growing areas (Central Rural
region), which are the ones that suffered the greatest price shocks; Table 1.

Region 

National 
Urban 
Rural 
Managusa 

Urban 

Rural 

Central

Urban 
Rural 

Atlantic

1993 
19.4 
7.3 
36.3 
5.1 

6.4 

31.6 

15.3 
47.6 

1998 
17.3 
7.6 
28.9 
3.1 

9.8 

24.1 

12.2 
32.7 

2001 
15.1 
6.2 
27.4 
2.5 

5.9 

16.3 

11.1 
38.4 

93-98 
-2.1 
0.3 
-7.4 
-2.0 

3.4 

-7.5 

-3.1 
-14.9 

98-01 
-2.2 
-1.4 
-1.5 
-0.6 

-3.9 

-7.8 

-1.1 
5.7 

93-01 
-4.3 
14.1 
-8.9 
-2.6 

-0.5 

-15.3 

-4.2 
-9.2 

1993 
50.3 
31.9 
76.1 
29.9 

28.1 

70.7 

49.2 
84.7 

1998 
47.9 
30.5 
68.5 
18.5 

39.6 

67.1 

39.4 
74 

2001 
45.8 
30.1 
67.8 
20.2 

37.2 

56.8 

37.6 
75.1 

43 
76.7 

93-98 
-2.4 
-1.4 
-7.6 
-11.4 

11.5 

-3.6 

-9.8 
-10.7 

8.9 
-4.3 

98-01 
-2.1 
-0.4 
-0.7 
1.7 

93-01
-4.5
-1.8
-8.3
-9.7

-2.4 

-10.3 

-1.8 
1.1 

-1.4 
-2.6 

9.1

-13.9

-11.6
-9.6

7.5
-6.9

Extreme Poverty Ratio (%) 
Net Primarv Enrollement Ratio (%) 
MaternalMortality 
Infant Mortality (/.O000 live births) 
Child Mortality (/1.000 live births) 
Access to Renrod. Health Serv. (%) 
CThronic Malnutritinn (/) 
Water Coverage (%) 
Sanitation Coverace (%) 
Illiteracv Rate (%) 

LSMS 
MECD 
MINSA 
DHS 
DHS 
MINSA 
ISMS 
ENACAL 
LSMS 
LSMS 

19.4 
75 6 

17.3 
79.6 

40 
50 

237 

19.7 

148 

21.0 

66.5 

82.6 
21 5 

84.1 
18.8 

15.1 
83.0 
125 
31 
40 
23.8 
17.8 
70.0 
86.2 

18-7 

16.0 
77.9 

22.0 
17.9 
69.5 
85.0 

1 R5 

2015

9.3
90.0
37
21
22
1Q
7.0
100.0
95.0

14.3 
83.4 
129 
32 
37 
23 
16* 
75.4 
88* 
16* 

Yes 
ves 
yes 
yes 
yes 
oartlv 
ves 
partlv 
yes 
no

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

4

elsewhere, has proved difficult to affect in a medium term time frame. There also are concerns
about the current pace at which access to reproductive health services (by persons of appropriate
age) and the coverage of water services are increasing. Both indicators have achieved their short
term PRSP targets in 2001, but these short term targets are extremely modest relative to the
MDG targets for 2015. Though not listed as a PRSP target, the indicators on child health related
to diarrhea also are an issue of concern because they appear to have deteriorated since 1999
according to the first PRSP Progress Report.

Table 2. Nicaragua: Progress Toward Meeting the PRSP Targets
and Millennium Development Goals

Actual Values 

PRSP Targets Trk? Tareet

Poverty Indicators 

1993 

1998 

1999 

2001 

2001 

2005 

Data Source

National Strategy for Sustained Development 
yes
Source: World Bank, Nicaragua Poverty Assessment Follow-up, 2002. (Note: Starred (*) items refer to 2004 targets.

(to be implemented by 2005) 

9. 
Looking toward the future, progress in Nicaragua's social indicators is constrained by the
extremely low levels of social spending, which reflects mainly the country's overall low level of
income, thus further emphasizing the need for higher, sustained growth. Even though per capita
social spending increased by 50 percent in US Dollar terms in the aftermath of hurricane Mitch,
it still remains far below the average for Latin America. 
(Social spending as a share of GDP
appears to be higher than the Latin American average, but that is due to the sub-valuation of
Nicaragua's GDP; Box 1.) This necessarily directs attention to the need for sector reforms that
aim to bring about a more efficient use of existing resources, as well as on resource growth
thrmugh higher GDP.

10. 
Core Labor Standards. Nicaragua has ratified all seven of the International Labor
Orgazization's (ILO's) core labor conventions, and its legislation generally complies with the
LO core labor conventions on forced labor. There are no indications of the p-actice of forced
labor. 
In many areas, however, law enforcement is weak and further measures are required in
order to ensure compliance with the commitments that Nicaragua accepted in the World Trade
Organization Ministerial Declarations and in the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and
Rights at Work adopted in June 1998. Problems have been reported about adequate enforcement
of trade union rights 
(particularly 
in export processing zones), about discrimination against
women (as reflected in pay differentials and in women's reduced presence in higher occupational
positions in the private sector), and about the prevalence of child labor in the informal sector
(including 
the production of export 
commodities). 
Given 
the extent of poverty and
unemployment in Nicaragua, 
the PRSP has focused attention mainly on employment creation,
rather than on the quality of employment Two upcoming initiatives that could shed more light
into the issue of labor standards are a study of youth employment in Nicaragua, b be conducted
under the Bank's social protection lending activities 
that support 
the social 
investment 
fund
(FISE), and by an investment climate assessment to be conducted jointly by the Bank and EFC.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

5

Box 1: The Sub-Valuation of Nicaragua's GDP

The official national income accounts significantly underestimate Nicaragua's Gross Domestic
Product. This observation emerges from the 1993 and 1998 Living Standards Measurements
Surveys, which yield total private consumption figures that are significantly higher than is reported in
the national income accounts. The Central Bank of Nicaragua is in the process of revising the
national income accounts, by modernizing the data-gathering process and correcting relative price
distortions that had marred the earlier figures, and plans to have the revised figures available by
March 2003. While the sub-valuation of GDP has raised questions about Nicaragua's eligibility for
IDA and HIPC assistance once the revised figures are presented, it is unlikely that the corrected
figures would boost Nicaragua's per-capita income above IDA operational thresholds. (Although the
sub-valuation of GDP is widely recognized, the figures in this report continue to refer to the official
national income figures to avoid confusion.)

The World Bank, "Improving the Poverty Focus of Public Spending", Nicaragua Public Expenditure Review, Dec. 7, 2001.

Recent Macroeconomic Developments

11. 
Following a decade of economic and political disarray in the 1980s, Nicaragua has
advanced far in restoring a stable, private sector-led, market economy. Hyperinflation was
halted in 1991 and economic growth reemerged 
in 1994. Trade barriers were progressively
lowered to open up the economy, FDI increased until 1999 from minimral levels in the early
1990s, and by 1997, private investors overtook the public sector as the main source of capital
accumulation. 
The oversized public sector 
inherited 
in 1990 was reduced 
through major
contractions in the public sector labor force, cuts in public expenditures, and the privatization or
closure of most state-owned enterprises. Other reforms included the modernization of financial
sector 
legislation and prudential norrns, 
closure of all 
state-owned commercial banks,
privatization of public power and 
telecommunications utilities, 
strengthening of regulatory
agencies for public services, restructuring of the public sector, 
initiation of a comprehensive
pension system reformn, and reforms in public administration through the creation of a single
treasury account (Caja Unica) and introduction of a modem 
financial management system.
These measures were accompanied by the creation of various social funds, most importantly the
Emergency Social Investment Fund (FISE), to direct resources to the poor, and steps to reform
the social sectors, particularly health and education, to improve the quality of services within a
highly constrained budget. As a result of these efforts, significant progress has been made in
reducing many of the most visible structural constraints on economic growth and development.
A number of structural issues remain to be addressed, however. These are well-recognized by
Government and are discussed in Section II below, which describes the Government priorities as
reflected in the PRSP.

12. 
By 1997-98, the Nicaraguan Government, having accomplished 
the structural reforms
described above, was well-advanced in the process of restoring fiscal discipline, rebuilding an
adequate reserves cushion and reducing the country's dependence on foreign aid. This program
received support from the IMF, via a 3-year PRGF arrangement which was initiated in March
1998, and by other partners, including IDA. The process of fiscal consolidation was interrupted
by hurricane Mitch in October 1998. However, Nicaragua was able to rebound quickly from the
physical damage caused by the hurricane, due largely to a massive inflow of foreign aid that
came in response. 
In addition, as one of the world's most indebted countries, Nicaragua was

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

6

declared eligible for HIPC relief in 1999, and reached the HIPC Decision Point in December
2000. At the time, expectations were that the Government would negotiate a third-year PRGF
arrangement with the IMF for 2001, and that the HIPC Completion Point could be reached by
late 2002.

13. 
As the post-Mitch boom came to an end in 2001, economic activity slowed 5 , and the
Govemment was unable to rein in spending commensurately, resulting in large fiscal deficits and
a weakened intemational reserve position. The economic and monetary situation was further
aggravated by the failures of several major banks, which had to be intervened, 
forcing the
Central Bank to issue domestic debt to avoid a run on deposits. The Govemment was unable to
take necessary corrective measures, 
in part because of political concerns 
linked 
to 
the
presidential elections 
in November 2001, and the 3 rd year arrangement under the PRGF was
abandoned. A less demanding Staff-Monitored Program (SMP) was agreed with the IMF for the
period of June-December 2001, but even that program was not complied with, and most of the
agreed targets were missed by wide margins. As a result, the projected HIPC Completion Point
date slipped into 2003.

14. 
The fiscal 
indiscipline of 2001, combined with external prices shocks (oil, coffee),
exacerbated Nicaragua's already 
large macroeconomic 
imbalances. 
The most pressing
imbalance 
in the short and medium term is the large fiscal deficit and the large public debt
(Table 3). Another imbalance that stands out is the huge external deficit This mostly reflects
the country's large fiscal deficit (which is beginning to be addressed) and the large supply of aid
that Nicaragua has received in the past and is continuing to receive. The large inflow of foreign
aid has propped up the real exchange rate, resulting in a "Dutch disease" phenomenon, which has
encouraged extremely high domestic absorption rates and may have dragged down the country's
competitiveness. 6 The adverse impact of an appreciated real exchange rate on growth is offset to
some degree by the competitiveness-enhancing 
impact of the capital investments that are made
possible by the aid inflows. The precise degree to which competitiveness 
is in fact enhanced
depends critically on the efficiency of donor assistance -
an issue that should receive increasing
attention in the coming years, together with other pressing issues, such as the fiscal deficit and
high public debt.

15. 
Immediately upon assuming office, 
the Bolafios administration has begun 
to address
these issues, and began discussions with the IMF on a PRGF arrangement. A new three year
PRGF was approved by the IMF Board in early December 2002. The program envisages a
substantial 
fiscal adjustment and reduction 
in 
the exchange-rate 
indexed stock of domestic
central bank debt, which are expected to take place through a comprehensive tax reform, and
amended budget for 2002 and a program to recover assets of previously intervened commercial

5 Private investment as a percentage of GDP declined sharply from its peak of 22.2 percent in 1999 to 14.2 percent
in 2001.
6 The large external deficits do not appear to be signaling major problems with exchange rate policy. The authorities
have maintained a crawling peg policy since 1994 that kept real exchange rate behavior fairly stable, except for
the one-time real appreciation (on the order of 15 percent) in 1999-2000, which was likely reflecting the post-
Mitch surge of foreign aid. But this trend has not continued in 2001-02, as aid flows have been declining toward
pre-Mitch levels.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

7

banks. These measures are designed to put Nicaragua's fiscal balances on a sustainable path. 7
I 
line with program targets the Government has already passed the first phase of a tax reform
and has revised the 2002 budget by a significant amount. Also the Government has succeeded in
passmg in the National Assembly the school autonomy law and the general health law which
create the legal framework for the modernization reforms in the sector.

Table 3: Nicaragua - Key Macroeconomic Indicators, 1994-2001

Prelim. Prelim.

1999 

2000 

2001

Real GDP growth 
Inflation rate (CPI, e.o.p.) 
Unemployment Rate 

Exports, f.o.b. 
Export volume 
Imports, f.o.b.. 
Import volume 
Terms of Trade ( - = deterioration) 
Real Eff. Exchange Rate; e.o.p. (- = deprec.) 

Trade Balance 
Current Account Balance 
Current Account Balance (excluding interest) 

Public sector balance (before grants) 
Grants 
Public sector balance (after grants) 
o/w Central bank profits 

Gross domestic investment 
Public 
Private 
National savings 
Public 
Private 
External savings 
Gross International Reserves (months of imports) 
Source: IMF and Central Bank of Nicaragua

Ave. 

1994-96 

4.1 
11.9 
16.7 

36.1 
22.2 
16.2 
12.4 
8.9 
-5.2 

-25.6 
44.1 
-19.0 

-14.2 
7.5 
-6.7 
-0.2 

24.7 
15.7 
8.9 
4.5 
1.6 
-6.1 
29.0 
1.4 

1997 

1998 

percentages
5.1 
4.1 
7.4 
7.3 
18.5 
7.2 
14.3 
13.2 
10.7 
annual percentage change
23.4 
-0.6 
-4.9 
22.6 
-2.3 
9.3 
30.6 
0.9 
23.1 
33.0 
8.6 
15.9 
6.8 
7.7 
-19.1 
3.5 
2.0 
1.6 
Percent of GDP
-40.4 
-39.2 
-52.3 
-39.8 
-37.2 
-47.9 
-29.1 
-26.9 
-37.7 

-9.7 
5.2 
-4.5 
-0.5 

30.5 
13.7 
16.8 
-4.6 
4.0 
-8.6 
35.1 
2.3 

-7.4 
3.8 
-3.6 
-3.3 

33.8 
13.0 
20.8 
2.3 
5.6 
-3.3 
31.5 
2.3 

-15.7 
8.7 
-7.0 
-1.7 

43.3 
21.1 
22.2 
1.4 
5.4 
-4.0 
41.9 
3.3 

-15.4 
7.3 
-8.1 
-1.5 

34.9 
19.0 
15.9 
2.5 
3.6 
-1.2 
32.4 
3.2 

5.5 
6.6 
9.9

18.3 
15.1 
-3.2 
-9.7 
-4.0 
6.0 

-41.4 
-38.2 
-28.0 

3.1
4.7

-8.1
7.3
-1.1
3.1
-11.2
-0.6

-41.4
-37.7
-26.4

-21.0
6.3
-14.7
-2.0

30.4
16.2
14.2
-3.1
-4.4
1.3
33.5
2.3

7 Based on the model of fiscal sustainability developed in Annex B of the Nicaragua Public Expenditure Review,
Nicaragua's large public debt is clearly not sustainable with the currently low level of GDP growth and primary
fiscal surplus (after grants) of 2% of GDP estimated for 2002. Under the IMF-supported program, the size of
Nicaragua's total public debt (in present value terms) is projected to decline to shortly over 50 percent of GDP
by 2005, assuming that the corrected value of GDP is larger than the currently sub-valued GDP figures by a
factor of 1.7. This level of public debt would be sustainable with a primary fiscal surplus of 2 percent of GDP if
GDP growth of at least 5 percent per annum is reestablished and donors are prepared to continue extending
concessional credits in similar amounts and conditions as in 1997-2000; see Annex F ("Note on Fiscal
Sustainability").

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

8

H. NICARAGUA'S GROWTH AND POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY

16. 

PRSP Development Priorities and Agenda. Since 1990, Govenmment policies have been
guided by the vision of a stable market economy in which the private sector becomes the main
engine of growth and poverty reduction. During the early 1990s, these policies focused on
restoring peace, ending hyperinflation, and 
transfomiing a command economy into a market
economy. 
As the economy stabilized by the mid-1990s, attention shifted toward growth.
Poverty reduction efforts intensified in the aftermath of hurncane Mitch, while the Government
initiated an intense dialogue with a broad spectrum of Nicaragua's society.8
These efforts
coincided with 
the enhancement of the HIPC Initiative and led to the preparation of the
Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), which 
is the basis for this CAS.
Recent IDA support 
to the Government's PRSP preparation 
included two core non-lending
products: a Poverty Assessment (FY01) and a Public Expenditure Review (FY02).

17. 
The PRSP rests on four pillars: a) broad based economic growth with an emphasis on
productive employment generation and rural development; b) greater and better investment in the
human capital of the poor; c) better protection 
for vulnerable populations; and d) 
the
strengthening of institutions and good govemance. 
These four pillars are intertwined with three
cross-cutting 
themes: a) a reduction 
in environmental degradation and ecological vulnerability;
b) an increase in social equity; and c) further decentralization. Although prepared by the former
administration, the Bolanios administration has expressed its support for the PRSP, indicating that
in response to recent developments it plans to give particular emphasis on the first and fourth
pillars of the strategy .
It has also emphasized the need to revise the criteria used for allocating
resources, such that both the poverty map and assessments of the productive potential of program
beneficiaries should henceforth serve for program targeting purposes. This change in emphasis
is driven by the following considerations: the fiscal adjustments contemplated under Nicaragua's
macroeconomic program may well exert a recessionary 
influence on economic activity in the
short run, which would threaten the achievement of Nicaragua's poverty reduction targets, given
the sensitivity of its poverty indicators to the GDP growth rate (para. 6). Therefore, a major
challenge facing the Nicaraguan authorities 
is how to restore growth in the absence of fiscal
stimuli and in the presence of an appreciated real exchange rate due to the significant donor
presence. 
To meet 
this challenge, 
the Government 
is 
looking toward 
fiscally 
inexpensive
measures 
to improve Nicaragua's private 
investment climate, as well as measures to improve
governance and public 
sector management. 
Improvements 
in governance-including better
defined and enforced property rights, clear rules of the game and transparent management of
public resources-are seen by the Government as crucial for restoring investor confidence. At the
same time, a strengthened public sector management and better capacity to coordinate aid are
crucial for increasing the impact of public expenditures and minimizing the macroeconomic drag
on competitiveness associated with aid inflows.

18. 

Progress in PRSP Implementation. The Government has made good progress over the

past year towards PRSP implementation and towards achieving PRSP goals. The Joint Staff
Assessment of the first PRSP Progress Report (Report No. 25104-NI dated November 11, 2002
and IDA/SecM2002-0545/1 dated November 19, 2002) describes that the country is on the way

8 Although the PRSP was prepared with extensive and broad-based consultations, recent consultations indicated that the
familiarity among different groups with the contents of the PRSP was uneven, suggesting a need for making
additional efforts to ensure wider participation in future revisions of the PRSP; Annex E.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

9

to reestablishing a fiscal track record and considerable advances have been made in improving
governance and strengthening public expenditure management, including the development of
tracking mechanims for poverty related spending, as contemplated under the fourth pillar of the
PRSP. Further efforts to accelerate and improve the implementation of the PRSP are needed
however, especially with regard to growth and employment promoting measure, especially in
rural areas, as envisioned under the first pillar. The implementation of some key institutional
reforms have been delayed, such as the civil service and pension reforms, and the programs to
improve land security. Important progress was made in implementation of the second pillar with
the approval of framework laws in health and education, but the associated institutional reforms
in these social sectors have been advancing slowly. Finally, a national social protection policy is
needed urgently to ensure successful implementation of the third pillar. With respect to the
cross-cutting themes in the PRSP, incipient progress has been made in reducing environmental
vulnerability and decentralization, but nothing is reported in the PRSP Progress Report in the
area of social equity.

19. 
The PRSP's four pillars and cross-cutting themes are described below, together with the
planned World Bank Group assistance in support of each of these. The IDA assistance to
Nicaragua involves an increased reliance on program lending, beginning with a Programmatic
Structural Adjustment Credit (PSAC) that will support key reforms that are needed achieve the
PRSP targets. 
IDA's assistance strategy contemplates a move towards programmatic lending
through Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) once it is clear that the required
environment for this type of assistance is in place, i.e. that the public expenditure program
supports PRSP 
implementation adequately, and 
that public 
financial management and
procurement systems are in place to ensure the transparent, economic and efficient use of
Government resources. Some of the required analytical work in this area has been completed,
but key fiduciary assessments are still under preparation. Preliminary findings, however,
indicate that the framework for providing financial assistance through a PRSC, could be in place
in FY04. Complementing the PRGF arrangement with the IMF, the PSAC and PRSCs will
provide assistance that is conditioned on progress made in implementing specific measures
contemplated in the PRSP, which coincide with key actions broadly identified in the HIPC
Completion Point matrix. The move towards programmatic lending would undoubtedly improve
the impact of public programs 
through better donor coordination and stronger country

ownership, and goes hand in hand with the transition toward sector-wide approaches, which is

being advocated by the Nicaraguan government and many donors.

20. 
Under this new framework, the bulk of IDA financial assistance eventually would be
provided under the PRSCs (which would be larger in value terms than the PSAC). The main
reforms and policies that are to be supported by the PSAC (and eventually PRSCs) are described
in the context of each of the PRSP's pillars. These are followed by a list of ongoing lending and
non-lending assistance that supports those polices, and the proposed new lending. To support
PRSP implementation, IDA expects to carry out a proposed Poverty Assessment Update
(FY03), a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) (FY04), and a Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM)/Development Policy Review (FY04). Once IDA's investment assistance
is provided under a PRSC framework, remaining IDA operations would consist mainly of
technical assistance operations to help implement specific measures contemplated in the PRSP
and highlighted by the PSAC/PRSC policy matrix, as well as small, innovative projects of an
experimental nature or for which the institutional infrastructure needs strengthening.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

10

First Pillar - Broad-Based Econoniic Growth and Structural Reform

21. 
The first pillar-Broad-Based Economic Growth and Structural Reform--was designed to
address the constraints to growth identified in the PRSP. These include:

* 

* 

* 

the large fiscal deficit and public debt, which represent a major source of macroeconomic
vulnerability,
the 
fragile banking system, which faces high administrative costs, 
low capitalization,
over-concentrated branches, a short-term, 
skewed deposit structure 
resulting 
in an
incapacity 
to provide medium 
and 
long-term 
financing 
to productive 
sectors,
underdeveloped capital markets and limitations on collateral guarantees,
* weak property nights, which represent one of the main factors inhibiting development of
land markets and other productive assets, as well 
as 
investments 
in, and 
the
diversification of, the rural economy,
technological backwardness, which places major constraints on productivity growth,
low human capital 
indicators, which inhibit 
the absorption of new 
technologies and
contribute to the country's poverty levels,
* poor physical infrastructure, which translates into higher production costs for the private
sector and, hence, lower competitiveness,
* high vulnerability 
to natural disasters and socio-econonic 
periodic destruction of assets and economic disruption, and
the low efficiency of public expenditures.

shocks, which 

* 
* 

results 

in

22. 
To address 
these constraints, 
the 
first pillar focuses on 
the 
implementation of a
macroeconomic program of continued stabilization and structural reform, 
including privatization
of remaining Govenmment-owned utilities, actions aimed at modernizing 
the rural economy,
fostering small and medium businesses, 
the development of the Atlantic Coast, and 
the
promotion of strategic productive clusters. 9
This pillar clearly relies on an aggressive private
sector response, which will require equally aggressive measures to motivate private investors,
who are currently being very cautious 
in the face of an uncertain economic and political
environment. 
The PRSP expects the future economic expansion to be led by urban services
(such as tourism, banking, comrnerce and communications), but the success of poverty reduction
requires a special effort to ensure that the rural economy expands as well. With that purpose in
mind, the PRSP focuses on the following actions:

* 

Improving 
incentives for rural development 
through the elimination of price and cost
distortions. The government has eliminated non-tariff barriers and reduced most import
tariffs to within a range of 0-15 percent (the main exceptions being chicken parts, sugar,
basic grains and powdered milk). Further reductions in the anti-export bias facing rural
producers are expected to come mainly from the free trade agreements with Nicaragua's
major trading partners.
* Securing property rights and improving the operation of rural factor markets to encourage
private investment. Efforts to modernize and accelerate the operations of the land registry
and titling systems are crucial for securing property rights, which in tum is a pre-requisite
for attracting more private 
investment. 
The government also plans to revise bank

9 Several of these growth constraints are being addressed under separate pillars, notably the low levels of human

capital (Pillar 11) and the low efficiency of public expenditures (Pillar IV).

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

II

* 

financial organizations

regulations 
to widen credit access, 
fornalize non-conventional 
and improve the operations of its own rural credit fund.
Increasing investments in rural infrastructure. Better and more rural roads are required to
lower the costs of inputs and raise sale prices to farmers while facilitating the delivery of
social services. Rural electricity and telecommunications coverage need to be expanded.
Implementing programs aimed at small and medium-sized producers through a strategy
to foster competitiveness in several strategic clusters with high growth potential, such as
tourism, textiles and clothing, and forestry products.
* Promoting 
the adoption of 
improved production 
productivity growth, and
* Completing the pension reform and financial sector strengthening activities

raise agricultual

* 

technologies 

to 

23. 
The promotion of foreign direct investment is an important development platform for the
new President, whose first official actions included convening, the day after his inauguration, an
investor conference to discuss Nicaragua's potential as a. host for FDI. The new government
needs to follow up its private sector-friendly rhetoric with actions in several areas that require
special 
attention 
for 
improving 
the private 
investment 
environment. 
This 
includes, 
(i)
developing a more proactive foreign direct investment promotion capacity, 
targeting 
specific
sectors, (ii) strengthening the entire network of agencies 
involved in promoting and facilitating
investment 
in Nicaragua, 
(iii) strengthening of technical training activities 
in close coordination
with sector targeting programs, (iv) improving the infrastructure network related to foreign trade,
(v) developing ESW in support of regional initiatives to advance regional cooperation, especially
in trade and in setting uniform standards, and (vi) improving Nicaragua's image vis-a-vis the
international business community. 
Though far from ideal, Nicaragua's political and investment
environment is not significantly worse than those in the rest of the region, but its image still
suffers from the anti-private sector policies in effect two decades ago.

24. 
There are several other recent structural development of relevance to the implementation
of the first pillar of he PRSP. First, domestic public debt has grown very rapidly in recent years,
threatening to undo the debt reduction benefits projected from the HIPC initiative (see footnote
No. 7). Second, Nicaragua has been hard hit by the significant fall in the real price of coffee,

which represents the single most important export product and the largest source of incomes in

rural areas. Given the prospects that prices will remain low in the future, coffee producers will
need 
to 
improve productivity significantly and reorient production 
towards specialty coffee
markets and more generally to new products and markets. Finally, a recent development with
potentially 
far-reaching 
implications 
for Nicaragua's 
future development 
is 
the 
increased
willingness by the United States to establish a free trade area with Central America. 
The
prospects of greater market access for Nicaragua could become one of the most important forces
driving investment and growt, 
even though it is also 
likely to require 
important adjustments
among many sectors of society. 10

25. 
The Government, as well as many donors and civil society commentators on the PRSP,
consider that this pillar needs to be strengthened in order to assure that the rest of the poverty

'0 Prospects for a US-CA Free Trade Area improved sharply in October 2002, with the US Trade Representative

formally notifying the US Congress that it plans to initiate formal negotiations in early 2003, as well as a strong
offer of cooperation aid support for institutional strengthening for CA countries that may have problems
preparing for the negotiations and implementing agreements.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

12

reduction strategy is sustainable. Accordingly, 
the Government has been revising its priorities
under this pillar, putting particular emphasis on the acceleration of economic growth, raising
productivity, better 
risk management 
and a cluster development 
strategy 
to enhance
competitiveness. At the same time, the more recent structural developments mentioned above
are being taken into account in the PRSP implementation, as described in the first PRSP Progress
Report and contemplated under the Government's macroeconomic program supported by the
IMF.

26. 
Bank Group Assistance. As an integral part of the PRSP's focus on broad-based growth,
IDA, IFC and MIGA will work closely together on this pillar, aiming at a stronger private sector
response and infrastructure development Given recent integration initiatives associated with the
Free Trade Areas of the Americas (FTAA) and a possible Central America Free Trade Area
(CAFTA), and the increasing possibilities of the greater market access for Nicaragua and other
Central American countries to the more developed NAFTA partners, competition is expected to
intensify among 
the Central American countries. 
In 
this context; 
logistical 
improvements,
including the time and costs required 
to receive certain trade-related services, is expected to
become 
increasingly important to Nicaragua. On IDA's part, the proposed PSAC, and later
PRSCs, would provide assistance for the implementation of this strategic pillar that would focus
on policies to facilitate cluster network development and on measures to improve the investment
climate 
through the strengthening of property rights, completion of the ongoing privatization
programs and 
the pension reform program, 
improvement of public 
infrastructure 
services,
strengthening of the financial system, and development of a clear competition policy. Given the
concentration of the poor in rural areas, IDA's proposed assistance strategy would also continue
to support improvement of the performance of the agricultural and forestry sectors which are
essential for sustainable poverty reduction.

27. 
The activities under this pillar are supported by various ongoing lending and non-lending
operations, which have had a strong rural focus. The ongoing lending operations are the Second
and Third Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Projects (Credits 3085-NI and 3464-NI)
approved in FY98 and FY01, respectively, that seek to improve road infrastructure; the Pension
and Financial Market Reform TA Project (Credit 3344-NI) approved in FY00 which
supports the development of an actuarially sustainable pension system and the strengthening of
the Superintendency of Banks; the Telecommunications Sector Reform Project (Credit 3291-
NI) approved in FY00 that is helping to strengthen the policy and regulatory environment while
the state telecom enterprise, ENITEL, is being privatized (ENITEL was privatized on December
18, 2001, with technical assistance under this project, when 40 percent of the company's shares,
plus management contract, were sold to Telia/EMCE, a Swedish/Honduran consortium); 
the
Competitiveness Learning and Innovation Project (Credit 3456-NI) approved in FY01 which
is assisting in the development of business clusters and measures to improve the overall business
climate; a Sustainable Forestry Investment Promotion Project (Credit 3160-NI) approved in
FY99 
that 
supports 
the development of private and communal 
forestry activities; 
an
Agricultural Technology and Technical Education & Training APL Project (Credit 3371-
NI) approved in FY00 that aims to develop a market for agricultural technology services and
rural 
training systems as engines 
for raising rural sector productivity growth; and a Land
Administration Project (Credit 3665-NI) approved in FY02 that seeks to improve the security
of land 
tenure. 
Ongoing noi-lending operations 
include 
two advisory 
services 
tasks, a
Commodity Price Risk Management 
(FY03) task and a Rainfall Insurance Development

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

13

(FY03) 
task, which 
seek 
to develop private sector mechanisms 
for 
insuring agricultural
producers and, possibly, public 
infrastructure against natural and market-based risks; and an
Agricultural ESW (FY02) on promoting competitiveness and stimulating broad-based growth in
agriculture.

28. 
The main new lending operation being considered by IDA over the next three years, other
than the PSAC and series of PRSCs, is a Second Competitiveness Enhancement (FY04) credit
that would incorporate the findings of FIAS' work on the investment climate and competition to
improve the investment environment, help Nicaragua's private sector prepare for possible entry
into a regional free trade area, and eventually support an expansion of the number of business
clusters. This project, combined with TA support from MIGA and IFC/FIAS, is envisioned as
the core source of technical assistance services for measures to improve the hbsiness climate and
accelerate growth. 
In addition, two or three small investment projects are being considered.
These projects are all of an innovative character and have in common a strong rural development
and poverty reduction focus. An Off-Grid Rural Electrification Project (FY03) would support
the sustainable provision of electricity services and associated social and economic benefits 
in
selected rural sites; a Rural Micro-Finance Development Project (FY03) seeks to improve the
efficiency and soundness of financial 
intermediation 
in rural areas; and possibly a Rural
Telecommunications Development Project (FY05) would extend access to rural telecom
services. The PCF Umbrella Project (FY02) will purchase carbon credits generated by a small
portfolio of primarily 
renewable energy projects, addition 
to energy sources diversity and
benefiting both 
the 
local and global environment. 
Future Clean Development Mechanism
potential 
in the forestry/land management sectors (for carbon sequestration) could have similar
positive spin-offs 
for rural sector productivity and sustainability. 
The main new non-lending
operations envisioned over the next three years in support of this pillar include a Land Sector
Study (FY03) that reviews the progress and challenges remaining in the area of land rights, an
Investment Climate and Competition Environment Assessment (FY04) 
(by FIAS) which will
be carried out in coordination with a Rural Sector Competitiveness Assessment (FY04), both of
which seek to provide analytic underpinnings for future operations to improve competitiveness;
an Infrastructure Assessment (FY05) to identify the most pressing infrastructure needs that need
to be addressed in the future;" l and a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) (FY04) to
strengthen our understanding of potential vulnerabilities 
in 
the 
financial 
system and design
corrective measures. Two studies with a regional focus are proposed that are of relevance 
to
Nicaragua: Central America Trade ESW (FY03) that will center on strategic issues related to a
US-Central America FTA, and a study on Drivers of Sustainable Rural Growth in Central
America (FY03). At the govenmuent's request, IDA is also planning a diagnostic mission,
possibly with IMF participation, 
to review the sustainability of Nicaragua's domestic debt and
help identify strategies to address it.

29. 
In conjunction with the Bank's programs, IFC has been focusing on facilitating private-
sector development since it resumed its activity in Nicaragua in FY98. 
It is supporting 
the
private 
sector with existing 
investments 
(of about $16 million commitment) 
in productive
Nicaraguan finns in agribusiness, retail, pharmaceuticals, and the financial sector. Through each
investment, 
IFC provides scarce 
long-term capital and transfers expertise on environmental,

An assessment of the regulatory policies and institutional framework to identify and address adverse impacts
related to environmental issues, land acquisition and physical relocation that could result from significant
increases in infrastructure investments may be considered for certain sectors (e.g., roads) as part of the
infrastructure assessment.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

14

social, managerial and financial practices. 
IFC's support for the Nicaraguan private sector also is
provided through 
regional projects (of about $70 million commritment) in Central America, that
include investments in a private equity fund (Central America Growth Fund), a regional power
development 
company 
(EGO, 
a 
regional 
information 
and 
communications 
provider
(Convergence), a regional financial group (Cuscatlan), and a credit bureau company (Trans
Union Central America - TUCA). 
In support of the IFC's focus, a number of trust funds were
utilized 
for 
regional market 
assessment 
initiatives 
covering Nicaragua, with 
respect 
to
development of the SME, insurance, private health and education, and hydroelectric generation
projects.

30. 
FIAS has been supporting Nicaragua in its promotion of investment, particularly FDI, via
its advisory services. 
In FY98-99, FIAS completed 
three assignments with respect to (i)
implementing new FDI 
laws, 
(ii) establishing an 
investment promotion agency, 
and 
(iii)
examining the country's legal framework for FDI. FIAS is also launching two new initiatives as
part of IDA's Competitiveness Learning and Innovation Credit: (a) assisting in developing the
Nicaragua FDI and (market) competition policy framework and (b)assisting the Government in
establishing a reform strategy for the removal of administrative barriers to investment.

31. 
MIGA has been active in Nicaragua through its activities in insurance as well as technical
assistance for investment promotion. Taken together, the WBG's activity in this area is focused
on improving investor confidence and removing barriers to private sector-led growth.

Second Pillar - Greater and Better Investment in Human Capital

32. 
The PRSP's second pillar-Greater and Better Investment 
in Human Capital--aims 
to
increase 
the human capital of the poor through investments in basic education and technical
training, preventive health care at the primary 
level, child nutrition and a stronger population
policy, in order to enhance their productivity, income and welfare. 
Structural reforms in the
social sectors are vital to the success of these efforts in view of very tight budget constraints that
force the Govemment to limit its social budget and look instead for institutional strengthening
and operational efficiency gains. Two key ongoing decentralization efforts that the Government
seeks to enhance in the education and health sectors involve a balance between the power of
local autonomy and the need to provide an adequate framework of incentives for quality and
equity at the national level.

33. 
The education strategy focuses on the delivery of quality educational services that would
depend upon an adequate mechanism of incentives to provide those services. Central to the
strategy 
is an initiative to provide financial and administrative autonomy to schools that would
be more responsive to the local community that they serve, backed up by a strong, centrally
managed system 
that would ensure an adherence 
to minimum quality standards, 
to capture
spillover benefits between decentralized units, and to ensure 
that equity objectives are not
undermined due 
to decentralization. 
In addition 
to efforts 
to provide greater autonomy to
schools, the government also plans to expand the coverage of preschool and make selective
investments in providing access to school for children unable to attend early grades because of
their distance to the school site. Additional investments to improve schools and schooling would

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

15

guarantee a minimum quality standard of schooling 
inputs, conditions, and services 
for all
schools, as well as a program of incentives to parent/school councils to steadily increase the
quality of their schools and achieve higher outcomes for their students. The curricula of the
teacher traiiing institutes are to be improved and expanded to make them more relevant for local
needs.

34. 
For the Atlantic Coast, the PRSP emphasizes 
the continued use of instruction in the
mother 
tongue 
in 
the 
initial grades while strengthening 
the attainment of Spanish 
language
proficiency. 
A series of studies are planned 
to assess the effectiveness and relevance of
technical and tertiary education with a view toward possible reforms. 
(Such reforms could
become an important engine for increasing productivity growth and for widening the skills and
adaptivity of the workforce; both of which would enhance private sector growth and encourage
FDI.) 
Finally, the PRSP proposes a family subsidy program to encourage very poor children to
attend primary school on a regular basis.

35. 
The Government submitted a proposal for funding to the Secretariat of the Education for
All - Fast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI), an initiative of international donor countries to provide
grant financing for deserving countries towards the goal of assuring that by 2015 all children will
obtain at least a complete primary school education. Nicaragua's proposed EFA-FTI is built
around a two-pronged strategy. 
First, it would provide school councils of all of the nation's
schools with resources, guidelines and technical assistance to enable them to raise the quality of
education services their schools deliver, step-by-step, to guarantee adequate learning for all of
the children in their community, while at the same time holding these councils accountable for
results. Second, the proposed plan would provide demand-side subsidies through a scholarship
incentive fund, integrating the Red de Protecci6n Social with the Ministry of Education's Beca
program, to help children from the poorest families overcome hardships to enroll in school and
attend class daily. The proposed program would also promote the engagement of parents and
civil society 
in the education process, provide adequate educational material, and measure
results. 
The educational administration at all 
levels would be strengthened on the basis of
experiences from successful interventions and would be able to assist areas where results have
been lacking. 
Representatives of the donor community have recently formally agreed to support
Nicaragua's EFA-FTI program. Work is now proceeding to build the required capacity and close
the financing gap, which is estimated to cost approximately US$20 million per year until 2015.

36. 
The PRSP's health 
sector 
strategy 
focuses on 
improved 
implementation of 
the
institutional modernization process, increasing the coverage and quality of health services and on
promoting behavioral changes at the household level. The modenization process focuses on
improved management practices, 
innovative ways of providing 
services 
in remote areas,
alternative systems 
for procurement and distribution of medicines, 
the creation of special
'matemal houses' to improve access to prenatal and care and institutionalized births for women
with obstetric risks, and a demand-driven process to target health services. The expansion of
coverage focuses particularly on primary health care and on women of reproductive age, children
and adolescents, and will involve the creation, rehabilitation and equipping of health centers in
rural areas, together with the development of a cost effective package of basic services, which is
to include reproductive health care services. Improving the patient referral system and expanding
provision of vaccines at the primary level is also expected to contribute 
to a more efficient
delivery of services. To achieve behavioral changes, the PRSP contemplates education programs
to improve hygiene and nutrition practices at the community and household levels, in addition to

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

16

their inclusion in the primary education curricula. Recogrizing the importance of access to safe
water and sanitation for improving health and nutrition outcomes, the PRSP also contemplates
major investments to expand the national coverage of water and sanitation.

37. 
In nutrition, 
the strategy 
focuses on preventive measures directed at 
the chronic
malnutrition problems of children under two years of age. 
It particularly stresses family and
community actions and programs 
to encourage healthy diets, hygiene, preventive health, and
child/maternal care. 
Specific activities will concentrate on monitoring the physical development
of children, negotiating constructive 
feeding and food preparation practices at the household
level, and distributing vitamin supplements to nursing and expectant mothers and to children

38. 
In population, the strategy aims to integrate reproductive health care into primary health
care services, to improve family planning, reduce mortality rates and strengthen the basic social
fabric. 
In addition, 
it also contemplates 
formal and 
informal education programs, with 
the
participation of NGOs, community 
leaders 
and municipalities 
to encourage 
self-esteem,
responsible maternity and paternity, and family unity. 
These are considered 
important 
for
influencing behavioral patterns within families and among vulnerable groups to reduce domestic
violence and family disintegration.

39. 
Complementing 
its sectoral policies 
in education and health, 
the Govemment 
is
developing a social protection strategy to enhance human capital development of the poor and
vulnerable. 
A comprehensive 
review of selected poverty programs 
in Nicaragua's PRSP
portfolio revealed that there is considerable program duplication and fragmentation. About a
quarter of the programs do not address the needs of the poor. 
In many, targeting and evaluation
systems are weak. 
In sectors where policies are not well defined and explicit, inconsistencies
appear among different programs and projects. 
Furthermore, despite 
the great number of
programs and projects, the review detected areas where resource allocation appears insufficient,
including attention to the health, nutrition and educational development of children 0-3 years of
age, access to clear title for housing and property, and attention to personal risks, especially
domestic violence. These, as well as results from other studies and program evaluations would
inform the Government in its effort to develop a coherent social protection strategy conducive to
reaching the goals of the country's poverty reduction strategy. 
The strategy 
is expected to
include policies and measures for improving access to basic social services for the poor, for
confronting socio-economic crises, as well as for addressing the specific needs of vulnerable
groups.

40. 
Bank Group Assistance. 
The proposed PSAC and PRSCs aim to support this pillar of
the PRSP by focusing on measures to improve the coverage and quality of primary education,
improving 
the coverage and quality of basic health services, especially 
in rural areas, and
improving child nutition indicators. The measures highlighted by the PSAC are being supported
by several ongoing lending operations, consisting entirely of second-generation projects, which
reflects the Bank's close involvement with Nicaragua's social sectors since the early 1990s. The
Second Basic Education Project (Credit 3281-NI) approved in FY00 is expanding education
coverage and quality by promoting a more equitable and effective basic education system with
community involvement 
in school govemance. The Agricultural Technology and Technical
Education & Training APL Project (Credit 3371-NI) approved in FY00 addresses training

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

17

and rural 
technical education as part of pluralistic, knowledge and information system. The
Second Health Sector Modernization Project (Credit 3084-NI) approved 
in FY98 
is
contributing 
to 
expanding 
service 
coverage 
and quality by 
improving 
the 
efficiency,
effectiveness and equity of the Nicaraguan health system by scaling up the Integrated Model of
Maternal and Child Care. 
The Third Social Investment Fund Project (Credit 3142-NI)
approved in FY99 as well as the Poverty Reduction and Local Development Project (Credit
3504-NI) approved in FY01, both carried out by FISE, are expanding the coverage and quality of
social services by providing essential small-scale social infrastructure 
(mainly education, health
and water & sanitation) in poor communities, while strengthening the municipal management of
this inifastructure 
to help sustain 
it longer. 
Increasingly, 
these projects are also turning 
to
support the expansion of economic infrastructure in poor communities. These projects are also
supporting 
the Living Standard Measurement Surveys 
that are periodically carried out 
in
Nicaragua, together with the preparation of poverty maps used by FISE to target interventions.
Recent non-lending IDA operations that support this pillar include an Ex-Post Evaluation of the
Emergency Social Investment Fund (FY02) and a Review of Selected Poverty Programs in
Nicaragua's PRSP Portfolio (FY02), which identify strengths and weaknesses 
in existing
operations with the aim of helping the authorities restructure them to improve their effectiveness.

41. 
New lending operations being considered by IDA to support this pillar, in addition to the
PSAC and later PRSCs, include a Third Basic Education Project (FY04) that would consolidate
the innovations and successes of earlier projects. Given that Nicaragua has been selected to
participate in the EFA Fast Track Facility, this project would also serve as an "EFA Support
Project," a technical assistance operation to help the Government and other stakeholders achieve
the benchmarks for the Education for All Initiative. A Third Health and Nutrition Project
(FY05) is proposed to deepen the health sector modernization process and extend the nutrition
pilot project initiated under the earlier project. An Education Sector Policy Note (FY03) will
address the coordination of the PSAC with the existing and new education sector projects and the
Education for All Initiative.

Third Pillar - Better Protection for Vulnerable Groups

42. 
The 
third PRSP pillar-Better Protection for Vulnerable Groups--seeks 
to guarantee
access to basic social services for Nicaragua's extreme poor and protect them from natural and
economic disasters that perpetuate poverty. The governnent is still in the process of developing
a social protection strategy, so immediate efforts in this area have focused on a pilot program
that assists young children in extremely poor households by encouraging 
their attendance 
in
school and regular medical visits for checkups and vaccinations 
through incentives 
to their
parents. This pilot was recently evaluated and found to be well targeted and effective in building
human capital as well as alleviating 
income shocks experienced during the recent coffee crisis.
As a result of the evaluation, the program is being expanded. As part of its longer term strategy,
the government is strengthening the public institutions responsible for social safety nets, such as
the Ministry of the Family, and rationalizing 
the institutional roles of multiple entities involved
in providing services to vulnerable groups. The design and monitoring of assistance programs is
being 
improved, with clearer 
targeting and exit mechanisms 
to avoid dependency. 
Further
proposed actions include efforts to improve early warning of natural disasters and ameliorate
their impact more effectively, as well as measures 
to strengthen the institutional capabilities of
local governments and communities to deal with disasters and reduce vulnerability.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

18

43. 
Bank Group Assistance. This represents the least developed of the four pillars that
underlie the PRSP. Accordingly, 
the main action emphasized in the PSAC at this stage to
support this pillar is the design and adoption of a social protection strategy, with special attention
to children aged up to three years, which have been identified as among the most vulnerable
members of Nicaraguan society. Other than the PSAC/PRSC, no other IDA operations are
planned to support this pillar during this CAS period, in part because the ongoing operations are
relatively new and expected to continue executing over this planning period. The main ongoing
lending operation to support this action is the Poverty Reduction and Local Development
(FISE IV) Project (Credit 3504-NI) approved in FY01, which goes beyond earlier FISE
operations by supporting the development of safety nets within a strengthened social protection
strategy. 
In addition, the project includes a Social Assistance Innovations Fund to identify new
measures 
to 
reach vulnerable groups which are not easily 
reached 
through 
supply side
interventions. 
Furthermore, special attention is being given to develop fast response safety net
mechanisms that can be used to cushion the detenoration of human and social capital during
economic crises and natural disasters once they occur. The Natural Disaster Vulnerability
Reduction Project (Credit 3487-NI) approved 
in FY01 also 
is supporting 
this pillar by
improving Nicaragua's disaster management capacity at national and local levels. An ongoing
non-lending operation that supports this pillar is the Informal Safety Nets Study (FY02), which
analyses the coping mechanisms of those affected by economic and natural shocks, including the
current crisis 
in 
the coffee sector, and seeks 
to formulate effective assistance strategies 
in
response. This findings of this study are being further refined in the regionally-focused Social
Impact of the Coffee Crisis (FY03) study that will analyze poor household's coping mechanisms
and the Government's response in order to identify the scope for public action as well as specific
Governnent interventions to address the poverty and social impacts of the coffee crisis and other
economic shocks that affect the poor, particularly in rural areas.

Fourth Pillar - Good Governance and Institutional Development

44. 
Nicaragua 
ranked 8lIt among 
102 
countries 
in 
the Transparency 
International's
Corruption Perceptions Index 2002, which constitutes an important negative signal for potential
investors 
interested in expanding 
their operations in the country. Despite ongoing efforts to
strengthen public sector financial management, the system is still weak and is considered an
obstacle to growth and poverty reduction, since it reduces the impact of public spending and
encourages donors to bypass the Government's budgeting and expenditure processes, resulting in
a fragmented investment programs. Also, the constitutional reforms of 2000 caused a setback to
governance-improving efforts by appearing to undermine the independence and legitimacy of the
other Powers of the State, notably the Supreme Court and Comptroller General's office. 
12 To
improve Nicaragua's governance and institutions, the PRSP focuses on consolidating the rule of
law, major institutional strengthening, greater transparency and efficiency 
in public expenditures,
and institutionalizng a culture of integrity. The PRSP also seeks to promote democracy through
an expanding decentralization, participation of civil society and respect for human rights. To

12 The constitutional reforms changed the structures of the Comptroller General's office, the Supreme Court and the
Supreme Electoral Council, among other, by expanding their governing boards. Although these structural
changes may have been technically justified, the appointment of the new magistrates and members of these
appeared to be heavily influenced by political, rather than professional, considerations. This has potentially far-
reaching implications for investor confidence, which depends on the enforcement of property rights and
adherence to the rule of law.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

19

achieve these ends, the PRSP contemplates various reforms to modernize 
the commercial and
civil laws, strengthen the Comptroller General's office and the Judiciary 
through training and
equipment (especially in the resolution of property claims), accelerate land titling and modernize
the cadastre and registry, and establish special public defenders to give the poor greater access to
the legal system. To ensure transparency 
in public management, the strategy emphasizes the
establishment of an 
improved public procurement system and the operation of a reliable
integrated financial management system 
in 
the central government. 
To fight corruption and
strengthen ethical values, the PRSP envisages a comprehensive revision of the legal framework
on integrity and other actions to increase the effectiveness and independence of the National
Assembly, 
the Judicial System and the Comptroller General's Office. 
The IDB is providing
financial and technical assistance to the Government in these three areas. Transparency and fair
enforcement 
in 
legal, judicial and bidding framework are keys to growth and private sector
development 
in Nicaragua, especially where foreign private sector participation in such sectors
as 
infrastructure may be sought. 
Particularly 
important will be 
the 
laws and actions 
to
professionalize 
the civil service, clarifying 
the accountability and functions of public servants.
The participation of civil society in public affairs, promoted through CONPES, is to be further
strengthened through legislation to codify the participation of citizens in government processes.
Offices for the defense of human rights and 
the public defenders of children, women and
indigenous populations are to be reinforced.

45. 
Bank Group Assistance. The PSAC and PRSCs aim to support this pillar by focusing
attention on measures 
to 
improve public sector financial and expenditure management, 
tax
administration, civil service 
reform and donor coordination. 
The 
institutional 
strengthening
objectives to be supported by the PSAC are already being supported at the sector levels through
IDA's ongoing 
lending 
operations, 
all of which have 
some 
institutional 
strengthening
components. 
In addition, IDA is supporting a comprehensive 
institutional reform effort through
the Economic Management TA Project (Credit 3314-NI) approved in FY00. This project has
supported 
the extension of the Integrated Financial and Administrative Management System
(SIGFA) across the public sector, the initiation of the civil service reform process, improvements
in economic management, reorganizations to streamline the public sector, and other governance
improving measures initiated under the National Integrity Program. The main IDA noni-lending

the Public Expenditure Review (FY02), which

operation supporting 

this pillar has been 

provided recommendations 
for 
improving public expenditure management 
to strengthen 
the
poverty focus of public spending and for establishing a tracking mechanism 
to channel and
account for the public savings accruing from HIPC debt relief.

46. 
The main iew lending operation proposed to support this pillar is the Second Economic
Management TA Project (FY04). This operation is envisaged as a key provider and coordinator
of 
technical 
assistance 
services 
in 
all governance 
and 
institutional 
strengthening 
areas
emphasized by the PSAC. This includes completing the implementation of the SIGFA, passage
and implementation of the civil service reform law, strengthening the government's fiscal policy
formulating capacity, and 
implementing public 
sector 
financial and expenditure management
reforms. The latter should improve transparency and create the basis for a multi-year budgeting
framework and for improving donor coordination mechanisms. Also, 
this project should be
designed with sufficient 
flexibility to support other related governance 
improving 
initiatives that
may require support, such as judicial reform. 
(Although judicial reform is a high priority for
Nicaragua, 
the political climate 
for supporting such reform 
is still evolving and 
the donor

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

20

funding available 
for ongoing activities appears 
to be adequate.) 
Key non-lending services
envisaged under 
this pillar are 
the preparation of a Country Financial Accountability
Assessment (FY03) and a Country Procurement Assessment (FY03). The main findings from
these assessments will guide 
the 
institutional strengthening and 
reform measures supported
through 
the PSAC and other operations, 
including 
the 
IDB-financed procurement 
reform
program, and will set the basis of measures to be taken before IDA moves towards a providing
financial assistance under a PRSC framework.

Cross-cutting Themes

47. 
The PRSP's three cross-cutting themes refer to environmental vulnerability, social equity
and decentralization. 
The plans to reduce ecological vulnerability are laid out in Nicaragua's
Environment Policy and Action Plan 2000-2005 (PANic) that was approved on February 23,.
2001. 
It lays out 16 areas where the Government will take environmental actions, including the
promotion of a 
sustainable development model, harmonizing 
legislation 
that affects 
the
environment, developing a national environmental 
information system, promoting environmental
education, developing ways to charge for pollution costs and ensuring the use of environmental
parameters in public projects to measures cost and benefits. Specific action priorities encompass
six areas: water, forestry , soils, solid and liquid waste, environmental education and institutional
coordination. 3
Although most regions require environmental attention, highest priority 
is give
to areas of Jinotega, Nueva Segovia, The North Atlantic region (RAAN), Chinandega, Esteli and
Matagalpa.

48. 
The PRSP 
is especially concerned 
that future growth be broad-based, rather 
than
contributing 
to an already high 
level of inequality. 
Recognizing 
that the rural-based growth
experienced in Nicaragua during the 1990s has largely favored the poor, the PRSP continues to
focus attention on the 
importance of a rapidly growing rural economy. 
Other actions
contemplated 
in 
the PRSP 
to promote social equity include 
reviewing 
legislation affecting
indigenous groups, the children and adolescents' code, and the adoption law. These reviews are
expected to lead to important draft legislation to improve the rights of these vulnerable groups.
Also, the strategy contemplates 
the development of action plans to improve opportunities for
men and women, assist rural women and reduce domestic violence. 
In this last context, the
National Women's Institute and centers for adolescents at risk are to be strengthened.

49. 
The PRSP considers decentralization an integral part of Nicaragua's modernization and
reform process. 
In this context, it encompasses plans to strengthen the municipalities through
development of better financing systems, improving their planning capabilities and strengthening
their capacity 
to monitor and evaluate 
their performance. 
This will require better 
trained
personmel, fiscal support systems and improved local tax collection. 
In addition to the efforts
taking place 
in education and health, decentalization 
initiatives are also expected to yield a
major impact 
in the 
transportation sector, where 
the regulation and management of public
transportation, including lake and river ports, is to be transferred to local control.

3 Of these six priority areas, the one area where Nicaragua's environmental 
indicators stand out most in
international comparisons is in the extremely rapid rate of deforestation; Annex Table BI 1.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

21

50. 
Bank Group Assistance. The first and third cross-cutting themes identified in the PRSP
are currently being supported directly by the Second Rural Municipalities Project (Credit
3480-NI) approved in FY01, which seeks to improve the performance of rural municipalities by
building 
their capacity 
to provide 
local public 
infrastructure, protect 
the environment and
manage natural resources in a sustainable manner, and promoting local economic development.
In addition 
the Poverty Reduction and Local Development Project (Credit 3504-NI)
approved 
in FY01 works with communities 
(including 
indigenous) 
to empower 
them 
to
participate in local decision making and project execution so that investments best address their
development needs. 
The project also supports a Youth in Action program by co-financing
recreational activities for poor urban youth in collaboration with municipalities and the private
sector. A GEF-funded Atlantic Biodiversity Corridor Project (Credit 28361-NI) approved in
FY97 also is contributing 
to these objectives by seeking to ensure envirornentally sustainable
land use 
in 
the Atlantic Coast region 
through better 
land use and biodiversity planning,
monitoring and evaluation, and financial mechanisms to sustain the corridor. With regard to the
second cross-cutting theme, the Bank has recently been carrying out analytical work on Youth at
Risk 
in Nicaragua, which shows 
the 
tremendous challenges 
involved 
in 
the formation and
integration of adolescents into society and offers recommendations on what government, donors,
and civil society can do b create better opportunities for youths, especially young women. 
IDA
will continue this work with a focus on improving employment opportunities for adolescents.

51. 
The PRSP's cross-cutting 
themes are being mainstreamed 
in IDA operations: all new
projects are routinely subjected to prior environmental 
impact evaluations, as well as to gender
assessments in an effort to guarantee a more equitable project impact. Activities with a possible
incidence on the Atlantic coast of Nicaragua also are being reviewed b ensure conformance with
the governnent's 
indigenous policy 
framework. 
Finally, 
it 
is 
important 
to note 
that
decentralization 
features prominently 
in ongoing 
IDA-financed operations, most of which
include specific 
institutional strengthening components. All social sector projects, for example,
involve some form of decentralization to improve service delivery and accountability. Two new
tasks are being proposed to help reduce enviromnental vulnerability: a second GEF-funded
Atlantic Biological Corridor Project (FY04) and a Renewable Energy Resources Policy Paper
(FY03). 
The 
last activities should also help position Nicaragua 
to participate 
in the global
market for carbon sequestration.

Economic Outlook

52. 
External Environment. 
In many ways, Nicaragua's extemal environment today is
more difficult that at the time of the last CAS:
* 
terms of trade have deteriorated significantly since the late 1990s;
* 
economic growth among the main 
trading partners, notably of the United States, has
slowed down in the aftermath of September 11, 2001;
* domestic credit growth is projected to be slow, as the surviving commercial banks behave
with greater caution and are subject to tighter prudential oversight;
the domestic debt burden is significantly higher than in the mid- 1990s;
the international reserves position is weaker; and
the Government does not command a clear majority in the Legislature.

* 
* 
* 

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

22

53. 
There are also some positive developments that the new Administration can build on,
however, and new opportunities to exploit. In particular:
* The new Administration's visible commitment 
to combat corruption is being recognized
as a positive force for development by private investors, and, also by donors who appear
to be revising their aid commitments favorably. Although it is unlikely that the recently
high levels of aid recent years can be sustained in the long run, this positive attention may
postpone the projected aid decline for some years.
* Prospects of greater market access for Nicaragua and other Central American countries to
the more developed NAFTA partners have improved with recent 
integration 
initiatives
associated with the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) and a possible Central
America Free Trade Area (CAFTA).
* The completion of a broadly participative PRSP in 2001 should facilitate the coordination
of assistance efforts around better focused development policies.
* Many difficult political decisions 
identified as Completion Point conditions under 
the
HIPC initiative-e.g., 
the privatization of power and telecommunications, and the reform
of the pensions system-have already been taken and started to be implemented. 
This
should simplify the task of complying with the Completion Point conditions.
* A budding Manufacturing Free Trade Zone exists, that has grown to encornpass 44 firms,
generating some 37,000 (direct and indirect) jobs.

54. 

Short and Medium Term Macroeconomic Prospects. Due to the more difficult external

environment described above, the macroeconomic outlook for 2002 
is very weak (Table 4).
GDP growth is projected to slow to 1 percent, after having grown by an annual average of 6
percent in 1999-2000 and 3.3 percent in 2001. 
Inflation is projected to remain near 6 percent,
close to the rate of exchange rate crawl that is being implemented. The value of exports is
expected to resume modest growth in 2002, after a spell of negative growth in 2001 on account
of the depressed coffee market and lower demand from the United States. 
Import growth is
expected remain negative 
in view of the slow income growth. Both trends together should
gradually strengthen the balance of trade.

55. 
In the medium term, Nicaragua's GDP is projected to grow by 3 percent in 2003 and 4.5
percent in 2004, while inflation should remain steady within single digit figures. This stronger
growth is driven by a projected economic recovery in the US and Europe that should increase
demand for Nicaraguan exports, a partial improvement of the terms of trade and greater investor
confidence as the impasse with the National Assembly becomes resolved. These projections also
are premised on the adoption of a disciplined fiscal policy under an agreed PRGF program
supported by the IMF and other donors. The fiscal adjustment in 2002 is projected to be large in
comparison to the 2001 fiscal deficit, but modest compared to the Budget that had been approved
in 2001.14 Even so, a major cumulative adjustment on the order of 6 percent of GDP (after
grants and HIPC debt relief) will be needed over four years to move toward a sustainable
macroeconomic situation. This adjustment places a significant constraint on the public sector's
ability to maneuver in years to come. The government is committed to protect poverty related
spending when undertaking this adjustment, as the PRSP Progress Report (Table 4) projects a
continued increase 
in 
the GDP share of poverty-related spending 
in spite of the significant

4 The entire fiscal adjustment between 2001 and 2005 amounts to about 11% of GDP, of which almost half (5.2%)
is expected to emerge from lower interest payments in the wake of HIPC debt relief Of the remaining
adjustment, it is envisaged that 40 percent would be generated through the tax reform and 60 percent through
expenditure cuts.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

23

decline in GDP-share of total public expenditures. 
It is expected that the growth retarding effects
of reduced public expenditures will be largely offset by the growth inducing effects of more
private 
investments 
facilitated 
("crowded 
in") by 
the reduced government presence 
in 
the
economy, together with the adoption of market-oriented reforms contemplated in the PRSP.

56. 
Debt and Creditworthiness. Nicaragua is not creditworthy for borrowing from IBRD
(and has a per capita income below the IDA eligibility threshold), so it is considered an IDA-
only country. As of December 1999, extemal debt stood at $5.5 billion in Net Present Value
terms, which amounts to a little over two times the official GDP in 2001. Once it reaches the
HIPC Completion Point, Nicaragua can expect to receive debt relief on the order of $4.3 billion
(including through traditional mechanisms), which would reduce 
its extemal debt in NPV terms
to 150 percent of exports or roughly 50 percent of 2001 GDP. Nicaragua also has one of the
largest domestic debts among HIPC countries, reaching about $1.4 billion equivalent, or slightly
more than 50 percent of 2001 GDP. The need to service 
these public debts constitutes a
significant burden on public finances, but should be manageable under the proposed PRGF
program.

Table 4: Nicaragua - Projected Macroeconomic Indicators (2002-2005)

Real GDP growth 
Inflation Rate CPI; (e.o.p) 

Exports f.o.b. 
Export Volume 
Imports f.o.b. 
Import Volume 
Terms of Trade (deterioration-) 

Trade Balance 
Current Account Balance 
Current Account Balance (excluding interests) 

Combined Public Sector Balance (before grants) 
Grants 
Combined Public Sector Balance (after grants) 
Public Sector Primary Balance (after grants) 

Gross Domestic Investment 
Public 
Private 

National Savings 
Public 
Private 
External Savings 

2002 

1.0 
6.0 

.1.0 
1.1 
-4.2 
-4.7 
-0.6 

-37.4 
-28.2 
-26.0 

-16.5 
7.3 
-9.2 
2.0 

27.3 
12.2 
15.1 

-1.2 
-4.2 
3.0 
28.5 

2003 
percentages
3.0 
6.0 

10.8 
5.5 
-2.4 
1.0 
3.0 

% of GDP

-35.1 
-24.0 
-21.2 

-13.2 
6.9 
-6.3 
4.1 

27.8 
12.2 
15.6 

3.0 
-1.0 
4.0 
24.8 

2004 

2005

4.5 
4.0 

11.5 
6.1 
3.6 
3.4 
5.2 

-32.6 
-19.3 
-16.0 

-9.4 
4.1 
-5.3 
0.9 

29.1 
12.9 
16.2 

9.0 
3.8 
5.3 
20.0 

5.0
4.0

12.6
6.2
6.2
6.1
5.9

-31.0
-18.3
-15.2

-7.5
4.2
-3.3
1.9

30.6
13.0
17.6

11.6
5.6
6.1
19.0

Gross International Reserves (in months of imports) 
2.3 
2.5 
2.6 
2.9
Source: IMF and Bank Staff estimates. (Note: The public sector primary balance in 1999-2000 averaged -4.0% of GDP.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

24

III. 

THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Progress since the Last CAS

57. 
The Previous CAS. At the time of the last CAS in March 1998, Nicaragua was in the
midst of completing a dual transition from a centrally planned to a market economy, and from
war and instability to peaceful democracy. Growth had resumed, prices remained stable and the
possibilities of renewed hyperinflation, civil war or the abandonment of market economic
(This represented a significant evolution
principles were no longer considered major threats. 
from the early 1990s, when such concerns were still at the forefront.) 
IDA's assistance strategy
was aimed at (i) consolidating growth through private sector development, (ii) developing the
rural sector, and (iii) developing human capital and protecting the poor.

58. 
Progress was to be evaluated according to the following criteria (i) establishment of a
track 
record of macroeconomic 
reforms 
that will enable 
I{1PC eligibility, 
(ii) progress
benchmarks 
for each of the 
three priority areas of assistance described above, and (iii)
maintaining 
the current quality of portfolio 
implementation. 
Three major risks to the Bank
strategy were foreseen: 
(i) increased political polarization that could plunge Nicaragua 
into a
governability crisis, (ii) interest group and social pressures that could push the Government to
increase 
fiscal expenditures and/or halt privatization efforts, and (iii) weak 
implementation
capacity that could delay reformns and project implementationr

59. What worked well. 
In broad terns, most of the priorities identified in the 1998 CAS
were pursued. 
Indeed, actions 
that depended mainly on decisions by the Executive were
achieved. Nicaragua succeeded in accelerating growth during the second half of the 1990s and
became eligible for HIPC debt relief by reaching the Decision Point. Most of the progress
indicators presented in the previous CAS were achieved, and Nicaragua continued to make
in addressing poverty. 
(The matrix 
in Annex D describes the advances made in
progress 
reaching the progress benchmarks incorporated in the previous CAS.) Significant progress was
made in the privatization of public utilities and banks, but the quality of privatization was not up
to par. The telecom utility (ENITEL) was privatized, despite several failed attempts. Also, the
Government succeeded in maintaining an excellent record of portfolio implementation. 
In fact,
as all ongoing projects are classified 'Satisfactory' or better, and none is currently classified as
being 'at risk'.

60. 
What did not work well. Nicaragua was 
less successful 
in establishing a solid
macroeconomic 
track record. Although the Government has now assigned priority in this areas,
the 1998 PRGF program went off-track toward the end of the last CAS period, despite a strong
effort to maintain stability in the aftermath of hurricane Mitch (Box 2). 
Progress towards
structural 
reformns was also mixed. 
BANIC, a public commercial bank, was eventually
privatized, but the transparency of its privatization was widely questioned and ultimately the
Similarly, efforts to strengthen public sector institutions, through initiatives such as
bank failed. 
the introduction of the SIGFA and the strengthening of several line ministries, 
generally have
been successful but suffered an imnportant setback when the staffing process for the Comptroller

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

25

General's Office and the Supreme Court in the wake of the 2000 constitutional reforms resulted
in public distrust in these institutions' independence, thereby affecting their effectiveness.

Box 2: The World Bank's Response to Hurricane Mitch in Nicaragua

Hurricane Mitch struck Nicaragua in late October 1998, causing major human and physical damage.
The World Bank's response to this catastrophe included 
increasing Nicaragua's IDA allocation to
finance a Hurricane Emergency Assistance Credit ($50 million) and a Supplementary Basic Education
Credit ($13.2 million), accelerating the preparation of the Sustainable Forestry Investment project ($9
million), 
reprogramming $62 million in ongoing IDA-financed projects to assist in emergency
reconstruction activities, and the establishment of a Central American Emergency Trust Fund to
channel donor resources in providing debt service relief. Nicaragua recovered fairly quickly from the
damages caused by the hurricane, but encountered fiscal problems when aid-financed reconstruction
activities were phased down.

61. 
Immediately upon assuming office, 
the Bolafios administration has begun to address
these issues, and began discussions with the IMF on a PRGF arrangement. A new three year
PRGF arrangement was approved by the IMF Board in early December 2002, and the first PRSP
Progress Report and Joint Staff Assessment were reviewed by the IDA and 1MF Boards. The
program envisages a substantial fiscal adjustment and reduction 
in the exchange-rate 
indexed
stock of domestic central bank debt, which are expected to take place through a comprehensive
tax reformn, and amended budget for 2002 and a program to recover assets of previously
intervened commercial banks. These measures are designed to put Nicaragua's fiscal balances
on a sustainable path. 
The Bolafios government has also given priorities 
to rooting out
corruption and increasing transparency in the use of public funds.

Portfolio Performance and Management
62. 
As of September 30, 2002, IIDA's active portfolio consisted of 15 credits totaling $461.1
million, of which $258.1 million were undisbursed, plus one $7.1 million GEF grant for the
Atlantic Biodiversity Corridor Project.

* The last adjustment operation, a Financial Sector Adjustment Credit, was approved in
FY98 and was fully disbursed in FY00.
* Nicaragua has the largest active portfolio in Central America, with a good performance
record over the years. All active projects are rated Satisfactory, with one (Sustainable
Forestry) rated Highly Satisfactory, both in terms of achieving development objectives
and implementation progress. Furthermore, none of the active projects are currently rated
'problem projects' or 'projects at risk'.
* Disbursement performance has been generally strong, except for a slowdown in several
projects at the beginning of 2002, following the change in govenmment and the adoption
of fiscal austerity measures that reduced the available counterpart funds. Although the
disbursement ratio has declined since 1999, it is mainly because several large projects
became effective over the last two years, and are just beginning to execute in eamest.
* The average age of the IDA portfolio has also declined over the last 3 years, from 2.5
years in 1999 to 1.8 years in 2001, reflecting an increase in the number of active projects.
* Compliance with financial and auditing requirements has been good, and the quality of
audit and procurement reports is satisfactory. There are no overdue audit reports from
FY02. Two areas in need of attention are the monitoring of project expenditures and

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

26

activities carried out via decentralized schemes, and 
the capacity of local firms 
to
undertake project audits m compliance with International Standards of Auditing and
World Bank requirements.
* The last Country Portfolio Performance Review took place in Febniary 2002.

The Process of CAS Formulation

63. 
CAS consultations were carried out with the Government, civil society and other dorors
on August 12-14, 2002 to seek views on IDA's role in Nicaragua and to identify its comparative
advantage vis-a-vis other donors in supporting specific programs. 
The consultations did not
focus on eliciting views on Nicaragua's development challenges, or on 
the Government's
strategy 
for addressing 
them, since 
these had been 
the focus of 
extensive consultations
throughout the PRSP process. The main findings of the CAS consultations are described in
Annex E.

The Proposed Assistance Strategy

64. 
This CAS describes a new assistance framework for Nicaragua in which World Bank
Group assistance 
is designed around the implementation of the country's Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper (PRSP). For IDA, this approach entails a program of lending and non-lending
assistance 
structured around 
the PRSP's four pillars. 
Initially, a Programmatic Stiuctural
Adjustment Credit (PSAC), supported by investment and 
technical assistance operations, 
is
proposed as a vehicle for supporting the implementation of key reforms and delivermg the
financial assistance required to 
implement the country's PRSP. 
Complementing 
the PRGF
arrangement with the IMF, this assistance will be conditioned on progress made in implementing
specific measures contemplated in the PRSP.15
Over time, IDA expects to move towards a
framework of programmatic assistance through which the major share of financial support would
be provided 
through larger Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) that would provide
broad program support for PRSP implementation. The volume of lending provided under PRSCs
is expected to be larger than under the PSAC, so the amount of financial support provided
through 
investment 
lending would decline significantly with 
the move 
toward PRSC-based
lending. Stand-alone operations under a PRSC framework, would be mainly limited to small,
innovative projects of an experimental nature or for which the institutional infiastructure 
is still
underdeveloped, and 
to technical assistance operations 
to help 
implement specific measures
contemplated 
in the PRSP. 
The 
transition 
towards a PRSC approach requires 
that the
Government's public 
expenditure program 
is 
appropriate 
and adequately 
supports 
the
accomplishment of PRSP goals, and also 
that adequate public 
financial management and
procurement systems are in place to ensure the transparent, economic and efficient use of public
resources consistent with the agreed public expenditure program. To some extent, the focus on
fast-disbursing credits 
is motivated by the need for Balance of Payments support during the
initial period as 
the Government 
implements 
its governance 
improving 
refon-us and other
adjustment measures. 
More 
importantly, however, 
the focus on programmatic 
lending 
is
motivated by the desire to improve the impact of public programs through better coordination
and stronger country ownership.

15 These measures also coincide with the key actions identified in the HIPC Completion Point matrix.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

2 7

65. Working closely with IDA, IFC will support the implementation of Nicaragua's PRSP,
particularly on the first strategic pillar - broad-based economic growth. 
IFC's approach 
in
Nicaragua and in other countries in Central America is to support private sector development
through activities at both the individual country and the regional levels.

66. 
In support of Nicaragua's PRSP agenda, 
IFC will continue 
supporting Nicaragua's
pnvate sector in priority areas such as (i) strengthening the financial sector and capital market,
(ii) promoting foreign private 
investment 
in Nicaragua, 
(iii) broadening private participation 
in
infrastructure, and (iv) reactivating growth in agriculture and industry. 
IEFC 
is currently 
in the
preliminary stages of looking into possible investment opportunities 
in tourism 
in the Central
American 
region. 
IFC 
is 
further 
interested 
in 
investment opportunities 
in housing 
finance,
micro-finance, agribusiness, manufacturing and SMEs (through intermediaries) 
in Nicaragua or
at the regional level. On the nor-investment side, IFC is considering to cany out a housing
finance market assessment in Nicaragua, supported by a trust fund. 
IFC's future investments
will depend on the 
improvement 
in removing 
the structural obstacles identified 
in the 2001
PRSP, such as the fragile banking system and weak property rights, and progress in addressing
the fourth pillar -
good governance and institutional development - which will be critical for
improving investor confidence and doing business in Nicaragua.

67. 
The renewed emphasis on foreign direct investment by President Bolanos has created
significant momentum within 
the country 
in support of the use of such 
investment as a
development tool. Working in dose cooperation with the rest of the World Bank Group, MIGA
is assisting the govemment to improve Nicaragua's ability to attract and host investment, and to
realize fully the potential development benefits of those investments.

68. 
Since FY01, MIGA has been working 
in conjunction with 
the World Bank's
Competitiveness Learning and Innovation Credit to improve the ability of the country to attract
foreign investment. Already completed components of this capacity-building program include:
organizing 
the national system for investment promotion; creating effective promotion strategies
for 
targeted sectors; and fostering cooperation between government ministries and agencies
involved in the investment promotion and installation process.

69. 
For FY03, MIGA plans 
to assist the national investment promotion agency by: analyzing
key sectors and identifying companies in those sectors that are potential investors; helping the
agency 
to 
effectively 
target 
those 
companies 
through 
structured 
investment promotion
campaigns; developing an investor facilitation function to assist in the installation of FDI; and,
the creation of an aftercare function to improve investor retention and reinvestment.

70. 
Currently, Nicaragua is the largest host country for MIGA-guaranteed investments in
Central America, with $161.9 million in gross exposure for five guarantees in the country. These
guarantees relate to two projects, both in the power sector. One is a geothermal power plant
(Momotombo), which MIGA insured in FY00 and the other, signed in June 2002, is for a power
distribution project that covers all of Nicaragua except the Atlantic coastal areas. Currently,
MIGA is not in the process of underwriting any projects in Nicaragua that are likely to be signed
in FY03.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

28

71. 
MIGA will continue 
to promote Nicaragua as a foreign 
investment destination, and
emphasize 
the value of guarantees 
to facilitate 
that investment. 
However, 
the actual FDI
facilitated by and large will depend on continued progress in the areas of economic reform and
privatization.

Core Diagnostic Requirements for Moving Towards a PRSC Framework

72. 
Two ex-ante analyses are expected to underpin the development of a PRSC program: (i) a
cross-cutting assessment of the country's social, 
structural, and key sectoral development
policies, which covers the policy reform and institutional development priorities for sustainable
growth and poverty 
reduction, and 
(i) 
an assessment of the country's public 
financial
accountability anrangements, which covers 
its public expenditure, procurement and financial
management systems. Both of these constitute core diagnostic sector work, drawing as needed
on poverty 
assessments, public 
expenditure 
reviews, 
country procurement 
and 
financial
accountability reviews, and other analyses.

73. 
IDA is wel advanced in completing the core diagnostic sector work for Nicaragua, but
additional work is needed to move towards a PRSC framework. A detailed Poverty Assessment
(PA) (FY02), based on the 1998 LSMS supported the preparation of the PRSP, while the Public
Expenditure Review 
(PER) (FY02) presented recommendations 
for improving 
the poverty
focus of public spending, strengthening public expenditure management and establishing a HIPC
tracking mechanism. An update to the PA is underway to incorporate the results of the 2001
LSMS. A Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) (FY03) and a Country
Procurement Assessment Report (FY03) also are currently under preparation. Once these are
completed and their findings discussed with the Govenmment 
the resulting recommendations will
be integrated into a Country Economic Memorandum/Development Policy Review (FY04),
which will sunmmanze actions needed and 
the Govemment's program for moving towards a
PRSC framework. 
In the meantime, the initial PSAC will support already identified reforms that
aim 
to bring 
the Govenmment's program and policies 
in 
line with public expenditure and
fiduciary pre-requisites for the PRSC framework. 
This is the case of the Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (Box 3), for example, where initial mission recommendations have
already been incorporated as reforms to be supported under the PSAC.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

29

Box 3: The CFAA: An Example of Ongoing Fiduciary Work to Ensure a Successful PRSC
Framework

The interim guidelines for PRSCs require an ex-ante fiduciary assessment of the country's financial management
systems, including the adequacy and transparency of systems for monitoring, reporting on, and auditing public
financial flows. The main field work for the Nicaragua Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA),

conducted jointly with the IDB, was carried out in November 2002. The CFAA is scheduled to be completed and

discussed with the Government by February 2003.

In moving towards a PRSC approach, IDA would seek assurances that the Government is prepared to address
significant weaknesses identified in the CFAA. At this stage, it is envisaged that broad actions would include, that:

* A strong and realistic public financial management improvement program, built around an agreed CFAA action
plan, is under implementation under the coordination of an inter-institutional working group and that financing
sources for the action plan are identified;
* Significant progress is made towards consolidating and updating current laws and regulations in a draft Public
Financial Management Law, with significant gaps filled by Executive Decrees;
* The Government continues use of its integrated financial management system (SIGFA), enhanced through
implementation of the treasury module and advanced design of the procurement, human resources and physical

assets modules, as the core tool for public financial management processes and information;
* The budget document to be presented 
to Congress includes all extra-budgetary public funds and the
Government initiates a program to include specific outputs related to budgeted costs in sectoral development
plans, to serve as a basis for ex-ante feasibility and ex-post execution evaluation;
* Detailed cash flow schedules are prepared such that discretion in expense and payment prioritization at the
central level is substantially reduced;
* A plan for strengthening internal controls (with a focus on legality and efficiency of expenditures), and
upgrading of human and technological resources for accounting and internal audit departments of executing
agencies is prepared, and includes specifics of internal control for decentralized/deconcentrated budget
execution;
* The statement of budgetary execution is complemented with a cash balance reconciliation, and all budget
transfers are subject to proper accountability reports on use of funds. Procedures for preparing Government
financial statements, as part of a gradual plan for adopting international practice, are prepared. Public access to
Government financial information and quality of information available to the public are enhanced;
* The program for modernization of the Comptroller's General Office (CGR) is underway. The CGR endorses a
realistic plan for, and is committed to, produce a compliance/financial audit report of Government accounts;
* An inventory of Donor-financed programs (under execution and in preparation) per sector and institution is
completed and possible duplications and inefficiencies are identified. External aid channeled through the
Treasury accounts 
is incremented significantly, and all domestic Central Government revenues and

the Treasury accounts. Cash 

flow 

information 

for public

expenditures 

are 

channeled 

through 

decentralized/deconcentrated/state-owned entities is available on a timely basis;
* Capacity for public debt management in the Ministry of Finance is increased. Procedures for extension of loans
to decentralized and state-owned entities, and for issuance of government guarantees are established;
* The tax administration reform program -including upgrading of human resource capacity- continues under
implementation. Customs and tax administration procedures are enhanced, documented and consolidated.

74. 
The Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR), also currently in progress, is
being prepared 
in close coordination with 
the 
IDB. 
Given 
the 
IDB's support 
to 
the
implementation of an ongoing procurement reform effort, close coordination between both donor
institutions 
is critical. 
A September 2002 CPAR mission found that Nicaragua's overall
procurement framework is reasonably acceptable. Although there are some provisions that do
not follow acceptable international practices, they are not an impediment to procurement under
IDA-funded projects since IDA guidelines prevail over local 
legislation. A December 1999
Procurement Law has substantially improved the public procurement system, but there is still
room for improvement in efficiency and tansparency, and for making the law more compatible
with intemational practices. To address this, the Govemment has just started implementing an
ambitious procurement reform program with IDB and other donor assistance to strengthen the

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

30

legal, regulatory and independent oversight aspects of public procurement 
The findings and
recommendations of 
the CPAR, expected 
to be completed 
in mid-2003, will provide
recommendations for actions needed to complement the Government's efforts under the IDB-
financed program, and for reforms, if any, to be supported by subsequent PSACs or PRSCs.

Institutional Arrangements

75. 
The move towards PRSCs will require an adequate institutional capacity on the part of
Government, as well as of the Bank and other donors. On the part of Government, fiduciary and
public expenditure planning capacities need to be sufficiently well developed to persuade 
the
Bank and other donors to move toward programmatic support, or at least to channel all project
aid through a common treasury accounting framework (Caja Unica). On the Bank's side, the
new assistance framework will lead to several important institutional adjustments:

* Enhanced Task Coordination. The tasks of preparing and monitoring the PSACs under
this new framework will require greater coordination between the PSAC team (and later
the PRSC team) with teams supporting other IDA operations in the country portfolio and
this approach will undoubtedly require a stronger country team environment.
* Enhanced PSAC Supervision Budget. Because of their cross-sectoral nature, the PSACs
and then PRSCs, especially, will require a correspondingly larger supervision budget than
straight investment projects. Additional 
resources beyond 
that may be needed since
activities supported under PSACs and especially PRSCs will not be coordinated by
individual project coordinating units which are generally 
set up 
for conventional
investment- projects. 
lmproved financial management on the part of government should
help in the task of tracking the use of resources, but the tasks of quality control and
monitoring of project outcomes will entail a stronger internal effort.
* Enhanced AAA Services. As support for investments is channeled increasingly through
vehicles other than straight investment operations and the number of different project
teams and coordinating units is reduced, IDA's analytic and advisory services need to
expand as the main vehicle for channeling expertise toward different sectors. This trend
is consistent with 
the Bank's evolution 
towards being a 
'knowledge 
institution'.)
Particular attention will needed in the form of workshops and training activities to help
government institutions learn to operate under the new CAS framework, and WBI can
assume an increasing role in this transforrnation.
* Enhanced Field Presence. Given the size of its program and cross-country experience,
IDA is well positioned in Nicaragua to play a lead role in several sectors 
To exercise
that lead effectively, however, IDA will need 
to strengthen its Country Office with
experienced staff that can provide 
the necessary day-to-day, 
in-country coordination
support. (Some donors have indicated that they would consider financing the incremental
costs associated with an expanded Bank presence in certain sectors.)

The IDA Assistance

76. 
The Resource Envelope. The overall IDA resource envelope for Nicaragua during this
CAS period 
(FY03-FY05) 
amounts 
to SDR90 million 
(or approximnately $120 million
equivalent). This amount represents a 40 percent reduction with respect to the 1998 CAS base

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

31

case of $205 million.1 6 However, this decline in Nicaragua's IDA allocation should not result in
a decline 
in net disbursements 
to Nicaragua over the new CAS period. 
In fact, gross
disbursements from IDA are projected to increase from an average level of $67 million in 2001-
02 to an average of $90 million over 2003-05, since under the new CAS frarnework a larger
proportion of aid is front-loaded on account of the PSAC/PSAC credits.

77. 
The reduced IDA allocation over this CAS period is due mainly to Nicaragua's previous
poor performance on governance. To a lesser extent the young age of the portfolio also affected
the allocation. 
Unfortunately, the perceived lack of progress on governance mainly reflects the
previous 
administration's 
shortcomings, 
since 
the new Government 
is placing 
improved
governance at the top of its policy agenda and already has taken some bold steps in this area. 
It
is expected 
that 
with 
the Governnent's strong focus on governance 
IDA allocations 
to
Nicaragua should increase in future years.

IDA Alternative Lending Scenarios

78. 

Base Case program. The IDA base case program is developed around a series of

adjustment credits, beginning with a one-tranche Programmatic Structural Adjustmnent Credit
(PSAC) and continuing with a one- or two-tranche Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC-I),
that would provide financial support for implementation of the policy and institutional reforms
needed 
to 
support 
implementation of Nicaragua's PRSP, 
together with an 
IMF PRGF
arrangement. The proposed PSAC and PRSC-I would support the implementation of the PRSP
under extremely 
fiscally-constrained conditions 
that 
threaten 
to undermine 
the Government's
capacity to meet its poverty spending targets, and, at the same time, support reforns aimed at
establishing conditions needed for moving towards a PRSC framework. The PSAC and PRSC-I
are envisaged as separate credits conditioned on measures identified in the PRSP over the course
of this Government administration and highlighted 
in 
the HIPC Completion Point matrix. 17
Assuming 
that 
the 
institutional 
and 
fiduciary 
framework needed 
to move 
towards 
a
programmatic approach are in place by fiscal year 2004, IDA would begin to provide an
increasing share of its financial support through PRSCs 
and reduce the amount of investment
finance provided under individual investment projects. 
In the event that the setting up of this
framework is delayed, a base case follow-up PSAC-II could be considered, but smaller in size
than the envisioned PRSC-I. 
(The CAS program matrix in Annex B1 lists the main areas to be
supported with IDA assistance.)

16 It also represents an even greater decline with respect to the actual lending since IDA allocations for FY99-01
were increased through a supplemental allocation in response to hurricane Mitch.
7 Seven floating completion point conditions are listed 
in the Nicaragua HIPC Decision Point Document
(IDA/R2000-237 dated December 7, D100, Box 6). They refer to the preparation and implementation of a
PRSP, implementation of a tracking mechanism for HIPC funds, maintenance of a stable macroeconomic
framework supported by a PRGF arrangement, 
implementation of reforms 
to promote human capital
development and social protection, implementation of governance strengthening measures, introduction of a
satisfactory reformed pension system, and divestment of the public telecom (ENITEL) and energy generating
units (ENEL).

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

32

79. 
Since the Government's tenure extends beyond this CAS period,'8 only two of the three
adjustment credits are contemplated in the base case program, while the third credit is envisaged
to fall into the next CAS period. The PSAC is proposed to be relatively small ($15 million),
while the first PRSC would be for a larger amount ($35 million), for a total of $50 million over
the 3-year IDA period.

80. 
The PSAC and PRSCs are designed to support the implementation of the PRSP in three
key areas: 
(i) improving the business climate to promote faster, private sector-driven growth,
particularly agriculture and forestry (Pillar I of the PRSP), (ii) social sector reforms to improve
the development 
impact of social programs and developing a social protection mechanism
(Pillars II & E), and (iii) improving governance and strengthening institutions (Pillar IV). 
In
this context, and responding to the new Administration's particular focus on the first (economic
growth) and fourth (governance and institutional strengthening) pillars, it is envisioned that the
first PSAC will place particular emphasis on strengthening public 
sector 
institutions and
improving private 
investor confidence, moving in tandem with private sector support 
to be
provided by IFC, FIAS and MIGA. Four technical assistance-intensive investment projects are
contemplated in the base case program to help implement the activities focused on in the PSAC
and PRSCs, including: 19

* a Second Competitiveness Enhancement Project (FY04, $8 million) that will provide

technical assistance to support the measures under the first pillar of the PRSP;

* 

two social sector projects (Third Basic Education Project (FY04, $15 million) and the
Health and Nutrition Project (FY05, $11 million)) that will help miplement measures

contemplated under the second and third pillars of the PRSP; and

* a Second Economic Management TA Project (FY04, $17.5 million) that will provide

technical assistance to support implementation of the fourth pillar of the PRSP, including
possible support for the judicial and electoral reforms contemplated by the Government
(if it requires additional assistance 
in these areas), 
in addition 
to 
the financial and
institutional strengthening activities initiated under the first project

These four technical assistance-intensive 
investment operations, 
together with the PSAC and
PRSC-I, constitute the core of the FY03-05 CAS Program (Table 5). Although they contain a
high component of technical assistance, these four projects are also expected to finance some
investments.

18 The government's tenure ends in January 2007, while this CAS period extends until June 2005.
19 The most important feature of each of these projects is that it will serve as a vehicle for providing comprehensive
technical assistance in the area covered by its respective PRSP pillar. The titles have been drawn from the
ongoing projects which appear to be best positioned for providing such comprehensive TA support through
follow-up projects. A further project that may be considered in this context is the second phase of the
Agricultural Technology and Technical Education APL project, which has been serving as a focal point for
various rural sector initiatives co-financed by several donors. The ongoing Agricultural Technology project was
approved as an APL project with 
the understanding 
that the next phase would receive financing if
implementation proceeded satisfactorily. 
It is assumed here that this next phase would be financed under the
next CAS period, either through a follow-up second Agricultural Technology credit or indirectly through a
PRSC.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

33

Table 5: The IDA Base Case Program (FY03-05)

PSAC/PRSC 

PSAC/PRSC Support Projects

Ptinar 1 

Lending Program

Pillars 2 & 3 

| 

Pillar 4

- Rural Microfinance ($7m)
- Rural Electrific. ($12m)

- Competitiveness II ($8m) 

- Basic Education III 

-Econ. Mgmt TA

($1lIm) 

Health & Nutrition
(15m)

($17.5m)

PSAC I 

($15m) 

PRSC I 

($35m) 

FY03 

FY04 

FY05 

( High 
Case 

PRSC II 
($25m) 

- Ag. Tech. APL 11 ($7m)
- Rural Telecom Dev ($7m)

FY02 

- PER

Non-Lending Services

- Joint Staff Assessment of the PRSP
- Comp. and Broad-based 

Growth in Agric. ESW 
- Improved Cook. 

(ESMAP) 
- Nicaragua PCF Umbrella 

- Informal Safety Nets

- Ex-Post Eval. Of Emerg.
Social Investment Fund

- Review of Selected
Poverty Pgms. Nic. PRSP

- Poverty Assessment Update
- Joint Staff Assessment of the PRSP Progress Report

FY03 

- Land Sector ESW 
- Atlantic Bio Corr 11 
(GEF) 
- Off-Grid Rural Elec

(GEF)

- Renew. Energy (ESMAP)

- CA Trade Study 
- Drivers of Rural Growth

-FSAP

- Inv. Climate Assessment 
- Rural Sector Competitiv.

- Education Sctr Policy 
Note 
- Youth at Risk Study

- CFAA
- CPAR

- Soc. Impact Coffee Crisis

- Audit Firn Capac. Ass.

- Infrastructure Assessment 

- Improving Govemance

Regional Studies 

FY04 

- CEM 

- PSIA

FY05

81. 
Finally, 
the base case program also includes two small, innovative 
investment projects
with a strong rural, poverty-reducing focus. 
These are the Off-Grid Rural Electrification

Project (FY03, $12 million) and the Rural Micro-finance Development Project (FY03, $7

million), and represent about 15 percent of the base case lending program of $120 million. The
Govemment considers both of these projects to be high priority, and preparation activities are
fairly advanced. These projects support the first pillar of the PRSP and maintain the strong rural
development focus exhibited by the ongoing IDA portfolio. 
(The projects being considered here
in addition to the PSAC and PRSC are not exclusively TA projects, but will also be expected to
involve some investment components, given that they are being implemented during a period of
transition toward a PRSC-centered program.)

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

34

82. 
High Case Program. The high case program would provide an additional allocation of
$40 million compared to the base case. The most significant change is that PRSC II (FY06, $25
million) would be advanced to FY05. For this to happen, 
the measures spelled out 
in the PRSP
and supported by the preceding PSAC and PRSC must be implemented rapidly and the IDA
portfolio needs to be perforning smoothly, reflecting adequate 
institutional capacity to execute
projects. 
Under these conditions, execution of the ongoing Agricultural Technology and
Technical Education & Training Project (Loan 3371-NI), an APL, will 
likely be well
advanced and a second phase of the Agricultural Technology APL Project (FY05, $7 million)
would be proposed. This project would complement the assistance to the PRSP's first pillar
being proposed under the Second Competitiveness Project by emphasizing improved agricultunal
sector competitiveness. Also, complementing the two other new rural programs identified in the
base case program, a Rural Telecommunications Development Project (FY05, $7 million)
would be included in the high case reflecting the Government's capacity to implement new,
innovative projects.

83. 
Low Case Program. The low case would be a response to the Government's inability to
maintain adequate macroeconomic control, to make progress in the implementation of the PRSP,
or 
to 
its encountenng portfolio performance problems 
that prevent 
it from absorbing 
the
resources available under the base case IDA allocation. By the time this scenario materializes, it
is likely that the first PSAC would already have been approved (and disbursed), as well as the
two innovative rural projects contemplated in the base case. Under this scenario, IDA would not
provide further fast disbursing assistance. 
(This scenario is distinct from the base case program,
where some delays in program implementation have been factored in, with the result that only
two fast disbursing operations become effective within the 3-year CAS period.) Similarly, FY04
and FY05 projects seeking to support the first PRSP pillar would lose their rationale because the
intended growth-promoting 
impact would be affected adversely by macroeconomic 
instability.
Consequently, 
the FY04-05 
low case would 
include only 
the 
two social sector projects
supporting the PRSP's third pillar, Third Basic Education Project (FY04, $15 million) and the
Health and Nutrition Project (FY05, $11 million), the Second Economic Management TA
Project (FY04, $17.5 million) that will provide technical assistance to support the measures
under the first pillar of the PRSP, and the Off-Grid Rural Electrification Project (FY03, $12
million) and the Rural Micro-finance Development Project (FY03, $7 million) that will already
have been approved.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

35

Table 6: IDA Assistance Scenarios for Nicaragua (FY03-05)

Low Case 

Base Case 

High Case

Triggers

Fiscal Unsatisfactory macroeconomic framework, Evolution of public sector deficit as share o same as base case
PerformancE with public sector defick (after grants) 
GDP broadly in line with the Govemment's
remaining above 8 percent of GDP in 2003 macroeconomic program (9.2% in 2002,
6.3% in 2003 and 5.3% in 2004) that is
being supported by the PRGF

Share of central govemment budget devoted Share of public expenditures in CG budget same as base case
to PRSP programs declines to 40% or lower devoted to poverty programs consistent
with PRSP targets (43% in 2002,47% in
2003, 50% in 2004)

Reform 
Program 

Inability to implement economic and social Satisfactory progress in implementation of Significant progress in at least
reform program contemplated in the PRSP economic and social reforms contemplated one of the following areas
and supported by PRSC-I 
in PRSP and supported by PRSC-1 
requiring legislative approval:
(1) completion of the ENEL and
ENITEL privatization programs;
and (2) strengthening of
property rights through
approval of "Land Registry
Law" and "Indigenous Lands
Demarcation Law".

HIPC Tracking Mechanism operating 
adequately

Same as base case

Governance 

Portfolio 3 or more IDA projects rated unsatisfactory At most 2 projects rated unsatisfactory 

Perfornancc 

Significant progress in at least
two of the following areas: (1)
passage of the "Civil Service
Reform Law"; (2) improved
public financial management
through approval of 'Public
Financial Management Law";
and (3) improved budgetary
process through approval of
"Budget Framework Law".

At most one project rated
unsatisfactory

Difference between expected and actual 
Total portfolio disbursements broadly in line Difference between expected
portfolio disbursements increases above with projections at appraisal 
and actual portfolio
15% of undisbursed balance 
disbursements remains
consistently negative

____________________________________ 

_____________________________________ 

Lending Program

Lending No follow-up fast-disbursing operations after Lending program contemplates two fast- Same as base case, plus one
Strategy PSAC; only core investment lending in 
disbursing operations (PSAC, PRSC-1) and additional fast-disbursing
operation (PRSC-II) and two
social and rural sectors 
6 investmentfTA operations 
additional investment
operations currently
contemplated for next CAS
period.

Lending 
amounts

$80 million 

$120 million 

$160 million

84. 
Key Lending Triggers. Triggers to move into the high or low case are presented in
Table 6, and are centered on 
the Government's ability 
to maintain macroeconomic stability,
implement key measures contemplated 
in 
the PRSP, 
improve governance and maintain

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

36

satisfactory portfolio implementation. The main trigger for moving to a low case scenario would
be a deteriorated macroeconomic framework as demonstrated by the new PRGF program going
off track. Another 
important 
trigger 
is related 
to the overall public spending on priority
programs identified in the PRSP, as reflected in the annual budget presentation and execution
figures. A failure to maintain such spending stable as a share of GDP would undermine 
the
rationale of the CAS. A third important trigger is the failure to implement a transparent tracking
mechanism for HIPC funds and, more generally, a lack of progress in the implementation of
institutional reforms required to support a program lending approach. The absence of progress
on this front would trigger a hold on further PSACs/PRSCs, but would leave open the possibility
of reverting to a more conventional, project-based aid so long as the performance of other IDA
projects remains satisfactory. Accordingly, a fourth trigger is the perceptible decline in the IDA
portfolio performance 
indicators. A high case scenario would be triggered by an unexpectedly
rapid progress in the implementation of the PRSP, both in terms of overall spending on programs
in the PRSP portfolio, as well as of the passage of important refonns. Particularly noteworthy in
this regard would be the approval and implementation of the Civil Service Reform law, the
approval of the indigenous lands demarcation law , and the completion of the power and telecom
privatization programs. 
These measures had encountered significant political resistance 
in the
past. 
Their passage would signal the existence of a national political consensus around the
government program, and that the Assembly is fully on board and prepared to move forward at
an accelerated pace. The additional IDA support provided in the high case program would be
warranted under those circumstances.

Bank Analytical and Advisory Services.

85. 
In tandem with the objective of moving towards a programmatic approach, analytical and
advisory services will become an ever more important component of IDA's assistance. Recently
IDA has completed a Public Expenditure Review (FY02), which includes a fiscal sustainability
analysis and aims to support the PRSP process and its implementation. Other ESW includes:
Nicaragua: Promoting Competitiveness 
and Stimulating Broad-based Growth 
in
Agriculture (FY02), a Review of Selected Poverty Programs in Nicaragua's PRSP Portfolio
(FY02), a Joint IDA-IMF Staff Assessment (FY02) of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP) prepared by 
the Government 
in July 2001 and a second Joint IDA-IMF Staff
Assessment (FY03) of the PRSP Progress Report prepared in November 2002, a second Poverty
Assessment: Challenges and Opportunities for Poverty Reduction (FY01), 20 an Ex-Post
Evaluation of the Emergency Social Investment Fund (FY01) and a report on the Nicaragua
Pension Reform Proposal (FY00), which provides 
the background for the recent pension
reforms adopted by the Government. Nicaragua has been carrying out LSMS since 1993, and
these have provided the basis for high quality poverty analyses that have supported the design
and implementation of the PRSP.

86. 
As previously mentioned, a large share of IDA's ongoing and future ESW program
relates to core diagnostic products needed to provide the underpinnings for moving towards
lending though PRSCs: a Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
(FY03), a Country

20 This assessment was based on the second Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS) carried out in 1998, and

also includes the results of the Qualitative Poverty and Exclusion Study, which included consultations with 22
poor communities in three regions of the country. A follow-up report is being prepared in 2002 with figures
from the 2001 LSMS.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

3 7

Procurement Assessment (FY03), a Country Economic Memorandum/Development Policy
Review (FY04), and a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (FY04). Other ESW and advisory
services tasks currently planned include the following:

* A review of Rural Sector Competitiveness and Land Sector (FY03) will 
identify thi
main obstacles to growth in the rural business environment and in the consolidation of
land tenure rights.
* A study on Improving Governance (FY05) will update 
the knowledge base on
governance 
in light of the Government's recent strong measures and identify, from a
poverty reduction perspective, which types of corruption have the greatest impact on the
poor and, thus, deserve priority attention.
* An Infrastructure Assessment (FY05) will assess existing 
infrastructure deficits 
in a
comprehensive manner to help identify the areas with the biggest gaps for purposes of
prioritizing investments.
* An Investment Climate Assessment 
(FY04), will provide a diagnostic of the business
climate 
in Nicaragua, 
assess 
competitiveness 
and analyze 
the competition policy
framework. 
It is expected that, with support from other Bank units, this assessment will
include special attention to the environment for rural investments.
* The ongoing regional Social Impact of the Coffee Crisis (FY03) is synthesizing existing
work on the nature and extent of the coffee crisis in Central America and its impact on
the poor, with a view to developing quick surveys 
to complete 
the diagnostic for
designing a social protection mechanism 
that would be consistent with country 
level
growth promotion
* An Education Sector Policy Note (FY03) will address the coordination of the PSAC
/PRSC with ongoing and proposed IDA projects 
in the education sector and the
Education for All Initiative.
* Ongoing Energy Sector Assistance (FY02) supported by ESMAP includes an ongoing
program for Pilot Commercialization of Improved Cooking Stoves to reduce household
demand for wood fuels and lower pressures on peri-urban woodlands, and the recently
initiated preparation of a Policy and Strategy for the Promotion of Renewable Energy
Resources to overcome policy and market barriers to the introduction of clean energy
sources.
* A joint IMF-IDA Financial Sector Assessment Paper (FY04) will analyze financial
sector vulnerabilities and provide recommendations for 
improvement of the legal and
regulatory 
framework applicable 
to all 
financial 
institutions, 
including 
the anti-money
laundering and combating the finacing of terrorism (AMIJCFT) regime. As a follow-
up, 
IDA would 
support Nicaragua's 
initiatives 
towards 
strengthening 
its existing
AML/CFT 
regime and bringing 
it in compliance with 
the 
international standards by
providing the necessary technical assistance and training, or directing technical assistance
requests to other donors.
* Since it relies exclusively on private audit finms in Nicaragua, IDA is planning an Audit
Firm Capacity Assessment (FY04) to review institutional capacity, audit capacity, and
engagement terms on the basis of International Standards of Auditing.

87. Within IDA's program of non-lending services, WBI has assumed an increasing role in
knowledge dissemination and the provision of advisory services. Based on the previous CAS
priorities, WBI 
learning/training events 
in Nicaragua have 
included programs on Attacking

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

38

Poverty, Decentralization, Urban and Local Government and Social Protection. 
Nicaraguan
civil servants and private sector individuals have also participated in a number of other programs
run at the regional level. The new Global Development Learning Network (GDLN) center-
established and operating 
in the Bank's Managua Country Office will continue to assist in
disseminating further many of WBI's learning programs. 
In line with its new objective of
integrating knowledge more closely with WBG operations, over the CAS period, WBI will help
assess in more depth the institutional capacity building needs of the country and run or help run
learning programs 
in the areas of rural development and productivity growth, 
rural poverty
alleviation and human capital development.

Table 7: Status of Core Diagnostic Work

Core Diagnostic Report 

Country Economic Memorandum 

Public Expenditure Review 

Poverty Assessment 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 

Country Procurement Assessment Report 

Coordination with other Donors

Last Completed 

1994 
December 7, 2001
February 21, 2001 

Next Scheduled

FY04

FY03 (Update)
FY03 (underway)

FY03 (underway)

88. 
hi view of Nicaragua's aid dependent status, donor activities are very visible and play an
important role. Although strong donor coordination has facilitated the exchange of information
among donors, more needs to be done to improve coordination of the donor funded activities
themselves. 
The Govenmment has taken an important step in June 2002 by proposing a new
mechanism 
for 
future donor-government 
relations, 
characterized by greater government
involvement 
in aid coordination, better 
identification and articulation of the 
type of aid
demanded (as opposed to letting aid be supply-driven), and improvements 
in public financial
accounting and oversight mechanisms 
to 
facilitate 
the eventual adoption of sector wide
approaches by donors. 2'

89. 
Even though Nicaragua has been one of the most aid-favored countries in the world, the
impact of this aid has been generally below expectations. To improve program impact, many
donors and the government are increasingly arguing in favor of a sector wide approach that relies
on an understanding between donors and the Govemment with general agreements in three areas:
(i) on the entire public expenditure program at the sector level, (ii) to finance the sector program
through budget support, and phase out isolated project financing, and (iii) on the division of
labor among donors, including agreement by some donors to take the lead in coordinating the
sector dialogue in some areas and to participate as co-financiers in others. While the country
would find this approach advantageous in terns of increased flexibility to allocate resources in a
consistent manner (thereby overcoming 
the main drawback of inadequate donor coordination),
and donors would be able 
to economize on administrative 
resources without sacrificing
development impact, it will require some time to implement given the necessary preconditions
that must be in place for success. 
IDA's shift towards programmatic 
lending, supported by
critical analytical and fiduciary work, will help support donors' plans 
to begin 
to provide
assistance in the context of a sector-wide approach.

21 The thrust of the proposed new mechanism is consistent with the recommendations made in the Bank's 2001
Nicaragua Public Expenditure Review.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

39

90. 
CAS preparation has been coordinated closely with the Inter-American Development
Bank 
(I1DB), which also 
is preparing an assistance strategy aligned with Nicaragua's PRSP,
emphasizing 
poverty alleviation, 
institutional strengthening and human development 
The IDB
is 
the largest multilateral 
lender to Nicaragua, with annual disbursements 
that averaged $88
million in 1997-2001, and also plays an important role 
in organizing and chairing donors'
meetings through a Consultative Group process. The last CG meeting was held in May 2000 and
the next CG meeting is scheduled to be held in Managua in February 2003. 
In terms of 1997-
2001 
lending volumes to Nicaragua, 
IDA provided slightly less, $85 million. 
The 
largest
bilateral lender is Taiwan, China, with annual disbursements averaging $26 million. The IDB
has taken the lead in the energy, housing, water and sanitation, social protection and higher
education sectors, while the World Bank has taken the lead in the telecommunications, basic
education, disaster and risk management, agricultural 
technology, municipal development and
land management sectors. 
IDA and IDB coordinate closely through either formal cofinancing of
specific operations or 
informal arrangements 
(with 
informal 
agreements, 
for example, 
to
coordinate assistance on either a sectoral, subsectoral or regional basis) in the areas of pension
reform, 
financial development, 
health 
sector modernization, FISE, 
transport, 
institutional
development and environment. 
(Annex C lists the areas of IDB and IDA activity with reference
to Nicaragua's PRSP.)

91. 
The IDB's lending program has projected comniitnments averaging $105 million per year
over the next 4 years, which includes a high proportion of fast-disbursing assistance in the areas
of (i) competitiveness enhancement and 
tax reform, accompanied by project lending to 
the
private 
sector 
through 
financial 
intermediaries, and 
(ii) 
social sector adjustment. 
New
investment projects contemplated 
in the IDB program include support for the education sector
(including technical education), the social protection net, productive activities in the rural sector,
housing, urban poverty reduction, general pre-investment activities, environmental clean-up of
the Masaya 
lake basin, improved citizens' security, development of the Atlantic Coast, and
improving ethics among civil servants. 
The 
IDB 
is providing assistance 
in 
the area of
governance and 
institutional 
strengthening, 
in particular 
for procurement 
reform and 
for
strengthening the Office of the Controller General.

92. 
Of the bilateral donors, Japan and the United States provide the largest volume of grants,
with annual disbursements averaging close to $50 million each during 1997-2001, 
followed by
Sweden and Denmark ($21 million). Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Norway, Switzerland,
Finland and Taiwan, China, have aid programs exceeding $5 million in annual disbursements.
Aid granted by the UN Agencies as a whole has averaged $30 million per annum, while the
European Union's assistance has averaged $27 nillion. The European Union, which is also in
the process of preparing a new assistance strategy, 
is contemplating a program with annual
commitments averaging Euros 50 million over the next five years. About one-half of this total
assistance 
is expected to support rural development and agricultural policy, while another 20
percent aims to support the education sector. The Netherlands is currently co-financing two
IDA-supported projects (Agricultural Technology and Technical Education & Training APL and
Economic Management TA), Norway and the Nordic Development Fund are co-financing the
ongoing IDA-financed Health Sector Modernization project, and Switzerland and IFAD also are
co-financing the Agricultural Technology and Technical Education & Training APL Project

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

40

Program Monitoring

93. 
The achievement of CAS objectives will be monitored according to three sets of criteria:
program 
implementation 
indicators, 
sector outcome 
indicators and portfolio performance
indicators. These performance benchmarks to be used in each case are outlined in Table 7. All
of these benchmarks have been derived from the Nicaragua PRSP, and several of them vil also
be picked up in the PSAC/PRSCs, which support PRSP implementation. 
The performance
indicators pertaining to the social sectors and incidence of poverty are consistent with the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and most of these indicators are reflected in the HIPC
Completion point conditions.

Table 8: CAS Performance Targets and Indicators

Area 

Indicator,2 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ___ 

PRSP

T arg ets

Program Implementation Indicators

Macroeconomic Program 

Maintenance of an adequate macroeconomic 

same

framework

Poverty Spending 

Increased GDP-share of poverty-reduction spending

Institutional Strengthening 

Adequately operating HIPC Tracking Mechanism by 

no target

_ 

to 50% of total public expenditurcs by 2005 

same

Education 

Health 
Social Protection 

Private Sector Development 

Sector Outcome Indicators_ 

Reducing poverty level 

Improving the business climate 

Improving accountability/transparency 

Improving Education 

Improving Health 

_________________________________ 

end-2003

Increased percent of all primary schools receiving 
direct financial transfers under autonomy program

from 50% in 2002 to 70% in 2005.

Consolidated PHC models used across all SILAIS; 
Adoption of fiscally sustainable social protection 

strategy

Completion of pension reform program 

Reduction in national extreme poverty rate from 15.1 

_ % in 2001 to 14% in 2005

Substantial reduction in red tape for starting new 
businesses and concluding export transactions (with
baseline to be developed under a proposed
Administrative Barriers Assessment)
Substantial increase in donor funding channeled 
through single treasury account (with baseline to be
determined by CFAA)
Increase in primary school completion rate from 41% 
in 2002 to 44% in 2005;
Increase in primary net enrollment rate from 81% in 

2002 to 85% in 2005

Reduced incidence of diarrhea among children under
5 from 25% in 2001 to 18% in 2004; 
Reduced incidence of acute respiratory infections in

children under 5 from 24% in 2001 to 21% in 2004 

Portfolio Performance Indicator 

At most two projects in portfolio are rated 

.___ 

__ 

__ _ __ 
__ 
__ 

_ __ 
__ 
_ 

__ 
_ 

unsatisfactory 

Total portfolio disbursements remain broadly in line 
with projections at appraisal

no target

same
same

same

15.3% in 2005

no target

no target

same

83.4% in 2005

16% in 2004

same

no target

I

no target

22 In some cases CAS Performance Indicators may be different than PRSP targets. This is because the CAS
Performance Indicators reflect an updated expectation of outcomes based on experience with PRSP implementation
to date.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

41

CAS Risks

94. 
The proposed CAS faces political, institutional and economic risks. Political risks relate
to the rift that emerged within the Liberal party between President Bolafios' supporters and
members of the former Administration. Although there is hope that the party may again be ieady
to work together, a persisting rift could interfere with the passage of key legislation needed for
implementation of the PRSP agenda and would make it difficult to sustain the political support
needed 
to complete a fiscal adjustment of the magnitude contemplated 
in the government
program. 
IDA has been working with key members of the National Assembly, facilitating
relevant 
information and seeking 
to avoid misunderstandings about the reforns 
that will be
supported by IDA. A local civil society specialist in the Bank's Country Office is working
closely with civil society to maintain an open dialogue on IDA assistance. 
Institutional risks to
program 
implementation are posed by weaknesses 
in 
the judicial system and the Controller
General's Office, especially, and also in specific implementing agencies. The absence of sound
and effective institutions in either of these areas could undermine private sector confidence and
limit the impact of efforts to reduce poverty through faster growth. Conscious of this risk, the
Government has put governance and the fight against corruption at the top of its agenda, and has
taken important actions in these areas. 
The Government either already has in place or, is
expected 
to 
rely on donor 
financial 
and 
technical assistance-including 
from 
IDA--for
strengthening both the judicial system and the Controller General's Office. 
Finally, to mitigate
the risk of weak 
institutional capacity for PRSP implementation, IDA's CAS contemplates a
particularly 
strong component of 
institution-building 
technical 
assistance 
either 
in 
specific
investment operations or 
through 
stand-alone 
technical assistance projects 
in all 
lending
scenarios.

95. 
Finally, there are potential economic risks to program implementation, both external and
internal 
Externally, Nicaragua remains vulnerable 
to natural disasters (el Nino, hurricanes,
earthquakes) and to terms of trade shocks further coffee price declines, oil price increases),
either of which could produce important setbacks in the Government's macroeconomic program.
On the intemal side, fiagjlity of the financial system makes Nicaragua vulnerable to financial
crises triggered by extemal shocks or corporate govemance deficiencies. Also, the related risk of
rapidly expanding domestic debt could undermine fiscal adjustment. The weak status of land
tenure security 
represents 
the other 
important 
source of domestic debt expansion, while
constituting a source of political risk in its own right. To the extent possible, the Government
has been working to reduce some of these risks posed by external shocks. An ongoing IDA-
financed Disaster Mitigation Project (Loan 3487-NI) is assisting the Government in the
design of disaster preparedness and damage mitigation programs, while on the commodity
side, the Government is designing commodity price management and rainfall insurance systems
to handle better commodity price shocks. To mitigate risks from the financial system, 
the
implementing measures, with IDA assistance under the ongoing Pension and
Govemment 
is 
Financial Sector Reform Project (Credit No. 3344-NI), to strengthen prudential norms and
Banking Superintendency. These are expected to reduce the risk of financial crises and, thereby,
the prospects of further domestic debt accumulation. Weak land 
title security is also being
addressed with IDA assistance in the context of the recently approved Land Administration
Project (Credit No. 3665-NI). Specific measures being supported will require setting limits on
the compensation offered to former property owners for past expropriations.

Nicaragua - Country Assistance Strategy 

42

96. 
Finally, the move towards a programmatic assistance approach is not without risk, but
IDA is carrying out carefully the requisite fiduciary work and the move towards a PRSC
framework will only be implemented after there are adequate assurances that Nicaragua's public
expenditure program focuses correctly on the appropriate mix of investments and expenditures to
address PRSP priorities, and that 
the Government has put 
in place adequate financial
management and other control policies 
to ensure that resources are utilized effectively,
efficiently and transparently.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter L. Woicke

By:

Shengman Zhang 

Washington, DC
December 18, 2002

Nicaragua 
Key Economic & Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS

Annex Al

Forecast in Last CAS 

Actual 

Current CAS Forecast

Economy (CY 
Growth rates (%)
GDP 
Gross domestic income 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

1999 

2000 

20018 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005

5.3 
5.5 

5.7 
4.6 

6.0 
6.2 

6.2 
6.4 

7.4 
3.0 

5.5 
2.7 

3.1 
-0.5 

1.0 
3.1 

3.0 
2.4 

4.5 
4.0 

5.0
4.5

Inflation, average (%) 
GDP deflator (%) 

7.3 
7.5 

5.8 
5.8 

5.2 
5.2 

4.8 
4.8 

11.2 
11.2 

11.6 
11.9 

7.4 
7.4 

4.4 
4.4 

6.0 
6.0 

4.8 
4.8 

4.0
4.0

National accounts (% GDP)
Gross domestic investment 
Government 

27.8 
12.7 

27.8 
12.0 

27.8 
11.6 

28.0 
11.4 

43.3 
21.1 

34.9 
19.0 

30.4 
16.2 

27.3 
12.2 

27.8 
12.2 

29.1 
12.9 

30.6
13.0

Balance of payments (% GDP)
Resource balance 
Current account balance 

-22.4 
-19.3 

-22.1 
-17.8 

-21.1 
-16.0 

-20.4 
-14.8 

-54.2 
-47.9 

-42.6 
-38.0 

-39.5 
-37.7 

-40.8 
-28.2 

-40.5 
-24.0 

-40.2 
-19.3 

-37.3
-18.3

Public finance (% GDP)
NFPS fiscal balance 
Foreign financing 

-3.8 
8.1 

-3.1 
8.3 

-2.7 
8.1 

-2.3 
5.8 

-14.1 
19.5 

-13.9 
13.8 

-19.0 
12.7 

-13.5 
13.8 

-10.0 
10.3 

-5.9 
6.7 

-4.2
6.3

Program (Bank's Flo 
In millions of US$
Lending 

FY99 

FY00 

FY01 

FY02 

FY01 

FY02 

FY03 

FY04 

FY05 

FY06 

FY07

80.0 

50.0 

75.0 

45.0 

182.2 

32.6 

34.0 

72.0 

40.0 

40.0 

40.0

Gross disbursements 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

65.6 

78.1 

79.0 

86.0 

86.0 

90.0 

95.0

a. Estimated year.

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Nicaragua at a glance 

11120/02

Latin
America 
Nicaragua & Carib. 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Low-
Income 

Development diamond*

2001
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)" 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

5.1 
420 
2.2 

517 
3,560 
1,862 

2,460 
430
1,069

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1995-01

Population (%) 
Labor force (96) 

2.7 
3.8 

1.5 
2.2 

1.9
2.3 

GNI 
per 
capita 
,,m.mas
31
59
76

Gross

'-primary

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1995-01) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (56 of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (I% of population) 
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (9A of school-age populatlion) 
Male 

ienrlment

48 
65 
68 
40 
11 
84 
19 
102 
100 

., 
76 
70 
29 
9 
85 
11 
130 
131 

.. 

Access to improved water source

76
37
96 
103 

-

l-icaragua
Low-income group

Female 

103 

128 

88 

1

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

Economic ratios*

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savingslGDP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt service/exports 

2.5 
23.6 
22 3 
4.2 
-3.1 
-26.7 
3.7 
99.8 
37.9 

1 5 
20.8 
21.8 
-9.9 
-31.2 
-57.2 
13.1 
736.1 
141.2 

2.4 
34.9 
35.9 
-11.1 
-6.4 
-38.0 
3.3 
281.8 
22.1 

2.6
30.4
32.5 
-15.2
-11.6
-38.1 
2.6 
250.8
34.6

Trade

.
somestc 

/n\tmn

Investment

Present value of debt/GDP 

.. 

,. 
.

228.2

Present value of debt/exports 

.. 

399.7

Indebtedness

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

2001-05

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 

-2.5 
-5.0 

4.1 
1.3 

5.5 
2.8 

3.0 
0.5 

3.9 
1.7 

Nicaragua
Low-income group

-

Exports of goods and services 

-3.3 

8.9 

13.9 

6.8 

7.0

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)

(%6 of GDP)
Agrculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

20.2 
32.9 
26.7 
46.9 

29.1 
22.0 
17.9 
48.9 

32.7 
22.3 
14.3 
44.9 

32.3 
22.3 
14.2 
45.4 

60
40

20

o

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

73.9 
21.9 
41.8 

89.4 
20 6 
52.5 

92.5 
18.6 
81.9 

95.1 
20.2
78.1 

-20 

96 

97 

9a 

99 

00 

01

GOI 

O GOP

1981-1 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

(average annual growth)

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 

-2.9 
-2.9 
-3.8 

6.5 
4.7 
2.1 

11.4 
3.1 
2.8 

3.1 
3.2 
2.6 

40
30
20

Services 

-2.0 

2.3 

3.1 

2.9 

1 

O

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

-1.1 
-1.3 
-7.1 
-2.0 

5.1 
1.4 
11.9 
11.0 

-2.7 
2.0 
-9 7 
-8 0 

0.3 
94 
-1.1 
1.8 

-10 
-20

9S 97 

8 

99 

0s1

Eoff 

O 

Imports
P

Note: 2001 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.
Currently the official National Accounts are significantly underestimated.

Annex A2

Page 2 of 2

Nicaragua

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domestic prices 

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflation (%)
15.
7.4 1 O
7.4

(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

23.9 
11.7 

2,945.0 
4,523.7 

11.6 
11.9 

Government finance

(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

o

.. 
.. 
.. 

.
.. 
.. 

24.5 
2.3 
-14.2 

22.4 
4.7 
-19.4

96 

97 

98 

99 

00 

01

DP deflator 

*PI

TRADE

(US$ millions) 
Total exports (fob) 
Coffee 
Shrimp and Lobster 
Manufactures 

1981 
514 
137 
20 
79 

1991 
272 
36 
13 
61 

2000 
645 
171 
112 
232 

2001 
592 
105
76 
252

Export and import levels (USS mill.)
2,600

1.500

Total imports (cifl 

828 

751 

1,800 

1,789 

100

Food 

166 

179 

418 

474 

i11

Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

176 

115 

291 

269

138 

191 

444 

414 

o

9596 

7 

9 

99 

OD 

01

Export price index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

78 
61 
129 

86 
91 
94 

84 
117 
71 

76
115 
66

Jl Exports 

*Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

Exports of goods and services 

561 

350 

956 

919 

Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

1,044 
483 

843 
492 

1,991 
-1,035 

1983 
-1,064

.10

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-178 
0 

-375 
15 

-287 
400 

-311
402 

-30
-40

Current account balance 

-661 

-852 

-922 

-972 

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

714 
-53 

868 
-16 

893 
29 

801 
171 

-so
-60 -

Memo:

Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locallUSS) 

118 

169 
4.9 

497 
12.7 

383
13.4

.

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRO 
IDA 

Composition of 2001 debt (USS mill.)

2,471 
118 
53 

10,959 
124 
113 

6,851 
5 
654 

6,385
0
691 

G 831 

B:61 43

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

223 
17 
0 

530 
248 
6 

300 
6 
6 

457
5 
7

F 344

Composition of net resource flows 
Official grants 
Official credilors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

D 1,490

25 
324 
-17 
0 
0 

795 
-7 
-3 
0 
0 

255 
147 
141 
254 
0 

241
147
141
289
0 

E 297

World Bank proqram
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
43 
7 
36 
10 
26 

114 
54 
114 
-60 
141 
-201 

53 
87 
7 
81 
5 
76 

182 
63 
6 
56 
5
51

A-15RD 
B-IDA 

E-Bilateral
F -Pnvate
G -Short-temi

D - Other multilaleral 

C - IMF 

l

Development Economics 

10/30/02

Development Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

ANNEX BI: NICARAGUA CAS - Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)

Overarching Objective: Cut 
extreme poverty rate in half by 
2015, relative to 1995 rate. 

Implement PRSP;increase share of Reduced extreme poverty rate to
PRSP programs in total public 
13.7% by 2005, from 15.1% in
spending to 62% by 2005 
2001.
PILLAR I: BROAD-BASED ECONOMIC GROWTH AND STRUCTURAL REFORM
Macroeconomic Stabilitl
Maintain stable macroeconomic 
environment 

High public expenditures in wake of Reduce fiscal deficit to sustainable PRGF program on track 
hurricane Mitch and declines in tax level and implement actions to 
collection led to huge fiscal deficits restore growth 
and reserve losses that leave the
economy very vulnerable;
slowdown in economic growth 
threatens to reverse gains in 
poverty reduction 

Bank Group 
N LS

Lending/ 
Investments

Others

IDA ongoing: 
EMTAC 

PER, PRSP 
IMF (PRGF),
Progress report, IDB, bilateral
PSIA support 
donors

Restored annual GDP growth to 
IDA planned: 
average 4.2% of GDP over 2000- PRSC (03-05), 
05: 
EMTAC 11 (04)

Poverty Update
(03), CEM (04),

Nicaragua's huge extemal debt 
represents a major obstacle to 
investment and growth 

Recent Bank interventions (2000- Bring public debt to sustainable 
01) financed by domestic debt 
level
undermine the HIPC process to
reduce Nicaragua's public debt.

Reached HIPC Completion point

Incomplete privatization process 
creates investor uncertainty 

Structural Reforms
Continue transformation to market 
economy by completing the 
privatization program and social 
security reform process, improving 
the financial situation of public 
utilities, strengthening the domestic 
financial system and capital
market, and modemizing business ENACAL losses undermine fiscal 
legislation. 
control and service expansion 

Complete the telecom privatization Sold remaining shares of ENITEL 
program 
to private sector. 

Complete power privatizatlon 
program 

Sold remaining public electricity 
generating plants 

IDA ongoing:
Telecom
Reform TA, 
Power Proj.
guarantee
(MIGA)

Improve performance of water utility Water/sewerage tariffs adjusted to 
cover marginal costs 

IDA planned: 
Rural Telecoms

IDB

IDB, KfW

(04); IFC:
Potential

infrastructure

proP.

Page 1 of 1 0

Development Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

ANNEX BI: NICARAGUA CAS -- Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)

Bank Group 
NLS

Banking failures in 2000-01 
exposed weaknesses of 
Nicaraguan financial system and in 
prudential supervision, leaving 
system vulnerable to crises. 
Intervened assets need to be sold 
to reduce the domestic debt and 
contribute to improved govemance. 

Lending/ 
Investments
Implement program to strengthen Completed full cycle of on-site 
IDA ongoing: 
the financial system 
inspections of commercial banks 
Pensions &
with adequately trained SBIF-staff. Financial TA.
IFC: Potential
financial sector
projects (incl.
regional proj.)

Social security reform needs to be Complete social security system 
completed to avoid accumulating 
reform program 
fiscal losses (through the traditional 
system which is broke) and to
contribute to Nicaragua's capital 
market development. 

Brought prudential norms into
compliance with Basel core
principles

Completed sale of assets from 
intervened banks at market prices 

Awarded contracts to private 
pension fund managers 

IDA ongoing: 
Pensions &
Financial TA,

Introduced system of individual
funded accounts

Completed pending reforms of the
traditional pension system and
completed restructuring of INSS

Others

IMF, IDB

IMF, IDB,
USAID

IDB

Develop domestic capital markets 

Introduced modem capital markets 
law and insurance framework law

IDB

Current commercial code dates 
from the 1930s

Modemize commercial code 

Modemized the commercial code 

UNDP, Spain

Develop a professional civil service Low productivity in provision of 
public services due to inadequate 
skill composition of public 
employess. Lack of proper 
framework inhibits developmenl of
professional, adquately paid civil 
service 

Approve and implement the civil 
service reform law 

Established independent rector 
IDA ongoing:
agency for mediating civil service Econ.Mgmt TA
disputes and completed training of
HR units to manage new system.

iDA planned:
A substantial proportion of central Econ. Mgmt. II,
govemment staff employed under PRSC
revised system

Page 2 of 10

Development Objectives 

Diagnosis 

StrategylActions 

Progress Indicators 

ANNEX BI: NICARAGUA CAS - Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)

Bank Group 
N LS

Lending/ 
Investments

Others

Productive Sector DeveloDment

Improve land markets and 
strengthen property rights 

Uncertain property rights ranks 
Modemize catastre system and 
among Nicaragua's greatest 
property registry, and regularize 
obstacles to private investment and property titles 
growth, especially in rural areas.
Uncertain land rights encourage 
overexploitation of lands; integrity 
of land title registries/ cadastre 
severely eroded. 

completed cadastre/registry 
modemization program and titling 
in 3 departments.

Approved law to modemize real 
estate registries and law to 
strengthen national and municipal 
cadastres 

IDA ongoing: 
Land Mgmt 

Agricultural 
Policy Note

EU

IDA planned: 

UNDP

Land Sector 
Work (03),
Rural Dev. &
Prod. Advisory
(03)

Indigenous groups face very 
insecure land tenure rights 

Establish appropriate legal 
framework to demarcate 
indigenous lands 

Approved law for demarcating and
titling of indigenous' communities
lands in Atlantic region

Improve rural financial services 

Limited access to rural finance; 
sector development inhibited by 
culture-of non-payment and 
distorted terms in donorlNGO 
projects. 

Improve incentives for developing 
sustainable rural financial 
intermediation. 

Develop rural productive 
infrastructure 

Lack of energy, telecom and road Design and implement rural 
infrastructure promotes market 
electrification program 
segmentation, and inhibits rural 
development. 

Completed demarcation and tiiling 
of at least 12 indigenous 
comunities in At7antic Coast and
Bosawas

Implemented regulatory framework IDA planned: 
for micro-finance institutions 
Rural 
Microfinance 
(03). IFC: 
Potential 
microfinance
proj (ind.
regional proj.)

GTZ, USAID,
Finland

IDA ongoing: 
Comm. Price 
Risk Mgmt, 
Rainfall
Insurance Dev.

IDB, USAID,
Germany,
Sweden, NGOs

Prepared rural electrification 
IDA planned: 
Rural 
master plan; Off-grid electrification Off-Grid Rural Electrification
programs operating in 5 
Electrification 
(Advisory),
communities 
(03) 
Infrastnucture
Assessment (04

IDB

05)

Page 3 of 1 0

Development Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

ANNEX B1: NICARAGUA CAS -- Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)

Bank Group 

Others

Lendingl 
Investments
Expand telecom coverage in rural Rural telecom fund operabng; set 
IDA ongoing:
areas 
up intemet-based public service 
Telecom
centers in all department capitals. Reform TA, IDA
planned: Rural
Telecoms (04)

NLS

Expand paving stone (adoquinado) Paved 300 km of rural roads during IDA ongoing: 
program 
2002-04 
Road Rehab &
Maintenance

Roads TA (IDF) 

IDB, Sweden

Accelerate technological progress Low rural productivity levels persist Implement the National Program of Substantial increase in number of 
IDA ongoing: 
in agriculture by developing rural 
because most medium and small 
Technology and Technical 
program beneficiaries and 
Agr. Tech. & 
extension and technology services scale farmers have limited acess to Agricultural Education 
evidence of increased productivity Rural Educat. 
appropriate technology 
and product diversification in farms
benefited by program

IDB, EU,
COSUDE,
Netherlands

Promote faster growth through 
cluster development 

Low levels of domestic 
Establish conditions to enourage 
infrastructure and skills call for a 
the development of at least 5 
clustered development approach to clusters 
attract new private investors and 
maximize their development impact 

Sustained private investment 
growth in identified clusters. 

IDA ongoing: 
Business
Competit. LIL, 
Environment
IDA planned: 
Assessment (03
Competitive. II 04), Regional
(05). IFC: 
Integration
Potential 
Study (03-04)
projects in
tourism,
agribusiness,
manufacturing
and SMEs
(through
intermediaries).

Social Infrastructure
Expand the provision of safe water Serious gaps in coverage of water Expand provision of water and 
and sanitation in rural areas 
and sanitation, with negative 
sanitation infrastructure in rural 
implications for health; pace of 
areas. 
coverage expansion in rural areas 
is below PRSP target. 

Increased national coverage of 
IDA ongoing: 
water/ sanitaton by 1.4% per year Poverty Redu. & 
during 2001-2005, with at least half Local Dev.
of all new investments located in 
(FISE IV)
extremely poor municipalities

IDB, KfW,
Japan, NGOs

Page 4 of 10

Development Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

ANNEX B1: NICARAGUA CAS -- Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)

Develop the housing market 

Significant housing deficit; Role and Transform the State's role in the 
strategy of the public sector to 
sector from executor to facilitator/ 
address this deficit are unclear. 
regulator 

Approve'appropriate sector 
legislation, and replace BAVINIC 
with INVUR in accordance with 
new legislation 

Lending/ 
Investments
IFC: Potential 
regional 
investment in 
housing finance.

Bank Group 

Others

NLS

IFC: Housing 
finance market
study.

IDB, GTZ

PILLAR Il: GREATER AND BETTER INVESTMENT IN.HUMAN CAPITAL 
Education

-- 

-.. 

.. 

-.

Increase the coverage of primary 
education 

Low enrollment rates, particularly in Implement plans to increase double Increase net primary enrollment 
rural areas, perpetuate poor 
shifts, expand multgrade schools 
rate from 75% in 1999 to 83% in 
education indicators and high 
and rehabilitate or replace 
2005 
illiteracy rates 
classrooms 

IDA ongoing: 
Basic Educ. II 

IDB, EU, KfW,
USAID, WFP,
Luxemburg,
Spain, Sweden

Increase the quality of primary 
education 

Poor quality of education linked to 
severe underfunding, poor 
admininstration and lack of 
accountability calls for a different, 
more decentralized, sector 
development model 

Review/assess national coverage Prepared national inventory and
and gaps of education 
master plan for school
infrastructure. 
Infrastructure development

Implement the autonomous shools Substantial increase in primary and IDA planned: 
program and modify the funding 
secondary students enrolled in 
Basic Edu. II/ 
formula for autonomous schools to autonomous schools 
(04)
improve incentives for increasing
enrollment

Evidence of systematic
improvement in promotion rates
with same evaluation standards.

EFA Fast Track
(03)

Health

Improve coverage and quality of 
health services for women of 
childbearing age and for children 
and adolescents 

Health status indicators among the Continue implementation of 
worst in the region, especially in 
ongoing programs for improving 
rural areas. 
basic health infrastructure and 
equipment in the 15 SILAIS and 
staff training.

By year 2002, reductions in infant 
IDA ongoing: 
mortality rate to 32 per 1000 I.b.and Health 
under-5 mortality rate to 37 per 
Modemization 
1000 l.b. 

IDB, PAHO,
Japan, Norway,
Spain, Sweden,
Germany

Modemize the sector to increase 
Budgetary restrictions, together 
Strengthen MINSA in its normative 
Issued 'reglamento for the new 
capacity and efficiency of service with allocative inefficiency and bias and regulatory role as stipulated in Health Law. 
provision 
in favor of curative versus 
the new General Law for Health 
preventive medicine, calls for major

IDA Planned:
Health &
Nutrition (05)

Page 5 of 10

Development Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

ANNEX BI: NICARAGUA CAS - Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)

Bank Group 

NLS

Lending/ 
Investments

Others

institutional revamping, toward a 
more decentralized, demand-driven 
mixed (public/private) health 
system. High administrative cost 
and program duplication in primary
health care (PHC) across different
SILAIS yield low program cost- 
effectiveness. 

___ _ _ __ _ _ __ _ _ _ __ _ 
_ _ __ _ _ _ __ 

_ _ __ _ _ _ __ _ _ __ _ _ 
__ _ _ _ __ 

Nutrition
Foster preventive approaches to Malnutritition indicators very high by Promote healthy growth and 
malnutrition by promoting 
regional standards, largely 
development strategies at 
behavioral changes in families and attributable to inappropriate 
community level for children, 
communities 
nutrition practices and family 
monitoring weight during pregnancy 
behavioral pattems 
and developing social 
communication strategy to promote 
breasfeeding; revise primary school
health education curricula

Based on evaluation results.
consolidated the number of PHC
models under implementation in
agreement with donors

Introduced new medical and
pharmaceutical supplies
procurement and distribution
system

Most hospitals operating under

autonom y program

Reduced under-5 chronic 
IDA ongoing:
malnutrition from 19.9% in 1998 to Health
16% by 2004 
Modemization,
JDA planned:
Health &
Nutrition (05)

Population
Increase access to reproductive 
Matemal mortality rates, adolescen Incorporate reproductive health 
Standard PHC model to be 
health care services to individuals pregnancy rates and population 
care services as basic service 
adopted and implemented in all 
of all ages 
growth rank among the highest in component available to all women SILAIS includes reproductive 
the region. 
and adolescents 
health component.

IDA ongoing: 
Health
Modemization

UNFPA

PILLAR III: BE1TER PROT^ECTJON FOR,VULNERABLE GROUPS

Reduce vulnerability of the extreme Lack of a coherent strategic 
Design and implement a tiscally 
poor 
framework for short term 
sustainable social protection 
interventions; lack of clear priorities strategy 
on target groups to be addressed; 
weak coordination among myriad o 
projects; lack of work in urban 
environments where poverty is 
growing fastest and is vulnerable to 
disasters, economic shocks and
social conflicts

inforM31 Safety 

Completed background study to 
IDA ongoing 
IDB. 
l<P,V.
identify the most vulnerable goups Poverty Red. & Nets Study, 
UNDP,
and the most critical social risks 
Local Dev.; 
Regional Coffee COSUDE, WFP
facing them; analyzed existing 
Managua 
Study,
programs and ranked them on 
Vulnerability
basis of cost effectiveness; 
Reduction Pilot
analyzed sustainability of different 
(JSDF)
social protection models

Page 6 of 10

Development Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

ANNEX BI: NICARAGUA CAS -- Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)

Bank Group 
Lending/ 
NLS

Investments

Others

PILLAR IV: GOOD GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Institutional Develooment and
Transparencv
Improve public financial 
management 

Insufficient transparency in the use Complete program to establish 
of public resources; weak 
SIGFA across entire public sector 
budgetary processes, weak intemal 
controls and extemal audits, and
weak accounting systems limit 
capacity to maintain fiscal control 
and track the use of public funds 
for better accountability.
frbtracu 

Passage of law to guarantee 
access to public information 

Initiated implementation on national
scale of a sustainable social
protection program for families with
children facing health, educational
and nutritional risks

Completed SIGFA program 
implementation 

IDA ongoing: 
Econ.Mgmt TA 

Public 
Investment 
Sector (IDF) 

Netherlands,
Norway,
Canada

i. Complete program to establish 
Single Treasury Account. 

SIGFA accounts publicly 
accessible through Internet 

IDA planned:
Econ Mgmt 11
(04)

All donor funds received by public 
sector channeled through single
treasury account

Create proper HIPC tracking 
mechanism 

Periodic presentation of 
satisfactory reports on use of HIPC
debt relief

Carry out Country Financial 
Accountability Assessment and 
implement key recommendations.

Implemented key CFAA
recommendations

Modemize public procurement 
Implement key recommendations 
system, based on a thorough 
of Country Procurement
Country Procurement Assessment Assesment

Public procurement system is 
antiquated and ongoing efforts to 
reform the system are disperse; 
new procurement law passed in
1999 contains limitations that
reduce efficiency

IMF

IMF

IDB

Page 7 of 10

Development Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

ANNEX BI: NICARAGUA CAS -- Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)

Bank Group 

NLS

Lending/ 
Investments

Improve public expenditure 
planning and management 

Lack of monitoring and evaluation Develop regular monitoring and 
systems perpetuates the existence evaluation system of PRSP 
of obsolete/ineffective programs; as programs and objectives 
overall public spending is reduced,
public resources need to be
refocused on poverty reducing 
To improve efftciency of public 
programs and overall efficiency of expenditures, prepare plan to 
publis spending needs to increase 
introduce a medium term
expenditure framework, together

with enabling budget framework

law

IDA ongoing: 

Household
Survey Sys.
Dev. (IDF); PER

Prepared plan to introduce Medium
Term Expenditure Framework

Improve public expenditure 
Strengthen donor coordination 
Several 'mesas sectoriales' 
management through benter donor effort through establishment of 
operating under govemment 
coordination; donor-funded 
sector coordination groups (mesas leadership to coordinate sector 
programs account for two-thirds of sectoriales) in parallel with 
activities. 
the public investment program; 
improvements in public financial 
inadequate donor coordination 
management.
fosters duplication and reduces 
program impact. 

Initiated at least one sector-wide
approach on a pilot basis

Judicial Reform
Strengthen govemance through 
judicial reform 

The judicial system is unreliable 
Implement program for institutional 
and slow. Lack of credibility 
strengthening (technical and 
creates uncertainty for current and professional ) in judicial manters 
potential investors. 

Implementation of action plan to 
strengthen judicial system based 
on report prepared in 2002 by
special commission to the
Executive, including reforms
pertaining to the election of
supreme court magistrates and the
judicial career system

Modemize Penal Code and Penal Passed laws and completed
Process Law, and implement legal 
training program
training programs to implement
new codes.

Others

Denmark,
Sweden,
Netherlands,
Norway,
Germany

IDB, UNDP,
Spain,

Page 8 of 10

Development Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

ANNEX BI: NICARAGUA CAS -- Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)

Participatoryv rocesses
Institutionalize the PRSP process 

Lack of consensus on development Consolidate and insttutionalize the Prepared an updated, broadly 
program has led to erratic program PRSP process initiated in 2000. 
consulted PRSP, accompanied by
implementation over time. 
PSIA.

Bank Group 

NLS

Lending/ 
Investments

Others

IMF, IDB

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES: ENVIRONMENT, SOCIAL EQUITY, DECENTRALIZATION
Environment and ecological
vulnerability
Reduce environmental degradation Absence of environmental policy 
and promote the ecological 
strategy and proper legal 
restoration and sustainable 
framework have resulted in the 
management of productive areas 
degradation of fragile eco-systems, 
as well as unexploited development Prepare appropriate legal 
opportunities. 
framework for sustainable 
exploitation of natural resources 

Implement and monitor the 
Environmental Policy and Action 
Plan (PANic) 

Approved and initiated 
IDA ongoing: 
implementation of Biodiversity Law Sustainable 
Forest Dev. 

Approved law on Water Resources 
and law on Fisheries 

Atlantic Bio.
Corridor (GEF),
Pilot
commercializato
n imp.
Cookstoves
(ESMAP)

Strengthened environmental units 
IDA planned: 
to consolidate the National System Sustainable 
of Environmental Administration 
Forest 11,

Atlantic Bio.
Corr. 11 (GEF)

Promote sustainable forestry 
investments

Offer environmental services 

Modemize early waming systems 

Aproved forestry development law

Promote carbon emissions 
mitigation and participate in market 
for carbon sequestration 

IDA planned: 

Completed installation of 25 
IDA ongoing: 
telemetric hydrometry stations, 8 Disaster 
seismic stations and national 
Prevent. (IDF)
tsunami waming center; organized
a Disaster Operation Center

Policy &
Strategy for
Promotion of
Ren. Energy
(ESMAP);
Nicaragua PCF UNDP
Umbrella proj.

Reduce environmental risk 

Nicaragua's geography makes it 
very vulnerable to natural 
catastrophes; the recently created 
system for the prevention, 
mitigation and response to 
disasters needs to be made
operational and strengthened.

Page 9 of 10

Development Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

ANNEX B1: NICARAGUA CAS -- Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)

Bank Group 

NLS

Formulate National Emergencies 
Plan; reduce hazard risks 

Lending/ 
Investments
Risk assessments and mitigation 
IDA ongoing: 
measures carried out in 25 of the Natural Disast.
most vulnerable municipalities; 
Vulnerability
disaster emergency committees 
Reduction
organized, trained and equipped in
all municipalities.

Others

JICA, SIDA

Social Equitv
Guarantee equal gender access to 
economic, social, cultural and 
political areas 

Design and implement plan to 
promote sexual equality in salaries 
in the public and private sectors 

Designed Plan and initiated 
implementation 

IDA ongoing: 

Promoting
Gender Acc.
(IDF)

Decentralization
Strengthen local governments and Excessively centralized decision- Define and implement national 
consolidate decentralization 
making; unclear policy and 
policy and strategy on 
policies towards local governments commitment by central government decentralization 
toward decentralization; Lack of 
own fiscal resources limits the 
capacity of municipalities to
develop and provide basic services Implement program to strengthen Completed program to strengthen
for which they are responsible by 
INIFOM and to develop and 
43 municipalities, which exhibit
law 
strengthen the technical capabilities significant increase in fiscal
and fiscal capacities of municipal 
revenues.
administrations

Advanced implementation of 
decentralization strategy 

Approved law on a national
comprehensive cadastre that
incorporates municipal cadastres

Prepare and implement plan to 
coordinate municipal investment
plans through SNIP

Implemented plan

Implement decentralization strategy Issue 'reglamento' for Autonomy
for Atlantic Coast region 
law of Atlantic Coast region

IDA ongoing: 
Rural 
Municipalities 11 

IDB, UNDP,
DANIDA,
USAID,
Germany,
Finnland

Page 10 of 10

Annex B2

2002

16
2.4
6.3
2.9
6.3
2.9
23.8

Yes
1165.2
72.8

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of September 30, 2002

Nicaragua

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number 8 c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount 'C 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount 8 ' d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

d 

1999 

10 
2.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
78.5 

Yes 
483.2 
48.3 

2000 

14 
2.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
45.1 

No 
800.1 
57.2 

2001 

16 
1.8 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
25.3 

No 
750.0 
46.9 

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 

Last Five FYs

23 
730.8 
13.6 
24.0 

7
266.0
14.3
5.5

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Nicaragua: Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IDA Base-Case Lending Program (FY03-05)

Annex B3

FY 

2003 

2004 

Project 

Nicaragua PSAC 
Rural Micro Finance 
Rural Electrification 
Subtotal for 2003 

Nicaragua PRSC 
Competitiveness 
Economic Management TA II 
Basic Education III 
Subtotal for 2004 

2005 

Health and Nutrition III 
Subtotal for 2005 

TOTAL 2003- 05 

$ Million 

Strategic 
Rewards (H/MIL'0

Implementation
Risks (H/M/L)0

H 
M 
M 

H 
H 
H 
M 

M 

M
M
M

M
L
M
M

M

15.0 
7.0 
12.0 
34.0

35.0 
8.0 
17.5 
11.0 
71.5

15.0 
15.0

120.5

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, the table indicates whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M), or low (L).

IFC and MIGA Program, FY99-2002

(as of November 30, 2002)

Category 

IFC Approvals ($ million) 

Sector (%)
Agriculture and Forestry 
Food and Beverages 
Textiles, Apparel and Leather 
Fianance and Insurance 
Wholesale and Retail Trade 
Tourism Services 
TOTAL 

Investment Instrument (%)
Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity (Loan type) 
Quasi-Equity (Equity type) 
Guarantee 
Risk Management Products 
TOTAL 

MIGA Guarantees ($ million) 

1999 

15.0 

7 
43 
8 
0 
37 
6 
100 

85 
12 
3 
0 
0 
0 
100 

0.0 

Fiscal Year
2000 

5.0 

43 
0 
0 
57 
0 
0 
100 

87 
13 

0 

0 
0 
0 
100 

81.4 

2001 

5.0 

0 
0 
0 
100 
0 
0 
100 

100 
0 

0 

0 
0 
0 
100 

80.8 

2002

0.0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0

0

0
0
0
0

127.6

Nicaragua: Summary of Nonlending Services

Product 

Completion FY 

Amount (US$000) 

Audiencea Objective

Annex B4

Recent completions:
Policy Framework Paper 
FISE Impact 
Pension Reform Proposal 
Evaluation of Emergency Social Fund 
Poverty Assessment 
PRSP 
Public Expenditure Review 
Agricultural Policy Note 

Underway:
PRSP Progress Report 
Informal Safety Nets 
Coffee Study (regional) 
Commercialization of Improved Cookstoves 
Poverty Assement Update 
Financial Accountability Assessment 
Renewable Energy Policy 
Youth at Risk 
Country Procurement Assessment 

Planned:
Rural Sector Competitiveness 
Trade Study (regional) 
Drivers of Rural Growth (regional) 
Social Impact of Coffee Crisis (regional) 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Land Sector Work 
Poverty and Social Impact Assesment 
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
Improving Govemance 
Infrastructure Assessment 

Rural Electrification 
Institutional Capacity Building 
Rural Development and Productivity 
Education Sector Policy Note 
Rural Poverty 
Human Capital Development 
Inv. Climate Assessment 

Promoting Gender Accountability 
Agricultural Political Forum 
Roads TA 
Improvement of Regional Maritime Trade 
Public Investment Sector 
Disaster Prevention 
Development of Household Surveys System 

AUantic Biological Corridor II (GEF) 
Off-Grid Rural Electrification (GEF) 

Analytical Work/ReDorts

FY00 
FY00 
FY00 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 -02 
FY02 
FY02 

FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 

FY03-04 
FY03-04 
FY03-04 
FY03-04 
FY04 
FY03 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04-05 
FY04-05 

Advisory Activities
FY02 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY04 
FY04 
FY03 

IDF Grants
FY99 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
Other
FY03 
FY03 

30 
133 
37 
-
418 
-
159 
41 

-
91 
65 
100 
41 
60 
-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-

26 
-
-
-
-
-
-

197 
381 
186 
148 
236 
250 
467 

7,140 
100 

a. Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

G,B 
G, D, 8 
G, B 
G, D, B 
G,D,B,PD 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G,D,B,PD 

G, D, B 
G,D,B,PD 
G,D,B,PD 
G, D, B 
G,D,B,PD 
G. B 
G, D, B 
G,D,B,PD 
G,B 

G, D, B 
G,D,B,PD 
G,D,B,PD 
G, D, B 
G,D,B 
G, B 
G,D,B,PD 
G, B 
G,D,B,PD 
G, D, B 

G,D,B,PD 
G,D,B,PD 
G,D,B,PD 
G,D,B,PD 
G,D,B,PD 
G,D,B,PD 
G,D,B,PD 

G, D, PD 
G, D, PD 
G, D, PD 
G, D, PD 
G, D, PD 
G, D, PD 
G, D, PD 

G, D, B 
G, D, B 

KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG. PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS

Annex B5

Nicaragua Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY

(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index 

Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 

Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 

Male 
Female 

Access to an improved water source
(% of population)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 

Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1994-00 

2.5 
3.3 
50.3 
6.6 

.. 
.. 
.. 

3.4 
3.1 
56.4 
5.5 

.. 
.. 
.. 

640 

750 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

2.9 

63 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

*- 
,. 

.. 

57 
55 
59 

93 
168 

348 
283 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

,. 

.. 

1.4 

73 

71 
75 

.. 
.. 
.. 

49 
35 

10 

61 
58 
64 

71 
143 

277 
189 

.. 
.. 

5.1 
2.7 
64.7 
3.6 

47.9
30.5
68.5

410 

60.3

2.3
63.6 

5.7 
6.3 

4.9 

80 

78 
81 

84 
92 
72 

99 
82 

11 

68 
67 
71 

40 
50 

220 
223 

148

70

Latin
America 
& Carib. 

515.7 
1.6 
75.4 
2.6 

Low-
income

2,459.8
2.0
31.9
3.6

3,670 

410

-

2.8 
3.3 

7.4

97

99
98

85 
93 
62 

9357
87 

9

70 
67 
74 

29 
37 

208 
121 

1.2
3.4

76
88
70

57

59
58
60

76
115

294
261

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data.

2002 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Nicaragua - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
1999 

Estunate 
2001 

(Projected Base Case Scenario)
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005

1998 

2000 

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100.0 
32.4 
22.1 
45.5 

100.0 
31.6 
22.9 
45.5 

100.0 
32.7 
22.3 
44.9 

100.0 
32.3 
22.3 
45.4 

100.0 
32.4 
22.5 
45.1 

100.0 
32.5 
22.7 
44.8 

100.0 
32.5 
22.7 
44.8 

100.0
32.5
22.7
44.8

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

106.1 
33.8 
13.1 
20.8 

110.9 
43.3 
21.1 
22.2 

106.9 
34.9 
19.0 
15.9 

109.1 
30.4 
16.2 
14.2 

113.5 
27.3 
12.2 
15.1 

112.7 
27.8 
12.2 
15.6 

111.1 
29.1 
12.9 
16.2 

106.7
30.6
13.0
17.6

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

40.1 
80.1 

37.9 
92.1 

39.3 
81.2 

36.0 
75.5 

36.0 
76.8 

37.7 
78.1 

39.6 
79.8 

41.5
78.8

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 
Memorandum items:
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method) 
370.0 
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1998 prices'
Gross domestic product at market prices 
4.1 
7.4 
Gross Domestic Income 
16.1 
3.0 
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1998 prices,
Gross domestic product at market prices 
1.3 
4.5 
Total consumption 
18.4 
1.8 
Private consumption 
23.5 
0.6 

-6.1 
2.3 

-10.9 
1.4 

-6.9 
2.5 

-9.1 
-3.1 

-13.5 
-1.2 

-12.7 
3.0 

-11.1 
9.0 

-6.7
11.6

2067.8 

2212.5 

2429.9 

2537.0 

2571.0 2661.0 

2806.0 

2989.0

390.0 

410.0 

420.0 

450.0 

460.0 

480.0 

500.0

5.5 
2.7 

3.1 
-0.5 

1.0 
3.1 

3.0 
2.4 

4.5 
4.0 

5.0
4.5

2.8 
-4.4 
-5.2 

0.5 
-0.6 
-2.2 

-1.0 
-5.1 
-5.5 

1.0 
-3.0 
-3.5 

2.5 
-1.1 
-2.0 

3.0
-0.4
-1.3

Balance of Payments (US$)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 

830.0 
573.2 
1656.0 
1384.0 
-826.0 
311.0 

838.2 
545.2 
2037.8 
1702.8 
-1199.6 
396.0 

956.1 
645.1 
1972.0 
1629.0 
-1015.9 
400.0 

913.0 
592.0 
1915.0 
1561.0 
-1002.0 
402.0 

926.0 
598.0 
1974.0 
1598.0 
-1048.0 
453.0 

1002.0 
1110.0 
663.0 
739.0 
2079.0 2238.0 
1659.0 
1758.0 
-1077.0 -1128.0 
496.0 
541.0 

1240.0
833.0
2354.0
1878.0
-1114.0
543.0

Current account balance (before oficial gran 
Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 

-768.6 

-1058.6 

-931.0 

-956.4 

-726.0 

-638.0 

-541.0 

-548.0

125.2 
237.3 
236.8 
6.0 

300.0 
106.0 
422.8 
-77.2 

265.0 
49.0 
242.0 
29.0 

132.0 
40.0 
284.4 
171.0 

201.0 
75.0 
171.0 
13.0 

256.0 
33.0 
205.0 
-30.0 

250.0 
34.0 
71.0 
0.0 

239.0
10.0
169.0
-50.0

Other capital(net, incl errors&ommissions) 

Change in reservesd 

Memorandum items:
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) 
Netcurrenttransfers(%ofGDP) 

-39.9 
-37.2 
15.0 

-54.2 
-47.8 
17.9 

-41.8 
-38.3 
16.5 

-39.5 
-37.7 
13.0 

-40.8 
-28.2 
17.6 

-40.5 
-24.0 
18.6 

-40.2 
-19.3 
19.3 

-37.3
-18.3
18.2

Exports volumes 
Imports volumes 

-2.3 
8.6 

9.3 
15.9 

15.1 
-9.7 

7.3 
3.1 

1.1 
-4.7 

5.5 
1.0 

6.1 
3.4 

6.2
6.1

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Nicaragua - Key Economic Indicators (continued)

Actual 
1999 

Estimate 
2001 

(Projected Base Case Scenario)
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005

2000 

1998 

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
26.9 
Current expenditures 
21.6 
Capital expenditure 
10.5 
Overall Balance surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
-5.1 
Foreign financing (including grants) 
10.8 
Grants 
3.1 

25.8 
21.8 
17.9 
-13.9 
18.2 
7.4 

24.5 
22.2 
16.6 
-14.3 
12.4 
6.1 

22.3 
27.0 
14.7 
-19.4 
11.0 
5.7 

23.4 
26.2 
10.2 
-13.0 
12.4 
6.7 

25.1 
23.7 
10.3 
-8.9 
13.1 
6.3 

25.8 
18.1 
11.3 
-3.6 
9.8 
3.6 

25.7
16.1
11.6
-2.0
9.6
3.6

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 

68.6 
30.5 

68.3 
18.8 

63.3 
9.4 

63.5 
11.1 

63.5 
7.4 

63.5 
9.2 

63.5 
10.3 

63.8
11.0

Price indices( 1990 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCUJ 

Consumner price index (average, % change) 
Consumer price index (end of year, % chani 
GDP deflator (% change) 

71.7 
131.4 
54.5 
2.0 

13.0 
18.5 
13.0 

62.4 
140.6 
44.4 
1.6 

11.2 
7.2 
11.2 

64.1 
164.4 
39.0 
6.0 

11.9 
6.6 
11.9 

54.9 
157.7 
34.8 
-0.6 

7.4 
4.7 
7.4 

56.3 
142.6 
39.5 

59.4 
142.6 
41.7 

61.8 
141.8 
43.6 

65.4
141.8
46.2

..

4.4 
6.0 
4.4 

6.0 
6.0 
6.0 

4.8 
4.0 
4.8 

4.0
4.0
4.0

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. IMF definition.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation

Annex B7

Nicaragua - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
1999 

Estimate 
2001 

(Projected Base Case Scenario)
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005

2000 

1998 

6450 

6909 

6851 

6385 

5999 

5838 

5725 

5594

194 
829 
255 

106 
483 
186 

49 
358 
300 

40 
465 
457 

-75 
573 
564 

33 
453 
453 

34 
385 
385 

10
339
339

TOTAL EXTERNAL DEBT*
In USS millions
Total debt outstanding and disbursed (TDC 

Net disbursements 
Total debt service due (TDS) 
Total debt service paid (TDS) 

Debt and debt service indicators ("lo)

TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS Due/XGS" 
TDS Paid/XGS' 

565.3 
311.9 
72.7 
22.3 

559.9 
312.2 
39.1 
15.1 

505.2 
281.8 
26.4 
22.1 

483.3 
251.7 
35.2 
34.6 

426.4 
233.3 
40.7 
40.1 

377.9 
219.4 
29.3 
29.3 

337.4 
204.0 
22.7 
22.7 

299.9
187.2
18.2
18.2

IBRD and IDA exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 

IBRD DS/XGS 
IDA DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)y 
IDA TDO (US$m)c 

6.3 
38.2 

1.0 
0.4 
15 
487 

5.2 
29.0 

3.3 
27.8 

0.6 
0.4 
9 
598 

0.4 
0.5 
5 
654 

2.0 
29.5 

0.4 
0.5 
0 
691 

0.0 
29.4 

0.0 
0.5 
0 
803 

0.0 
29.4 

0.0 
0.6 
0 
882 

0.0 
29.7 

0.0 
0.6 
0 
929 

0.0
29.5

0.0
0.6
0
994

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Includes present value of guarantees.

Annex B8
Page 1of 2

Nicaragua - Status of Bank Group Operations
As of September 30, 2002
Operations Portfolio

Closed projects: 43 
Board 
Date 
Fiscal 
Year 

Active Projects 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 
Development lmolementatio 
ObiDecives 
n Proiress 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

IDA 

GRANT 

Undisb. 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/
FrmT
Rev'd

Orig. 

.

1997 P041790 Atlantic Biological Corridor 
1998 P035753 Health Sector II 
1998 P053705 Transport II 
1999 P040197 FISE III 
1999 P052080 Forestry 
2000 P050613 Basic Education II 
2000 P055853 Telecom. Reform 
2000 P049296 Economic Management TAC 
2000 P056087 Pension and Financial Market TA 
2000 P064915 Agr Tech & Rural Edu 
2001 P070016 Competitiveness LIL 
2001 P068673 Road Rehab & Maint 
2001 P055823 Rural Municipalities II 
2001 P064916 Natural Disaster Vulnerability 
2001 P064906 Poverty Red & Local Dev 
2002 P056018 Land Administration 

S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 

24.0 
47.4 
45.0 
9.0 
52.5 
15.9 
20.9 
8.0 
23.6 
5.0 
75.0 
28.7 
13.5 
60.0 
32.6 

7.1 

3.8 
7.5 
5.4 
3.5 
2.9 
19.8 
1.9 
7.2 
3.4 
12.2 
4.6 
66.3 
20.7 
12.7 
55.4 
34.6 

3.7 
4.2 
2.4 
5.0 
2.7 
-31.4 
1.3 
-12.6 
-3.3 
3.9 
1.8 
-11.1 
2.1 
-1.1 
31.3 
0.0 

461.1 

7.1 

261.8 

-1.1 

1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.0

Total Disbursed (IBRD and IDA): 
of which has been repaid: 
Total now held by IBRD and IDA /b: 

All Projects
IBRD 
IDA 
229.6 
825.8 
224.1 
19.3 
0.0 
779.9 

Total
1055.4
243.3
779.9

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Nicaragua: Statement of IFC's Committed and Disbursed Portfolio
As of November 30, 2002
(US$ millions)

FY 
Approval Company 

2001 
2000 
1998 
1998 
1999 

BANEXPO 
Finarca 
Frutan 
La Colonia 
SEF Dicegsa 

Total Portfolio: 

Loan 

5.0 
1.4 
0.4 
3.5 
0.8 

11.1 

Committed 
Equity 
Quasi 

Partic. 

Loan 

Disbursed
Equity 

Quasi Partic.

0.0 
0.6 
0.4 
0.0 
0.0 

1.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.5 
0.0 

0.5 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 

0.0 
1.4 
0.4 
1.5 
0.8 

4.1 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.5 
0.0 

0.5 

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0

NICARAGUA
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
performance' 

Majorissueb 

Country 
priorityc 

Bank 
priorityC 

Annex B9

Reconciliation of
country and Bank
priorities d

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development 
Environment 

Social development 

good 
good 
fair 
fair 

good 
fair 
fair 

good 
fair 

fair 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 

fair 

Private sector 
Energy & mining 

Infrastructure 

fair 
fair 

good 

Rural Poverty 
Fiscal 
Transparency 
Not a priority 

moderate 
high 
high 
low 

high 
high
high
moderate 

ongoing dialogue

ongoing dialogue

Quality 
Institutional reform 
Lack of strategy 

high 
moderate 
moderate 

high
high 
high 

ongoing dialogue
ongoing dialogue

Poverty/ low technol. 
high 
Deforest.indigenous rightsl moderate 
biodiversity
Decentralization 

moderate 

high
moderate

moderate

Corp. governance/regulatory moderate 
framework 

Regulatory/judicial reform 
high 
Losses of state utility/regul. moderate 
framework
private sector participation 

moderate 

high 

high
low 

moderate

Prog.
Conditional./TA

IDB has the lead

a. Use 'excellent,' 'good," 'fair," or 'poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty;' for education, 'female secondary completion;" for
environment, 'urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use 'low," 'moderate," or 'high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for examrple, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Nicaragua: Key Evironmental Indicators

Annex B1O

Population (millions), 2000 
Urban population (% of total), 2000 
GDP ($ billions), 2000 
GNI per capita, Atlas method ($), 2000 

Nicaragua 

5.1 
64.7 
2 
400 

Environmental strategy / action plan (year preparec 

1994

121 
62.3 
3.2 
146 
135.6 
72 

33 
27.0 
3.0 

200
6
482
5
7.5 

-j

4.2 
539 
42 
44 
268 

.. 

Agrticulure

Land area (1,000 sq. km) 
Agricultural land (% land area) 
Irrigated land (% of crop land) 
Fertilizer consumption (100 grams/ ha arable land) 
Food production index (1989-91=100) 
Population density, rural (people/ sq. km arable lar 

Foireit- 

-

Forest area (1,000 sq. km) 
Forest area (% total land area) 
Annual deforestation (%, 1990-2000) 

lod!versit___ 

Mammal species, total known 
Mammal species, threatened 
Bird species, total known 
Bird species, threatened 
Nationally protected area (% land area) 

.- ----- 

_

-

_ 

_ 

-_ 

[~~~~g~~~ 
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP$ / kg oil equiv) 
Commercial energy use per capita (kg oil equiv) 
Traditional fuel use (% total energy use) 
Energy imports, net (% commercial energy use) 
Electric power consumption per capita (kWh) 
Share of electricity generated by coal (%) 

Emissions and pollution 
CO. ern-ssions per un 01 GDP lk rper PPP S ofGEC 
Total C0 2 emissions, industrial (,000 kt) 
CO2 emissions per capita (mt) 
Suspended particulate in largest city (microgr/m3)
Passenger cars (per 1,000 people) 

IcW ter & Sanitation ___ _ut _ 
-
-
Access to improved water source (% total populatio 
Access to improved water source (% rural populatio 
Access to improved water source (% urban populati 
Freshwater resources per capita (cubic meters) 
Total freshwater withdrawal (% total water resources 
Agriculture withdrawal (% total freshwater withdraw 
Access to sanitation in urban areas (% urban popul 
Access to sanitation in rural areas (% rural populati, 
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 

National accounting aggregates - 2000 
Gross national savings (% of GNI) 
Consumption of fixed capital (% of GNI) 
Net national savings (% of GNI) 
Education expenditure (% of GNI) 
Energy depletion (% of GNI) 
Mineral depletion (% of GNI) 
Net forest depletion (% of GNI) 
C02 damage (% of GNI) 
Adjusted net savings (% of GNI) 

Latin
America 
& Carib. 

516 
75.4 
2,001 
3,670 

20,062 
37.9 
14.0 
856 
133.5 
252 

9,440 
47.1 
0.5 

Low.
Income

2,460
31.9
1,048
410

32,536
42.6
26.3
707
127.9
510

8.802
27.1
0.8

7.4 

5.7

6.0 
1,171 
16 
-39 
1,470 
5.2 

*- 

o 3 
3.4 
0.7 

-

0 4 
1,308.3 
2.6 

3 

79 
59 
95 

37,507 
0.7
84 
96 
68 
41 

14.1 
9.3 
4.7 
2.6 
0.0 
0.1 
0.3 
1.1 
5.9 

119 

85 
62 

93 

32,905 

74 
87 
48 
37 

17.0 
10.6 
6.4 
4.2 
5.1 
0.6 
0.0 
0.4 
4.4 

3.6
567
29
-8
358
44.5

-

0 5
2,416.1
1.0

9

_
76__ 
76
70
88
6,243

90
78
30
115

20.7
8.7
11.9
2.8
7.2
0.5
0.9
1.5
4.7

Intermediate 

Goals 

I

IDA and IDB Support for Nicaragua's PRSP Objectives
Sub-Goals 
World Bank Activities 
IDB Presence

ANNEX C

Pillar 1: Broad Based Economic Growth

Macroeconomic Strengthen fiscal policy 
Stability 

Econ. Mgmt TA 
Econ. Mgmt TA 11(2004) 

Administraci6n Tributaria.
Sectorial Modernizaci6n Tributaria
(2003).
odernizaci6n fiscal (2004-5).

Structural 
Reforms 

Improve debt Mgmt. 

Reform civil service 

_ 

____ ___ ____ __ ____ ___ ____ ___ _ 
_____M 

Econ. Mgmt TA 11(2004)

Privatize & regulate 
public utilities 
Strengthen financial syst. 

_

Econ. Mgmt TA
Econ. Mgmt TA 11(2004)
Telecom Reform TA

Pension & Fin.Sctr Ref. 

Prestamo Financiero.

Reform social security 

Pension & Fin.Sctr Ref. 

Reforma sistema previsional.

Rural 
Development 

Improve incentive 
structure 
Improve Land markets 

Improve rural financial 
services 
Strengthen 
commercialization 

Develop rural productive 
infrastructure 

Develop rural extension 
services/ technology 

Non-Rural 
Promote Cluster 
Development Development 
Promote private 
investments/exports 

Land Administration

Micro-Finance Dev.(2003) 
Com. Price Risk Mgmt 
Competitiveness LIL 
Competitiveness 11 (2005)* 
Sustainable Forestry 11 
_ (2004)
Roads Rehab. & Maint. 
Off-Grid Rur. Electrif. 
(2003) 
Telecom Reform TA 
Rural Telecom Dev. (2004) 
Ag. Technology & TE 

____ ___ ____ __ ____ ___ ____ ___ ___ _ 
______(2002).

Competitiveness 
Competitiveness 11 (2005)* 
Competitiveness 
Competitiveness 11 (2005)* 
Roads Rehab & Maint. 
Telecom Reform TA 
Rural Telecom Dev 
(2004)* 

Improve ports 

Social 
Increase coverage in 
Infrastructure water/sanitation 
Develop housing sector 

I 

____________________ 

_ 

FISE 111, FISE IV 

_

I _II 

Reactivaci6n Productiva Rural
(2002).

Programa Global Multisectorial
(2003).
Reactivaci6n Productiva Rural
(2002).
Carreteras colectoras (2003).

Reactivaci6n Productiva Rural
(2002).
Carreteras colectoras (2003).
Infraestructura basica Plan Puebla-
Panami.
Innovaci6n tecnol6gica.
Reactivaci6n Productiva Rural

Prestamo de Innovaci6n de
Competitividad (2003).
Desarrollo Electrico
Rehabilitaci6n Carretera Pana.
Road rehabilitation San Lorenzo-
Muhan.
SIEPAC Interconexi6n Electrica.
Fortalecimineto Capacidad de
Negociaciones (2003).
Programa Global Multisectorial
(2003).
Carreteras colectoras (2003).
Prestamo de Competitividad (03)
Infraestructura basica Plan Puebla-
Panama (2004-5).
Infraestructura basica Plan Puebla-
Panam a.
Modernizaci6n Agua Potable.

Programa de Vivienda, Bajos
ingresos (2002).

Intermediate [ 

Sub-Goals 

World Bank Activities 

I I l

Goals 

Pillar II: Investment in Human Capital

Improve Expand coverage & 
Education quality of basic 
education 

Basic Education 11 
Basic Education 111(2004) 

Expand vocational 
education 

__________ __________ _ 
_________________Sectorial 

Ag. Technology & TE 

Improve Health 

Improve 
coverage/quality of 
primary health care 

Health Sctr. Modernization 
Health Sec. & Nutr. (2005) 

ANNEX C

I IDB Presence

Red de Protecci6n Social.
Red de Protecci6n Social 11(2002).
Sectorial social (2002).
Educaci6n secundaria (2004-5).

Social 11(2004-5).

Educaci6n. para J6venes y Adultos,
Habilitaci6n Laboral (2004-5).
Modernizaci6n de la Educaci6n

Tecnica (2004-5).

Red de Protecci6n Social.
Red de Protecci6n Social 11(2002).
Sectorial social (2002).

Modernize health sector 
overall 

Health Sctr. Modernization Modernizaci6n red hospitalaria.
Health Sec. & Nutr. (2005) 
Sectorial social (2002).

_______________ _____________________ _ Sectorial Social 11(2004-5).

Improve 
Nutrition 

Improve child nutrition 

_______________ 

Health Sctr. Modernization 
Health Sec. & Nutr. (2005) 

Strengthen 
Improve reproductive 
Population Pol. health 

Pillar m: Protection of Vulnerable Groups
Protection of Vulnerable Groups 
_ FISE IV 

Health Sctr. Modernization 
Health Sec. & Nutr. (2005) 

Pillar IV: Strengthen good governance

Improve transparency 
and efficiency in pub. 
expend. 

Econ Mgmt TA 
Econ Mgmt TA (2004) 

Reform judicial system 

______________________ 

Strengthen property 

Land Administration

Sectorial Social 11(2002).

Red de Protecci6n Social.
Red de Protecci6n Social 11(2004-
5).
Sectorial social (2002).
Sectorial Social 11 (2004-5).

PAININ 11.
FISE III.

Fortalecimiento Ministerio de la Familia.
Alivio de la Pobreza y Desarrollo Local.
Costa Atlantica.

Compras y adquisiciones.
Fortalecimiento CGR.
Probidad administrativa (2004-5).
Apoyo al Plan Nacional Anti-

Corrupci6n (2004-5).

Pr6stamo-Cooperaci6n T6cnica e-

gobierno (2004-5).

Modernizaci6n del Sistema Judicial

rights

Strengthen public 
institutions 

Encourage broader 

participation 

_ 

Econ Mgmt TA 
Econ Mgmt TA (2004) 

Programa de Preinversi5n (2003).
Pr6stamo -Cooperaci6n T6cnica e-

gobierno (2004-5).

mainstreamed 

Barrios en extrema pobreza urbana

(2004-5).

2

ANNEX C

Intermediate 
Goals 
Cross-Cuttin Themes

Sub-Goals 

I 

World Bank Activities 

IDB Presence

Reduce 
Environmental 

Vulnerability 

Protect environment 

mainstreamed 

Conserve bio-diversity 

_ 

____Cuenca 

Atlantic Bio Corridor
(GEF)

Mainstreamed.
Ambiental Forestal.

Masaya (2003)

Manage forests 
sustainably 

Sustainable Forestry 
Sustainable Forestry II 

Mainstreamed.
Administraci6n Forestal.

_ 

(2004)*

Manage natural risks 

Disaster Prev./Mgrnt 

Infraestructura basica Plan Puebla-

______________ 

Land Administration

_

Panama (2004-5).

Mainstreamed 

Mainstreamed.

Improve land use 

planning 

Guarantee equal gender 
access
Prevent abuse to
women/children
Strengthen local 
government 

Improve social 
equity 

Decentralize 
government 

Implementation 

of the ERCERP 

Rural Municipalities 11 

FISE III.
Desarrollo y fortalecimiento
municipal.

Municipal Managua.

Consolidate 
decentralization policy 

___________________ 
_________Modernizaci6n 

Rural Municipalities II
mainstreamed

_ 

_ 

_

Implementaci6n de la ERCERP.

Note: Programmed year of credit approval is in parentheses; Ongoing credits do not have dates. Starred
(*) credits refer to projects which may be incorporated as components of other projects.

3

ANNEX D

NICARAGUA -- STATUS OF ADVANCE IN IMPLEMENTING 1998 CAS

Planned in 1998 CAS 
I 
Implemented by June 2002
Strategy/Actions 
I Progress Indicators I Strategy/Actions 
IProgress Indicators

A. CONSOLIDATING GROWTH THORUGH PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT
Consolidating Macro-
economic Stability
Improve efficiency of tax 
administration, public 
expenditures, public 
enterprises and the Social 
Security Institute, and 
implement a labor mobility 
program 

Achieve IMF ESAF targets, 
Strategy largely implemented. Target not achieved. Public
including public sector savings Assembly approved tax reform savings rose in 1998, but
from 3.7% of GDP in 1997 to 
in 1997, National System of 
tumed negative with post-Mitch
8.1% in 2000. 
Public Investment was 
emergency spending.
strengthened, social security
institute was reformed, labor
mobility program was

Strategy to reform the pension 
system by end-1999; progress 
in reform by 2001 

completed. 

Target achieved. Assembly
approved new pension law
(No. 240) in March 2000 and
Pension Superintendency law
(No. 388) in March 2001.

Continue debt negotiations 
Obtain Paris Club debt relief 
with bilateral creditors, and 
1998-00 and comparable terms
maintain performance record to from other bilaterals
achieve earliest possible HIPC
debt relief. 

HIPC decision point and 
completion points by soonest 
possible dates. 

Strategy was implemented 

Target achieved.

Reforming the State
Downsize and increase 
Reduce number of ministries 
effiency of Government 
and agencies that report to the 
through comprehensive public Presidency, and restructure 
sector reforms 
those that remain by end-1999 

Strategy implemented 

Establishment of an integrated Implement SIGFA-central 
financial management system acounting system in MIFIN by 
(SIGFA) in all ministries and 
1998 and ministerial system in 
agencies. 
all agencies by 2000 

Strategy implemented 

Target achieved wl delays.
Nicaragua reached HIPC
Decision point in December
2000.

Target achieved. Assembly
passed Law No. 290, yielding a
net reduction of 2 ministries
and 3 autonomous agencies,
while reducing significantly the
number of high ranking
officials.

Target achieved widelays
SIGFA was implemented in
MIFIN in 2000 and in all
agencies in 2002.

Establish a technical body to 
develop a global investment 
strategy and priorities.
Integrate investment 
responsibilities in MIFIN. 

Technical body instituted by 
1998 

A revised strategy was 
implemented. 

Target achieved, with the
creation of SETEC in 1998.

SNIP integrated in MIFIN by 
1998; and ministerial systems 
in all agencies by2000. 

Target partially achieved.
SNIP was integrated in SETEC
(instead of MIFIN) with
counterparts in all ministerial
agencies by 2000.

Page 1 of 9

ANNEX D

NICARAGUA - STATUS OF ADVANCE IN IMPLEMENTING 1998 CAS
Planned in 1998 CAS 
Implemented by June 2002
Strategy/Actions 
IProgress Indicators 
StrategylActions 
Progress Indicators

Reform the regulatory 
framework, human resource 
management structure & 
compensation system. 

Revise compensation system 
and legaVregulatory framework 
for civil service by 1999. 

Strategy partially implemented Target partially achieved
wldelays. A civil service refom
law submitted to Assembly in
1999 is still pending approval.
Progress has been made in
designing new regulatory
framework and compensation
system.

Decentralize environmental 
responsibilities (section C), 
school administration and 
health services (section D) 

Establish a transparent fiscal 
transfer mechanism based on 
equity and efficiency criteria 

Strategy partially implemented Target partially met. A pilot
fiscal transfer mechanism was
set up in 2002 under the Rural
Municipalities project and is
being tested.

Provide financial resources 
and technical assistance to 
local governments

40 municipalities with adequate Strategy substantially 
financial management capacity 
implemented

Target achieved.

Fosterino Private Sector
Growth
Institute the rule of law through Implement reform and 
judicial reform focusing on 
prefessionalization of juridical 
institutional strengthening, 
body. 
court reform and legal reformn 

Strategy partially implemented Target not achieved. The
with the adoption of new Penal judicial system remains very
code, administrative disputes weak.
settlement law, and new public
prosecutor law. Program to
build court houses and train
judges was completed.

Develop a strategy and 
detailed plan for streamlining 
and modernization of 
commercial legislation and 
regulations

Revise priority legislabon: 
bankruptcy and comporate
reorganization procedures, and
companies law.

Action not taken 

Target not achieved.

Field work to identify 
Develop a competitiveness 
impediments and opportunities enhancement strategy for 
for SMEs 
SMEs 

Task was implemented with 
the completion of a 
consultancy study on SMEs. 

Target not achieved, as
attention focused away from
SMEs to duster development
concept.

Broaden access to finance 
through banking reform and 
limited direct financing 

Increase banking credit and 
financing for SMEs 

Strategy was implemented as Target not achieved as private
private banks were encouraged commercial banks remain
to expand with dosure of 
reluctant to finance SMEs
BANADES and FNI was
permitted to operate only as a
2nd tier bank.

Increase the capital base by 
raising capital requirements 

Raise minimum capital 
requirements; raise capital 
adequacy ratio to 10 percent 

Done 

Target achieved through new
commerdial banking law
passed in 1999.

Page 2 of 9

NICARAGUA -- STATUS OF ADVANCE IN IMPLEMENTING 1998 CAS
Planned in 1998 CAS 
Implemented by June 2002
Strategy/Actions 
I Progress Indicators 
Strategy/Actions 
Progress Indicators

Tighten exceptions, reduce 
foreign exchange exposure 
and improve monitoring of 
related party exposure 

Introduce prudential regulation Strategy implemented with 
on foreign exchange exposure 
delays 
and prudential limits on related 
party lending 

Issue accounting standards 

Revised accounting standards
were issued in May 2002, but
contain discrepancies with
GAAP

Close and privatize largest 
BANADES to cease banking 
state banks and reform/contain operations (May 98) 
smaller ones

Action taken 

ANNEX D

Target achieved widelays with
passage of new commercial
banking law and revision of
prudential norms in 1999.

Target achieved. BANADES
was closed and liquidated in

Target achieved. Majority
share of BANIC was sold to
private investors in1999.

Target achieved. BCP was
closed in 2000

Sale of majority shares of 
BANIC to private sector in 
1999 

Asset ceiling and reform of 
BCP 

Initiate financial legislation 
reform 

Pass secured transaction 
legislation

Unify legal framework with 
precise, automatic rules and 
definitions 

Create first generation 
regulatory capacity for 
securities market and
insurance

Establish basic regulations for 
corporate finance, market
transactions and investment
management

Strategy partially implemented Target achieved, with the
passage of 3 financial sector
reform laws in 1999

Target not achieved.

Minimum staffing for securities Action taken 
and insurance supervision 

Target met. Some staff hired
by SBIF for this purpose

Issuance of minimum 
regulation 

Target met. Minimal
regulations were issued

Action not taken

Improve framework for Foreign Revise foreign investment law Action taken 
Direct Investment 

Improvina Basic
Infrastructure
Creation of autonomous 
Enactment of sector legislation Strategy implemented 
regulators. Separate INM into (electricity, water) and ogranic 
operational and regulatory 
laws for regulators. 
entities, convert ENAP into
regulatory role.

Assembly approved new
foreign investment law in May
2000.

Targets achieved. ENACAL
separated from INAA in
November 1997

Page 3 of 9

ANNEX D

NICARAGUA -- STATUS OF ADVANCE IN IMPLEMENTING 1998 CAS
Planned in 1998 CAS 
Implemented by June 2002
Strategy/Actions 
Progress Indicators 
Strategy/Actions 
Progress Indicators

Convert MCT into overseer & Strengthen MCT's planning 
policy-maker 
and contracting capacity

Strategy implemented 

Target achieved

Telecoms. Privatize ENITEL; Passage of legislation; 
establish regulatory framework successful privatization 

Strategy implemented 

Target achieved widelays.
40% of ENITEL (plus mgmt
contract) was sold in 2001.

Roads. Increase private sector 20% of network in good 
participation. Establish Road 
condition 
Maintenance Fund. Accelerate 
maintenance by contract, 
including micro-enterprises

Strategy implemented, except Target almost achieved (1 9%
for final step in setting up 
in fair to good condition) in
Road Maintenance Fund 
spite of setback from hunicane
Mitch

40% of maintenance to be 
done by private sector by 2001

Target achieved.

Rehabilitate and improve 
principal export corridors 

Completion of works on north- Strategy implemented 
south corridor and Managua-El 
Rama road 

Develop rural and feeder 
40% of rural municipalities 
roads. Phased transfer of rural managing rural roads by 2001 
road maintenance to 
municipalities. 

Strategy implemented 

Target achieved widelays.
Hurricane Mitch caused
postponement of Managua-El
Rama road.

Target not achieved. Rural
municipalities only managed a
minor share of road
maintenance in 2001

Electricity. Introduce private 
sector in distribution, thorugh
privatzation or concessioning 

Passage of electricity law 

Strategy implemented 

Law was passed

oningsale of 
distribution and generation 
assets 

All distribution assets and all
but two generation plants were
privatized by 2001

Complete existing program of Completon of bid process for 
contracting IPPs. All 
thermal plant to increase 
investment in generation to be capacity of Momotombo
privately funded 
geothermal plant.

Strategy implemented 

Momotombo plant has been
divested.

Water and Sanitation. Reach 
agreement and implement 
strategy to involve private 
sector in management of INAA 

Implement management 
contract or concession/sale of 
Managua system by 2002 

Strategy was revised. 

Target not achieved.
Government decided to pilot
concessioning process with
smaller systems.

Augment share of investment 
to rural areas.

B. DEVELOPING THE RURAL SECTOR
Accelerating Aariculture
Growth

Strategy implemented

Page 4 of 9

ANNEX D

NICARAGUA -- STATUS OF ADVANCE IN IMPLEMENTING 1998 CAS

Planned in 1998 CAS 
Strategy/Actions 
I Progress Indicators 

Implemented by June 2002
Strategy/Actions 
I Progress Indicators

Remove vestiges of state 
control in land, labor and credit 
markets. Invest in public 
goods. 

Divest BANADES and BANIC 

Strategy on removing state 
Target was achieved:
control in land, labor and credit BANADES and BANIC have
markets implemented 
been closed and are being
successfully. 
liquidated.

Privatize ENABAS 

Publicize information on 
market and prices

Target not achieved.
ENABAS is still operating, but
on a very modest scale.

Target partially achieved.

Modernize and combine the 
cadaster and registry of land 

Establish a multi-purpose 
Strategy partially pursued. 
Targets partially achieved An
uniform national cadastre and Activities on titling and 
appropriate draft law to
modernize registry 
cadastre under ATML project modernize the registry was
were pursued and 
submitted to the Assembly, but
economically justified 
is still awaiting approval. Land
titling benefitted 50,000 rural
households (56% of original
target).

Resolve legal disputes 
conceming land ownership 

Enact Property Law 

Strategy partially implemented. The Property law that was
passed in 1997 proved to be
deficient.

Resolve the issue of 
indigenous land. Complete 
land titling 

Enact legislation and 
procedures for demarcating, 
titling and registering 
indigenous lands. 

Strategy not successful as little An extensively consulted
was achieved in area of 
Indigenous Land Demarcation
indigenous rights recognition 
law was submitted to the
as per Nicaraguan 
Assembly in 1998 but is still
Constitutional rights 
awaiting approval.

Improve agricultural research 
and farmer training in 
agronomic management and 
marketing technologies. 
Develop co-financed and
private extension and research
services

Increase by 40% the number o Strategy implemented 
farmers assisted by 
publictprivate extension 
services by 2000.

Target was likely achieved, but
cannot be confirmed due to
absence of baseline data.

Eliminate government direct 
interventon in rural financial 
markets 

BANADES to cease banking 
operations. 

Strategy partially implemented. Target was achieved with the
Although BANADES was 
satisfactory dosure of
closed, public intervention in 
BANADES.
rural credit markets continues
through FNI, IDR, and FCR.

Rationalize credit lines funded New credit lines to be subject 
Strategy partially implemented: Target not achieved.
by donors. Replace subsidized to strict lending criteria: interest Subsidized credit lines were
credit with input vouchers 
rates set at market levels, 
complemented by voucher
system but not replaced.

Page 5 of 9

NICARAGUA - STATUS OF ADVANCE IN IMPLEMENTING 1998 CAS
Planned in 1998 CAS 
Implemented by June 2002
Strategy/Actions 
I Progress Indicators 
Strategy/Actions 
Progress Indicators

ANNEX D

Input voucher system 
established. 

Reform legal, regulatory and Modify banking legistlation 
Strategy was pursued, but 
supervisory framework to 
(incl. new secured transactions proved more difficult to 
remove barriers to formal 
law) and supervisory practices. 
implement than anticipated. 
financial intermediation in rural
areas. Reduce credit risk
byimproving rural insurance 
markets. 

Modenize registry for movable 
asset pledges 

Introduce rainfall insurance 

Increase by 20% the number o 
rural entreprenerus receiving
credit by 2000

Target was achieved as a
voucher system was
established.

Target partially achieved.
Selected legal and regulatory
reforms were introduced.

Target partially achieved.
Background studies fo
modernize framework for
moveable asset pledges were
completed, but framework was
not revised.

Not achieved. Despite cutting
edge analytic preparatory work,
rainfall insurance was not
introduced for lack of demand.

Target not achieved.

Natural Resource
Management
Modernize natural resources 
legislation. Complete land 
titling and registration. 

Pass forestry, fisheries, and 
water laws by'1999. 

Strategy continues to be valid Target was not achieved.
but implementation has been Draft forestry and fisheries
slower than anticipated. 
legislation has been prepared,
but has not been submitted to
the Assembly. Water law has
not been prepared. Titling
target was not achieved.

Provide training to key 
legislators 

Target achieved. Multiple
training events were carried ou
for legislators under Protierra
project.

Decentralizing and 
restructuring MARENA. 
Improve forestry and fishing 
policy and management, 
particularly in the Atlantic 
region 

Separate MARENA's 
normative and management 
functions. 

Strategy successfully 
Targets achieved. Forest
implemented, with support 
management was separated
from Protierra to restructure 
from forest regulation and
and strengthen MARENA, and transferred to Agriculture
with support from Sustainable Ministry.
Forestry and ABC projects to
improve natural resource
management in Atlantic.

Page 6 of 9

NICARAGUA - STATUS OF ADVANCE IN IMPLEMENTING 1998 CAS
Planned in 1998 CAS 
Implemented by June 2002
Strategy/Actions 
I Progress Indicators 
Strategy/Actions 
Progress Indicators

Technology transfer to poor in Access to appropriate 
fragile areas on natural 
technology to 10,000 families 
resource mgmt. 
in fragile zones by 2000 

Strategy was implemented 

Targets likely to have been
achieved, but cannot confirm
for lack of baseline data.

ANNEX D

Legal and institutional .of 
environmental enforcement 
agencies and of protected 
areas system 

Pass biodiversity law, 
protected areas regulations 
and renewed strategy for 
protected areas. 

Strategy only partially 
implemented as protected 
areas agency remains weak 
and underfunded. 

Training of enforcement 
agencies on natural resources 
regulations. 

Target partially achieved.
Managerial plans canried out in
all protected areas of AUantic
region. Draft blo-diversity law
was prepared, but has not
been submitted to Assembly.

Environmental Fund to secure
funding for enforcement
agencies was created, but is
not operating.

Strengthening of indigenous 
land tenure and natural 
resourre rights. 

Pass indigenous land rights 
Strategy was pursued but 
Target partially achieved.
law, progress in 
proved slow to implement. 
Most extensive consultation of
demarcating/titling in ABC 
Indigenous land tenure law 
any law in the history of
areas and titling of two 
was prepared in 1998, but still Nicaragua, but legislative
demaracted areas in Bosawas. pending approval. 
approval is pending.
Demarcation Is underway in 
Indigenous land administration
Atlantic protected areas, but 
was strengthened, resulting in
not in indigenous ares. 
reduced local conflicts.

Create a framework to 
rationalize donor aid through 
the ABC planning process. 

Bi-annual donor coordination 
meeting in Atlantic region 
during 1998-2001 

Strategy successfully pursued. Target achieved. Regular
Coordination meetings have 
donor meetings were held.
been convened on bi-annual
basis by regional govemments.

C. DEVELOPING HUMAN CAPITAL AND PROTECTING THE POOR
Education
Decentralize shool 
administration to local school 
management boards. 
Strengthen institutions at both 
central MECD and local levels
and carify roles. Rain 
teachers and improve 
pcenrfves based on 

Decrease drop-out rates from 
18% to 15% and repetition 
rates from 25% to 20% for 

90% of primary and secondary Strategy has been pursued 
schools to be managed by 
successfully. 
local school boards by 2000. 

textbooks and charge nominal pnmary students by 2000 
rental fee to encourage
recyding.

Maintain 100% textbook 
provision to primary students
through 2002.

Target achieved for secondary
schools, but not for primary
schools (80% of students in
2002).

Tafget achieved. Primary
repetition rate is now 8.2%
and drop-out rate is 10%

(2001).

Target achieved.

Page 7 of 9

ANNEX D

NICARAGUA -- STATUS OF ADVANCE IN IMPLEMENTING 1998 CAS
Planned in 1998 CAS 
Implemented by June 2002
Strategy/Actions 
I Progress Indicators 
Strategy/Actions 
I Progress Indicators

Expand the number of primary 
school teachers eligible for 
performance incentives to 
11,000 by 1999. 

Target was achieved. (In
2000, 12,500 teachers
received incentives under the
program.)

Expand and strengthen pre- 
primary education, targeting 
children in rural and marginal 
urban areas 

Strategy was being pursued.
However, coverage fell slightly
below govemment target of
30% coverage in 2000/01.
Target may be achieved in
2003.

Health
Extend to the national level, 
By year 2002, reductions in 
with emphasis on rural poor, 
infant mortality rates from 58 
an integrated PHC model 
per 1000 I.b. to 54, in maternal 
focusing on preventive care, mortality rates from 110 per 
family planning, nutrition 
100,000 to 100, and in the 
assistance, pre- and post-natal malnutrition rate for children 
care. Define an inter- 
under 5 from 28% to 25%. 
institutional coordinated 
national nutrition strategy and
develop national nutrition
education program 

Extension to 17 SILAIS of PHC 
model including instituitonal 
delivery. 

Implement reproductive health 
education module by 2002

Implement nutritional strategy 
and educational program by 
2000. 

Strategy partially implemented. Targets appear to have been
met. 
In 2001, infant mortality
was 31 per 1000 l.b. and
chronic malnutrition rate was
17.8%. The figures on
maternal mortality are not
accurate enough to confirm
trend.

PHC model extension was
partially achieved. A national
standard model still needs to
be defined on basis of ongoing
evaluation.

Partially implemented

Pilot nutrition program is
operating. Needs to be
expanded on basis of

evaluation results.

Strengthen cost recovery, 
extend coverage of health 
insurance. Increase share of 
primary expenditures and 
establish expenditures 
planning and evaluation 
system 

Strategy partially implemented.
Hospital fees were suspended
due to unpopularity and admin
problems and share of primary
expenditures declined
between 1997 and 2001. A
planning/evaluation module
(SIMINSA) in process of being
established.

Consolidate decentralization 
Develop and implement 
Partially implemented. 
process: transfer functions and integrated expenditure program Performance agreements
budgets to health districts and supported by donors. 
('compromisos de gestion') are
municipalities; strengthen role 
in place for all SILAIS, but

In process of implementation

Page 8 of 9

ANNEX D

NICARAGUA -- STATUS OF ADVANCE IN IMPLEMENTING 1998 CAS

Planned in 1998 CAS 
Strategy/Actions 
Progress Indicators 

Implemented by June 2002
Strategy/Actions 
I Progress Indicators

compitance is tagging;

30% of budget and drug 
categdes 
ecentalizd to 
categores decentralized to 
health distnicts by 2002 

Successful implementation of 
MINSA and INSS restructuring. 

MINSA's policy and regulatory Target not achieved.
unit was strengthened, but staffare
turnover has weakened it
again. A new General Health
law was passed in 2002, but
still requires a 'reglamento'. 

INSS was succesfully
restructured; MINSA was not.

Separate INSS health and 
pension accounts by 2000

Implement new hospital 
management agreements. 

Target achieved.

Agreements were signed, but
there are many problems of
implementation and
compliance.

Rehabilitate most dilapidated Regulate private providers 
health facilities through 
competitive fund. 

Strategy under implementation Accreditation of private
providers has taken place.
Further follow-up is needed.

Issue the Pharmaceuticals law, 
the MINSA and INSS Organic 
laws, and the Health Insurance 
law by 2001.

Safety Nets
Develop an effective and well Adopt national poverty strategy A Social Safety Net program 
targeted social safety net 
setfing priorities, streamlining 
was developed and evaluated.
strategy and program 
programs, reducing duplication 
It is now being revised by the
of efforts; establish operational new government, which has
plan to implement strategy, 
expressed different priorities.
with clear targeting criteria for
assistance programs.

Laws were passed, but
'reglamentos' have not been
issued.

Target not achieved.

Continue to provide social 
Infrastructure through FISE
and other programs; increase
emphasis on rural water supply
and sanitation

Strategy implemented

Develop nutrition programs 
FISE to increase number of 
and assistance to children and projects in rural water supply
pregnant & lactating women 
and sanitation

Strategy partially implemented Target achieved.

implement nutritional strategy 
and education program by 
2000 

A pilot program was
implemented, but still needs to
be evaluated and expanded
accordingly.

Page 9 of 9

ANNEX E

CAS Consultations with Nicaraguan Stakeholders

Consultations on the World Bank's Country Assistance Strategy for Nicaragua were held in
Managua during August 13-14, 2002, with civil society (through the Economic and Social
Planning Council, CONPES), members of the Legislature, 
the international donor community,
media representatives and the Executive branch of Government. The Bank was represented at
these consultations by the Department Sector Leaders: Helena Ribe (HD), Manuel Sevilla
(FPSD, Martin Raine (ESSD) and Felipe Jaramillo (PREM) visiting from headquarters, and by
Florencia Castro-Leal 
(Sr. Economist, PREM), Violeta Granera 
(Civil Society Specialist,
LCCNI) and Ulrich Lachler (Resident Representative) from the Nicaragua resident mission..

Following an introductory presentation by the Resident Representative, the participants invited to
each meeting were asked 48 questions via the Options Finder survey technology, which was ably
administered by a team of consultants from El Salvador led by Ms. Claudia Monzon. After this
the meeting was opened up for general discussion, with Mr. Mario Fuentes (CONS) serving as
facilitator.

Overall, the meetings were very positive and supportive of the World Bank's role in Nicaragua.
The formal consultations focused on two types of questions: those pertaining to Nicaragua and
those pertaining to the role of the World Bank in assisting Nicaragua. The first set of questions
sought to find out what are perceived to be the most important issues requiring attention (e.g.,
development bottlenecks) among all those enumerated in the PRSP, while the second set sought
to find out in which areas the World Bank is perceived as having a comparative advantage in
providing assistance. 
(he 
statistical compilation of answers to these questions is available upon
request) 
On 
the basis of these answers, 
the following 
trends emerged 
from 
the CAS
consultations:

The Nicaraguan Context

* 
Civil society is better informed than the Government about the PRSP; 31 percent of the
government representatives 
indicated that they did not know the PRSP, compared to only 21
percent of the civil society representatives. Most significant 
is that over half of the legislators
surveyed did not know the PRSP. This suggests that a greater effort is needed to familiarize the
members of the National Assembly with the PRSP.

* 
When asked how important were each of the different obstacles to development facing
Nicaragua, most participants rated 'low human capital 
levels' and 'low technology' as highly
important, whereas 
the 'fragile banking system' and 'lack of infrastructure' were rated less
important.

* 
Most participants 
in every group surveyed chose 'low growth" as the most important
economic development problem for Nicaragua. The next largest group among civil society and
among donors chose 'adverse terms of trade shocks'. Among government representatives, 
the
next largest group chose 'low productivity' in answer to this question.

1

ANNEX E

* 
In response to questions about the most important social problem affecting Nicaragua's
development, most participants in all groups opted for 'low investment in human capital'. Also,
a significant number of respondents chose 'income inequality'. 
In cortrast, few respondents
opted for 'gender inequality', 'population growth', or 'migration' to answer this questions.

* 
In response 
to questions about the most important 
institutional issues for Nicaragua's
development, most participants opted for 'better transparency and control mechanisms' and
'institutional capacity building' and 'strengthening the rule of law'. A significant number of
participants also selected 
'strengthening 
the judicial system'. 
In contrast, 
few participants
selected answers relating to 'democracy', 'decentralization' or 'consensus building'.

The Role of the World Bank

* 
Most participants saw the World Bank's role as a financial 
institution as far more
important 
than 
its role as a 'provider of technical assistance', 
'knowledge 
institution' or
'dialogue promoter'. They also saw an important role in the area of assisting the government
with donor coordination.

* 
With respect to strategic objectives, most respondents saw a significant role for the World
Bank in the areas of 'promoting economic growth' and 'raising rural productivity'. Members of
the government also gave significant weight to the area of 'institutional development.'

* 
With regard 
to sectoral 
involvement, most participants agreed that 
the Bank had a
significant role to play in helping to invest in the social sectors (health and education). Beyond
that, there was great disparity in the sectors emphasized. 
'Rural development' attracted many
responses among legislators, 'decentralization' was emphasized by civil society representatives,
'physical 
infrastructure 
and modernization of 
the state' were emphasized by government

representatives and 'strengthening economic policy and the financial system' was emphasized by

donors.

* 
With regard to criteria for targeting assistance, most respondents leaned toward 'growth
potential' as a very important criterion, while 'incidence of poverty' was perceived as more
important 
than 
'capacity 
to execute projects' as a criterion 
for 
targeting assistance 
to
municipalities.

* 
With regard to focusing additional World Bank assistance at this moment; most groups
leaned 
in 
favor of focusing 
this assistance more on accelerating growth 
(versus poverty
reduction), on rural (versus urban) development, on financial (versus TA) assistance and on
investing in human (versus physical) capital. Most groups were more or less evenly split on the
question of focusing Bank assistance on strengthening the public versus private sectors.

* 
With respect to relations with the Bank, more than 50 percent of the government and
donor representatives rated their relations with the World Bank as 'good to excellent.' 
This
contrasted with the responses of legislators and civil society representatives, of which less than
25 percent gave this rating. 
(The multiple-choice question relating to this issue did not contain
an option to reflect the case of 'no relations' with the Bank, so many participants appear to have

2

ANNEX E

chosen the option of 'poor' relations to characterize this situation.) One aspect that stood out
from these responses 
is that no group 
indicated that they had a "high" degree of access to
information on the World Bank, and most civil society representatives obtained their information
about the World Bank from the media.

The main message suggested by these responses is that the Bank should focus its assistance on
lending activities 
to promote faster economic growth, with special attention on raising rural
productivity, and on investing in human capital. 
This message is broadly consistent with the
general strategic direction outlined in the draft CAS, as well as with the previous CAS (1998).
In view of recent developments (including approval of a fast-track negotiations process in the US
Congress), several participants suggested designing the CAS more explicitly within a regional
integration framework.

The consultations with the Government went a little deeper than those held with the other groups
in that the IDA allocation was discussed, as well as specific projects under preparation. 
In
general, 
the government believed 
that the reactivation of economic growth was 
the most
important objective 
in the short run. 
Though most government participants agreed with the
in public spending and policies, they also emphasized that this
principle of targeting poverty 
targeting criterion needs to be accompanied by the criterion of growth potential.

Following 
the 
consultations, 
several bilateral donors 
(representing 
the Nordic countries,
Germany and the Netherlands) sent a written comment to recommend the adoption of sector-
wide approaches, encouraging the Bank to move explicitly in that direction in the CAS. Such an
approach was taken to imply a clearer division of labor among the main multilateral donors
terms of taking 
the 
lead responsibility 
in
(World Bank, 
IDB and European Union) 
in 
coordinating each sector, and for the World Bank to strengthen 
its 
local office 
to assume
leadership in particular sectors.

Various participants emphasized the need to improve coordination within the activities supported
by each of the 
larger donors, citing an example of several 
IDA-financed operations with
overlapping components. Another message emerging from these consultations is that the World
Bank could do more in terms of developing a clearer sector perspective and generating a greater
cohesiveness among the different projects it finances in each sector. This requires, among other,
closer coordination among the team leaders managing the active projects in each of the sectors

Finally, one clear message from these consultations 
is that the Bank needs to make a greater
effort to communicate beyond the government and donors. 
Important steps were taken in this
regard with the launching of a Global Distance Learning Center at the resident mnission and, most
Several participants also
recently, with the hiring of a civil service specialist earlier this year. 
spoke in favor of creating a public information center (PIC). 
(Some participants indicated that a
PIC should look beyond being a mere repository of World Bank documents, and aim to be an
intemet access point for development information.) The consultation with media representatives
centered on 
the usefulness of setting up regular meetings between 
the Bank's Resident
Representative and key media representatives (say, once a month) for informal, off-the-record
interest 
In response 
to the enthusiasm generated by the
conversations on topics of mutual 
meeting with media representatives, an interview to discuss the CAS consultations was granted
to the weekly magazine, CONFIDENTIAL, which appeared on August, 25, 2002.

3

ANNEX F

A Technical Note on Nicaragua's Fiscal Sustainability

Annex B of the Nicaragua Public Expenditure Review (PER, No. 23095-NI, dated
December 7, 2001) develops a model to assess the sustainability of macroeconomic
policies. The model basically compares the expected flow of future public sector
revenues under given fiscal, monetary and exchange rate policies to the debt servicing
requirements of a country's outstanding public debt. If the present value of the future
flow of revenues exceeds the present value of the flow of debt servicing requirements,
then the government's macroeconomic policy stance and debt level are said to be
sustainable. If it falls short, then it is unsustainable.

This model has been adapted to Nicaragua's structural characteristics by using the
macroeconomic parameter values pertaining to that country in 2001, and incorporating
the assumption that the country's extemal debt is reduced in line with the debt relief
target contemplated at the Decision Point under the HIPC Initiative. This model then
calculates the present value of public sector net revenues (after servicing the external
debt) as a function of three key variables: (i) the rate of real GDP growth, (ii) the public
sector primary savings rate (after grants), and (iii) the behavior of donors in supplying
credit on concessional terms.

With respect to donor behavior, two alternative assumptions are considered: the first is
that donors will continue to give Nicaragua enough credit on concessional terms so as to
maintain the proportion of the external debt to GDP constant at the ratio reached
immediately after the HIPC debt relief. (That ratio is estimated to be about 50 percent of
GDP.) A second, less generous assumption about donor behavior is that donors will only
roll over the principal on the external debt to maintain the nominal US Dollar value of the
external debt constant. With a GDP growth of 5 percent per annum and a US Dollar
inflation rate of 2 percent, it tums out that the first assumption about donor behavior
would have yielded a gross disbursement of concessional credit of about US$410 million
in 2001. The second assumption about donor behavior yields a gross disbursement of
US$105 million in 2001 (i.e., the actual value of principal repayments in 2001). As a
point of reference, actual gross disbursements received by Nicaragua's public sector in
1997-2000 averaged US$288 million per annum, which is about half-way between the
disbursements resulting under the two alternative assumptions about donor behavior. So,
if donors continue to exhibit the same levels of generosity on average as during 1997-
2000, the donor supply function for concessional credit to Nicaragua can be modeled by
averaging the disbursement outcomes under the two behavioral functions described
earlier.

Annex B of the PER shows (in Tables B.3 and B.4) the present value of future public
revenues (after external creditors are serviced), expressed as shares of GDP, under each
of these two donor behavior functions for a given combination of GDP growth rates and
primary surplus ratio (after grants). The assumption that donors will continue to assist

Nicaragua with the same degree of generosity as in 1997-2000 is represented by Table F 1
below, whose cells were derived as simple averages of the cells in PER Tables B.3 and
B.4 for each combination of GDP growth and the primary surplus ratio.

ANNEX F

Table F. 1: Present Value of Net Public Revenues
(as proportion of GDP)

annual GDP growth rate
3% 
4% 
5% 
6% 

7%

0% 

1% 

2% 
3% 

4% 

5% 

0.12 

0.24 

0.38 

0.56 0.79

0.22 

0.34 

0.50 

0.69 

0.94

0.26 
0.40 

0.50 

0.59 

0.45 
0.55 

0.66 

0.76 

0.62 
0.73 
0.85 

0.97 

0.83 
0.96 
1.09 

1.10
1.25
1.40

1.22 

1.55 

-r 

<e 

e 

i 

Each entry in Table F. 1 shows the present value of future public revenues that can be
devoted toward the service of the domestic public debt. To ascertain whether
Nicaragua's fiscal and macroeconomic policies are sustainable under this model, it is
necessary to see whether the present value shown in the table for a particular combination
of GDP growth and primary savings is greater than the value of the domestic public debt.
(Unlike most of Nicaragua's external debt, the domestic debt is contracted on market
terms, so its present value and its face value are about the same.)

According to the most recent figures from the Central Bank and the IMF*, Nicaragua's
domestic debt is estimated to be around US$1.6 billion, or approximately 62 percent of
GDP in 2002. From Table F.1, all growth and primary surplus combinations that lie to
the south-east of the diagonal line represent sustainable policies. So, for example, if the
rate of GDP growth turns out to be 4 percent per annum, then the primary surplus ratio
would have to be close to 4 percent of GDP to ensure sustainability.

According to the economic program supported by the PRGF arrangement agreed in
December 2002, the primary public sector surplus averages 2 percent of GDP per annum
during 2002 and 2005; see CAS Table 4. With the domestic debt amounting to 62
percent of GDP, this primary surplus ratio would be sustainable if the GDP growth rate is
at least 5% per annum, which had been the average growth.rate during 1996-2000. To
the extent that Nicaragua's medium term growth prospects are more modest than they
were in the latter half of the previous decade, a greater fiscal adjustment effort may be
necessary to ensure fiscal sustainability.

* See appendix on "Debt Sustainability" in the IMF document titledNicaragua- Selected Issues and
Statistical Appendix, which provides background information to the staff report on the 2002 Article IV
consultation discussions with Nicaragua and Nicaragua's request for a three-year arrangemcnt under the
PRGF, approved on December 4,2002.

2

ANNEX F

It is useful to note that the preceding calculations are not affected significantly by the
possible sub-valuation of Nicaragua's GDP. Assuming that Nicaragua's true GDP is
substantially higher than the official figures currently indicate, the ratio of the domestic
debt to GDP will turn out to be much lower than the 62 percent of GDP mentioned
earlier. By the same token, however, the ongoing fiscal adjustment effort will also turn
out to be correspondingly weaker - i.e., what appeared to be a primary surplus of 2
percent of GDP, was actually a much lower surplus. So, if the combination of a given
fiscal effort and projected growth rate yielded an unsustainable domestic debt under the
old GDP figures, the same fiscal effort would continue to yield an unsustainable outcome
under the revised figures.

3

1 

ANNEX G

Bank-Fund Relations Note

On December 4, 2002, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved in principle a three-year
arrangement for Nicaragua under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) in the
amount of SDR 97.50 million (about US$129 million) to support the government's 2002-05
economic program. The decision entitles Nicaragua to the release of SDR 6.97 million (about
US$9 million). The IMF Board's decision became effective after the World Bank Executive
Board's review of Nicaragua's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) progress report on
December 10, 2002.

The PRGF is the IMF's concessional facility for low-income countries. It is intended that PRGF-
supported programs are based on country-owned poverty reduction strategies adopted in a
participatory process involving civil society and development partners, and articulated in a PRSP.
This is intended to ensure that PRGF-supported programs are consistent with a comprehensive
framework for macroeconomic, structural, and social policies to foster growth and reduce
poverty. PRGF loans carry an annual interest rate of 0.5 percent, and are repayable over 10 years
with a 5 1/2-year grace period on principal payments.

Nicaragua was also granted in principle SDR 1.88 million (about US$2.5 million) in additional
interim assistance under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. The additional
interim assistance will also become effective after the World Bank Board's review of Nicaragua.
Nicaragua reached the decision point under the HIPC Initiative in December 2000 and is expected
to reach the completion point by the end of 2003.

In commenting on the Executive Board's discussion, Eduardo Aninat, Deputy Managing Director
and Acting Chairman of the Board, said: "Following a sharp deterioration of economic
performance in recent years, the new government of Nicaragua has embarked on a three-year
program, to be supported by a new PRGF arrangement, that addresses key economic
vulnerabilities and barriers to growth and poverty reduction. The authorities have already
demonstrated a strong commitment to appropriate policies through the important measures they
have put in place, and their ownership of the program augurs well for its implementation. Given
the considerable challenges that lie ahead, however, they need to work toward further broadening
program ownership across the political spectrum and be forceful and vigilant in implementing
their policy agenda.

"Key components of the program include the targeted reduction of the fiscal deficit while
protecting poverty-related outlays, stepped-up bank supervision and tight enforcement of
prudential rules, and the central bank asset recovery plan. The structural reformn agenda focuses
on removing constraints to growth, including through privatization, increasing budget
transparency, public sector restructuring, judicial system reform, and further trade liberalization
and regional integration. The government's strong anti-corruption agenda and its efforts to
enhance governance and accountability in the public and private sectors is a key overarching goal
of the strategy. Crucial priorities for the immediate future include early approval of the 2003
budget in line with the program, a second round of tax reform including substantial reduction of
zero-rated VAT items, strict enforcement of prudential rules, and full implementation of the asset
recovery plan.

"The government is to be commended for completing the PRSP Annual Progress Report, which
has been prepared in a participatory process including civil society and the donor community, and

2 

ANNEX G

provides a sound basis for Fund concessional assistance. While progress has been made in
implementing the PRSP, the sizable deviations from the macroeconomic framework in 2001 did
not allow the government to fully implement its poverty reduction strategy. Thus, a satisfactory
track record of implementation of the PRSP still needs to be established for Nicaragua to reach
the HIPC completion point.

"The Executive Board's approval of the authorities' request for a new three-year PRGF
arrangement as well as for interim debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative will become
effective following the World Bank's endorsement of the PRSP progress report, which is
expected shortly," Mr. Aninat stated.

Program Summary

Nicaragua's economic growth decelerated in the last three years from over 7 percent in 1999 to an
estimated I percent in 2002, due to a marked weakening of the fiscal policies, a banking crisis,
and a deterioration in the extemal environment.

The fiscal imbalances that emerged in 2000-01, as a consequence of increases in spending and
weakening in tax revenues, were addressed by the govemment that took office in January 2002.
Govemment spending was reined in through administrative means and a reduction in the budget.
As a result, primary spending during the first three quarters of the year was contained at 26
percent of GDP, down from 28 percent during the same period of 2001. Nicaragua's assembly
also approved the first round of a tax reform package, and, to reduce financial sector
vulnerabilities, the authorities are about to implement a recovery plan for assets of failed banks.
For 2002, real GDP growth is projected at 1 percent, followed by a gradual recovery during 2003
to 3 percent. Growth in 2003 is expected to be driven mainly by construction, agriculture and
livestock activities.

The objective of the approved PRGF-supported program for 2002-05 is to promote sustained
growth and poverty reduction, in an environment of low inflation and fiscal sustainability. The
authorities' strategy for the next three years is to combine deficit reduction with higher and more
efficient poverty-related spending.

During the first year of the program, Nicaragua will focus on making further progress in fiscal
consolidation, improving the reserve position of the central bank and strengthening the financial
sector.

As part of the fiscal effort, the authorities intend to reduce primary spending, while protecting
poverty-reducing outlays, and an increase in tax revenues. The public sector deficit is expected to
be reduced to 6.3 percent of GDP in 2003, down from 14 percent in 2001. The program also
targets govenmment revenues to rise by 1- percent of GDP in 2003, reflecting the effects of the tax
reform initiated in 2002 and the partial effects of the second stage of the tax reform to be
implemented in 2003.

The monetary policy will aim to strengthen the position of the central bank in a low-inflation
context. The authorities have noted that fiscal adjustment and satisfactory implementation of the
asset recovery plan are critical to achieving this goal, and intend to sign shortly a contract with
the selected firm to carry out the recoveries.
The extemal current account deficit is expected to be reduced from 28 percent of GDP in 2002 to
24 percent in 2003. This improvement is mainly due to higher exports as a result of an expected

3 

ANNEX G

recovery in coffee and sugar pricds and production, as well as better prospects for seafood
exports.

Nicaragua joined the IMF on March 14, 1946; its quota is SDR 130 million (about US$172
million). Its outstanding use of lMvl 
financing currently totals SDR 123 million (about US$163
miilion).

IMF Contact name: Mr. Jorge Toro

Thnmno been prepo-d

NICARAGUA 

HONDURASU R A S 

t 

DEPARTMENTS 

-

WANltAGOON 
\, 

&n p m 

n"

on hf Dd 
th WnM,Zon the
o ml

> 

\_ ~~~~ 

BilwrJ~~~skorman 

Department boundaries 

o 

CAYOS 
MISQUIAOS 
ISLANDS 

no
toeyonoy

r tai 

Poralupi 

-pteton 

National capital 

of -1, b-da 

o 

Cities and towns
International Boundaries 

L LAGOON

40 _Bon La Rosita 

0Puerto Cabezos

J 

O T E GWA 
-9 

J 

I 

N 

LAGOON
LI.JNTA 

POtOsiOvt 

SomotilloO 
oMATAGALPA 

~~~~~ 

jf/ 

1 

0~~~ 

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

120 

140 

160

Chim 
ntapoisillot S E 
m dego_#g 

A T L A N T I C O 

/ J # k 

20 

40 

60 

80 

100

Chrinto\Og 

L 

eondega 

oMA s 

ATLAN

\ 

W U T L 

k t Libertod 

l 

XRomo 

PERLASLAGOON 
Bluff 

M 

-

L 

CARIB

FONSECA 

'iond0 

CARIBBEAN 

ASNEA_ 

O N T A L E S 

-

< 

-X 

bS4S 

o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~HODrA
NS

rZ- 

\goglp 

MrO 

At 

ugop 

leil 

Ir 

\UO 

EEt

c 

Boaco 

SUR 

a 

>) 

bPuertonod 
A_ 

\ Sandineldo 

CLUEFIEWS 
EL

BAY 

9 

Jinotepl 

,,}8dnd ime LAKE<\SLVADO/

La Borquiaw 

_ 

Abgc 

| 

NICRG 

$

.

\ 

\ ~~~~~~~~Rivas 

O 

rM 

\ 

~

0

ReiOA No.: op
Type:

