d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 25228-JO

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR THE

HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN

December 20, 2002

Thiz: document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
perf brmance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of December 10, 2002)

Currency Unit = Jordanian Dinar (JD) 

US$1.00 =JDO.71 

JD 1.00 = US$1.41

JD1.00 = Fils 1,000

PRINCIPAL ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS USED IN THE TEXT

AAA 
APC 
CAE 
CFAA 
CIDA 
CPAR 
CT 
CVDB 
DFID 

Analytical and Advisory Services 
Arab Potash Company 
Country Assistance Evaluation 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
Canadian Intemational Development Agency 
Country Procurement Assessment Report 
Country Team 
Cities and Villages Development Bank 
Department for Intemational Development 
(UK) 
ECE 
Early Childhood Education 
Electricity Distribution Company 
EDCO 
EIA 
Environment Impact Assessment 
EIB 
European Investment Bank 
ERFKE 
Education Reform for Knowledge Economy 
ESW 
Economic and Sector Work 
EU 
European Union 
FIAS 
Foreign Investment Advisory Services 
GDLN 
Global Development Leaming Network 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Facility 
GOJ 
Govemment of Jordan 
Gessellshaft fUr Technische Zusammenarbeit 
GTZ 
Human Development Indicators 
HDI 
HEIS 
Household Expenditure and Income Surveys 
HRDSIL Human Resources Development Sector 
Investment Loan 
Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
Information and Communication Technology 
Islamic Development Bank 
Irbid Distnct Electricity Company 
Institutional Development Fund 
Intemational Finance Corporation 
Intemational Monetary Fund 
Independent Power Project 
Jordan Export Promotion Council 
Japan Intemational Cooperation Agency 
Jordan Investment Promotion Council 
Jordan Mortgage Refinance Corporation 
Jordan Phosphates Mining Company 
Jordan Rift Valley 

ICT 
IDB 
IDECO 
IDF 
IFC 
IMF 
IPP 
JEPC 
JICA 
JIPC 
JMRC 
JPMC 
JRV 

IBRD 

MIGA 
MOH 
MOP 
M&E 
MTBF 
NAF 
NGO 
O&M 
OED 
PESW 
PPI 
PRG 
PSD 
PSR 
PSRL 
PSET 

JSDF 
Japan Social Development Fund
JTC 
Jordan Telecommunications Company
JUH 
Jordan University Hospital
JVA 
Jordan Valley Authority
KfW 
Kreditanstalt fir Wiederaufbau
LIL 
Learning and Innovation Loan
LMICs 
Low and Medium Income Countries
MDG 
Millennium Development Goals
MENA 
Middle East and North Africa
MEREN Middle East Regional Development Enterprise
METAP Mediterranean Environmental Technical
Assistance Program
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Planning
Monitoring and Evaluation
Medium Term Budgetary Framework
National Aid Fund
Nongovemmental Organization
Operation and Maintenance
Operations Evaluation Department
Programmatic Economic and Sector Work
Private Participation in Infrastructure
Partial Risk Guarantee
Private Sector Development
Public Sector Reform
Public Sector Reform Loan
Program for Social and Economic
Transformation
Qualifying Industrial Zones
Royal Jordanian Airlines
Royal Medical Society
Small and Medium Enterprise
Social Productivity Program
Social Security Corporation
Technical Assistance
United Nations Development Programme
United States Agency for Intemational
Development
Water Authority of Jordan
World Bank Institute
World Trade Organization

QIZs 
RJ 
RMS 
SME 
SPP 
SSC 
TA 
UNDP 
USAID 

WAJ 
WBI 
WTO 

Vice President 
Director 
Task Team Leader 

IBRD 
Jean-Louis Sarbib 
Joseph Saba 
Osman Ahmed 

IFC
Assaad Jabre
Sami Haddad
Margaret Henderson

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contents

E,XECUTIVE SUMMARY 
I. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

A. Political and Governance Issues 
B. Poverty and Social Challenges 
C. Meeting the Millennium Development Goals 
D. Poverty Reduction Programs 
The Correlates of Poverty: Education and Health 
Improving Employment Opportunities 
E..Gender 
F. Public Sector Reform: Quality, Equity,
Accountability, and Efficiency in the Delivery of Public Services 
G. Resources Scarcity_ 

IH RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK 

_ 13

A. Recent Economic Developments 
B. Medium-Term Economic Outlook_ 
C. External Environment 

II . COUNTR Y DE VELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND PRIORITIES 
IK BANK GROUPASSISTANCE STRATEGY 
_ 

A. Progress and Outcomes in Past World Bank Group Programs 
B. Objectives and Principles of CAS 
C. CAS Instruments 

V BANK GROUP ACTIVITIES TO SUPPORT THE STRATEGY 

i
1
1

2
3
5
5
8
10

10
11

13
15
17

18
19

19
19
24

26

33

33
34
35
35

38

A. Human Development and Poverty Reduction 
26
B. Achieving Greater Gender Equity 
27
C. Private Sector Development and Infrastructure for Sustainable Growth and Job Creation 28
D. Improving Water Resource Management and the Environment 
30
E. Improving Public Sector Efficiency and Governance 
31
F. Supporting the Knowledge Economy 
32

P1. MANAGING THE ACTIVITIES 

A. Portfolio Management 
B. Monitoring Indicators and Benchmarks 
C. Lending Scenarios and Triggers_ 
D. Bank Exposure 

i'lI. RISKS 

Annexes
A2 
E.2 
E.3-1 
E 3-2 
E4 
E,5 

Country at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program Summary
Summary of Nonlending Services
Social Indicators

This doc ament has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the perfarmance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed

without 'World Bank authorization.

2

B6 
B7 
B8-1 
B8-2 
B9 
B 10 
C 

Boxes
I. 1 
I.2 
1.3 
1.4 
I.5 
IV. 1 
IV.2 
IV.3 

Tables
I.1 
I.2 
11.1 
VI. 1 
VI.2 
VI.3 
VI.4 

Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
CAS Program Matrix
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
USAID and EU Programs in Jordan

Country Profile
Millennium Development Goals: Summary of Jordan's Progress
Women's Education
Women's Health
Women in the Labor Force
Implementation of Previous CAS
World Bank Assistance Evaluation Reports
Major Partners in Jordan

Poverty Trends in Jordan, 1987-2001
Selected Human Development Indicators in Jordan and Comparable Countries
Key Macroeconomic Indicators
Portfolio Management Indicators
CAS Monitoring Indicators
Assumptions and Triggers for the Lending Program
World Bank Assistance Program (FY03-05)

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
Jordan, a middle income country, without significant natural resources, relies primarily on its
hum an capital for development. Over the past decade, Jordan has focused on human resource investment,
structural reforms and fiscal discipline to enhance opportunities for growth and stability. Performance
trends have been mixed over the decade, but over the past two years, despite adverse extemal factors,
Jordan's strategy has produced positive and promising results. However, faced with demographic
pressure, severe external shocks, and persistent natural resource constraints, Jordan faces daunting
problems. Prior Country Assistance Strategies for Jordan were focused on assisting Jordan to meet these
challenges. This CAS aims to help Jordan strengthen and deepen past efforts-capture and retain the
gains, better manage resources, and optimize human resource development, thus encouraging growth and
presenting a backward slide into increased unemployment and consequent poverty.

ii. 
Jordan's achievements in human development over the past 30 years have been impressive.
Life expectancy at birth has increased from 58 to 70 years and adult literacy from 47 to 90 percent. Infant
mortality fell by nearly 50 percent, and fertility rates are declining. Remittances from mainly skilled
Jordanians working overseas, mostly in the Gulf states, contribute 25 percent to GDP. Overall, the
counitry has made significant progress in meeting the Millennium Development Goals of universal
priliary education and reduction in child mortality. However, the cost in terms of public expenditures has
been relatively high. Moreover, the capacity to maintain the gains through coherent policies, effective
inst tutions, and adequate economic growth remains uncertain.

iii. 
Given demographic pressure, the gains made on human development to date cannot be
suslained without major improvements in the quality and efficiency of education and health
services. Jordan spends about 9 percent of its GDP on health (3 percent more than comparable countries);
reforms to improve efficiency are needed. In education, Jordan must raise quality and realign the
cun iculum to meet the demands of labor markets and the challenges of the knowledge economy.
Although progress has been made in achieving gender equality, especially in education, the legal status of
worrien and their access to employment still need improvement. The potential of women in the economy
remains largely unrealized.

iv. 
The performance of Jordan's economy has improved since the last CAS was presented to the
Board in November 1999. Annual growth was more than 4.7 percent during 2000-02 (compared to
3.2 percent in 1996-98). Exportsjumped 21 percent in 2001 after five years of very little growth.
Infl ation has been less than 2 percent. The economy has also shown resilience in the face of the escalating
regional tension and the events of September 11, 2001. The resilience is based in part on the Government
of Jordan's (GOJ) broad, decade-long program of structural reform. However, the economy's capacity for
growth is fragile and its rate of growth may not resolve long-standing challenges. Unemployment and
underemployment remain high, and deep pockets of poverty persist. Underemployment, especially among
university and secondary graduates, and persistent poverty could undermine social cohesion. Further
escalation of regional conflicts could undermine fiscal discipline, the reform process, and investor
confidence, thereby exacerbating poverty and joblessness.

v. 
Despite some progress, Jordan faces serious challenges in natural resources management.
As one of the most water-deprived countries in the world, Jordan must enhance management of its limited
water resources. Strategic challenges facing the water sector are a lack of sustainable policies dealing with
the long-term water balance with available water per capita declining over the next decade. Resource
management requires considerable attention, particularly the efficiency of use in agriculture.

ii

vi. 
In response to these challenges, in May 2002, the GOJ announced a National Strategy for
Poverty Alleviation. Previously, in October 2001, the GOJ launched an ambitious multi-year
development program aimed at deepening and accelerating the pace of structural reforms and
increasing investments for human development and poverty reduction. Taken together, these
programs are clear commitments to poverty alleviation, improved human resources development, public
sector efficiency, and realignment of the roles of state and private sector in the economy.

vii. 
The CAS addresses the same systemic challenges as the last one. Its overarching objective
remains aligned with Jordan's goals: sustained growth to create jobs and permanently reduce
poverty. Building on lessons of the past, Bank Group support to Jordan will concentrate on five
priority areas:

0 Human resources development pursued strategically to support the key development goals of
reducing poverty and enabling more Jordanians to participate in the knowledge economy.
I Water resource management and protection of the environment.
I Private sector development and infrastructure for sustainable growth and job creation.
> Public sector reform and governance for more equitable, efficient, and higher quality delivery of
public services.
I Gender inclusion in development planning and analysis.

viii. 
The CAS includes several activities and instruments to achieve its objectives: lending,
analytical and advisory activities (AAA), partial risk guarantees, equity and loan financing to the
private sector, and training for institutional capacity building.

ix. 
The Bank lending program for the FY03-05 period ranges from US$305 million in the base
case to US$380 million in the high case (compared to US$300 and US$450 million, respectively, in
the last CAS), in addition to two partial risk guarantees of US$150 million. In the low case, which is
considered unlikely, lending will be reduced to US$100 million. Bank lending will concentrate on the
areas of human resource development (largely education) and public sector reform, which together
will account for more than 75 percent of the lending, a continuation of Bank support in both areas-
reflecting the need for long-term engagement to address deep, underlying structural issues.

x. 

For sectors and areas where longer-term strategic Bank Group engagement is necessary,

whether or not lending is envisaged, Bank support wilH focus on AAA, including multi-year

nonlending services in the form of Programmatic Economic and Sector Work (PESW). During the
period of this CAS, such nonlending support is proposed for the following areas: water sector reform,
education sector strategy and implementation, pension fund reform, and the monitoring and evaluation of
the GOJ's development programs. The entire assistance program is shown in table VI.4.

xi. 
Preparation of the CAS was participatory. The process of preparing the CAS began with a
one-day brainstorming retreat for members of the Bank's Jordan country team (CT) and senior GOJ
officials, followed by sector-by-sector discussions between the CT and the GOJ. Two Bank missions later
visited Jordan to discuss the strategy with the GOJ, civil society, and other development partners.
Discussions with other major donors, both in the field and at their respective central offices were held in
October 2002 to ensure upstream collaboration. Consultations with civil society, including one half-day
session with most of the major NGOs, the private sector, think tanks, academia, and the media was jointly
organized by the Bank and the GOJ and took place in mid-October 2002. The priorities that emerged from
.these consultations form the basis of the CAS.

xii. 
Developments and lessons since the last CAS. Ten projects have closed since the last CAS was
presented to the Board. Of the ten projects, eight have been evaluated and found to have achieved their

deve,lopment objectives. The current portfolio consists of eight projects for a total net commitment of
US'255.5 million. Seven of the current projects are free of problems and risks. The portfolio management
targets set in the last CAS were largely met. The AAA program set under the last CAS also was
satisfactorily completed. A draft Country Assistance Evaluation by the Operations Evaluation Department
(OED) concludes that the Bank's AAAs have generally been successful in advancing the reform agenda.
OED's overall evaluation of the lending portfolio was more mixed. While implementation outcomes were
gen -rally satisfactory, development impacts were rated as modest. This CAS reflects the
recommendations of the several recent evaluations of the effectiveness of assistance.

xiii 
From experience over the past two CAS periods, it has become clear that the developmental
impact of lending operations is more likely to be successful if the operations are the instruments of
coherent policies and strategies rather than activities undertaken in reaction to immediate needs.
Coherent, comprehensive strategies often have been lacking, incomplete or not consistently implemented
due to the exigencies of a particular period. Moreover, often there has been a lack of synergies between
the Bank's AAA work and the lending program. Demand for the Bank's AAA work has increased this
pasi year and shifted to the more challenging tasks of assisting the design, implementation, and evaluation
of tie development agenda. Thus, the CAS AAA program has been designed to include a more strategic,
denmand-driven agenda. PESWs will focus on education, water, and the pension system. Additional AAA
will be directed to a broad menu.

IFC has been active in direct support to the private sector in Jordan for many years and has
xiv, 
a current portfolio of US$94 million in 15 companies. IFC will continue to be active in Jordan as the
invi stment environment continues to improve, and as new opportunities for export-oriented businesses
open up in response to the free trade agreement recently concluded with the United States, as well as the
association agreement reached with the European Union. In addition to export-oriented sectors, IFC plans
to f ocus on investments in the financial sectors, including support for SMEs, infrastructure development,
and information technology. The Bank will consider partial risk guarantees for major projects to attract
privrate sector participation and to provide a stronger financial package for critical infrastructure projects.

xv. 
The country strategy faces several risks, the most significant of which are: (i) regional
con flicts, including the continuing violence between Palestinians and Israelis, and the possibility of a
conflict in Iraq, a major trading partner and source of financial assistance; (ii) vulnerabilities to
inturnational and regional developments, given Jordan's heavy reliance on remittances from workers
abroad (25 percent of GDP) and tourism (10 percent of GDP); (iii) domestic tensions arising from
regional conflicts and high unemployment and persistent pockets of poverty; and (iv) the high level of
ext ,rmal debt, which in spite of recent efforts still constitutes a major drag on the economy.

xvi. 

I 

The Executive Directors may wish to consider the following questions:
> Is the assistance strategy sufficiently focused? Is it in line with Jordan's needs and the Bank's
comparative advantage?
Is the three-year lending level of US$305 million in the base case appropriate given the country's
needs and the Bank's exposure, with the option of moving to the high (or low) case if conditions
in the corresponding triggers are met (or not)?
0 Are the lending and nonlending instruments appropriate, flexible, and in line with the country's
needs and consistent with the Bank's role as a knowledge institution?

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. Political and Governance Issues

1. 
Economic growth, poverty reduction, and general improvements in welfare have been the
top priorities of the Jordanian Government under the leadership of King Abdullah since his
ac cession to the throne in February 1999. Toward these goals the GOJ has continued and often
accelerated the stabilization and structural reforms initiated in the early 1 990s. Significant steps
taken to integrate Jordan into the global economy include an association agreement with the
Eairopean Union (EU) in 1999, membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2000,
and a free-trade agreement with the United States in 2001. Taken together, Jordan's economic
reform agenda makes it one of the leaders in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region.

2 
Good governance, sound macroeconomic management, public sector reform, and the rule
of law have gained strong momentum over the past three years. Advances have been made in
reducing government interference and delays in private sector economic activity; improving civil
slXrvice recruitment, management, and training; and enhancing the rule of law through more
efficient and transparent legal administration and judicial reform. Macroeconomic management
performance generally exceeded expectations in 2000 and 2001, but the country's external debt
r-mains high. Outmoded and heavily bureaucratic procedures, a weak service orientation, and
continued patronage in recruitment, though improving, continue to burden access to and delivery
of basic public services.

AWhile Jordan's democratization process is generally regarded as strong in comparison
vith the region, recent events-including the dissolution of parliament in June 2001, two
postponements of elections for a new parliament, and measures to limit the diversity of
e xpression-may represent a slowdown of that process.

Box I.1 Country Profile

Jordan is a small, heavily urbanized country with a population of about 4.9 million. About 92 percent of Jordan's
land is semi-arid; around 6 percent is arable, subject to the annual vagaries of water availability. Agriculture is
.oncentrated in the Jordan River Valley, with some non-irrigated crops grown upland. Much of Jordan's
groundwater is not renewable. Other natural resources are primarily limited to phosphate and potash. Jordan's
reasonably well-developed human resources are the driving force of the economy.

Politically, Jordan is a constitutional monarchy with executive authority vested in H.M. the King and his Council of
Ministers. The Council of Ministers is appointed by the King and led by the prime minister. It is responsible to the
Chamber of Deputies on matters of general policy. Legislative power rests in the bicameral National Assembly.
The 104 members of the Chamber of Deputies are elected to four-year terms. The 52-member Senate is appointed
by the King. The current parliament was formed after the 1997 elections and dissolved in June 2001. The next
elections are scheduled for spring 2003.

4. 
Jordan's geopolitical realities directly affect the country's development prospects. Events
in the region since 1999 have adversely impacted the country's reform agenda. Building
institutional capacity; changing the relative roles of the state, civil society, and the private sector;
and addressing resource constraints, especially the water shortage, all require time and
reasonable security. But escalating violence in the West Bank and Gaza and the prospects of

2

further conflict in Iraq-Jordan's major trading partner and energy supplier-have had a chilling
effect on investment. Expectations of a "peace dividend" in 1994 have turned to frustration,
which in turn intensifies the need to demonstrate specific welfare benefits from the still
unfinished reform agenda. Thus, the necessity of a long-term, comprehensive approach to
systemic problems has been compromised by short-term solutions to immediate problems. In
summary, Jordan's reform effort has been strong over the past three years, but external volatility
has constrained growth.

B. Poverty and Social Challenges

5. 
Poverty Dimensions and Trends. Over the last decade, poverty has become a serious
problem in Jordan. It is estimated that only 3 percent of the population were poor at the end of
the 1980s. By 1992, the proportion of poor rose to 14.4 percent, and the number of poor
increased more than sixfold. The Gulf War and its aftermath, combined with the collapse of oil
prices and subsequent drop in worker remittances from neighboring oil-producing countries, and
the return of 300,000 Jordanians from the Gulf countries all tended to sharply raise the incidence
of poverty in Jordan.

6. 
Poverty declined between 1992 and 1997 (from 14.4 percent to 12 percent) primarily due
to a decline in inequality resulting from better-targeted Government transfers. The poorest
40 percent of the population had higher per capita expenditure levels in 1997 than in 1992, while
the richest 60 percent were worse off. This clear reduction in inequality outweighed the effect of
the decline in per capita expenditure levels during the period and led to a lower poverty rate in
1997 than in 1992. Inequality in per capita consumption expenditure, as measured by the Gini
Index, declined from 0.40 to 0.36 during this period. This underlying level of inequality is
moderate by regional and international standards. '

7. 
The poverty analysis in Jordan is based on household expenditure and income surveys
(HEIS) conducted by the Department of Statistics in 1992 and 1997. New data and analysis will
be available in 2003 based on a 2002 HEIS. However, using the estimated increase in real per
capita private consumption since 1997, and assuming no worsening of its distribution, poverty in
terms of the percentage of population is not expected to have changed significantly since the last
analysis, but poverty in terms of the number ofpoor is expected to increase slightly due to the
high population growth, as noted in Table 1.1.

8. 
Location and Profile of the Poor. Most of Jordan's poor live in urban areas (primarily
around Amman and areas north of Amman) mainly because Jordan is a highly urbanized country
with 79 percent of the population living in urban areas. Nevertheless, the incidence of poverty is
nearly twice as high, and poverty is twice as deep in rural than in urban areas. The proportion of
population in rural and urban areas that are poor, is 18 percent and 9.5 percent respectively. The
depth of poverty, as measured by the income gap from the poverty line was 4 percent and
2 percent in rural and urban areas, respectively. Deeper pockets of poverty exist in a number of

l Jordan's level of inequality is similar to that of other MENA countries at similar income levels. The Gini
coefficient for Tunisia (0.40) and Morocco (0.39) show greater inequality, whereas Algeria (0.35) and Egypt (0.32)
seem to have less inequality.

3

rLual areas. In Mafraq, a sparsely populated and predominantly rural govemorate, for example,
tho poverty gap was nearly five times that in Amman.

Table 1.1 Poverty Trends in Jordan, 1987-2001

Headcount index (percentage of population)' 
Number of poor people (thousands) 
Pcverty gap (percent of poverty line) 
Gi ii coefficient of inequality 
Gl)P per capita index (1987=100) 

1987 
3 0 
85 
0.3 
0.36 
100 

1992 
14 4 
538 3 
3 6 
0 40 
79.1 

1997 
11.7 
522 
2 5 
0 36 
81.4 

1 9 99 b 

11 7 
556 

-

0 36 
81 3 

2 0 0 0 b 

11.5 
561 

-

0 36 
82.2 

2001
11 2
563
_
0 36
83 2

-
Not available
a. The headcount index is based on updates of the official poverty line (per capita consumption expenditure per year) originally
de nved by the Ministry of Social Development for the year 1987. For example, the 1992 update of the 1987 official poverty line
ge9nerated a per capita poverty line of JD261 per year, which, in 1997 prices, is the equivalent of an annual per capita poverty line of
JD313.5 (US$442).
b Assuming that inequality did not change from its 1997 level, a per capita income-poverty elasticity of -2, and given the per capia

GDP growth rates of-0.1 in 1998, 0 in 1999, 1.1 in 2000, and 1 3 in 2001
S urce. Radwan Shaban, Dina Abu-Ghaida, Abdel-Salam Al-Naimat (2001), Poverty Alleviation in Jordan: Lessons for the Future

9. 
Poverty is highly correlated with employment, education level, household size, and
gender of the head of household. Households headed by the unemployed had the highest
i icidence of poverty. Those with household members employed in the public sector are less
likely to be poor than those with the head of household or members employed in the private
sector, pointing to the disparity in average wages between the public and private sectors.
HIousehold size is also directly related to poverty with large households more likely to be poor.

0. 
Vulnerability of the Poor. The poor are particularly vulnerable to economic shocks. A
(lecrease of only 5 percent in real per capita consumption (roughly the magnitude of fluctuations
in the 1990s) would potentially increase the incidence of poverty by 12 percent. This
vulnerability to economic fortunes, coupled with the sensitivity of Jordan's economic
:erformance to developments in the region, highlights the need for effective social safety net
programs to cushion the poor and vulnerable from the effects of these shocks.

C. Meeting the Millennium Development Goals
Jordan has made excellent progress toward the Millennium Development Goals2
11. 
(MDGs). It compares favorably with the low and middle income countries (LMICs) as a group,
and with most countries in the Bank's MENA region on all eight MDG targets. The country's
youth literacy rate is about 99 percent (compared to 88 percent for MENA and 85 percent for the
LMICs). Infant mortality, at 26 per 1,000 live births, is lower than the MENA and LMIC
averages of 43 and 33, respectively. The proportion of the population living in extreme

2 In September 2000, the member states of the United Nations unanimously adopted the Millennium Declaration,
committing the organization to what are now known as the Millennium Development Goals. The goals give force to
an expanded vision of development, one that vigorously promotes human development as the key to sustaining
social and economic progress in all countries and that recognizes the importance of creating a global partnership for
development. There are eight goals targeting poverty, education, gender equality, child mortality, maternal health,

HIV/AIDS, environment, and partnership.

4

Box 1.2 Millennium Development Goals: Summary of Jordan's Progress

Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger

Target I Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion ofpeople whose income is less than one dollar a day
Target 2. Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people who sufferfrom hunger
1990 

2000 

Population below SI a day (°/O 

______ ________ 

Prevalence of child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Income share held by lowest 20% 

<2 

6.4 

<2 

5.1 (1997) 
76 (1997)

Target

1.15

3.68

Target
100

100

Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education

Target 3 Ensure that, by 2015, children everyuhere, boys and girls ahke, will be able to complete afjlil course ofprimary schooling
__1990 

I ___________________________________ 

2000 

Net primary school enrollment ratio (% of relevant age group) 
Youth literacy rate (% ages 15-24) 

66.3 
97 0 

96.5 (1999) 
993 

Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women

Target 4 Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education, preferably by 2005, and to all levels of education no later than 2015
1990 
2000 
Target

________ ____ 
_________ 

_ 

Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%) 

Ratio of young literate females to males (% ages 15-24) 

93.2 

973 

96.5 (1999) 

100 

100

100

Goal 4: Reduce child mortality

arget 5 Reduce by two thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-frve mortality rate

Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000) 
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) _ 
Immunization, measles (% of children under 12 months) 

1990 

34 0 
30.0 

87.0 

Goal 5 Improve maternal health

Target 6 Reduce by three quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio
1990 

.

Matemal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births) 

Births attended by skilled health staff(% of total) 

87 0 

2000 

30.3 

26 

94.0 (1999)

Target

11 33

8.3

2000 

41 (1995) 
97 (1995) 

Tar_ t

13.5
100

Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases

Target 7 Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the spread of HIVIAIDS
Target 8. Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases

[ 

Prevalence of HIV, female (% ages 15-24) 
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%) 

1990 

Target 

2000 
2
0.02
33 (1999)

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability

Target 9. Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programmes and reverse the losses of environmental
resources
Target 10 Halve by 2015 the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water.

Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Access to improved sanitation (% of population) 

1990 
97.0 
98 0 

2000 
96 0
99 0

Target

Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development

Target 18 In cooperation with the private sector, make available the benefits of new technologies, especially information and communications

Personal computers (per 1,000 people) 
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people) 

1990 
6 4 (1995) 
57.9 

2000 
22 5
151.2

Target

poverty (less than US$1 a day) is less than 2 percent in Jordan; it averages 23 percent in the
LMICs. Jordan has also made major strides in gender equality. The ratio of girls to boys in
primary and secondary enrollment is 97 percent; it is 83 percent for MENA as a whole. The
youth literacy gap between females and males in Jordan is less than 1 percent. However, the rate
of participation of women in the labor force continues to be low and the unemployment rate

5

among women (25 percent) is nearly twice that for men (15 percent). Regarding political
parlicipation, the parliamentary elections scheduled for Spring 2003 are likely to result in female
rep]resentation. Jordan is ahead of MENA and the LMICs on access to safe water and sanitation,
but access is significantly lower in rural areas of the country than in its towns and cities. Water
der letion and pollution, coupled with worsening urban air quality, indicate that more progress is
needed if Jordan is to reach the environmental MDG.

D. Poverty Reduction Programs

12. 
A Three Pronged Strategy. Poverty alleviation remains the top priority for Jordan and a
newv National Strategy for Poverty Alleviation was launched in May 2002. The GOJ strategy
aims at: (i) providing access to quality education and assuring access to health care for all below
the poverty line; (ii) improving employment opportunity for those capable of working; and
(iii) improving the social safety net for the poorest. The basic approach being followed is to
im-)rove upon and support existing government programs, such as those administered by the
National Aid Fund (NAF), the government agency providing cash assistance to the poorest in
Joidan. The plan also proposes longer-term strategies for the private sector to have a greater role
in .reating jobs and in strengthening public-private partnership.

13. 
The PSET. Cognizant of these challenges, the GOJ announced, on November 15, 2001, a
multi-year (2002-05) Program for Social and Economic Transformation (PSET). The PSET, an
extension of past and ongoing reforms, aims at:
* Raising the quality of life for all Jordanians through qualitative improvement in
education, health, rural and community development, and enhancing social productivity
to combat poverty.
* Enhancing the capacity of the economy to attract more private capital through
acceleration of the ongoing privatization program, promoting private investment in large
infrastructure projects, and further improving the environment for private investment.
Improving the efficiency and effectiveness of government institutions, and improving the
quality and delivery of basic public services through gender-responsive public sector
reform programs.
* Adopting a results-based budget that maintains fiscal stability while targeting priority
areas such as education, health, rural development, and poverty reduction.
* Creating the institutions, incentives, and infrastructure necessary for the introduction and
adoption of information and communication technologies (ICT) and for knowledge-based
development in all areas of the economy. (See paragraphs 52-55 for further discussion of
PSET)

* 

'T he Correlates of Poverty: Education and Health

1.4. With indicators of basic education and health services above the MENA average
(l able I.2), Jordan outperforms four regional countries that have more resources-Algeria, Syria,
Tunisia, and Iran. However, improving the quality and focus of the education system and the
efficiency of health service delivery pose major challenges. There is strong evidence of a
substantial mismatch between the skills taught by the education system and those in demand in

6

the labor market. Similar challenges also affect the health system, where rapid population growth
increases demand for services and complicates health management.

Table 1.2 Selected Human Development In dicators in Jordan and Comparable Countries

Jordan 
1999/2000b 

1970-75 

Comparable Groups
MENA 
Lower-middle
1993-00 
Income, 1993-00

Life expectancy (years) 
Total ferbility rate (births per woman) 
Infant mortality (per thousand births) 
Access to an improved water source (percentage of 
population)
Gross primarya enrollment (percentage of school-age 

population)

60 
8 
49 

72 

70 
3.7 
26 
96 

104 

68 
3.4 
43 
89 

97 

69
2 1
33
80

107

107
107
70

15
9
21

Male 
Female 
Gross secondarya enrollment (percentage of age group) 
Male 
Female 
Adult ilirteracy (percentage of population age 15 and above) 
Male 
Female 
Negligible
Note: Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
a 
The primary cycle is assumed to be grades 1-6, while the secondary cycle is assumed to be grades 7-12 in Jordan.
GER data for Jordan for the year 2000.
Source: World Bank, Wodd Development Indicators (various years)

104 
104 
92.7 
91.8
93 6
10 
5.5 
16.6 

103 
90 
64 

79 
65 
48 

39 
22 
56 

34 
24 
46 

15. 
Education. Jordan has made great strides in improving its education system since
reforms started a decade ago. Gross enrollment rate for grades 1-6 was 104 percent (2000) while
the net enrollment rate was 96.5 percent (1999). Primary completion rate was estimated at
100 percent for both boys and girls (1999). Female adult illiteracy rates, however, remain high at
16.6 percent compared to male illiteracy at 5.5 percent. At the same time, Jordan is well placed
in achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) with regards to elimination of gender
disparities. Female enrollment accounted for 49 percent of all basic education enrollment,
50 percent of the upper secondary enrollment, 68 percent of community college enrollment, and
47 percent of public university undergraduate enrollment (1999). Jordan has emphasized the
development of human capital, spending over the years about 5 percent of its annual GDP on
education and trying to maintain universal access to basic education, despite high population
growth. In 2001, public expenditures on education represented 5.6 percent of GDP and
17 percent of total government expenditures. The commitment to "education for all" is reflected
in the fact that 80 percent of total education spending goes for basic education.

16. 
Despite its considerable achievements, Jordan lags behind its international peers (e.g.,
Tunisia and Turkey in mathematics), and the gap between Jordan's highest and lowest

3 The human development index is a composite index that measures a country's achievements in terms of life

expectancy, educational attainment, and adjusted real income.

7

performing students is wider than in most other countries, implying the current education system
is nt delivering equal learning opportunities to all students. Ongoing efforts to improve the
image of women and to eliminate the associated stereotypes in textbooks need to be strengthened
further. The learning culture remains one of memorizing rather than learning to learn. Education
speniding is thus not used efficiently, and for the poor, access remains limited at higher levels.
Bec ause the education system is not focusing on the right skills, as indicated by the segmentation
of the labor market, it is now necessary not only to improve the quality of education, but also to
align the curriculum with the skills demanded by the labor market. Too many graduates of
prog, rams that lack relevance are unemployed, due in large part to the skills mismatch. The new
glolbal economy requires that Jordan develop an education system that promotes high-level
thirking skills and prepares students to take on jobs. But improving the quality of education is
the key challenge the authorities face-to get more efficiency from the already high levels of
put lic spending on education.

Box 1.3 Women's Education

Jord an has made significant progress in extending universal access to all. Girls are as well represented in education
as a -e boys (see Table below for GER for girls and boys). The ratio of female to male enrollments is 97 percent
(19519) in primary and secondary education. Primary school completion rates are 100 percent, 101 percent for
fem ales and 100 percent for males. Female enrollments account for 68 percent of community college enrollments
and 47 percent of public university undergraduate enrollments (up from 37 percent in 1994). Kindergartens for 4 to
6 ye ar-olds are not compulsory and services are provided on a fee basis. Females account for 47 percent of all
kin(lergarten enrollments.
Although only 50 percent of students who take the general secondary exam (tawjihf) pass, female success rate is
sigr ificantly higher than that for males. The success rate of females was higher than that for males by as much as
18 percent in the governorate of Irbid and as low as 3 percent in Tafila. In more than 75 percent of the govemorates,
the female success rate was more than 12 percent higher than that for males.

Gender Disaggregated Gross Enrollment Rates (percent), 2000
Female 
Grade 
Male 
21.91 
19.75 
49.47 
45 22 
118.98 
116.23 
10333 
10406 
100.27 
100 89 
10033 
102.03 
102.12 
101.85 
101.21 
10128 
10616 
101.09 
10037 
98 76 
96 28 
97.37 
91 91 
91.66 
82 83 
84.69 
77.35 

KGI 
KG2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
Source: MOE

81 73 

Total
20 86
47.39
11762
10369
100.57
101.15
10199
101.24
10357
99.59
96.81
91 79
83.75
79.48

17 
Health. The health system in Jordan performs relatively well in terms of overall access to
he;alth services (financial and physical) and outcomes (as measured by indicators such as infant
mortality and life expectancy). However, with Jordan spending more than 9 percent of its GDP
on health (3 percentage points more than comparable countries), the country is at a crossroads in
the evolution of its health system. Passive acceptance of the status quo would likely result in a
sy,stem with high costs, gaps in access for vulnerable groups, wasteful excess capacity, and a
poDr ratio of outcome to investments. The rising costs of public programs-driven by the aging

8

population, the epidemiological transition to chronic and noncommunicable diseases, continued
high rates of population growth, and clinical and economic inefficiencies in the service delivery
system-would have a major impact on sustainability of the country's fiscal position. About half
of health expenditures are privately financed, and government subsidies do not reflect ability to
pay.

18. 
New health challenges have arisen. Although the incidence of infectious diseases has
been reduced, increasingly prevalent noncommunicable diseases (cancer, cardiovascular disease,
diabetes, hypertension), costly to treat, are straining the sustainability of the health system.
Treating such diseases efficiently will necessitate adjustments in the delivery of services. Major
causes of death are now cardiovascular disease, accidents, pneumonia, and cancer. The main
issues that need to be addressed in the health sector are inefficiencies, growth in health
expenditures, geographic maldistribution of resources, excess capacity, long-run financial
sustainability, and universal coverage.

Box 1.4 Women's Health
Educatior. is the strongest factor affecting fertility levels. Women who had attended secondary school had the lowest
level of fertility (about 4.1) while those with no education had the highest (6.9). The total fertility level was 6 for
women with primary education and 5.4 for women with secondary education. Women with secondary education had
the highest median age at first birth (21.2 years). The improvement of educational opportunities, particularly for
girls, has resulted in their staying in school longer, and subsequently pushed the age of marriage upward. Women
who have had more than secondary education tend to marry almost 6 years later than those with no education or
only primary education. The fertility level has been declining steadily during the last decade. The birth rate has been
declining from a rate of 50 per 1000 in the mid 1970s to 33 per 1000 in 1995. The total fertility rate declined from
7.5 children per woman in 1975 to 6.1 in 1985 and 3.7 in 2000.

Improving Employment Opportunities

19. 
Private Sector Development. Improving employment opportunity through private sector
development is one of the three aims of Jordan's National Strategy for Poverty Alleviation and
the PSET. Jordan has worked hard to create one of the better business environments in the
region, in terms of macroeconomic stability, trade access, and regulatory climate. While growth
has been disappointing, there have been some successes; proactive export policies have recently
resulted in strong export growth, and privatization and liberalization have led to new
investments, especially in the Qualified Industrial Zones (QIZs). Analysis by the Bank and
others indicate that Jordan's low growth is due to a combination of factors-among them
regional volatility, sluggish private investment, in part due to the uncertainties arising from
ongoing regional conflicts, and poor competitiveness. While Jordan cannot affect its geography,
challenges related to private sector investment and productivity at the firm level can be
addressed. Five critical factors are at play: (i) disincentives caused by the effects of fiscal deficits
and public debt burden; (ii) certain high transaction and logistics costs due to inefficiencies in
public sector performance; (iii) a mismatch between labor market demand and the skills of the
work force produced by the education system; (iv) limited access to credit and high cost of
credit, particularly for small and medium-scale enterprises; and (v) an oligarchic business
structure which impedes the entry of new firms.

9

20. 
Financial Sector. Jordan's financial system is dominated by its banking system. In
addition to local and foreign commercial banks (nine and five, respectively), the banking system
includes two Islamic banks, five small investment banks, and three small public and semi-public
specialized banks. Non-bank financial intermediation is small, although market capitalization of
the Amman Stock Exchange, at 77 percent of GDP, is one of the highest ratios in the region. At
pres.,nt, most activity on the exchange takes place for a few of the larger listings, and trading
volume is small. Most firms remain closely held and prefer to borrow from banks than to raise
func s by expanding share ownership or issuing bonds to the public. One of the key challenges
for the Jordanian financial system is the extension of credit to a wider segment of the private
sector. Bank hesitation to extend credit on a longer-term basis is in partly a reflection of the
uncertainty surrounding the country's short-term economic prospects. However, lack of
accc ptance of more diversified collateral (e.g., movable property) and poor sources of
information of credit-related behavior also reduce the number of potential borrowers.

Privatization. The privatization program in Jordan is one of the most successful in the
21. 
regi:bn. Several major transactions have been completed over the past few years (Jordan
Telcoms, Public Transport Corporation, cement companies, the management contract for
Gre ater Amman water, and divestiture of government shares in approximately 44 companies),
and there is a strong pipeline for future privatization in different sectors. Support for the
pri-vatization program is a good example of donor cooperation with the Bank providing the
teclnical expertise and USAID providing grant financing.

22. 
Pension Reform. Improving public pension system in Jordan is inextricably linked to the
third goal of Jordan's National Strategy for Poverty Alleviation: improving the social safety net
for the poor. The system comprises the Civil Servants Pension Fund, the Military Pension Fund,
and the Social Security Corporation (initially created for workers in the private sector). The GOJ
has adopted several reforms to improve financial sustainability and reduce the fiscal drain. Since
1995 the Civil Servants pension fund has been closed to new entrants. This has allowed a
reduiction in unfunded pension liabilities, although these still account for 69 percent of GDP. The
Coumcil of Ministers has also recently approved a reform of the military pension scheme. This
sysi.em provides rates of return that often surpass 20 percent per year and has unfunded pension
liatilities equivalent to 180 percent of GDP. The reforms have been agreed upon as part of a
program supported by the IMF and to be implemented from January 2003 with ongoing Bank
support. It contemplates the phasing out of the military pension scheme by enrolling new recruits
in the Social Security Corporation (SSC), reducing the prevalence of disability awards that are
currently granted to around 90 percent of new beneficiaries, and rationalizing various elements
of the benefit package. Altogether, these measures should reduce the financial burden of military
per sions by around 2.5 percent of GDP over 50 years. As these systems are phased-out the fiscal
buwden will eventually dissipate.

23. 
As the most urgent problems of the pension system are being addressed, the GOJ can
focus its attention on the Social Security Corporation. While the SSC is currently running a cash
surplus, it is running a long-term deficit. Its medium and long term sustainability are in question.
Re Forms are necessary to strengthen actuarial linkages between contributions and benefits, to
obtain a better balance between mandatory and voluntary savings, to eliminate incentives that
enc ourage retirement rather than work, to minimize distortions in labor markets, and to address
peiverse distributive effects (such as higher rates of return for individuals with rising wages and

10

long life expectancy). As SSC sets its new Investment Unit, careful attention needs to be given to
legal and governance structures to ensure that reserves are managed in the best interest of plan
members, while contributing to the development of financial markets.

E. Gender

24. 
Female empowerment and inclusion remain a challenge. Jordanian women have made
great advances in basic measures of welfare in the past 30 years, largely due to the GOJ's
progressive approach toward women's development. In fact, gender has been a key focus of
public health services and education (see boxes I.3 and 1.4 above). Over the past 30 years,
maternal mortality fell by nearly half to 41 per 100,000 births. The gross female primary school
enrollment rate is about 104 percent. Although women's participation in the formal labor force is
still low, it grew rapidly from about 15 percent in 1980 to 24 percent in 1999 (see box I.5 below).
Average unemployment rates among women are high-at 25 percent versus 15 percent for
men-particularly in the entry cohorts of the working age distribution (16-25 years old), where
it reaches 78 percent. Female unemployment rates tend to increase with successive levels of
education while the reverse holds true for males-higher education levels mean lower
unemployment for males but higher unemployment for females. Women feature prominently in
NGOs and political participation has increased with the next Parliament expected to have female
members. The legal status of women has improved somewhat, but significant inequalities persist
in matters of personal status. The GOJ has advocated a number of policies and programs to
advance women's status. Nevertheless, considerable work is needed to identify issues and
propose solutions.

Box 1.5 Women in the Labor Force

The participation of women in economic activities is increasing. From 1980 to 1999, the female labor force as a
proportion of the total labor force increased from 15 to 24 percent (from I percent in 1961). Education is one of the
main factors promoting women's participation in the labor force: 64 percent of females in the labor force have
intermediate diplomas and higher. Nevertheless, unemployment rates are generally higher for females, at all levels
of educationi, but especially for vocational training.

F. Public Sector Reform: Quality, Equity, Accountability,
and Efficiency in the Delivery of Public Services

25. 
The fourth goal of Jordan's National Strategy for Poverty Alleviation is to improve
public sector performance in the delivery of core services-health, education, and social
protection. The particular challenges of education and health are discussed above (in paragraphs
14-18). Significant progress has been made in reforming the public sector to improve service
delivery, but recent surveys have shown that outmoded and bureaucratic administrative
procedures still impose substantial costs on the public. Key issues continuing to affect the ability
of the public sector reform to deliver high quality services, equitably and efficiently, are:

e 

* centralization and rigidity of central systems with little cross-sectoral overview;
limited oversight, accountability, and access to information; and
* emphasis on material investments over opportunity costs and results.

26. 
Procurement. The environment for public sector procurement in Jordan has benefited
from the general respect for rules and regulations among civil servants and the widespread use of
committees and the Audit Bureau to oversee procurement processes and provide checks and
balances. Consequently, Jordan's procurement system represents a low-risk environment for
bi:lders-fraud and corruption have been contained at below-average levels. There have not been
auny cases of misprocurement under Bank-financed projects in recent years. Barriers to foreign
bilders, however, have been troubling. The GOJ has made progress in lowering these barriers,
especially in connection with the privatization of state-owned enterprises through competitive
bilding. However, the GOJ's internal procurement processes are not yet in line with
international standards.

27. 
Financial Management. The FY01 Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(C'FAA) concluded that the financial controls, management systems, and reporting underpinning
Jordan's public financial management provided an acceptable level of accountability-but it also
found them complex and oriented toward compliance rather than results. With regard to
accounting and auditing practices in the private sector, the CFAA noted that the local accounting
arid auditing profession was generally considered weak, particularly in the adoption and
ertforcement of internationally accepted accounting and auditing standards. The CFAA provided
St ggestions for overhauling the law on public accounting, focusing mainly on streamlining the
roles of practicing accountants and auditors, establishing an oversight board for the profession,
arid ensuring enforceability of the relevant professional standards.

G. Resources Scarcity
211. Water. The shortage of clean water is one of the most critical environmental constraints
tc sustainable development in Jordan. The country is one of the most water-deprived countries in
the world. Ninety percent of Jordan receives less than eight inches of rain annually. Of that,
91) percent is lost to evaporation. Aquifers are being depleted at a rapid rate. Periodic droughts
add to the water stress. Agriculture, which generates about 2.1 percent of GDP and 5 percent of
einployment, accounts for 70 percent of water consumption, indicating a need for greater
eificiency and a shift to higher-value crops. One of Jordan's main challenges is better
rr anagement of water resources, without which sustained long-term development is at risk.

29. 
In 2001 the GOJ, working closely with the Bank and other partners, updated its 1997
strategy for managing water demand and supply. The strategy emphasizes the need to increase
,water supplies and improve operations and maintenance by managing water better in urban and
niral sectors. The update has highlighted the following key challenges:

* 
Insufficient water supply to meet demand.
* Growing competition for water between rural and urban users, as the relative share for
urban use (municipal and industrial) is expected to increase from 30 to 50 percent over
the next 20 years against a backdrop of persistent drought.
* An unsustainable draw-down of groundwater, particularly in the highlands.
* 
Inadequate management of waste water (treatment and reuse).
* 
Inefficiencies in agricultural water use, resulting mainly from the tariff structure.

12

e Obstacles to new investments, highlighting the critical need for internal financing,
through better cost recovery and improved water services by the Water Authority of
Jordan (WAJ) and the Jordan Valley Authority (JVA).
Institutional limitations in policy formation, management and information systems, and
financial planning.

• 

30. 
Environment. Projected population growth and its geographic concentration-in the
north and in urban areas-represent a major challenge for Jordan's sustainable development.
Although no recent estimates for Jordan are available, estimates for other countries in the MENA
region indicate that the average cost of environmental degradation is 5-9 percent of GDP and
that the burden of diseases associated with environmental factors is significant. 4

31. 
Land degradation is a significant problem, with large areas suffering from soil erosion,
salinization, and overgrazing-all of which affect agricultural productivity. Jordan's rich and
important biodiversity is under threat of habitat destruction due to agricultural encroachment, the
introduction of invasive species, the increasing presence of chemicals, and degradation of land
and water resources.

32. 
However, Jordan has repeatedly shown a commitment to sustainable development. It is
the first country in West Asia to develop its Agenda 215 and the only Arab country to develop
strategies for environmental information, awareness, communication, and education. These
commitments still need to be converted into actions.

4 Environmental problems account for 14 percent of the burden of disease in the region. The primary problems are
poor water and sanitation (8 percent) and urban air pollution (3 percent).

Agenda 21 is a comprehensive plan of actions to be taken globally, nationally, and locally by organizations of the
United Nations system, governments, and other groups with respect to human impact on the environment.

13

II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
AND MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK

A. Recent Economic Developments

33. 
Real GDP growth reached 4.2 percent in 2001, as in the previous year. Since 1997, GDP
growth has exceeded population growth (3.1 percent per year), but has not reached the 6 percent
necessary to absorb all the new entrants into the labor force. Jordan's rate of GDP growth in
2C 01 was the highest and most resilient among the countries of the region, overcoming the twin
shocks of the Palestinian intifada, now more than two years old, and the events of
St ptember 1 1.6 Preliminary GDP data for the first 2 quarters of 2002 show growth heading to the
projected target of 5 percent, confirming the recent positive growth performance. The resilience,
so far, of the Jordanian economy to adverse regional and international shocks is partly the result
of ongoing structural reform efforts.

34. 
A surge in exports, a pick up in construction activity, and a revival of industrial
production and services has helped Jordan pick up growth momentum. The export performance,
in particular, has been exceptional over the past two years. After remaining flat at around
U s$1.8 billion annually for five years, exports jumped in 2001 by 21 percent (19 percent in
ccnstant dollar terms), and they have continued to increase at around 25 percent (year on year) in
the first 2 quarters of 20027.

3'i. 
Trade is likely to remain a main driver of growth in the coming year for a number of
reasons. First, the Qualified Industrial Zones have recently shown strong dynamism. In fact,
e).ports from QIZs to the United States accounted for half of the dramatic rise in exports in 2001
in the face of the slowest world trade growth since the oil crisis of the 1970s. QIZ exports have
shiown remarkable strength; however, they offer limited domestic value added and only weak
liiikages to the rest of the economy. Second, non-QIZ exports have also shown rapid growth,
with more extended linkages with the rest of the economy. Third, the association agreement with
tde EU, which went into effect on May 1, 2002, and the free trade agreement with the United
S ates, which went into effect in December 2001, carry significant potential for greater
ir vestment in Jordan and increased preferential exports of Jordanian agriculture and industrial
goods. Fourth, the entire Aqaba govemorate was declared a special economic zone, effective
January 1, 2002. It offers foreign and domestic investors lower business costs and preferential
tax treatment for business income (5 percent versus 35 percent outside the zone) and selected
pi,rsonal consumption goods (7 percent versus 13 percent outside the zone).

315. 
High Unemployment and Frustrating Underemployment. Notwithstanding the recent
p:-omising trends on growth and exports, providing jobs for a growing young population is one of
the most important challenges facing Jordan. Currently Jordan has a high unemployment rate,
v hich is officially estimated at 15 percent but may be closer to 25 percent if underemployment is
included. At the same time, the labor force is growing at 4.0 percent annually requiring the
c]reation of additional new jobs for young job seekers. The incidence of joblessness is twice as

6 Real GDP growth rates in 2001 for Jordan, Syria and Lebanon are estimated at 4.2, 2.8, 1.3 percent, respectively.
The figures do not include re-exports.

14

high among the young as other groups. The percentage of women seeking employment is also
likely to increase in the coming years (with the continued rise in female participation in the labor
force), putting additional pressure on the job market. These new jobs need to be generated in the
private sector as employment in the public sector and emigration to the Gulf are no longer
sustainable. At present, the country's labor market is highly segmented, with scores of skilled
Jordanians working abroad (mainly in the Gulf) and many low-skill foreign laborers (mainly
from Egypt and Iraq) occupying menial jobs in the country, which Jordanians, for cultural and
attitudinal reasons, are unwilling to accept. To absorb the new entrants into the labor force and
reduce the current unemployment (to about 6 percent by 2010), GDP must grow at about
6 percent annually, a rate that has not been achieved since the 1970s.

37. 
In juxtaposition to the growth data and in partial explanation of the weak job creation in
recent years, the decline in rate of investment stands out. Total fixed investment rate in Jordan at
around 21 percent in 1998 was near an historic low for the preceding 25 years but was at 25% in
2001. As a consequence, the rate of physical capital accumulation has decelerated from 16
percent per year in 1976-80 to a mere 3 percent per year over 1996-00. The failure of private
investment to respond strongly to structural reforms compensating for the inevitable decline in
public investment has held back total investment in the economy. Total factor productivity
(measured as a residual from GDP growth after allowing for the role of factor accumulation) is
also low or a small negative in the 1 990s, though steep declines in TFP witnessed in the late
1980s have been arrested with structural reforms.

38. 
Inflation. Inflation in Jordan has been moderate, averaging only 1.7 percent over the last
five years (1996-2001), helped partly by the unchanged nominal exchange rate between the
Jordanian dinar and the U.S. dollar since 1996. The U.S. dollar's strong appreciation against the
currencies of Europe-the source of a third of Jordan's imports-caused the country's real
effective exchange rate to appreciate. Together with cuts in import tariffs, that appreciation has
helped keep the cost of imports low. Annual inflation, as measured by the consumer price index,
averaged 0.7 percent in 2000, but began climbing in the beginning of 2001 to an average of
1.8 percent per annum, before subsiding again by mid-2002. The causes of the temporary hike
were increases in some administered prices-including petroleum and higher education-and the
extension to trading sectors of a 13 percent general sales tax.

39. 
Fiscal Management. Medium-term gains continued to be the chief goal of fiscal
management efforts. The introduction of a 13 percent general sales tax and a new public debt law
that empowers the cabinet to cap gross public debt at 60 percent of GDP, are strong indicators
that fiscal prudence will remain the overriding aim of fiscal policy. To reduce vulnerability to oil
price changes, the authorities announced increases in administered prices of petroleum products
in July-August 2001, and again in April 2002. For 2001, the budget deficit (before grants) is
estimated at 8.1 percent of GDP (3.8 percent after grants), a decline of 0.8 percentage point from
the previous year but still higher than the Government program supported by the IMF of 6.9
percent.

15

40. 
External Debt. Although external debt has diminished significantly in the last few
yeE'rs-from 114 percent of GDP in 1995 to 85 percent 8 in 2001-interest payments still absorb
15 percent of total government revenue. 9 On July 11, 2002, the Paris Club concluded an exit
arringement for restructuring debt owed to Paris Club members amounting to US$1.2 billion.'0
Th (s arrangement will give Jordan greater freedom in macro economic management by freeing
up to an estimated US$150 million a year in rescheduled debt service in the next five years.

B. Medium-Term Economic Outlook

41. 
Base-Case Economic Scenario. The base-case scenario is built around the current
government macroeconomic program for 2002-04, which is supported by an IMF stand-by
agi eement (table 11. 1). The economic program encompasses a reduction of the fiscal deficit in the
medium term, underpinned by a long-term reform of the public pension schemes, continued
strong external donor support as well as the recent debt rescheduling agreement. Continued
strong external performance, albeit a bit slower than in the last 6 quarters, is expected from the
im1 ,lementation of recent trade agreements and continued structural reform efforts, as well as a
stabilization of the real effective exchange rate.

42. 
Based on the improved medium-term fiscal outlook and strong exports performance, the
scenario assumes a base rate of GDP growth between 5 and 6 percent, slightly above the rate
achieved in 2000-1 in the face of global and regional weaknesses. In the near term, GDP
growth could climb up to 6 percent, in response to the GOJ's special stimulus package-known
as the Program for Social and Economic Transformation (PSET)-which is to be implemented
over the next four years. The success of the PSET depends on the country's access to more grant
financing from donors in the near term. The GOJ is committed to refraining from external
bo Towing to finance the program. In the event that adequate external grant financing does not
materialize, growth would slow to underlying base level. The uncertainty engendered by the
curTent regional context also reduces growth prospects somewhat, but Jordan's economy has
diversified significantly and proved resilient to ongoing regional events. Inflation is expected to
fall below 2 percent after a moderate increase in the past year as subsidies on petroleum products
art eliminated.

43 
As the economy picks up momentum, the pressure on the current account of the balance
of payments is expected to be offset by buoyant exports and reduced interest payment on
ex :ernal debt, allowing the current account to move close to balance in the medium term. The
real exchange rate should stabilize as a result of low domestic inflation and continued strength of
the Euro against the U.S. dollar.

8 External debt includes total government and government guaranteed external debt, collaterized Brady Bonds and

short-term debt (5 percent of GDP in 2001).
9 TDtal public debt was estimated at 97.6 percent of GDP in 2001, including net domestic government debt of JD I
bill ion (US$1.42 billion), equivalent to 16 percent of GDP.
'° The arrangement offers a decreasing share over time (100 percent until July 2004 coinciding with IMF Stand-by
arr mgement, but diminishing by 10 percentage points in the following three years) of the total amount originally
fall ing due over this period of about US$2 billion.

16

44. 
The need for government borrowing is expected to decline gradually to below 4 percent
of GDP, in line with the GOJ's debt policy, and thanks to continued external grants in amounts
equivalent to 5 percent of GDP per year average in the next three years. Active external debt
management (Brady Bond buy backs, negotiated swaps) has brought the ratio of external debt to
GDP down to 85 percent in 2001.11 The July 2002 Paris Club debt rescheduling agreement,
together with continued prudent fiscal management, is expected to bring down the debt to GDP
ratio below 60 percent by 2005. The new public debt law, enacted in 2001, will allow Jordan's
external debt to cap at 60 percent of GDP in the future.

45. 
Risks in the Base Case. The GDP projections underlying the base-case scenario are
vulnerable to external risks that could reduce effective growth to around 4 percent over the next
two years. These risks include continued or yet greater Israeli-Palestinian violence, lower than
expected grant financing of the PSET, a reduction in market appetite for state assets to be
privatized, and a slowdown in export growth. Even in the case of a full implementation of the
PSET, high uncertainty might reduce its expected growth impact. Lower growth would make it
difficult for the GOJ to reach the fiscal targets of the base case. While some tightening will be
expected under such circumstances, especially in discretionary programs, the base-case scenario
will include some limited flexibility in fiscal targets in case of external shocks to the economy.
The situation will be monitored in close collaboration with the IMF (see paragraph 108 for more
discussion on risks).

46. 
High-Case Scenario. The high-case scenario contemplates a situation where benign
external conditions and a firm implementation of the government program allow economic
growth rates and fiscal parameters that fully meet or exceed the base-case scenario targets. The
recent dynamism in exports, as well as the new free trade agreements with the United States and
Europe, bear the potential for achieving the kind of growth that will allow a dent to be made in
the high unemployment rate in Jordan. Robust growth is also an opportunity to aggressively
address the budget deficit, which remains high. Enhanced economic performance will also hinge
on concrete actions to address the most difficult items of the country's structural reform agenda,
particularly in sectors such as water and public administration.

47. 
Low-Case Economic Scenario. The low-case scenario considered in this document
assumes a worsening policy stance on fiscal and monetary issues, leading to low economic
growth and inefficient use of public resources in the economy. Substantial slippage from the
government fiscal targets supported by the IMF Stand-By Arrangement or continued strong
appreciation of the real exchange rate would represent policies that, under normal external
conditions, could not be supported by adjustment lending from the Bank. Such policies would
justify a lower overall lending volume.

48. 
This document does not discuss the potential impact of a war in the region, which could
dramatically worsen the terms of trade for Jordan, cut off a major source of foreign grants, and
affect the trade logistics of the economy. Among the countries in the region, Jordan would be
among the most severely affected in the short term. It is likely that concessional foreign

" Extemal debt includes total government and govemment guaranteed extemal debt, collaterized Brady Bonds and
short-term debt (5 percent of GDP in 2001).

assistance would rise to offset partly the impact on macro balances. GDP growth would,
nev -rtheless, be adversely impacted in the event of such a conflict in the near term (see
paragraph 108 on risks).

Table 11.1 Key Macroeconomic Indicators

Indicators 

| 1991 -95 

1996-00 

17

2004

2001 
(Prel.) 
4.2 
25.8 
25 9 
1.8 

2002 

2003 
(Proj.)
6.0 
27 9 
27 6 
2.5 

7.3 
23.7 
32.4 
4.3 

3.1 
27.3 
26 1 
2.7 

-8.2 
-4.1 
4.1 
1.4 
1.2 
0.6 
31.1 
35.4 
n/a 

5.1 
29.6 
25.7 
2.4 

-8.4 
-3.3 
3.3 
2 0 
1 3 
0.9 
29 6 
33.3 
0.9 

-4.2 
0.6 
-0.6 
0 0 
-1.3 
6.0 
37 0 
36.0 
n/a 

Rea GDP (mkt. Pr.) growth 
Gro.;s national savings, current prices, in % of GNI 
Gron;s domestic investment, current prices, in % of GDP 
Inflation (CPI) in % 
Fisc sl balance (central govt.)
Excluding grants in % of GDP 
Including grants in % of GDP 
Fiiiancing in % of GDP 
Prvatization (net) in % of GDP 
DOcmestic Borrowing (net) in % of GDP 
Primary balance in % of GDP 
Fiscal revenues including grants in % of GDP 
Fiscal expenditures in % of GDP 
Of which Program for Social and Economic Transformation 
speiiding in % of GDP
Curient account balance including grants in % of GDP 
-9.5 
0.6 
-0 1 
3.7 
0.1 
TotE I debt service (commitment basis) in % of exports' 
17.1 
15.5 
12.5 
11.9 
12.9 
External public debt, end period in % of GDP 3
120.7 
88.9 
75.8 
72.0 
66.9 
Doniestic Debt, end period in % of GDP 
28.4 
19.2 
21 9 
20.4 
32 2 
Gross Reserves (as months of imports) 2
6 2 
6 8 
7.0 
9.1 
8.1 
Not s: 
1. Debt service ratio is the ratio of debt service to export of goods and non-factor service, factor income
receipts and worker remittance receipts.
2 Gross reserves as months of imports are calculated for 1999-2007 and estimated for 1991-1998 as gross
international reserves divided by merchandized imports excluding re-exports.
3. Extemal debt refers to govemment and government guaranteed medium- and long-term extemal
debt, excluding collaterized Brady Bonds.
Sou rces: 1. IMF staff estimates as of November 2002 and Article IV Consultation Report 2002.
2. Monthly Bulletin (November 2002) by Central Bank of Jordan

-10.3 
-4 3 
4.3 
2 7 
0.8 
-0.3 
31 3 
35 6 
1 9 

-8.1 
-3.8 
3.8 
-0 1 
2.3 
0.7 
30.8 
33.8 
n/a 

58
28.3
27 7
1 8

-8 4
-3 9
3.9
2 5
-0.1
-0 4
29 4
33 3
n/a

0.7
12.3
62 5
32 3
7.6

C. ]External Environment
49. 
Because Jordan's economy is small and relatively open, it is significantly affected by the
exti,rnal environment. Four key external factors that challenge Jordan in the near term are the
slowvdown in world trade growth, the decline in tourism, more selective interest by foreign
inv.-stors in emerging markets, and the weak outlook on oil prices. Mitigating factors are present
but do not override continuing uncertainty arising from ongoing conflicts in the regions.

50. Weak demand and increasing capacity from non-OPEC sources are expected to keep oil
prices at around US$20 per barrel for the next three years, down from the average of US$28 per
bar-el recorded in 2000. The weak oil prices will limit demand from neighboring oil producers
for goods and workers from Jordan. However, cheaper international oil prices could help Jordan
spe -d up the process of eliminating domestic price subsidies for petroleum products.

18

III. COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND PRIORITIES

51. 
In addition to maintaining macroeconomic stability, Jordan's main development
challenges can be summarized in three cross-sectoral objectives: (i) achieving higher growth to
reduce and avoid poverty; (ii) improving the quality and efficiency of public services, with an
emphasis on education, health, and safety net programs; and (iii) addressing severe resource
constraints, beginning with the growing water scarcity. These challenges can be met by
deepening the reforms undertaken to date; building institutional capacity to implement, sustain,
and deliver reforms, while generating benefits to the population; and ensuring greater
effectiveness of resource use and enhancing the role of the private sector.

52. 
Strategic Vision. The National Strategy for Poverty Alleviation and the PSET together
constitute a strategic vision for poverty reduction and growth. They represent a clear and firm
commitment by the GOJ to pursue policies and programs in line with achieving the MDGs while
also preventing an increase of poverty and inequality.

53. 
Supporting Programs. To achieve its goals, the PSET calls for deepening and
accelerating the pace of structural reforms and of investments in key sectors, and for
strengthening development partnerships between the public and private sectors. Among the
structural reforms envisaged under the PSET are: (a) legal and regulatory changes aimed at
further improving the investment climate; (b) an accelerated program of privatization covering
almost all public enterprises; (c) public sector reform to improve the efficiency of public service
delivery; (d) pension fund reform; and (e) education and health sector reforms.

54. 
The PSET calls for a large package of additional spending and reform in several areas.
Public investment will be increased in education, vocational training, culture, media, youth care,
health care, social productivity and poverty alleviation, water resources and rural development,
and telecommunications. The PSET will also encourage private investment in large infrastructure
projects, including the Disi water conveyance project, power plants, a natural gas pipeline from
Egypt, and the development of Aqaba, Amman, and the Dead Sea. For 2002, the program
envisages an off-budget expenditure of up to JD200 million, contingent on the availability of
privatization proceeds and supplementary foreign grants.

55. 
Diagnosis. The Bank has been assisting the GOJ in PSET implementation with a program
of technical assistance in FY02 and FY03. Sector reviews were provided as well as a well
received model for prioritizing projects. Moreover, further assistance is contemplated in FY04
and FY05. The PSET is not without risk. It will increase the presence of the public sector in the
economy through significant additional expenditures. As a result, the fiscal deficit (before grants)
is likely to increase in the event that external grant financing could not be mobilized or
expenditures could not be correspondingly trimmed. The long-term impact on the deficit will
depend on the inertia of the spending programs. Although the GOJ is committed to financing
PSET expenditures from non-debt-creating sources, recurrent outlays are likely to be required-
the GOJ informed the Bank that it plans to create some fiscal space through budgeting efficiency.
Even if adequate external resources can be mobilized, the program is likely to increase the
dependence of the Jordanian economy on foreign grants. The program's long-term growth and
development effects will depend largely on the response of the private sector-that response is
likely to depend on matters lying outside the scope of the PSET.

19

IV. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. I'rogress and Outcomes in Past World Bank Group Programs

56. 
Implementation of the Previous CAS. The last CAS was designed to support the
couitry's development objectives through a broad array of instruments: adjustment lending;
investment operations in water, education and training, and export development; partial risk
gua-antees to catalyze private investment in large infrastructure projects; technical assistance and
anal ytical and advisory (AAA) services to facilitate knowledge sharing and capacity building;
and partnership with other donors to leverage Bank support. The adjustment operations went
forward. The guarantee operations did not proceed as the relevant transactions became delayed.
The only investment operation that was approved by the Board was in higher education. Several
smaller investment projects did not proceed due to changed policies, availability of grant funds
or a lack of institutional capacity to implement as planned. AAA implementation was generally
successful. An analysis of the implementation of the last CAS is shown in box IV. 1.

57. 
Evaluation of Bank Performance by Operations Evaluation Department. The Bank's
Operations Evaluation Department (OED) is evaluating the effectiveness of World Bank Group
assistance to Jordan from 1990 to 2000. While OED has not finalized the Country Assistance
Evaluation (CAE), one conclusion of the draft CAE is that since growth has not resumed as
exp2cted, the Bank's adjustment lending supporting structural reforms did not achieve its
ultimnate objectives, even though many of the reforms were implemented. It should be noted,
however, that growth did pick up in 1999 and continued strong despite regional disturbances and
the worldwide impact of the events of September 1 1. The record since 1999 indicates that
Jordan's economy has gained resilience from the structural reforms supported by the Bank. Some
preliminary conclusions of the draft CAE are shown in box IV.2.

B. Objectives and Principles of CAS

58. 
CAS Objectives. The overarching objective of the CAS is poverty reduction and
prevention. Guided by the principles outlined below and the GOJ's own strategy, and limited to
the areas in which the Bank Group can provide results, the five priorities of the CAS are:
* Promoting human development for poverty alleviation including gender-responsive
policies, strategies, and programs for education, health, and social insurance and
assistance.
* Enhancing conditionsfor growth led by the private sector.
* Addressing resource conservation, exploitation, and management with a focus on water
scarcity.
Improving governance through public sector reform and broader, deeper analytical
determination of development policies, priorities, and strategies, and through institutional
capacity building for efficient and equitable implementation of policies.
* Promoting gender inclusion in development planning and analysis.

* 

What Did Not Happen
Project lending was considerably lower than expected because
the GOJ strove to limi borrowing to bring down its high level of
external debt.

20

Box IV.1 

Implementation of Previous CAS

What Happened 
Bank portfolio of 9 projects was implemented satisfactorily 
indicating excellent Bank/GOJ partnership in project execution 
However, close supervision continued as the country's capacity 
to implement complex operations, particularly in infrastructure,
continued to be weak
Public Sector Reform (supported by Public Sector Reform
Loans-PSRLs)
Civil Service Reform: Implementation of new civil service bylaws Very slow implementation of budgetary reform
and regulations and procedures on selection and performance
evaluation of Government employees, within the Bank
supported PSRLs.
Legal and Judicial Reform. Adoption of arbitration code, basic
upgrade of Amman court management system, presentation of
law to parliament for reform of Judicial Institute.
Govemment Restructuring: Cabinet approval received for
creation of Ministry of Administrative Development and Civil
Service.
Financial and Procurement Reform Preparation of draft public 
procurement law and regulations meeting intemational 
standards prepared with support from Bank staff.
Economic Growth
Investment Promotion: Legislation prepared, approved by
cabinet, and presented to parliament.
Prnvatization progressing well-51 transactions completed, 
raising more than US$900 million achieved with close Bank 
advice and technical assistance (TA). 
Export Development supported by the Bank through a series of 
Economic Reform and Development Loans (ERDLs). Impressive
growth of 25 percent in 2000-01

GOJ's internal procurement processes not yet in line with
international standards; procurement law not yet passed

Some large privatization transactions-Royal Jordanian
Airlines, power generation-delayed.
Cooperative sector not restructured, as envisaged under the
previous CAS.

Human Development and Social Protection
Education- Successful implementation of Higher Education 
Project under way; Global Development Leaming Network 
center established at University of Jordan with direct Bank 
assistance and supervision Several new features being 
prepared or introduced in schools to meet challenges of the
knowledge economy. Based on Bank's AAA work, broad
consensus in govemment and among the public is that a new 
education vision is needed. 
Health: Health sector strategy updated, and a long-term reform
program begun with Bank's assistance.
Poverty Reduction: Comprehensive national poverty alleviation 
strategy adopted.
The project activities financed under the Community
Infrastructure Development Loan have created job opportunities
for local labor estimated at 240,600 work days.
Water
Water sector strategy updated with Bank's assistance. 

Improvements in leaming outcomes not adequate.
Continued lack of coherent, comprehensive strategy for
improving quality and relating education to needs of the labor
market

Insufficient progress toward improving quality and allocative
efficiency of health care system.

Poverty cannot yet be accurately measured or targeted.

Outside Amman, slow progress in preparing water systems for
operations and maintenance contracts with private sector
parties. Tender documents for Disi-Amman Water Conveyor
Project delayed.

21

Box IV.2 World Bank Assistance Evaluation Reports

OE[D prepared two reports as background to the Country Assistance Evaluation Report; one on Bank assistance for health,
educ ation, and poverty reduction, and one on the Economic Developments in the 1 990s and World Bank Assistance The reports
cove r the period 1990-2000.

Economic Developments in the 1990s and World Bank Assistance

The evaluation found the Bank's economic and sector work highly satisfactory, although some Important sectors (e g., labor
marliets) should have had greater attention.
The report evaluated the outcome of the Bank loans as moderately satisfactory because while they helped stave off Jordan's
finaicial crises and helped support the stable currency, they did not boost investment or growth. The Bank 's performance was
mocerately satisfactory: although its loans did not incorporate all of its analytical work, there were areas where the government
did liot feel a consensus existed for reform and the Bank could have been more persuasive The GOJ complied with the loan
covernants, but resisted including important reforms as loan conditions that may have improved outcomes. There has been no
mar ced change in institutions, and their development is therefore rated as modest. There does, however, seem to be a widespread
agreement that the reforms were desirable, and sustainability is therefore likely.
The evaluation recommended that future Bank assistance should support a significant reduction in government expenditures,
especially those that many PERs have already identified as being poorly spent. Given the high and persistent unemployment, a
study of the labor market rigidities could provide the basis for their removal, thereby reducing unemployment and helping
alle ,iate poverty.

Hcalth, Education, and Poverty Reduction

* 

OEI) rated the overall quality of the Bank's AAA program in poverty, health, and education as satisfactory. The overall quality
of tie lending portfolio was more mixed, with the outcomes generally rated as satisfactory, but the development impacts rated as
modest and their sustainability uncertain.
* 
For the AAA program, although the Bank has been able to identify some of the most pressing sectoral issues and
develop a strategy to deal with poverty, there have been some limitations. First, most of the recommendations made
have not found their way into actions. Second, the early work on education was too narrowly focused and did not
provide an adequate perspective from which to plan a comprehensive assistance strategy for the sector
For the lending portfolio, the evaluation found that, although the health projects have improved primary health care and
health sector manpower development, major problems persist-such as high expenditures, inefficiency, poor
management, and the absence of a universal insurance scheme. The evaluation also found that results in education
would have been better if the Bank had provided a review of policy and technical issues for the education sector as a
whole rather than addressing sectoral policy and technical issues piecemeal.
OE D Recommendations
* Analytical work to identify development priorities for the sector and the economy as a whole should precede project
lending intended to tackle those priorities. The Bank's assistance program for education, for example, should be a
review of the entire sector. The review should address the question of priority areas for future assistance
* A more purposeful and effective way to monitor and evaluate the outcomes of the projects should be developed
* Greater emphasis should be put on institutional development impact and sustainability, particularly in the design of
health and education projects.
* The CAS should identify the reasons for recent increases in poverty and design actions to reverse those increases.

59. 
Building on Lessons Learned. Over the past decade, Jordan adopted many of the
re orms supported by Bank lending and AAA program. Many of the immediate outputs of the
AkA program were achieved, but the overall objective of growth and poverty reduction
relnained elusive. As the draft OED evaluations and other Bank analysis noted, the development
censtraints were usually not financing but rather institutional capacity, and information and
kr owledge about international best practices and how other countries have addressed similar
challenges. Consequently, this CAS, while not making dramatic break with the past, does
atiempt greater focus in its objectives and guiding principles. The CAS program is built around

22

the cross-cutting themes of capacity building and knowledge development to help put in place or
strengthen, where the Bank can, those absent development factors, the foundation stones for
sustainable growth and poverty reduction.

Participation, Partnership, and Selectivity

60. 
Participatory Process. The CAS preparation process began with a one-day retreat for the
Country Team and GOJ representatives in key sectors. Results from the consultations revealed
substantial common ground among participants and helped identify development goals and shape
the Bank's draft program. A mission visited Jordan in June 2002 to discuss with the GOJ the
areas of focus and the instruments proposed in the CAS. The mission also met with other major
stakeholders in the private sector, academia, NGOs, and the donor community.

61. 
Further consultations with civil society and key donors took place during a follow-up
CAS mission in mid-October 2002, which was led by the Country Director. The mission, which
also included IFC, met with 45 representatives of different segments of Jordan's nascent civil
society-the private sector, NGOs, academia, and the media. The meeting revolved around
Jordan's development priorities and challenges from the perspective of civil society, and what
the Bank can do to support Jordan meet these challenges, and also provided a forum for
discussions between the GOJ and civil society on the country's main development issues,
generated considerable interest in longer-term process of engagement.

62. 
Coordination with Development Partners. Official development assistance to Jordan
during the last five years averaged about US$640 million per year, of which 51 percent were
grants. This does not include concessional oil sales from Iraq, which represent the equivalent of a
grant of US$300 million. USAID is the biggest bilateral donor, followed by Japan, the European
Union, and Germany. The Arab Fund and the Islamic Development Bank, in addition to the
Bank, are the most important multi-lateral donors. Box IV.2 shows the major partners and the
sectors in which they are involved. The Bank has regular meetings with the major partners in
Jordan, as well as at their home offices, to exchange views and information, and to coordinate
and complement our assistance strategies to the country. The CAS was discussed with EU
counterparts in November. Bilateral talks were also held with Germany, France, Canada, and
USAID. Bank staff also regularly consult regional development banks such as the Islamic
Development Bank (IsDB) and Arab Fund for Social and Economic Development. The
relationship with the IsDB has been formalized in a Memorandum of Agreement on the
modalities for greater cooperation in the Middle East and North Africa Region, including Jordan.
The OED and IsDB recently collaborated in the preparation of the Country Assistance
Evaluation on Jordan.

63. 
There is room for more effective collaboration between development partners. The draft
OED evaluation recommended that the Bank needs to strengthen its coordination with other
main partners in Jordan.12 The Bank intends to do so through regular exchange of views on each
other's assistance strategy, in order to ensure greater coordination, strengthen the spirit of
partnership, enable greater selectivity for the Bank's own program, and identify specific areas for

12 OED, Country Assistance Evaluation for the period 1990-2000 (in preparation).

Dunng the last five years, Jordan has received an average of US$640 million in foreign aid-including an average of US$324
million in grant assistance and US$316 million in loan assistance-from about 35 foreign govemments and multilateral agencies

Box IV.3 Major Partners in Jordan

23

Foreign Aid to Jordan 1998-2001 (USS million) 

|Grant

800 
600 

_- 

619000 

_ 

W 

1200 

::_FnlF 

*Loans|

tTla

__ 

21 

2

X 

The United States. The United States is Jordan's largest source of development assistance, which comes in the form of grants.
USfID intends to spend US$150 million in Economic Support Funds in FY2002 and US$250 million in FY2003. USAID's program
focuses on three strategic objectives (a) improved water resources management; (b) improved access to and quality of
repr3ductive and primary health care; and (c) increased economic opportunities for Jordanians. Gender and NGOs receive
proriinent treatment. (some of USAID actvities in Jordan are listed in Annex C)

The European Union. A recent EU country strategy paper outlines European assistance to Jordan for the period 2002-06 The
main objective in the medium term is to ensure successful implementation of the EU-Jordan association agreement as part of
Jorc an's overall modemization and to mitigate negative effects of economic reforms by supporting social reforms (poverty
alleviation) and human resources development (employment creation) (some of the EU's activities in Jordan are listed in
Ann x C).

Jap in. Japan provides grants, soft loans, and technical cooperation. Pnority areas are: (a) basic human needs, including water
supply, food supply, primary health care and medical services, and education; (b) industry, and (c) environment conservation

Gernany. Germany's development cooperation dunng 2002 concentrates on four areas water and environment, capacity building,
rura development and agriculture, and poverty alleviation.

Aral) Funds and the Islamic Development Bank. The Abu Dhabi Fund for Development, the Arab Fund for Economic and Social
Dev alopment, and the Islamic Development Bank are all significant donors to Jordan. They emphasize water, infrastructure,
capaicity building, and direct investments in human aevelopment (health and education).

Othirs Although less important in terms of financial flows, other bilateral and multilateral agencies contnbute significantly,
esp(icially in terms of technical assistance and training Among the bilaterals, Canada, France, Italy, Spain, and the United
Kingdom are important The principal multilateral partners are the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
Intei national Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment
Pro Iramme, and the World Food Program

up,tream collaboration over the CAS period, and to ensure that the donor community remains
invDlved in the CAS implementation process. A recently created Donor Coordination Group
cortsisting of most of the major donors in Jordan meets regularly. Visiting Bank missions
participate in these discussions when possible. The Lebanon Country Office, which also serves
Jor Ian, has been strengthened. The country economist for Jordan has been transferred from
Washington to Beirut, giving the office greater field presence and enabling greater participation
in informal donor group monthly meetings and more regularly coordinate with other partners in
the field. Since July, several meetings have been held in Amman, Brussels and Washington with
the principal partners.

24

64. 
Selectivity and Partnership. Lending in the CAS will focus on areas where (i) other
donors are less active (public sector reforms); (ii) there are heavy policy agenda and knowledge
transfer components (e.g., education reforms), in which the Bank has a relative comparative
advantage; and (iii) where Bank support can have a catalytic impact on private investment (e.g.,
partial risk guarantees for power and water). Just over 75 percent of Bank lending during the
next three years is proposed for only two operations-public sector reforms, where few other
donors are involved, and in education reform for the knowledge economy. The Bank plans to
collaborate with the European Investment Bank and other partners in the education sector, with
the Bank taking the lead in policy and capacity-building components. In nonlending services, as
earlier recommended by OED, Bank assistance will complement the work of other partners (e.g.
privatization and enterprise development which are heavily supported by USAID), or provide the
analytical underpinning, in terms of sector work and technical assistance for support by other
donors (e.g., water sector reforms, labor market study, pension fund reform, health sector
strategy, poverty assessment).

C. CAS Instruments

65. 
The instruments used in the CAS must strike the right balance between lending and
nonlending services to fulfill Jordan's priorities and make optimal use of the Bank's comparative
advantage as a global knowledge institution. Financial constraints are not the most binding
development constraints for Jordan. Geopolitical considerations ensure that Jordan is one of the
highest per capita aid recipients in the world (US$103 per capita in 2000), and there is
considerable room in Jordan to reduce, as well as to improve the efficiency of, public
expenditures. Moreover, Jordan's desire to limit external borrowing and bring down the
country's level of external debt, means that the volume of future Bank lending will be limited
and resource transfer will not be the primary form of Bank support. On the other hand,
knowledge about how other countries have addressed similar development challenges, and
information about international best practices and how to tailor them to Jordan's circumstances,
should become relatively more important. More knowledge transfer through technical assistance,
advisory services, economic and sector analysis, and dissemination of cutting-edge knowledge
and international experience will become more important vehicles for future Bank support.

66. 
Lending. Bank lending to Jordan will focus on areas where the Bank can promote and
accelerate key policy changes, have a catalytic impact on private investment or donor support,
bundle lending with knowledge (in the form of technical assistance and international best
practice), or support innovative approaches likely to lead to systemic changes. The level of Bank
lending and guarantees will be lower than in the previous CAS.

67. 
Analytical and Advisory Services. Because Jordan needs sustained support for policy
reforms, as well as help in moving into knowledge economy, the Bank's support over the next
three years will focus heavily on analytical and advisory (AAA) services. In addition to the more
traditional AAA, the Bank plans to use Programmatic Economic and Sector Work (PESW)
which would enable the Bank to provide sustained support for policy reform, implementation,
and institutional development. Jordan may have access to alternative sources of finance, but it
also has a clear need for assistance in shaping the institutions and structures responsible for
making and implementing policy reforms. The PESW, which is likely to be an increasingly
important form of Bank assistance to Middle Income Countries, will provide: (1) sustained and

25

systematic outcome-oriented support in the absence of lending; (2) structure, discipline, and
incentives to exploit knowledge services-through direct links to outcomes and through a
management, quality assurance, and budget framework that supports sustained and effective
ergagement by staff in the absence of a lending framework; and (3) creation of a mechanism for
aligning Bank and partner support around core development objectives. Support by other
pz,rtners could build on the Bank's analytical work.

6k:. 
The PESWs are structured, focused, client-owned tools for dialogue, policy advice and
kinowledge sharing. A PESW can be a viable standalone form of assistance or it can be linked to
one or more ongoing activities or reforms which separately may be financially supported by the
Bmnk or by another partner. PESW is essentially a work prograrn, structured on agreed
timetables, outputs, progress benchmarks and monitoring for impact. Each PESW is an agreed
fr,mnework for a focused program of knowledge sharing aimed at assisting the client in achieving
a ;pecific developmental goal. PESW selectivity is linked to the five CAS priorities (paragraph
58). Because it is a new activity for Jordan and for the Bank's Jordan Country Team, there is no
detailed or fixed template yet for each of the areas selected for its use. However, the general
principles are clear. For each PESW, the timeframe is to be agreed, and is anticipated to be 1-3
years. The agreed priority components and an impact-oriented action plan with clear
responsibilities for the Bank, the client, and any other partner will be set out in a memorandum
which includes benchmarks and periodic reporting to determine progress or exit. The GOJ and
the Bank have agreed on three areas for PESW-education, water, and pension fund reform.

26

V. BANK GROUP ACTIVITIES TO SUPPORT THE STRATEGY

69. 
The CAS program is described in matrix format (table VI4). The sections below indicate
the activities as organized in the five priority areas.

A. Human Development and Poverty Reduction

70. 
Education for a Global Economy. Building on the extensive initiatives of the past
decade, and in response to internal and external evaluation recommendations, the Bank intends
to help Jordan develop a comprehensive strategic framework for education. The first step was the
convening, in September 2002, of a highly successful forum aimed at articulating a vision for an
education system responsive to the needs of the knowledge economy. A National Education
Strategy drafted at the forum has formed the basis for subsequent discussions by the Economic
Consultative Council's Third Economic Forum, chaired by the King and representing the GOJ
and private sector. These discussions and consultations will be followed by a series of
consensus-building workshops with stakeholders-including local and district-level officials,
community leaders, private education providers, and labor market representatives-to build
consensus around the strategic vision and to design plans for implementing the vision. The
Bank's technical assistance to help the GOJ develop this strategy and identify the means of its
implementation are key goals of the CAS.

71. 
Lending. The Bank will work with the GOJ to design the third lending project in the
series of Human Resources Development Sector Investment Loan, titled Education Reform for
the Knowledge Economy, on the basis of the new National Education Strategy. The project
objectives include achieving sustainable learning outcomes relevant to the knowledge economy
by supporting gender-responsive educational reform at the governance, program, and facility
levels. The project accommodates improving the quality of the physical learning environment,
building information and communications infrastructure in schools, training teachers in
information and communication technologies and e-learning, and supporting implementation and
evaluation of e-learning pilots.

72. 
PESWandAAA. In addition to the lending, as part of the National Education Strategy,
the Bank will also carry out a PESW to support the Ministry of Education and the National
Council of Family Affairs to develop an Education Strategy, including an investment strategy for
early childhood education. Bank support is expected to contribute to an enhanced institutional
capacity for early childhood education within the Ministry of Education, a cadre of early
childhood educators, increased access to kindergartens for the poor, and parent and community
participation and partnership (public awareness and understanding).

73. 
Reforming the Health Sector. To provide a framework for comprehensive health sector
reform in Jordan, the Bank proposes to:

Assist the GOJ in organizing a health reform symposium to take stock of health reform
efforts to date, define government priorities, and identify the main strategic directions to
implement them.

27

a Provide technical assistance to the GOJ in the form of a Health Sector Strategy, and more
specifically to the Higher Health Council, supporting the elaboration of a health sector
strategy that will include short-, medium-, and long-term actions based on ongoing work
in the country by the GOJ and intemational and national agencies. This strategy should
take into account the epidemiological transition in the country and the need to adjust the
health system to provide integrated chronic care. This strategy should also identify the
resources (financial and human) necessary to implement the strategy.
* Ensure that those components of the ongoing World Bank Health Sector Reform Project
that focus on global pharmaceutical and health information system reforms are
adequately implemented.
* Provide support for the development of a nationwide network for monitoring and
promoting women's health.

74. 
Poverty Assessment. In FY04, in support of the National Strategy for the Alleviation of
Pove rty, the Bank and the GOJ will undertake a poverty assessment based on the HEIS to be
completed in 2003. It is proposed that a poverty-targeted operation responsive to the results of
the assessment should be developed at the municipal level in FY04. The objectives of the
operation will be to improve living conditions in poor communities by: (i) developing an
intergovemmental transfer mechanism that is poverty sensitive and gender-responsive and that
equalizes fiscal conditions across local governments; (ii) strengthening the institutional capacity
of the Cities and Villages Development Bank (CVDB) to ensure a hard budget constraint to
municipalities (to avoid future insolvency and disruption of services); (iii) improving the
capacity of governorates and municipalities to do participatory planning, budgeting, and
implementation; and (iv) addressing the basic infrastructure needs of poor communities through
dem,md-driven community development. The GOJ's recent empowerment of governorates and
its amalgamation of municipalities (from 328 to 99) puts regional and local government in a
muc:i better position to implement the operation and respond to the needs of the populace. The
operation will build on the lessons learned from the ongoing Community Infrastructure
Devtdlopment Project and the Jordan Social Productivity Program.

75. 
Poverty and Gender Data Collection and Analysis. Capacity for data collection and
analyisis will be funded by the Institutional Development Fund (IDF), to build analytical capacity
in the Department of Statistics for poverty measurement, poverty profiling and distribution, and
poverty monitoring, including gender aspects. WBI will also assist the Ministry of Planning in its
program of poverty monitoring and evaluation.

76. 
Pension Reform PESW. In FY03, the GOJ and the Bank will embark on a PESW, in
collhboration with the IMF, to implement short-term reforms of pension funds for civil servants
and ,nilitary personnel, and to initiate the preparation of a gender-responsive multi-year program
for systemic reform of the entire pension system.

B. A chieving Greater Gender Equity

77. 
The Poverty Assessment (FY03-04) and Public Expenditure Review (FY03-04) will
integrate gender analysis into the poverty diagnosis and public expenditure frameworks. These
effoits will be informed by ongoing work in gender. For example, through two IDF grants, the
Ban1c is supporting women and family issues in the delivery of public health services. Among the

28

anticipated outcomes of the IDF funded efforts are a nationwide database of women's issues in
Jordan; a detailed plan for the establishment of a national women's center; and a needs
assessment survey of female dependents of military personnel. With the findings, the Bank plans
to help the GOJ develop a detailed package of curative and preventive services for the target
population, especially those in underserved areas of the south.

78. 
The Country Gender Assessment (FY04) will identify gender-responsive policies and
actions important for poverty reduction, economic growth, human well-being, and development
effectiveness in a collaborative process. The assessment will update and synthesize existing
analytical work and help identify priority gender areas for further analytical work, policy design,
advisory services, partnerships and project activities.

C. Private Sector Development and Infrastructure for Sustainable Growth and Job
Creation

79. 
In close partnership with other donors, notably USAID and the European Union, the
Bank will focus on three areas in which it has a strong comparative advantage-improving the
investment environment, privatization, and export development. A FY04 Labor Market Study
will provide the information needed to assist both anti-poverty measures as well as private sector
efforts for job creation.

80. 
Improving the Overall Investment Environment. Work in this area will involve all the
World Bank Group's private sector actors; IBRD (with strong support from WBI), IFC, and
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). A principle objective of past and ongoing
Bank support for structural reforms is to improve the environment for private investment. 13
Expanding lending will be addressed in Mortgage Market Technical Assistance.

81. MIGA has been actively promoting its guarantee services, which appear to have become
more attractive as a result of the heightened tensions in the region. MIGA is currently reviewing
seven applications (involving potential projects representing an estimated US$1 billion in foreign
direct investment). Specific technical assistance interventions by MIGA will be identified case
by case. With an exposure of US$39.5 million (as of March 31, 2002), Jordan is the second
largest host country for MIGA guarantees in the MENA region. MIGA recently concluded a
cooperation agreement with the Jordanian Investment Board (JIB) to participate as a content
partner in MIGA's new FDI Xchange e-mail alert service. This online service provides
customized e-mail updates on new investment opportunities and market analysis matching the
interests expressed by registered users.

82. 
IFC has made business development in Jordan a high priority. During the previous CAS
period IFC experienced steady demand for financing from successful private sector companies,
including many export-oriented firms. IFC has been active in Jordan for many years and held a

13 The focus of Economic Reform and Development Loans (ERDL 1, II, and III) which were implemented during
1996-99 was to improve the investment climate-trade liberalization, legal and regulatory reforms, privatization
support, sectoral reforms. The ongoing Public Sector Reform Loans (PSRL I, II and III) aim to improve the interface
between the public and private sectors-judiciary reform, civil service reform, restructuring of government agencies
that deal with the private sector, improved service delivery of government agencies.

29

portiolio of US$94 million in 15 companies as of November 2002. The investments are
dive sified in hotels, financial services, chemicals, manufacturing, and industrial zones. Over the
past few years, IFC made an effort to diversify activities because almost half of its total exposure
had ,een in hotels, including three city hotels in Amman and two resort hotels on the Dead Sea.
IFC's exposure in tourism is now 30 percent of the outstanding portfolio. While tourism is one of
threc: priority areas for the GOJ, the sector is volatile because of the political climate in the
region. Moreover, a decline in hotel occupancy and room rates since 1995 indicates that the
marl;et is saturated.

83. 
Privatization. In cooperation with USAID, the Bank will continue to manage a trust fund
to support Jordan's privatization agenda and private provision of public infrastructure.
Priv atization is expected to improve the environment for private investment through (1)
enhEnced productivity and provision of better quality, lower cost services, and (2) by
encc.uraging private investment. Bank work on privatization combines both transactions and
regulatory capacity-building measures.

84. 
Export Development. While export growth has surged over the past two years, it is
driven by the QIZ system, which has weak linkages with the rest of the economy. A recent Bank
study on the sources of growth in Jordan identified infrastructure and trade logistics as a key
constraint to further export development. The Bank plans to conduct a follow-up Trade Logistics
Stucly to identify measures to improve trade logistics and facilitate exports. This work will
identify critical policy reforms, and clear priorities for future work. The Bank is providing direct
support for export diversification and development in the agriculture sector through a Learning
and Innovation Loan approved in FY02. Success of this pilot operation will open the door for
further Bank support in this area. MIGA has guaranteed a foreign investment in a fertilizer and
animnal feed supplement production facility in Aqaba. The project is expected to generate an
avelage of US$54.5 million in fertilizer exports during the first five years of operation.

85. 
IFC will continue to support export-oriented investments. In the past, the Corporation
made a number of investments in QIZs, which are primarily for export to the U.S. In FY01, IFC
invested in Boscan Jordan, a luggage manufacturer, and Jordan Gateway, an industrial zone. In
FY(12, IFC invested in two industrial zones in Jordan-Al Tajamouat Industrial City (committed
in C'ctober 2001), and Cybercity, an integrated industry and technology park (committed in
January 2002). IFC also committed MEREN, an investment in a silica sand project, primarily for
the export market. IFC is currently exploring new investments in pharmaceuticals, and export-
oriented electronic goods sectors. IFC is also investing in the IT sector, including software
development and animation for the regional market, via a venture capital company. The signing
of tbade agreements with the United States and the European Union is likely to enhance
prospects for private investment in export-oriented activities and IFC will continue to seek
oppDrtunities to support such activities.

86. 
Catalyzing Private Investment in Infrastructure: Partial Risk Guarantees and
Direct Investment. At the GOJ's request, the Bank Group will consider providing partial risk
guarantees to two projects: the Disi-Amman Conveyer Project (to transport drinking water to
Amman from the Disi aquifer on the Saudi Arabian border), and Samra First Private Power
Proj ect (the first build-operate-transfer power project in Jordan). The Bank may also consider a
partial risk guarantee to support the ongoing privatization in the power sector. Additionally, the

30

Bank plans to support transport and tourism operations to alleviate transportation bottlenecks and
contribute to further development of the tourism sector, which accounts for about 10 percent of
GDP. A recent Bank study'4 identified high transportation costs and poor transport logistics as an
important element in the high cost of doing business in Jordan. The Bank plans to support the
development of the transport corridor in the greater Amman area that would link the Zarqa
industrial area' 5 with Aqaba, the country's only sea outlet. The Bank will also support a lending
project for the Cultural Heritage, Tourism, and Urban Development project to attract private
investment in poor areas with significant cultural heritage assets.

87. 
IFC will continue to provide direct support to private sector participation in
infrastructure. An investment in Samra wastewater Build-Own-Operate is in the early stages. IFC
is in preliminary discussion on investment in the first IPP in Jordan. IFC would also be interested
in looking for investment opportunities in the oil and gas sector, including pipelines. A Bank
funded Energy Strategy Paper should assist in identifying promising opportunities.

D. Improving Water Resource Management and the Environment

88. Water Resource Management. The Bank plans to assist the GOJ in two important
areas-water demand management and supply augmentation. Its program for FY03-05 will
include a PESW to support a continuing policy dialogue on water issues facing Jordan. The Bank
will continue to support a comprehensive approach through integrated analysis and dialogue
about sectoral development policy in agriculture, industry, and urban development-with wider
participation of the public. The Bank will encourage a comprehensive policy on allocating water
among competing users; on pricing (which should take into consideration the economic value of
water and incentives for water conservation, including wastewater and drought management); on
the right institutional framework for managing water management and delivering services
efficiently; and finally on legal and regulatory aspects. To counter the impact of industrial
wastewaters and other industrial wastes on water resources, the Bank will help the GOJ form
policies and strategies to address pollution at the source, providing economic incentives that
enable industries to reduce pollution while maintaining their competitive advantage. To the
extent possible, such industrial policies should promote the use of clean technologies and dry
industries. A water sector strategy update would chronicle these activities and set out the desired
comprehensive approach. WBI will also support water sector reforms, primarily through sharing
the global knowledge and concrete country experiences.

89. 
Environment. The Bank's environmental assistance to Jordan will focus first on
addressing priority environmental issues by assisting in further mainstreaming of environmental
aspects in projects under preparation and supervision. Special efforts will be made to build on the
links between environmental protection and social development, economic efficiency, and
poverty alleviation, and to provide environmental management consultations where needed. The

4 Jordan Sources of Growth Study, World Bank, 2001.
1S Greater Amman, along with the urban area of Zarqa to the northeast, accounts for over 50 percent of the country's
population. It is the major commercial and industrial center of the country with over 80 percent of its industrial
sector located in this region.

31

seccnd prong of the Bank's support for the environment in Jordan will be to help protect the
country's natural heritage and the global commons through the following planned activities:

Conservation of Medicinal and Herbal Plants, a Global Environment Facility (GEF)
project (FY03)
Integrated Ecosystem Management in the Jordan Rift Valley GEF (FY04)
Gulf of Aqaba Environmental Consolidation Phase GEF (FY 04)

E. Imiproving Public Sector Efficiency and Governance

90. 
Public Sector Reform and Governance will continue to be a major area of Bank work
in Jordan for the next three years, but with a major shift in approach. In the past, much of the
dialogue in this area has focused on government-wide issues, pursued through large adjustment
loar s. This approach has provided the context and justification for the large financial transfers
requested by the GOJ, but it has not allowed the Bank to develop the knowledge-based
partnership that is needed to support the GOJ's public sector reform and institution-building
program. A Public Expenditure Review will be a centerpiece of the work program.

91. 
In terms of substance, work on public sector reform will continue to focus on public
adm7inistration, including the civil service, in support of the GOJ's effort to increase staff
accountability for delivering public services promptly, efficiently, and transparently. However, it
will focus more sharply on budgeting and financial management, consistent with the GOJ's
con mitment to advance policy reforms on this front. In particular, the work will support
government plans to move toward greater efficiency in expenditures and preventing the
exp mnsion of government spending. Work will focus on a results-oriented, medium-term
expenditure framework that will require much closer coherence and conformity with the Paris
Club and the program agreed with the IMF for exit from debt constraints and external finance
dependency. At the same time, Bank work will support the GOJ's programs to improve public
financial management, including procurement and auditing, through a Country Procurement
Assessment Report and a Country Financial Accountability Assessment.

92. 

Reform of the Municipal Sector. Half of Jordan's municipalities were declared
insclvent in 2000. In 2001, all 328 municipalities were amalgamated into 100 larger municipal
unil s. Their debt to the CVDB-a public municipal fund-was rescheduled. The factors
contributing to their insolvency included: (i) the mushrooming of small, poorly managed,
overstaffed municipalities; (ii) the lack of a hard budget constraint on municipal spending; and
(iii) poor built-in incentives and lack of horizontal equity in the intergovernmental transfer
syslem.

93. 
The recent measures to consolidate municipalities were necessary to generate economies
of scale in delivery of services and to raise municipal capacity, but they are not sufficient to
ensure that insolvency will not recur. Public sector reform efforts should include a municipal
governance component. Three areas of reform need to be considered: (i) strengthening the role
and autonomy of the CVDB as a specialized intermediary for municipal finance;
(ii) reconsidering the distributional criteria for intergovernmental transfers; and (iii) improving
municipal resource management practices and incentives. A FY03 Urban Management/
Mu,icipal Finance Strategy, which provides a detailed examination of the above challenges and

32

proposed reforms is being prepared.'6 WBI also intends to focus on municipal management
capacity-building activities. In the High Case, the CAS includes a Municipal Development
Project.

F. Supporting the Knowledge Economy

94. 
Knowledge Economy. A key plank in the PSET is focused on creating an enabling
environment for knowledge-based development in all areas of the economy. This explicit
recognition of the increasingly knowledge-intensive nature of competitive economies globally is
fairly unique in the region. The Bank and the GOJ will work with the private sector and other
key stakeholders to prepare a knowledge assessment of the Jordanian economy, complete with
recommendations. The assessment will be based on the five pillars of the knowledge economy
framework:

* An economic and institutional regime that provides incentives for the efficient use of
existing knowledge, the generation of new knowledge, the dismantling of obsolete
economic activities, and the creation of more efficient and competitive ones.
* An educated and entrepreneurial population that can create, use, and effectively
disseminate new knowledge.
* A dynamic information infrastructure for effective communication, dissemination, and
processing of information.
e An efficient innovation system of firms, science and research centers, universities, think
tanks, consultants, and other organizations that can interact and tap into the growing
stock of global knowledge, assimilate and adapt that knowledge to local needs, and use it
to create new knowledge and technology.
* An inclusion of leadership, governance, and gender indicators as part of the knowledge
economy framework.

95. 
The assessment would make the linkages between sectors such as ICT, education, private
sector development, much more explicit and facilitate prioritization of public policy choices. The
diagnostic work performed in the assessment will form the basis of a technical assistance to
evaluate and build on the assessment's recommendations. Annual triggers and monitorable
indicators will allow both the GOJ and the Bank to gauge progress toward agreed outcomes.
Such a technical assistance program would also allow explicit linkages between sectors such as
private sector development, education, ICT, etc., thus improving prioritization of public policy
choices for decision-makers.

16 "Jordan- Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations and Municipal Finance Sector Note," draft, September 2002.

33

VI. MANAGING THE ACTIVITIES

A. Portfolio Management

96. 
IBRD Lending. Since the last CAS, Jordan has been able to maintain a very strong
portfolio performance. Eight of the ten projects closed since the last CAS achieved their
de ielopment objectives and were completed with only minor delays. OED has evaluated five of
the eight projects and rated their sustainability as likely, their outcome satisfactory (between
highly satisfactory and moderately satisfactory), and the performances of Bank and borrower as
salisfactory. The Bank's Quality Assurance Group reviewed four projects under supervision and
foimd the overall quality of supervision to be satisfactory.'7

97. 
The current portfolio comprises seven loans and one Montreal Protocol project, for a total
net commitment of US$255.5 million and an average project age of 4.4 years. The ongoing
projects focus on education, urban development, health, social protection, water and sanitation,
ani tourism. All are in line with Jordan's present development agenda. Seven of the eight
projects are free of problems and risk, and the portfolio management targets set in the 1999 CAS
were largely met. The disbursement ratio for FY02 was 28.2 percent-on target and much higher
th; m the regional average of less than 14 percent (table VI. 1).

98. 
In preparation for this CAS, the Bank conducted a thorough review of the portfolio in
October 2002. During the CAS period, the Bank plans to conduct one or two output-based
Country Portfolio Performance Reviews. Strong ownership from Jordan, the excellent quality of
thz dialogue between the GOJ and the Bank, and the generally good project implementation
capacity of Jordanian institutions are the main factors behind the portfolio's relative success.

99. 
Decentralization. Of the seven loans in the active portfolio, two are managed by staff
lo ated in the Bank's Lebanon Country Office. This allows for proactive and flexible supervision
thait in turn promotes sustainability, facilitates mentoring, and allows for extensive monitoring
and evaluation. Because of these benefits, decentralization of the portfolio will be applied
whlenever feasible. The Country Economist is also now posted in the Lebanon Country Office.

1C0. No major changes are anticipated in the portfolio management strategy in th,e coming
years. The Bank will continue to use quality at entry and readiness filters'8 as its main tools,
fo-using on realistic objectives that are fully owned by the GOJ. In supervision, the Bank will
ccntinue at the current level of intensity to allow for successful implementation and continued
institutional capacity building.

17 upervision Quality in FYOO, A QAG Assessment, The World Bank.
18'rhe purpose of qualty at entry is to provide real-time feedback to staff and managers to improve the
developmental impact and identify systemic issues as a basis for improving quality of future operations.
Tb, e readinessfi lter is a tool that helps the user judge whether a project is ready for implementation before the loan
be -omes effective. Those criteria depend on the context of each country and include, among others, parliament

ral ification, implementation arrangements, framework for training if necessary, procurement plan, procedures

minual, etc.

34

Table VI.1 Portfolio Management Indicators

Indicators 

Previous CAS 

Target 

FY02 Actual 

FY03 

Targets

FY04 

Commitment at risk (percentage of 

Investment)

Disbursement ratio 
Realism index 

0 

30 
100 

1 9 

28.2 
100 

0 

25 
100 

0 

20 
100 

FY05

0

24
100

B. Monitoring Indicators and Benchmarks

101. 
Progress toward the achievement of the CAS objectives is shown in the CAS matrix
(Annex B9). Specific targets and possible intermediate indicators for each of the four areas of
CAS focus are shown below (table VI.2). The indicators should be interpreted with caution,
keeping in mind the difficulty of developing sound quantitative monitoring indicators, a weak
database on poverty, Jordan's limited monitoring and evaluation capacity, and the fact that the
true impact of interventions often can be observed only in the long run, making it necessary to
use interim or leading indicators for the CAS period.

Table VI.2 CAS Monitoring Indicators

Intefmediate Indicators 

Goals (2005)

Areas 
Human development
Poverty 

Reduction in unemployment from 
Ratio of people living under
15 percent at present to 13 percent by- US$2/day reduced by 50 percent
2004 
from the current 12 percent to 6
Design of poverty mapping 
percent
Proportion of poor covered by
govemment assistance nses from
18 percent at present to 30 percent by
2004
Implementation of education sector 
reforms 
Macroeconomic program targets met 
GDP growth in excess of 4 5 percente 
Export growth 10% and 9% in the years 

100 percent primary school
enrollment
GDP grows 5.5 percent or moreb
Nontraditional exports grow by
15 percent annually

Basic Education 

Macroeconomic stability and growth 

Public sector reform and govemance 

2003 and 2004 respectively

All policy reforms under PSRL I, II, and 
IlIl fully implemented 

Water resources management 

Demand management policies adopted 
and implemented 
Cost recovery policies adopted 

Improved service delivery as
measured by satisfaction of clients
expressed through service delivery
survey of selected govemment
agencies and departments to be
conducted starting FY04
Efficiency of water use in irrigated
agnculture improved by 5 percente
(from 45 percent to 50 percent)

a. Rate of growth required to keep unemployment from rising.
b. Target rate for growth for absorbing entrants to the labor market and reducing stock of unemployment.
c. As measured by water use per unit of agricultural output. Savings can result from efficiency of irrigation or from
shifting to higher-value crops.

102. To address these limitations in the CAS period, the various AAA activities are expected
to build reliable baseline data in key areas, such as poverty, gender, and efficiency of delivery of

35

basic public services, and to provide training and capacity-building assistance to key institutions
in inonitoring and evaluation. The Bank will also work with the GOJ to refine key targets. In the
are a of poverty, the Bank will support the inclusion of an extensive poverty and gender
coraponent in the 2003 household expenditure and income survey and help establish a poverty
monitoring unit in the Department of Statistics through an ongoing grant from the Institutional
De velopment Fund. The development of an adequate monitoring and evaluation system for the
delivery of government services is one of the important aspects of the public sector reform (PSR)
pro gram. Supported by the Bank, the PSR program includes surveys of deliveries of basic
government services as well as capacity building in monitoring and evaluation (M&E) for key
ministries and agencies. The Bank will also support M&E capacity building for the National
Ceniter for Human Resource Development, which is charged with educational policy
formulation, monitoring, and evaluation. The Bank expects this capacity building to be
undertaken as part of the education sector reform that is to be supported by the proposed
Ed ication Reform for the Knowledge Economy (ERFKE). In addition, through a PESW the
Baik will provide support to the Ministry of Planning in its plans to establish a system for
des igning and monitoring key development indicators.

C. Lending Scenarios and Triggers

10 3. Bank lending for FY03-05, not counting guarantees, is expected to range from US$305
million in the base case to US$380 million in the high case (US$455 million and US$530 million
inc luding guarantees for the base and high cases, respectively, table VI.4). Assumptions and
triggers for the high case are described in table VI.3.

* Base Case. The proposed ERFKE (formerly HRDSIL III), and an adjustment operation for
public sector reform (PSRL III) together account for over three-quarters of total Bank
lending in the base case. In addition, US$150 million in partial risk guarantees are envisaged
for the base- and high-case scenarios. The guarantees, which have been postponed from the
previous CAS, are proposed as a catalyst for private investment in water and power sectors.

* Low Case. Lending wvould be reduced to US$100 million.

* High Case. Lending would be raised to US$380 million. In addition to the partial risk
guarantees and the operations in the base case, the high case envisages a municipal
development project with a poverty focus, and an additional operation which has not yet been
identified.

1C4. 
In the previous CAS, adjustment lending accounted for 87 percent of lending. In the
CAS, it is expected to account for just 36 percent in the base case. The only adjustment operation
envisaged is the last of the PSRL series.

D. Bank Exposure

1(5. The Bank's exposure to Jordan reached US$952 million at the end of FY02 and is
projected to increase by almost 30 percent in FY03-04 to reach US$1.272 billion under the CAS
base case. Net flows to Jordan are projected to remain substantially positive in the coming two
years. Such exposure levels are relatively high given Jordan's small economy. Jordan stands

36

close to the very high end of the spectrum of all IBRD borrowers for traditional exposure
indicators, such as IBRD debt relative to gross national income or IBRD debt relative to the
country's population. In part, this reflects Jordan's significant total indebtedness relative to its
national income. But it also reflects the high share of IBRD involvement in Jordan vis-a-vis other
creditors, including other preferred creditors.

106. One mitigating factor, however, is that Jordan is a rather open economy. This means that
relative to exports, total indebtedness as well as IBRD exposure, though high, may be more
manageable. It remains pertinent, however, to judge indebtedness relative to the actual domestic
value added of those exports, which may be limited, most notably for those new exports
emanating from export processing zones and QIZs. In any event, total debt, including IBRD
debt, will remain manageable if Jordan's recent export and current account performance can be
sustained, and if bilateral aid flows remain substantial. Another mitigating factor for IBRD
exposure is the long maturity structure of IBRD debt, which has kept IBRD debt service so far at
reasonable levels, around 2 percent of exports.

107. Overall however, from the Bank's risk-management standpoint, concerns about exposure
and creditworthiness, particularly concerns related to the vulnerability of Jordan's current
account to exogenous shocks (see section VII on Risks), constrain the overall CAS lending
envelope that the Bank may envisage.

Table VI.3 Assumptions and Triggers for the Lending Program

Low Case Triggers 
Deterioration in portfolio 
performance (more than 20 
percent of ongoing projects rated 
unsatisfactory and disbursement 
ratio below 20 percent) 

Base Case Assumptions 
Portfolio performance remains 
satisfactory (with 10 percent or
less rated unsatisfactory and 
disbursement ratio at or above 20 
percent) 

High Case Triggers
Base Case Assumptions Plus

GOJ fully meets its
macroeconomic targets agreed
with IMF

Macroeconomic program 
Macroeconomic program targets 
supported by the IMF (SBA 2000- 
broadly met. Sustainable 
04) falls off track or major targets, macroeconomic framework in 
especially fiscal deficit, are 
place (fiscal deficit less than 4.3 
missed 
percent, after grants) 

By mid-2004 GOJ establishes a
systematic process of medium-
term expenditure programming
within a rolling macroeconomic
framework

Significant slowdown in 
implementation of structural 
reform program, especially on 
public sector reform, education, 
health system reforms, and 
privatization 

Continued progress in privatization Completion of commercialization
of Jordan Phosphate Mining 
and privatization preparation
Company, Arab Potash Company, 
process and good-faith offer of
Royal Jordanian Air Academy and 
power companies to the private
Training Center, Jordan 
sector, including power
Telecommunications Company, 
generation
and state-owned cement and
power companies 

Public sector reform program on 
track, especially the 
implementation of legal and 
judicial reforms and training of 
judges in commercial law, civil 
service reforms, and adoption of
medium-term budget framework
Passage and implementation of
Electricity Law

.__ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
_ 
_ 

Reform of water tariffs to cover
operations and maintenance of
Jordan Valley Authority and
Water Authority of Jordan by
end-2004. Enactment and
implementation of ground water
by-law to reduce overdraft

37

Table Vl.4 World Bank Assistance Program (FY03-05)
Lending/GuaranteesAnalytical and Advisory Activies
Base Case (US$ millions) 
High Case (US$ millions)
Cultural Heritage, Tourism 
Cultural Heritage, Tourism 
and Urban Development 
and Urban Development 
($45, FY05) 
($45, FY05)

Privatization TA (USAID) (yearly)
Trade Logistics (04)

Education Strategy (including follow-
up to the Cost Efficiency Study and
the Vision Forum (PESW))
Health Sector Strategy (03)

Poverty Survey/Assessment (03-04)

Public Expenditure Review (04)
Pension Fund Reform PESW (yearly)
Water Sector Strategy and
implementation PESW (yearly)
Natural Resources Management and
Environment TA (04)
Urban Management/Municipal
Finance Strategy (03)
Mortgage Market TA (03)
Energy Sector Strategy (04)

Country Gender Assessment (04)

Country Economic Management (05)
Economic Monitoring (yearly)
Govemment Development Program
TA (yearly)
Labor Market Study (04)

Knowledge-Based Economy (04)

Country Procurement Assessment

Review (04)

Country Financial Accountability
Assessment (05)
TBD

Stiategic Objective 

Private sector 
devuilopment for 
sustainable growth 
and job creation
Human development 
and poverty reduction 

Public sector reform 
and governance 
Waler resource 
mar iagement and 
env ronment 

lnfr, structure/finance 

Geiider 

Economic 
ma.iagement 

Education Reform for 
Knowledge Economy 
($120, FY03) 

Education Reform for 
Knowledge Economy ($120, 
FY03) 

Public Sector Reform Loan 
111 ($110, FY04) 
Disi-Amman Conveyor 
Guarantee ($100, FY04) 

Public Sector Reform Loan 
ill ($110, FY04) 
Disi-Amman Conveyor 
Guarantee ($100, FY04) 

Amman Development 
Comdor ($30, FY05) 
Samra 1st Private Power 
Guarantee ($50, FY05) 

Amman Development 
Corridor ($30, FY05) 
Municipal Development 
($20, FY05) 
Samra 1st Private Power

Guarantee ($50, FY05)

Un nilocated/Others 

Lending Operation TBD 

($55) 

Leiiding and 

Guarantees

oiw Lending 

$455 

$305 

$530

$380

TA Technical assistance

38

VII. RISKS

108. Despite the GOJ's efforts to deepen its structural reform efforts and so enhance the
resilience of the country's economy to exogenous shocks, the economy faces the following risks:

Regional Conflicts. Existing and possible conflicts in the region pose grave risks to the
Jordanian economy. The escalating violence between Israel and the Palestinians, the
possibility of a spillover of that conflict into neighboring countries, and the possibility of
military action against Iraq (from which Jordan gets most of its oil and at subsidized
prices) create a high degree of uncertainty which adversely affects prospects for
privatization, increased investment, and growth. A conflict in Iraq would create an even
more difficult situation that could dramatically worsen the terms of trade for Jordan,
decrease tourism, and affect workers' remittances and possibly reduce or even cut off
major sources of foreign grants. In the event of a conflict in Iraq, oil supplies from Iraq
and the attendant grants (valued at about US$300 million) could be abruptly terminated,
forcing Jordan to seek alternate sources which could raise the country's oil import bill by
as much as 50 percent. Additional effects would be at least the temporary loss of the Iraqi
export market (Jordan's second largest export market, accounting for 12 percent of
merchandise exports), and cost-push pressure on domestic prices.

* External Vulnerabilities. Apart from major shocks due to conflicts, Jordan's
performance is heavily dependent on socioeconomic developments in the region. A large
number of Jordanians work as expatriate workers in the oil producing countries of the
Gulf. Their remittances-as great as Jordan's exports of goods-have typically been
equal to almost 25 percent of GDP. A quarter of Jordan's trade is with neighboring Arab
countries (trade with Iraq alone amounts to around 12 percent). Financial support from
the Arab world has been significant, but depends on the political economy at any time.
The Jordanian dinar circulates in the West Bank and Gaza, where Jordanian banks have a
significant presence. Tourism accounts for about a quarter of Jordan's exports, or about
10 percent of GDP. Tourism receipts fluctuate, not only with war and peace prospects,
but also the economic circumstances of the potential tourists and their perception of risks
in Jordan.

* Domestic Tensions. Tensions from regional developments, unfulfilled expectations, and
persistent unemployment may militate against the structural reform efforts, and could
lead to social tension inside Jordan. Postponement of parliamentary elections, in part due
to the uncertainties created by escalating regional conflicts, could raise doubts about the
GOJ's commitment to political reforms.

* High Indebtedness and the Risks of Policy Slippages. Though on a declining trend, the
size of Jordan's public debt remains high. Total public sector debt relative to GDP
declined from 114 percent of GDP in 1995 to 85 percent in 2001. Interest payments cost
the GOJ about 15 percent of total government revenue. The GOJ has received relief from
its debt burden through a rescheduling agreement with the Paris Club in July 2002. That
agreement, coupled with the program agreed with the IMF, is intended to be an "exit"
agreement, permitting Jordan to sustain development without incurring undue
indebtedness. With the fiscal position already tight, it will be difficult to maintain fiscal
discipline if there are policy slippages or other events which constrain growth and/or lead

to a demand for greater expenditures. In particular, if external resources are insufficient
to fund the PSET and conditions deteriorate, there will be a risk that at least part of the
PSET will be debt funded. In that event, debt to GDP ratios could increase again, which
could significantly undermine Jordan's creditworthiness. The Bank will continue to work
with the GOJ on prioritizing the programs in the PSET to ensure 'that expenditures stay
within the resource envelope available from non-debt creating sources.

39

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter Woicke

By:
She ngman Zhang 

Washington D.C.
December 20, 2002

Jordan at a glance 

CAS AnnexA2

M. East 
Lower-
& North middle-
Africa 
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Jordan 

Development diamond'

2001F

Populaton, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

5 0 
1,750 
8 8 

301 
2,000 
601 

2,164 
1,240
2,677

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1995-01

Population (%) 
Labor force (I%) 

3 0 
4 0 

2 0 
2 9 

10
1 2 

GNI 
per 
capita 

Gross
pnmary
enrollment

I 

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1995-01) 
Poverty (% of populabon below national poveriy line) 
Urban populaton (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Ilirteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+) 
Gross pnmary enrollment (X ofschool-age population) 
Male 
Female 

12
79 
70 
26 
5 
96 
10 
104 
104 
104 

58 
68 
43 
15 
89 
34 
97 
103 
90 

46
69
33
11 
80
15
107 
107 
107

Access to improved water source

Jordan
Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981 
4 4 
45 4 
43 0 
-8 7 
42 2 

1991 
4 2 
25 9 
59.5 
2 6 
15 0 

2000 
8 5 
27.2 
41.8 
0 5 
27.8 

2001
8 8
25 9 
42 8
0 4
25 8

Economic ratios

GDP (USS billions) 
Gross domesbc investmenUGDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domesbc savmgs/GDP 
Gross natonal savings/GDP 

Trade

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debtVGDP 
Total debt servicelexports 
Present value of debtVGDP 
Present value of debVexports 

-0 9 
1 8 
49 2 
9 7 

-10 1 
6 8 
231 3 
24 3 

07 
2 9 
941 
12 3 
90.0
129 9

- 1 
2 6 
859 
12 5

Domestc 
savmgs
s

Investment

.. 

Indebtedness

1981-91 

199101 

2000 

2001 

2001-05

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

15 
-2 5 

4 5 
1 0 
2 4 

4 2 
1 1 
21 

4 2 
1 3 
4 6 

5.7 
3 0 
58

Jordan
Lower-middle-income group

4 5 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Growth of Investment end GOP (%)

(%6 of GDP) 

z

Agnculture 
Industry 
Manufactunng 
Services 

61 
29 8 
14 5 
641 

8 5 
26 2 
13 7 
65 3 

23 
25 3 
15.5 
72.4 

21 
25 2 
15 3 
72 7 

30
20 ..
10-
-0 

01

Private consumpton 
General govemment consumpbon 
Imports of goods and services 

77 7 
311 
97 2 

71 4 
26.0 
82 8 

74 5 
25 0 
68 5 

76.7 
23 0 
68 3 

-20

GDI 
G

e GDP

(average annual growth) 

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)
20

Agnculture 
Industry 
Manufactunng 
Services 

85 
-05 
0 7 
23 

-40 
45 
54 
49 

84 
33 
5.5 
52 

2.2 
63 
5.8 
43 

1s

10
s 

0/ 

i

Pnvate consumpton 
General govemment consumpton 
Gross domestc investment 
Imports of goods and servces 

-0 1 
06 
-2 5 

4 9 
4 9 
1 7 
2 4 

11.3 
6 8 
10.7 
14 5 

6 2 
-4 6 4 9 

o 

n 
Expons 

-0.9 

- O 

amports

-0.3 

2.2

Note 2001 data are preliminary estmates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete

Jordan

PRIC ES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domi istc prices 
(% change)
Cons imer prices 
Implcii GDP deflator 
Gove rnment flnance 
(% dl GDP, hncludes curnent grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Oven ill surplus/defici 

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflation (%)

77 
18.9 

8.2 
5.1 

0.7 
-0 1 

1.8 
00 

e

4

2 4

o -

49.1 
22.5 
7.2 

44.8 
13.1 
8 3 

30.0 
1.0 

30.8 
2.2 
-3 8 

-2 

99 

97 

9a 

99 

oo 

01

-

GDP deflator 

CPI

4.7 

1

TRAIDE

(US$ millions) 
Total expofts (fob) 
Food 
Phosphates 
Ma ,ufactures 
Total imports (cr) 

1981 
734 
100 
166 
215 
3,170 

1991 
1,132 
126 
181 
403 
2,512 

2000 
1,899 
164 
128 
933 
4,577 

2001 
2,295 
191 
130 
1,269 
4,833 

Export and Import levels (USS mili.)

a,ooo

9.0 
4.i

.

4,0
3.990

Fogid 

508 

613 

747 

733 2 i,0. . 4jj. E

Fu il and energy 
Ca Alelgoods 

533 
1.256 

355 
369 

718 
1,313 

702 
1,311 

2e000
0

95 

9e 

97 

9a 

99 

99 

01

Expc rt prnce index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terrrs of trade (1995=100) 

88 
124 
71 

87 
97 
89 

91 
106 
86 

92
108 
85

raExports 

e Imports

BALkNCE of PAYMENTS

(USI millIons) 
Exp(rts of goods and services 
lmpc rts of goods and services 
Resi,urce balance 

1981 
1,909 
4,215 
-2,306 

1991 
2,484 
3,429 
-945 

2000 
3,536 
5,796 
-2,260 

2001 
3,777 
6,027 
-2,250 

Current account balance to GOP (%)

-
54

3

Net income 
Neti:urrenttransfers 

87 
2,178 

-362 
884 

-27 
2,345 

9 
2,236 

2

o -

Cunrant acoount balance 

41 

423 

58 

-5 

2 

97 

98 

99 

DO 

01

Financing iterris (net) 
Cha iges in net reserves 

-5 
47 

403 
20 

714 
-772 

-180 
184 

43

.5

Man lo:
Res arves induding gold (USS mDillons) 
Con iersion rate (DEC, loca/USS) 

1,300 
03 

930 
07 

2,763 
0.7 

2,579
07

EXI ERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

(US milions) 
Totai debt outstanding and disbursed 

ComposIiMon of 2001 debt (US$ mrlL)

2,186 
45 
78 

9,700 
511 
76 

7,969 
798 
57 

7,588
886

lEIRD 
ICiA 

55G447 

A8

F 840 

B* 439

Tot.il debt service 

303 

740 

723 

779 

C 439

IBRD 
1IDA 
Cor ipostion of net resoune flows 
Cfficial grants 
CiOficial creditors 
F nvate creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Foitfolio equity 

3 
1 

97 
2 

106 
3 

105
3

D 0 981

891 
306 
29 
141 
0 

383 
414 
-97 
-12 
0 

404 
-63 
-155 
751 
104 

460
338
-70
78
-113 

E 3,940

Wo id Bank program
('ommitments 
Clisbursements 

25 
22 

25 
40 

35 
38 

120 
161 

A - IBRD 
B-IDA 

E - Bilateral
F - Pnvate

0 - Other multilateral 

F'nncipal repayments 

0 

56 
-16 

56 

57 

C -IMF 

G - Short-term

Net flows 

22 

-17 

104

Iiterest payments 
let transfers 

3 
19 

43 
-59 

53 
-71 

51
53

De, ielopment Economics 

12t20/02

CAS Annex B2

CAS Annex B2 - Jordan
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As of December 12, 2002

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation 8
Average Implementation Period (years)b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Numbera' c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amounta c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number8, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount4 d 
Disbursement Ratio (%)e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$'000) 
Average Supervision (US$'000/project) 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

12 
3.4 
0 
0 

0 

0 
16.9 

No 
801 
69 

11 
4.2 
0 
0 

0 

0 
16 3 

No 
651 
59 

9 
4 
11.1 
1.9 

11 1 

1.9 
28.2 

No 
710 
71 

8
4.4
12.5
13 7
12.5
13.7
13.4

No
525
70

Memorandum 
Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
49 
6
1510 
225.4
16 7 
16.7
12 9 
8.2

a As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program
e Ratio of disbursements dunng the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year Investment projects only. To-date for FY2003.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited dunng the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3 - Bank Group Program Summary - Jordan
As of December 12, 2002

CAS Annex B3
Page 1 of2

P oposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal 

year 
Proj ID 
2003 Education Reform for Knowledge Economy 
Subtotal 
2004 Third Public Sector Reform Loan 
Disi Amman Water Conveyor (Guarantee) 
Subtotal 
2005 Cultural Heritage, Tourism, and Urban Development 
Amman Development Corridor 
Samra 1 st Pnvate Power (Guarantee) 
Subtotal 
Total Excluding Guarantees 
Total Including Guarantees 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Strategic 

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/°L)

US$(M) 

Rewards b 

H 

H 
H 

H 
H 
H 

120.0 
120.0
110.0 
(100 0) 
110 0
45.0 
30.0 
(50.0) 
75.0
305.0
455.0

M

M
M

M
M
M

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years
t. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(%A), or low (L).

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Jordan

Jordan - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002

2000 

2001 

2002 

4.40 

25.00 

25.50 

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (%)

Financial Services 
Construction & Real Estates 
Food & Agro-Business
Hotels & Tourism
Oil, Gas and Mining 
Textiles 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other 

Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

CAS Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

2003

0.00

0

0

0

0
0

0

0

100

100 

50 
50
0 

100 

0.00 

40 

60

100 

96 
4 

0 

100 

80 

20 

100 

98 
2 

0 

100 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Jordan

CAS Annex B4

As of December 12, 2002

Completion 
FY 

Cost
(US$000) 

Product 

Recent completions
Pt blic Sector Reform Review 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Pcverty Alleviation in Jordan in the 1990 
Privatization Technical Assistance 
Ptiblic Procurement Modernization (IDF) 
Scurces of Growth 
W_men's Health Issues 

Uniderway

Privatization TA (including USAID TF manag.) 
Department of Statistics (IDF) 
Enhancing Women's Health Issues (IDF) 
National Council for Family Affairs (IDF) 
nlegrating At Risk Children into Mainstream 
Society (JSDF)
Dnvelopment Policy Review 
In egrated SEA into Water Quality Mgt (GPG) 
Cost Efficiency of Education 
Early Childhood TA 
Vision for Education Forum 
Uiban Management/Municipal Finance Strategy 

Planned
Country Assistance Strategy 
Eiiergy Sector Strategy 
Labor Market Study 
N, tural Resource Management & Environment 
Tiade Logistics 
H_alth Sector Strategy 
Education Strategy (incl. Follow-up to the Cost 
Efficiency Study) (PESW)
_Pnsion Fund Reform (PESW) yearly 
Water Sector Strategy and Implementation 
.(F'ESW) yearly
Macroeconomic Monitoring yearly 
P jblic Expenditure Review 
P )verty Survey/Assessment 
CEM 
CDuntry Gender Assessment 
CPAR 

CFAA 
Mortgage TA 
Govemment Development Program TA 

Knowledge-Based Economy 

T 3D 

FY00 
FY00 
FY00 
FY98-99 
FY01 
FY01 
FY02 

Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 
Ongoing 

FY03 
Ongoing 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 

FY03 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY03 
yearly 

yearly 
yearly 
yearly 
FY04 
FY04 
FY05 
FY04 
FY04 

FY05 
FY03 
yearly 

FY05 

FY04-FY05

a Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

0 
0 
17 9 
0 
0 
193 4 
65 9 

414 
47 1 
10 
10 
90 

98 9 
24 8 
148.8 
60.2 
5 
107.1 

209 
100 
150 
110 
70 
50 

50 
50 
125 
200 
200 
200 
80 
100 

100 
30 
50 

Audience' 

Objective b

Government 
Bank 
Government 
Government 
Bank/Government 
Government 
Government 

Problem Solving
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Problem Solving
Problem Solving
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation

Govemment 
Government 
Government 
Govemment 
Government 

Problem Solving
Problem Solving
Problem Solving
Problem Solving
Problem Solving

Government 
Govemment 
Government 
Government 
Bank/Govemment 
Government 

Knowledge Generation
Problem Solving
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation

Bank/Government 
Bank/Government 
Bank/Government 
Bank/Government 
Bank/Government 
Government 
Government 

Government 
Bank/Government 
Bank/Government 
Govemment 
Bank/Government 
Bank/Government 
Bank/Government 
Bank/Government 

Bank/Government 
Bank/Government 
Bank/Government 

Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation

Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Problem Solving
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Problem Solving/
Knowledge Generation
Problem Solving/
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Problem Solving/
Knowledge Generation
Problem Solving/
Knowledge Generation

100 

Bank/Government 

CAS Annex B5

Jordan Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

1970-75 

1980-85 

1995-01 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of populaton) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

1 8 
3 7 
57 8 
7 5 

26 
3 9 
66 4 
6 1 

M. East 
& North 
Africa 

300 7 
2.0 
57 7 
3 4 

Lower-
middle-
income

2,163 5
1 0
45 6
2 1

5 0 
3.0 
78.8 
3 7 

11 7

.

23 

1,990 
52 

1.750 
116 

2,000 
112 

1,240
186

36 4
76
44 4

56

104 
104 
104 

96 
100 
84 

94 
97 
5 

70 
70 
73 

26 
30 

153 
116 
41
97

87 
91 
82 

17 

.
.

49 
71 

.. 

,, 

72 
71 
72 

73 
85 

66 
64 
67 

38 
42 

.

75 

3 

97 
103 
90 

89 
96 
79 

86 
86 
15 

68 
66 
69 

43 
54 

183 
151 

25

107
107
107

80
94
70

89
88
11

69
67
71

33
42

198
131

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI percapda (US$) 
Consumerpnceindex (1995=100) 
Food pnce index (1995=100)

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income orconsumphon) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 
Educabon (% of GDP) 
Social secunty and weltfare (% of GDP)

Gross primary school enrollment rate

Access to an Improved water source

(% of age grup)
Total 
Male 
Female 

(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate

(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 

Mortality

Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand livebirths) 

Adult (15-59)

Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

CAS Annex B5 This table was produced from the CMU LDB system 
Note 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estmates of school-age populabon and reported enrollment data.

12/20/02

CAS Annex B6

Jordan - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
2000 

Estimate 
2003 

Proiected
2005 
2006 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

1999 

2001 

2002 

200.4 

2007

100 
2 
26 
72 

100 
2 
25 
72 

100 
2 
25 
73 

100 
2 
24 
74 

100 
2 
24 
74 

100 
2 
24 
74 

100 
2 
24 
75 

100 
2 
23 
75 

100
2
23
75

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

93 
23 
6 
18 

100 
26 
5 
20 

100 
25 
6 
19 

95 
24 
6 
19 

95 
26 
7 
19 

95 
26 
7 
19 

95 
26 
7 
19 

95 
26 
7 
20 

94
26
7
20

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

43 
61 

42 
68 

43 
68 

46 
67 

44 
67 

43 
66 

43 
66 

42 
65 

42
64

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsC 

7 
30 

0 
28 

0 
26 

5 
29 

5 
28 

5 
28 

5 
29 

5 
29 

6
29

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

8135 

8466 

8829 

9499 

10362 

11157 

11996 

12896 

13869

1620 

1830 

1830 

1830 

1920 

2050 

2170 

2280 

2390

Real annual growth rates (%/o, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
3.1 
4.2 
Gross Domestic Income 
3.3 
2.8 
Real annual per capita growth rates (0/o, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
0.0 
1.1 
Total consumption 
-4.6 
6.8 
Private consumption 
-5.9 
7.9 
Bazlnce of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

4.2 
4.4 

5.1 
9.0 

6.0 
5.2 

5.8 
4.2 

5.6 
4.6 

5.6 
4.7 

5.6
4.7

1.3 
1.1 
4.0 

2.2 
2.3 
1.7 

3.3 
2.6 
4.5 

3.2 
1.7 
5.6 

3.2 
1.9 
-0.2 

3.2 
2.1 
3.4 

3.2
1.4
2.0

3534 
1832 
4990 
3699 
-1456 
2016 
405 

3536 
1899 
5796 
4577 
-2260 
2345 
58 

3777 
2295 
6027 
4833 
-2250 
2236 
-5 

4329 
2760 
6335 
5042 
-2006 
2431 
353 

4580 
2910 
6956 
5560 
-2376 
2466 
9 

4819 
3050 
7397 
5903 
-2578 
2630 
76 

5142 
3260 
7892 
6295 
-2750 
2789 
91 

5474 
3473 
8415 
6708 
-2941 
2960 
79 

5820
3691
8866
7040
-3046
3102
129

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Change in reservesd 

154 
-37 
-36 

751 
-361 
-772 

78 
-159 
184 

51 
-144 
-683 

306 
-249 
-141 

209 
-233 
-162 

236 
-290 
-163 

233 
-275 
-185 

228
-281
-166

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-17.9 

-26.7 

-25.5 

-21.1 

-22.9 

-23.1 

-22.9 

-22.8 

-22.0

4.2 
-5.8 
11.0 
-0.9 

8.5 
7.1 
11.4 
20.8 

19.2 
39.1 
36.7 
3.2 

6.4 
7.6 
4.9 
5.9 

6.9 
4.9 
9.4 
8.1 

8.2 
5.8 
11.0 
3.1 

8.4 
6.4 
10.7 
3.9 

7.8 
6.6 
9.2 
4.5 

8.1
7.5
8.9
3.6

(Continued)

CAS Annex 86

Jordlanlll - IKey EconDomk fITmdhCato0rs

(Connnea1

! ~ 

, Cr!oi 

-; 
-;Actuial 
-

99I9 

-

2001 

R 

' 

2001 

-' Estimate 
20;03 

2002 

Prced

2004 

ljWO 

2j, 7 

7

Public finance (as % of GDP at market pricesy
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

30.7 
28.4 
2.3 
6.3 
2.0 

30.0 
29.0 
1.0 
4.9 
-1.4 

30.8 
28.6 
2.2 
5.2 
1.5 

29.6 
27.9 
1.6 
5.4 
1.5 

31.3 
30.0 
1.3 
5.6 
0.7 

29.4 
27.7 
1.7 
5.6 
1.5 

28.8 
26.6 
2.2 
5.6 
-2.8 

28.4 
25.6 
2.8 
5.6 
-2.8 

EI 

27.7
24.8
2.9
5.6
-2.8

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2 (/o) 

Price indices( YlR95 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f 

Real interest rates
Consumerpriceindex (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

117.0 
12.0 

123.9 
10.2 

125.7 
5.8 

127.9 
9.5 

129.0 
10.1 

130.3 
8.7 

131.4 
8.5 

132.7 
8.5 

133.8
8.5

92.1 
96.8 
95.2 
117.3 

88.0 
99.1 
88.8 
123.0 

89.2 
101.4 
88.0 
129.6 

100.8 
99.9 
100.9 
129.6 

99.4 
101.9 
97.6 
129.6 

96.4 
105.0 
91.8 
129.6 

95.0 
107.7 
88.2 
129.6 

93.9 
109.8 
85.5 
129.6 

92.2
111.3
82.9
129.6

0.0 
-0.2 

0.7 
-0.1 

1.8 
0.0 

2.4 
2.4 

2.5 
2.9 

1.8 
1.8 

1.8 
1.8 

1.8 
1.8 

1.8
1.8

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services.'
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central govemment.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Jordan - Key Exposure ltndicators

CAS Annex B7

' 1 

.

Indcaror 

_______ 

1999 

203 

2I 

_ _ 

__ 

202 

= 

__=, 

2C03 

2004 

_ec_ 

._ 

2005 

2 600

Total debt outstanding and 

disbursed (TDO) (US$mY

8837 

7969 

7588 

7689 

7675 

7594 

7424 

7221 

7010

Net disbursements (USm)a 

28 

-869 

-381 

823 

723 

779 

101 

818 

-14 

916 

-81 

-170 

-203 

-211

937 

922 

928 

948

147.4 
99.6 
13.0 
42.4 

15.9 
62.1 

2.1 
835 
60 

125.6 
87.0 
11.4 
43.6 

15.9 
32.3 

1.8 
798 
57 

120.0 
84.8 
11.3 
42.1 

14.9 
49.4 

1.7 
886 
55 

112.9 
80.9 
10.8 
45.9 

13.0 
49.7 

1.4 
1012 
52 

110.5 
74.1 
13.1 
49.2 

11.4 
60.1 

1.5 
993 
50 

103.0 
68.1 
12.5 
52.0 

12.5 
59.1 

1.6 
1256 
47 

95.6 
61.9 
11.3 
54.4 

12.7 
58.5 

1.4 
1239 
45 

88.8 
56.0 
10.8 
56.9 

12.8 
56.5 

1.4 
1220 
42 

83.3
50.5
10.3
61.0

12.2
53.5

1.3
1185
40

Total debt service (TDS) 
(USSmf

Debt and debt service indicators
(%/0)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
ConcessionalVTDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRDTDO(USSmf 
IDA TDO (USSmf 

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

CAS Annex B8 - Jordan
Status of Bank Group Operations (Opertions Portfolio)

As of Decomber 12, 2002

CAS Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Closed 
Projects

S

IBRD/DA 

Total Disbursed (Ambe) 
otwhich has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Tot Disbursed (Adve * Closed) 
otf whlh has been repaid 

Total Undisbured (ActNe) 
Total Unduibursed (Caosed) 

Total Undusbumed (Active + Cbse 

Active ProlaM 

148.34
8.00
1.808 21
955 24
1.954 54
93 25

102.39
314

105 54

Project ID Project Name 

P049581 Community Infrastructure 
P039749 Health Sector Reform 
P005307 Human Res Dev. SIL 
P076961 Hortlcultural Exports Promotlon 
P048521 AmmanVWater&Sanitatlon 
P069326 Higher Educrabon Developrnent 
P035997 Second Tounsm D8v. 
P049706 ODS Phaseout 11 
Total 

Lost PSR 
Supervislon Ratdng 

Amount In USS Milion 

DHfference Between
Expected and Actual
Dnsbursements

2Q 

S 

U 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

IE 

S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

Fiscal 
Year
1998 
1999 
1995 
2002 
1999 
2000 
1998 
1997 

IBRO GRANT 

Cancel Undhab. 

Orig. Frm RevXd

30 0 
35 0 
60.0 
6 0 
55.0 
34.7 
32.0 
00 
251.7 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
00 
00 
0.0 
0.0 
38 
3.8 

7.2 
19.9 
5.3 
5 0 
21.1 
27 9 
159 
0.9 
103.3 

7.2 
4 3 
5.3 
0 0 
168 
8.6 
15.1 
0 6 
57.7 

7 2
0 0,
53
0 0
0.0
0 0
0.0
0 5
13.0

0.0 

CAS Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

CAS Ann®at BB (OC) gor Jordan

Jordan
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 11/30102
(In US Dollars Millions)

FY A 

roval 

litlUktIon mm"a 

1998 
AIHC 
1987/1990/1993/1995 AI-Hkma 
1997 
BTC 
2001 
Boscan Jordan 
1997 
El-Zay 
2002 
IITPDC 
1995 
Indo-Jordan 
1998 
JHTC 
2001 
Jordan Gateway 
1998 
Jordinvast 
1999 
MAICO 
2000 
MEIB 
2002 
MEREN 
2002 
SIC 
1996 
Zara 
: * 

-| 3i h~f ltOlIO 

.1 

T 

| 

i. 

17 lirt 

.usl~AJ 
FY Approval 
3.60 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.41 
1.00 
2.20 
0.60 
0.00 
2.97 
.3tt78. 

0.00 
2.37 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.15 
0.00 
0.00 
0 00 

4.52 

.' 

Patt4,f- 

0.00 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0 00 
0.00 

Lo", 

IF¢ Diib 

0.00 
0.00 
3.11 
7.20 
2.86 
0.00 
14.00 
8.57 
3.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
6.00 
13.76 
58.61 

Equity 
IFOO Dhb 
3.60 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.41 
0.75 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2 97 
8.73

i 

Quasi
IFCEw.sb 
:J
0.00 
2.37 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.15 
0.00 
0.00 
0 00 

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0 00

0.00 
0.00 
3.11 
7.20 
2.88 
12.50 
14.00 

8.57 

3.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.40 
8.00 
13.76 

1 

n 

JORDAN

CAS PROGRAM MATRIX

FY2003-05

Needs and Priorities 

Needs a rirMonitoring Indicators 
Government Strategy/Actions 
Government.Strategy/Actions 
Country 
World Bank 

I 

L Human Development and Poverty Reduction

_____________. 

World Bank Group Support FY03-05 
Lending/ 
Knowledge 

.

.-... Ongoing Projects 

Advisory Services

CAS Annex B9
Page I of 11

Support from
Partners

Supor 

_____m

1.1 Education for a Global
Economy
* Articulate a vision for an 
gender responsive 
education system that is 
conducive to the needs of 
knowledge economy. 
o Give more attention on 
quality and relevance of 
learning. 
o Monitor and evaluate 
implementation of 
Government strategy for 
education reform. 
* Emphasize early 
childhood education. 
* Establish mechanism for 
lifelong learning. 

* Build on the results of the 
Education Forum (held in 
October 2002) which aimed 
at articulating a new vision 
for an education system 
suitable for global knowledge 
economy. 
o Continue the ongoing reform 
program with new orientation 
toward creating a knowledge 
economy. 
* Hold consensus-building 
workshops with all 
stakeholders, including local 
and district-level officials, 
community leaders, private 
education providers, and 
labor market representatives. 
* Develop a strategy for early 
childhood education. 

e Produce validated 
document embodying 
a new, comprehensive 
vision for the 
education system. 
o Increase net 
enrollment for basic 
and secondary 
education. 
o Introduce IT 
connectivity in school 
system. 
* Increase student 
achievement in core 
subjects at basic and 
secondary stages.. 
* Achieve higher 
education: levels ofjob 
placement. 
* -Adopt strategy for 
early childhood 
education.

Same as Country 
column 

Proposed Proiects 
* ERFKE 
* PSRL Ill 

.eHelp 

Ongoing Proiects 
o Higher Education 

EIB: school
construction
CIDA: e-
learming
KfW: school
construction
DFID: manager
training
JICA: digitized
science
textbooks

*Assist the
Government in 
building on the 
Vision Forum. 
develop 
ECE. 
-Develop capacity 
building program 
using the GDLN 
center. 
*Workshops on 
education sector 
reform, training of
teachers in use of
Internet, and
knowledge
economy (WBI).

*Programmatic

ESW in education.
eCountry Gender
Assessment.

Needs 
and 
Needs nd Prioritie 

.rIorities 

Strategy/Actions 
Governmffat 4Sxteg/Acions 

.overnment 

Monitoring Idicators 

.. Country 

CAS Annex B9

Page 2 of I I

World Bank Group Support FY03-0 

Support from

World Bank 

Lending/ 

.________________ Ongoing Projects 

Knowledge 

Advisoryervices

Partners

1.2 Health

o Contain public sector 
health expenditures. 
oReduce proportion of 
population (32 percent) 
lacking formal health 
coverage. 
o Achieve long-run 
financial sustainability of 
health-care system. 

1.3 Gender
o Increase female
participation in the labor 
force. 
o Lower female 
unemployment rate, 
including young women 
and educated women. 

USAID: TA and
training for
developing
insurance
options
Public Health,
Clinic
Rehabilitation

o Adopt long-term reform 
program drawing together 
MOH, RMS, JUH, and the 
private sector, with first phase 
focusing on: 
-containing growth in 
health expenditures; 
-efficient-use of physical 
facilities; 
-improving delivery and 
quality of services; 
-expanding health 
insurance coverage. 

o Contain public sector 
health expenditures. 
o Reduce percentage of 
uninsured from 32 to 
universal coverage by 
2010. 
o Increase occupancy 
rate of public hospitals 
from 63 percent to 70 
percent by 2005 

o Review labor laws. 
o Review laws and regulations 
relating to social security- 
benefits, allowances, 
pensions-social safety nets, 
and taxation to give women 
legal status as heads of 
households alongside men, 
regardless of marital status. 
o Ensure gender-balanced job-

creation and training projects. I

o Achieve equal rights 
for women under labor 
laws. 
o Equal regulations for 
womEn relation to 
women relating to 
social security, social 
safety net and taxation. 

o Achieve good 
progress in phase I 
of reform program. 
o Implement Health 
Sector Reform 
Project component 
focusing on global 
pharmaceutical and 
health information 
system. 
o Improve sector 
quality and 
efficiency. 

o Same as Country 
column. 

Proposed Projects 
o PSRL III 

Onnoing Proiects 
o Health Sector 
Reform 

Ongoing Proiects 
o Health Sector 
Reform 
Proposed Proiects 
Psed Pri 
o PSRL III 
o HRDSIL 

oAssist in 
organizing a 
health reform 
symposium. 
oTA for proposed 
Higher Health 
Council. 
oTA for 
development of a
network
nationwide,
promoting
women's health.
oCountry Gender
Assessment.

oJSDF legal aid for
poor women.
oIDF for enhancing
women's health.
oIDF for National
Council for
Family Affairs.
oCountry Gender
Assessment.

Needs and Priorities 

.
t , .
.
Government Strategy/Actions 

A~~~~~~~[6loitoiring 
Inidicators .
.
Country. 
World Bank 

'World Bank Group Support FYO."S
W 
.
Lending/ 
Knowledge 
Ongoing Projects 
Advisory Services

Support from
Partners

CAS Annex B9
Page 3 of II

1.4 Social Protection/
Poverty Reduction
* Increase efficiency of 
government aid and 
provide flexibility to 
respond quickly to 
negative impact of 
economic shocks. 
* Improve and minimize 
duplication of services. 
* Improve poverty/gender 
measurements to better 
target programs. 
* Improve sustainability of 
microcredit programs. 
* Reform pension funds and 
social security. 

* Target existing safety net 
more accurately on poor. 
i Establish database capable of 
avoiding duplication of 
benefits and services. 
* Improve poverty 
measurement and changes 
over time. 
* Reform pension funds. 
* Enhance role of local 
government in poverty 
alleviation. 

* Replace Recurrent 
Cash Assistance 
Program with new 
Family Income 
Supplement program. 
* Restructure the 
management of NAF 
to improve delivery of 
assistance to the 
neediest. 
* Develop poverty 
sensitive and gender 
responsive 
intergovernment 
transfer system 
(municipalities). 

* Demonstrate 
progress on pension 
reform. 

Proposed Proiects 
. PSRL III 
. Municipal 
Development 
Project 

Ongoine Proiects 
. Community 
Infrastructure 
Development 
* PSRL 11 

*Poverty 
Assessment. 
*Country Gender 
Assessment. 
*IDF under 
implementation
for improved 
poverty 
measurement. 
*Pension fund
Reform. 
*Workshops on 
pension reforms 
(WBI).

Islamic
Development
Bank:
computerization
of NAF

Save the
Children
program

JICA Rural
areas
communities

USAID: poverty
strategy
GTZ:
Municipalities
(manuals for
SPP)

CAS Annex B9
Page 4 of II

Support from
Partners

USAID
EU

Needs and Priorities 

2.1 Improving the
Investment Climate

GovernmentStrategy/Actions 

Monitorng Indicators 
World Bank Group Support FY03-45 
_ 
Country 
World Bank 
Lending/ 
Knowledge 
.______________.__I___________._____ 
Ongoing Projects 
Advisory Services
11. Private Sector Developmentfor Sustainable Growth and Job Creation

* Same as Country 
column. 

* PSRL 11 and III 
* Infrastructure 
(transport) 
development to 
facilitate inter- 
regional trade and 
exports (high 
case). 

* Reform/restructure public 
sector institutions that 
promote investment. 
* Improve and make more 
transparent government 
contracting for goods and 
services. 
* Reform judiciary. 
* Develop SME and 
microenterprise, especially in 
poorer areas. 
* Enhance public/private 
dialogue on key policy issues 
affecting the private sector. 
* Improve physical and human 
infrastructure for PSD. 

* Restructure/consoli- 
date JIPC and JEPC. 
* Create effective e- 
procurement system. 
* Establish effective 
arbitration mechanism 
as alternative for 
commercial disputes. 
* Train agreed number 
ofjudges in 
commercial and 
business laws. 
* Institutionalize 
public/private dialogue 
and means of 
information 
dissemination. 

* Trade Logistics 
Study. 
* Labor Market
Study.
* Knowledge and
information
sharing on PSD
(FIAS, IFC,
MIGA, SME
Department).
* Learning
workshops on
trade policy and
WTO (WBI).
* Macroeconomic
course (via
Distance
Learning).
* Country Gender
Assessment.
* Mortgage
Market T.A.

Needs and Priorities 

Go.enme Stratgy/Monitoring Indicators 
Government Strategy/Actions ISpotfo
NeXds and Priorities 
Country 
World Bank 
.___._______-__;__._ 

World Bank Group Support FY03-05 
Lending/ 
Knowledge 
Ongoing Projects 
Advisory Services

Support from
Partners

CAS Annex B9
Page 5 of I I

2.2 Privatization
* Accelerate 
implementation of 
privatization program. 
* Continue to build capacity 
in regulatory agencies. 

* Complete all identified 
privatization transactions. 
* Continue to build regulatory 
capacity of agencies 
regulating privatized 
companies, especially 
utilities. 

* Privatize JPMC, 
JTC, power 
generation and 
distribution 
companies; APC. 
a Strengthen 
regulatory capacity 
for telecom and 
power sectors. 

* Complete most of the 
privatization 
preparation process 
and bring to point of 
sales of JPMC, APC, 
Rl Air Academy, RJ 
Training Center, postal 
service, Jordan 
Cement, Power, JTC, 
Jordan Silos, and 
General Supply. 
* Strengthen regulatory 
capacity for telecom, 
power, and water 
sectors. 

*Continued 
USAID through
supervision of 
the Bank-
USAID 
implemented
Cooperative Trust Cooperative
Fund for 
Trust Fund.
privatization.
*IFC's advisory
role (e.g.,
transport, power,
water)
oTimely provision
of advice and
response to TA
needs.
*Workshops for
regulatory
agencies (WBI).

2.3 Private Provision of
Infrastructure: Energy/
Water
* Promote private sector 
participation in the power 
and water sectors. 
* Develop infrastructure to 
introduce natural gas for 
power generation and 
industries and to promote 
regional trade of gas. 

* Privatize generation, IDECO, 
and EDCO. 
* Introduce economic-based 
tariff structure. 
* Develop comprehensive 
strategy for privatization of 
generation and distribution. 
* Close Samra IPP financial 
package. 
* Approve private investment 
in Disi-Amman Conveyor. 

* Increased private 
sector share of power 
market. 
* Increase volume of 
private investment in 
developing and 
conserving water 
sources, wastewater 
treatment and service 
delivery. 

* Deepen sector 
restructuring for 
market competition 
* Implement a legal 
and regulatory 
framework for 
natural gas. 

* Guarantees for 
IPP pipeline 
transmission 
project. 
* IFC potential 
direct investments 
in infrastructure, 
* Guarantee for 
Disi-Amman 
Conveyor. 

*TA for developing EU/EIB: energy
energy sector 
regulatory
strategy, including 
system.
regional trade. 
Arab Fund:
*TA for 
power
privatization of 
restructuring.
generation and 
Germany:
distribution assets. water; power.
Japan: water
USAID: power
IDB: power
UNDP: power

Needs_andriorities 
Governmen Strategy/ActisMonitoring Indicators 
Country 
World Bank 

_______________________ 

____________________ 

World Bank Group Support FY03-05 
Lending/ 
Knowledge 

______ Ongoing 

rojects 

Advisory Services

oTrade Logistics 
Study. 

CAS Annex B9
Page 6 of 11

Support from
Partners

USAID:
increased
economic
opportunities.
EU: business
service team

2.4 Export Development
* Develop nontraditional 
exports. 
o Expand the linkages of 
the export sector to the 
rest of the economy. 

e Establish national 
system for quality 
control. 

e Establish national system for 
testing, certification, and 
quality control. 
* Promote linkages between 
farmers and exporters. 
* Further development of 
special economic zones. 
* Improve institutional 
structure for export 
promotion. 

a Increase volume of 
nontraditional exports. 
e Expansion of export 
growth beyond the 
QIZs. 
* Boost coordination 
between different 
investment and export 
promotion agencies. 
* Increase number and 
frequency of trade 
shows. 

Proposed Projects 
* Possible follow- 
on operation to 
Horticultural 
Exports LIL. 
* IFC proposed 
investments in
export-oriented
manufacturing
sector, and IT
related
investments.

Ongoing/Portfolio
Proiects
* Horticultural
Exports.
* IFC portfolio
investments in
QIZ firms.

World Bank Group Support FY03 
Lending/ 
Knowledge 

__Ongoing Projects 

Advisory Services

CAS Annex B9
Page 7 of I I

Support from
Partners

ipotfo

o IFC will consider Ongoing 
providing 
oMortgage Market 
technical 
T.A.
assistance.

USAID:
securities

Needs and Priorities 

Govern,ment Strategy/Actions 

Monitoring Indicators 
World Bank 

Country 

2.5 Financial Sector
Development
o Further develop 
primary and secondary 
housing finance 
markets. 

o Continue activities to 
strengthen JMRC bonds. 
o Encourage the development 
of the primary mortgage 
market, including the 
entrance, over time, of 
nonbank mortgage lenders. 
o Pursue the development of 
policy, institutional, and the 
legal and regulatory 
framework for the 
development of mortgage- 
related securities. 
o Develop an effective 
mortgage insurance program.

o Ensure regular JMRC 
bond issues, at yields 
mirroring market rates 
elsewhere in the 
financial sector.
o Reduce spreads
between deposit rates
and market interest
rates on mortgage
loans.
o Issue mortgage bonds.
o Achieve widespread
use by banks of
mortgage insurance.

Monitoring indicators 

Country 

-. 

Wol_ak 

World 

~ 

IML Public Sector Reform and Governance

World Bgntt Group Support FY03-O45 

Lndn/mmw 

g 

aoi 

Pro ecb 

Adviso 

Services

CAS Annex B9

Page 8 of I1

Suprt from

?aporteros

Needs 

_nd 

NQeeds end E?rlo riifiez 

_rloritie~ 
.overnment 
__ 
r _ 

te__ /Ac__ ns 

¢oven ment StnmegylA¢tionls 

_ 

3.1 Legal and Judicial
Reform
ReforImpm 
effective 
mImplement 
retive 
mechanism for resolving 
commercial disputes. 
aModerize case load 
handling system. 
o Train judges and key court 
officials 
on commercial 
laws. 

o Expedite litigation process. 
o Modernize court system. 
o Adopt plan for countrywide 
court management. 
Recruit additional judges. 

3.2 Civil Service Reform
o Modernize the civil
sMoemivi secicvi l a 
service. 
stefructurand link t 
structure and link to 

performance. 

oIncrease staff 

accountability. 

Implement new civil service 
bylaw. 
o Design and approve new pay 
structure for civil service, 

o Introduce merit-based 

promotion and compensation. 

Same as Country 
column. 

Proposed Promects 
-PSRL IIl 

Ongoing Proiects 
-PSRL 11 

Same as Country 
column. 

Same as above 

o Reduce backlog of 
commercial cases 
significantly. 
o Make substantial 
progress in 
modernizing the 
commercial legal 
system. 
o Create well 
functioning dispute 
resolution
mechanisms.
o Engage better trained,
up to date corps of

judges and auxiliaries.

o Put in place 
transparent and 
efficient and gender
responsive practices 

for hiring, firing, and 

promotion.

.

o Attract and retain 

qualified civil servants. 

oPublic
Expenditure
Review.
oCourse on legal
and judicial
reforms (WBI).
oTraining ofjudges
on commercial
and business laws
(WBI).

Labor Market
Study.

Poverty

Assessment.

Country Gender

Assessment.

Needs and Priorities 

Government Strategy/Actions 
; 
, .

~~~~~Country-- 

.
^_i___._C_-_-____ 

-Monitoring Indicators°. 
r 

.__ 

3.3 Improving Public
Services
* Update and simplify 
public service procedures. 
* Make information on 
public services 
transparent. 

* Simplify public service 
procedures. 
* Post public services by 
department for transparency. 
e Launch e-government 
initiative. 

* Institutionalize service 
delivery surveys. 
* Publish service 
standards in all 
departments. 

CAS Annex B9

Page 9 of II

d 

k 

World Bank Group Support FY03-05 
KPrtnr
edn/Inowledge 
KNrdJn 
Advisory Services

Ongoing Projects 

Supprt from
Partners

Same as above. 

eTA on 
intergovernmental 
fiscal relations for 
municipal finance. 
eTA as needed. 
*Training for urban 
management 
(WBI).

GTZ: TA in
development of
performance
indicators for
key ministries
and public
sector agencies.

USAID

DFID: PSR

3.4 Financial Management
and Budgetary Reform
* Update and decentralize 
budgetary procedures. 
* Introduce Medium-Term 
Budgetary Framework 
(MTBF). 
* Streamline internal and 
external audit function in 
accordance with Bank's 
2001 CFAA. 
* Overhaul law on public 
accounting as suggested in 
the CFAA.

* Introduce Medium-Term 
* Implement MTBF 
Budgetary Framework 
fully at center and in 
(MTBF). 
key ministries. 
* Convert Audit Bureau to fully * Put performance 
management system in 
independent audit institution 
by transferring ex ante audit 
place. 
functions to Government's 
* Revise audit law to 
internal audit department. 
convert the Audit 
* Overhaul law on public 
Bureau into an 
accounting. 
independent audit
institution.

* 

Same as Country 
column. 

Same as above. 

*Report on
observance of
accounting
standards and
codes.
*Training for
poverty
monitoring and
evaluation (WBI).

Monitoring Indicators 
W

C 

Counitry, 

Worldl IBank 

Lending/ 

Knowledge 

Partn ers

CAS Annex B9
Page 10 of II

World Bank Group Support FY03-05 

Support from

IV. Water Resource Management and Environment

______ 

__ ___ _____Ongoing Pro'ects Advisory Services

o Achieve constancy in 
supply of water. 
o Reduce overdrafts of 
renewable aquifers. 
o Reduce unaccounted- 
for water (target is 30 
percent). 
o Increased percentage 
of O&M costs of WAJ 
and JVA recovered 
through tariffs (target 
is full recovery). 
o Increasing percentage 
of wastewater 
collected, treated, and 
reused. 

o Define and 
disseminate sectoral 
policy on 
intersectoral water 
allocations. 
o Establish strategy 
for managing 
sustainable 
groundwater 
resources. 
o Complete well 
metering process. 
o Establish 
mechanism for 
implementing 
groundwater
monitoring program.
o Supervise ongoing
projects and provide
advice and response
to TA needs.

Proposed Projects 
oProgrammatic 
US 
EIB
o Potential IFC 
ESW for 
Japan/JICA
involvement in 
continuing policy 
CID- 
IKFW/
financing private 
dialogue. 
Italy
sector investments oUpdating of water GTZ-
in wastewater 
sector strategy. 
Operations and
systems. 
oLearning events 
management
on water sector 
support for
reform and PPI 
Jerash/Irbid.
(WBI).

Ongoing Proiects 
o Amman Water 
and Sanitation.
PRG for Disi-
PRG 
Conveyor
Amman Conveyor
project.

Needs and Priorities 

Government Strategy/Actions 

4.1 Water

o Future water balance and 
o Undertake a pilot project to 
auality: Manage water 
improve irrigation efficiency 
resources carefully. 
in the Jordan Valley. 
o Achieve greater efficiency o Implement the groundwater 
in municipal, industrial, 
by-laws to reduce 
and agricultural water use. 
groundwater abstraction in 
o Increase use of treated 
highlands, ensuring 
wastewater for irrigation 
operational performance of 
in Jordan Valley. 
meters, enforcement of 
o Move to high-value crops 
licensed quantities, and 
to obtain adequate return 
volumetric tariffs. 
on agricultural water use. 
o Manage demand by raising 
o Supply Augmentation: 
water charges by WAJ and 
Increase water supply to 
JVA. 
narrow gap between 
o Sign management contracts 
supply and demand. 
for water and sanitation 
o Financing and 
networks to main cities 
Institutional Challenges: 
(Amman already has one). 
Increase internal financing o Develop strategy and action 
of WAJ and JVA to meet 
plan for reuse of treated 
fiscal pressures for water 
wastewater in agriculture and 
investments. 
urban areas.
o Strengthen awareness
campaigns on water
conservation and quality.

Needs and Priorities^- 

Needs Knd 

.rloritles~ Governmept Stratet~r/Actions 

Goveromeot StrategylActions 

Monitoring Indicators 
Country. 
. WOrld Bank 

______________________ 

____________________ 

__________________ 

* Enact, at the national level, 
essential environmental 
regulations, including ElAs. 

* Put environmental 
regulatory framework 
in place. 

* Same as Country 
column. 

4.2 The Environment
* Enact essential 
environmental regulations 
such as environmental 
impact assessments 
(ElAs), based on the 1995 
environmental protection 
law. 

CAS Annex B9
Page II of 11

World Bank Group Support FY03-05
Lendingl 
Knowledge 

-flO ino g Projects 

A dvisory Services 

Sup,oort from

Partners

_ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ _

- EU/EIB's
support for
environmental
work through
METAP
UNDP
KFW

Natural Resources 
Management TA. 

GEF proiects 
*Conservation of 
Medicinal and 
Herbal Plants. 
.*Integrated
ecosystem in JRV.
*Gulf of Aqaba
Environmental
Consolidation.

Note: Acronyms and abbreviations used in the table are defined in the list that appears at the front of the CAS.

CAS Annex BI0 - Jordan
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

As of December 1t, 2002

Network area 

Country 

performance' 

Major issueb 

Country 

pnonty' 

Bank 

pnontyc 

Reconciliation of

country and Bank
pnonties d

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Manage. nent

Poverty reducton 
Econorr ic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, utrition & population 
Social protection 

Environrnentally & Socially Sustainable
Developi nent
Rural di ivelopment 
Environi nent 
Social development 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Private nector 
Energy S mining 
Infrastrt cture 

fair 
good 
fair 
good 

good 
good 
good 

fair 
fair 
fair 

fair 
good 
good 
good 

Incidence relatively high and progress

limited 
Public debt/budget deficit 
Efficiency in delivery of core services 
Female employment 

high 
high
high 
moderate 
high 
high
moderate moderate

IMF will take the lead

Quality/relevance 
Efficiency 
Efficiency 

high 
high 
high 

high
high
high

Rural poverty 
Water resource management 
Capacity of local institutions 

moderate moderate
high 
high
moderate high

Weak intermediation 
Compettioniuncertainty 
Restructuring/privatlzation 
Transport costs/maintenance 

moderate moderate
moderate moderate
moderate moderate
moderate moderate

a Use 'exo ilient,' 'good,' fair,' or 'poor'
b Indicate I inctpal country-specific problems (e g, for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty,' for education, 'female secondary completion,' for environment, 'urban air pollution')
c To ndica e pnornty, use 'low,' 'moderate,' or 'high '
d Give exp' anation, if pnonties do not agree, for exemple, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue

Annex C
USAID and EU Programs in Jordan

USAID Proaram in Jordan

Water
data collection, institutional improvements to water sector institutions
rehabilitating existing water systems to improve water use efficiency
improve, expand waster water treatment plants by improving wastewater quality

Economic Opportunity
Support for increase access to business services including microenterprise lending
Identification of key economic policy reforms to raise private sector competitiveness
Policy based balance of payment program focusing on reform to trade, investment, prvatization and others.
Technical assistance to establish Aqaba Special Economic Zone

Health, Population
Improved knowledge about modern contraceptives, in part through media campaign
Improvements in health centers to raise access and quality of primary health care
Encouragement to private sector for engagement in marketing family planning products and serves
Support for health policy reform

EU Program in Jordan

The main ongoing projects financed under MEDA (financial program to support EU partnership) are:
Industrial Modernization Programme
Support for regulatory reform and privatization (SRRP)
Global financing facility for SMEs - Risk capital (EIB)
Water Sector Intervention Programme
Support of SMEs - Risk capital (EIB)
Management unit for the Amman Water Rehabilitation Programme
Tourism development and preservation of cultural heritage
The social development project (SDP)/Development and
employment fund (DEF) (financed under Protocol 11, Ill, IV)

National Indicative Program for Jordan 2002-4 (approved August 2002), may change
Structural adjustment facility to support fiscal consolidation through reform of VAT and public pensions
Support to the implementation of the Association Agreement
Support to Aqaba Special Economic Zone Authority
Program for human rights and democratization

MAP SECTION

350 

370 

38 

.

39:

IBRD 29234

I' 

J 

.

V 

ir 

-33 '. 

1 

,/ 

\ 

33~30

330 

2 

@X,-' 

.

'1' 

,

' 

I 

/ 

' 

J 

/ 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~MAFRAK 

'

AiIon0

n

o 

nmm 

3 ~ 

' 

~ 

t 

"s/ 

-310 

K~~~~~

-31'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0

320rrk 

31-
4i>\ 

.ssenNnqb 

...-, 2' 

A N

.

C 

, , e 

,/ 

0 

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

.

; 

/6 NATIONAL CAPITAL

_ 

_ 

-

.

0. 

AlMudesowwoetA 

29 

0 

0 

0 

25 

25 

25 

50 

50 

50 

75 
75 

| ToAIB',, 

75 MILES 

EXPRESSWAYS

ROADS

' ' ' ' ' ' ' | 

RAILROADS

PERENNIAL RIVERS AND STREAMS 

29-

100 
100 

125 KILOMETS 
125 KILOMETERS 

------- 

-- INTERMITTENT STREAMS AND WADIS

~

Ths mop wos produced by the Mop Design Unit of The World Bonk 
The boundories, colors, denominations ond onyother informotion shown
on this mop do not imply, on the port of The World Bonk Group, any 
judgment on the legolstotus of any territory, or any endorsement or
occeptance of such boundories

^50 

36° 

-

GOVERNORATE BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

370 

380 

390

DECEMBER 1997

Danari 

I %OCJSI

Type: 

Ma^ : 

CAS

25228 

JO

