d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

For Official Use Only

Report No. 24372-YEM

MEMORANDUM OF TIE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF YEMEN

August 6, 2002

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective July 3, 2002)
Currency Unit = Yemeni Rial
YR 1 US$0.00568

US$1 YR 175.965

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 

CAS 

COCA 

FAO 

FY 

GDP 
GCC 
IDA 

IFAD 

IFC 

IMF 

Analytical and Advisory 
Assistance
Country Assistance Strategy 

Central Organization for 
Control and Audit
Food and Agriculture 
Organization 
Fiscal Year 

Gross Domestic Product 
Gulf Cooperation Council 
International Development 
Association
International Fund for 
Agricultural Development
International Finance 
Corporation
International Monetary Fund 

MDG 

Millennium Development 
Goal 
MENA Middle East and North Africa 

MIGA 

NGO 

Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency 
Nongovernmental 
Organization

ODA 

Official Development Assistance

OECD 

P1U 

PNS 

PRGF 

PRS 
PRSC 
PRSP 

Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development
Project Implementation Unit

Programmatic Non-lending
Services
Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper

SFYP 

Second Five-Year Plan

UAE 

United Arab Emirates

UNFPA 

United Nations Development
Program
United Nations Fund for
Population Activities
UNHCR United Nations High Commission
on Refugees
UNICEF United Nations International
Children's Emergency Fund
World Bank Institute

UNDP 

WBI 

WFP 

World Food Program

Regional Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Task Team Leader: 

Mr. Jean-Louis Sarbib
Mr. Mahmood Ayub
Mr. John Macgregor, Country Coordinator

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REPUBLIC OF YEMEN COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT 
A. 
QUALITY OF LIFE. 
B. 

I. 

II. 

m. 

IV. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

..

i

I

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND ENDOWMENTS ............................................. , 2

MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, PROSPECTS AND RISKS 
A. 
RECENT ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE. 
MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND RISKS .10
EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT. 

B. 
C. 

.

.

8
8

II

.

.

11

B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 

DEVELOPMENT AND POVERTY REDUCTION PLANS AND THE CAS 
A. 
SECOND FIVE YEAR PLAN AND PRSP. 
PROGRESS TOWARDS OBJECTIVES IN PREVIOUs CAS .13
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PREVIOUS AND PRESENT CAS .13
PROCESS IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PRESENT CAS .14
OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES .16
INSTRUMENTS .16
PROPOSED BASE CASE-ASSISTANCE PROGRAM .17
THE CAS AND THE MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS. .......................... 21
OUTREACH AND CAPACITY BUILDING .22
ALTERNATIVE CASES AND TRIGGERS .23
ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION .24
ROLE OF THE MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY .24

H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
L. 

G. 

II

B. 

IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES 
A. 
PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT .24
COORDINATION WITH DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS .25
MONITORING EFFECTIVENESS .27
RISK MANAGEMENT ............................................................................................. 27

C. 
D. 

24

..

BOXES

Box 1: 
Box 2: 
BOX 3: 

Box 4: 

Box 5: 
BOX 6: 
BOX 7: 

TABLES

TABLE 1: 
TABLE 2: 
TABLE 3: 
TABLE 4: 
TABLES: 

POVERTY SUMMARY .............................................................................................. 2

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND ....................... 

ATTACKING RURAL POVERTY IN YEMEN ....................... 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PREVIOUS CAS: WHAT WORKED, AND WHAT DID NOT. 15
AN INTEGRATED, DONOR-SUPPORTED WATER STRATEGY...................... 21

CRITERIA FOR LENDING LEVELS ................................. 

DONOR ASSISTANCE: COMPLEMENTARITIES ................................. 

3
6

23
26

COMPARATIVE SOCIAL INDICATORS ..........................
SELECTED ECONOMIC INDICATORS .......................... 
MEDIUM TERM MACROECONOMIC INDICATORS ................................. 

TIMING OF CORE ESW PRODUCTS .................................
YEMEN AND THE MDGS ................................. 

1......................... 

I

9
10

1 8

22

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance of their ofricial duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

ANNEX TABLES
Al: 
YEMEN ASSISTANCE AND MENA STRATEGY - KEY LINKAGES [BASE CASE]
A2: 
YEMEN AT A GLANCE
B2: 
SELECTED INDICATORS OF BANK PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND MANAGEMEN1
BANK GROUP PROGRAM SUMMARY
B3: 
B4: 
SUMMARY OF NON-LENDING SERVICES
B5: 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
B6: 
KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS
B7: 
KEY EXPOSURE INDICATORS
B8: 
STATEMENT OF IDA/IFC OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO
B9: 
CAS PROGRAM MATRIX
MAP MAP OF THE REPUBLIC OF YEMEN

Executive Summary

i. 
In the three years since the last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), Yemen has made steady
progress. The Government has continued to implement its program of economic, financial and administrative
reforms. Important steps have been taken in laying the groundwork for civil service reform and in setting up
decentralized fiscal entities. The authorities have successfully restored and maintained macroeconomic stability,
and are now rightly turning their attention to the growth and poverty challenges highlighted in the recently
completed Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP).
ii. 
Recent external and fiscal surpluses fueled by high oil prices and production were generally well
used, but pervasive poverty remains. Surpluses were judiciously used to pay off domestic public debt and to
build up foreign exchange reserves equal to about 14 months of imports. Surpluses, however, have had only a
modest impact on slow-changing human development indicators, which remain firmly among those of the least
developed countries. Especially serious are the low literacy rate (especially among females, at 28 percent) and
high fertility rate (5.9). The low and dwindling supply of fresh water constrains the options for labor absorption
in agriculture at above-poverty wages, and is already causing social disruption in areas where groundwater is
exhausted. Given Yemen's extreme dependence on oil (83 percent of goods and service exports), the decline in
oil production expected as oil reserves are gradually exhausted will place Yemen under strain as today's
surpluses could become tomorrow's deficits in the absence of new discoveries or alternative strategies.
iii. 
Addressing these weaknesses will not be easy. Yemen faces formidable obstacles resulting from weak
institutional capacity. There are also governance issues related to ineffective public administration and poor
service delivery. Achieving progress in these areas will take time, but the government has realized that, left
unaddressed, these challenges would create pressures and conflicts that choke off new investments and divert
attention from reform. That is why in the Second Five Year Plan (2001-2005) and in the PRSP, the Government
has recognized the need to address these areas in a systematic and comprehensive manner.
iv. 
There are some positive factors that should help Yemen reduce the impact of the above handicaps.
Yemen is evolving toward a more stable environment after the reunification of the country about a decade ago.
During the past three years, the country has started to benefit from improved relations with its neighbors,
especially Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Eritrea, and the first steps in accession of Yemen to the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) have been taken. The country's gas reserves have potential linkages to the rest of the economy,
starting with cheap power production. By and large, the government has been fiscally responsible, guarding
against the temptation of squandering resources in times of high oil prices. With the passage of the Local
Authorities Law in 2000, Yemen is poised to have one of the most decentralized governments in the Middle
East. And, thanks to support from development partners, important work is underway in the reform of civil
service, judicial reform and strengthening governance.
v. 
The present CAS is different from the previous CAS in two important respects. First, this CAS is
based on a full PRSP, which was reviewed by the MvfF and Bank Boards on July 31 and August 1, 2002,
respectively. Following a broad participatory process initiated in July 2001 that included the government,
private sector, civil society and development partners, there has been close coordination in the preparation of the
PRSP and the CAS. The CAS is firmly grounded on the Government's PRSP, with its strong focus on poverty
reduction, and is designed as the Bank's business plan for FY03-05 in support of Yemen's PRSP. Second,
recognizing that the most critical constraints on poverty reduction are in policy and institutional weaknesses, this
CAS greatly increases the emphasis on analytical and advisory services while underscoring the importance of
lending services in a country where developmental needs and demand for Bank financial support are both very
high.
vi. 
Building on the PRSP and the comments of donors and civil society on it, the following are the main
objectives of the CAS:
* 
Improved governance - better budgeting, expenditure, fiduciary controls, policy formulation, and
building capacity for effective decentralization and, more generally, for improved service delivery to the
public and business community.

* Attractive investment environment to generate job opportunities -

lighter and more predictable

regulation and taxation, enforceable contracts, predictable application of laws, and adequate
infrastructural support.
* Better human capital - expanding basic education, closing the gender gap in basic and secondary
education, and improving technical and vocational training and access to health care.

* Ensuring environmental sustainability - policies and investments for water sustainability, watershed

stability and soil conservation, and sustainable fish stocks.

vii. The Base Case, characterized by the continuation of a satisfactory macroeconomic framework, and
continued satisfactory implementation of the public sector reform and of the Bank's portfolio of ongoing
operations, consists of a lending level of about US$410 million for eleven credits during FY03-05. This
lending level, which is consistent with the present IDA allocation, exceeds slightly the amount comrnitted under
the previous CAS, but for fewer operations, reflecting greater focus on the key strategic objectives noted above.
Analytical and advisory assistance (AAA) would grow significantly. Equally important, within the AAA a new,
programmatic form would be introduced to follow up Bank analytical work with the sort of continuous advisory
support whose absence in the past often reduced the impact of the Bank's analytical services. 
In addition,
following this more knowledge-oriented approach to development assistance, the CAS would invest much more
than in the past in capacity building and outreach to decision makers, opinion leaders, and the general public.
The strategy would help broaden the support for vital but often misunderstood reforms by sponsoring policy
discussions informed by Bank and other analytical work promoting high quality policy analysis by Yemenis,
providing access to worldwide sources of information, training and discussion on development issues, and
expanding public awareness of the Bank's activities and goals.
viii. The role of IFC is expected to continue to be more active than it was at the beginning of the last
CAS period. Several potential investments could materialize, and IFC and IDA staff would seek to advance
those IFC projects that complement or support IDA-fmanced projects or reforms. Privatization of power
generation, privately managed industrial free zones, and tourism investments are examples. The CAS also
foresees very active collaboration with FIAS on improving the investment climate. No MIGA guarantees are
expected during the CAS period.
ix. 
If the implementation of the poverty reduction strategy is satisfactory, ongoing government efforts
and CAS support on governance are successful, satisfactory progress is made on the macroeconomic
framework, and portfolio performance is good, the CAS would move into a High Case. This would include
a lending level of about US$520 million for 13 credits, including a Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) in
FY05. If the policy and implementation performance deteriorates, the CAS would move into a Low Case of
about US$ 230 million in six credits, basically retaining the FY03 Base Case program but scaling down to one
social sector project per year thereafter. In this case, absent the environment in which lending operations could
be fully effective, the relative emphasis on AAA would be even greater.
x. 
The proposed strategy entails risks. Improving governance is time consuming and arduous and there is
the risk it will be slower than the Government intends. Exogenous shocks are also a threat. These include
threats to national security as well as disruptions to the world oil markets. Decentralization, while laudable, may
face problems in implementation, mainly due to the weak institutional capacity of local administration. Given
the Govenmment's stated commitments and the high stakes in terms of Yemen's future, these risks are
acceptable.
xi. The following issues are suggested for Board consideration:
* Does the CAS adequately support the PRSP?
* 
In view of the wide range of challenges identified, does the CAS propose the right mix of instruments?
* 
Is the CAS program sufficiently selective and is the breadth of the program appropriate for a country
facing so many challenges with relatively little internal capacity and external support?

ii

1. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. 

QUALrrY OF LIFE

1. 
After twelve years of dramatic change that included unification of north and south, the return of at least
800,000 Yemenis from the Gulf in 1991, civil war, launching of a major program of economic and
administrative reform, and wide swings in foreign exchange earnings reflecting fluctuating oil prices, Yemen is
by most measures better off than it was in 1990. However, with a gross national product per capita of US$460,
Yemen's 18.5 million people remain, on average, among the poorest in the world, and major constraints to
sustainable employment-generating growth and good public services stand in the way of rapid improvements in
the quality of life of the poor. The central objective of this Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) is to support the
Government in implementing its poverty reduction strategy and relieving the above constraints.

y

iX2 

Ls

e 

_ 'C- 

r 
e 

2. 
Social Dimensions. The challenge of improving the quality of life in Yemen can be understood by
reference to basic indicators. Table I compares present-day social indicators with those of 1990 and with the
average for least-developed countries. The numbers can only hint at Yemen's transformation since 1970, when
the more populous northern part of Yemen (the
former Yemen Arab Republic) contained only 200 
high school graduates and had only recently
emerged from long isolation. Despite the large
gaps in data, it is clear from the table that Yemen
has made great strides in many of the indicators of
today's Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 
but that it also still has far to go. About 42 percent 
of all households live below the poverty line (18 
percent are below the food poverty line), and a L e
large and rising proportion 
(25 percent) are
unemployed or underemployed. 
Basic health
indicators -
the infant mortality rate of 76 per 
a
1,000, the under-five mortality rate of 94 per 
1,000, and life expectancy of 56 years - are much 
improved since 1990 but still not acceptable.
Malnutrition affects almost half of children under
five. The total fertility rate, estimated at 5.9 births per woman, has come down from 7.6 in 1990, but continues
to fuel a very high population growth rate, estimated by the Government at 3.5 percent and by the Bank, at
close to 2.7 percent per annum. Education indicators, too, have improved but are very low - the adult literacy
rate is only 48 percent, and the gross enrollment ratio for basic education is 78 percent. Quality is widely
acknowledged to be poor. The gender gap is among the widest in the world, with only 55 percent of primary
school-aged girls in school (in rural areas only 24 percent), a 15 percent higher child mortality rate for girls,
longer hours of work (usually unpaid) for women, and much less freedom of female social and economic
opportunity. This wide gender gap placed Yemen at 1315' among 146 countries rated on the Gender
Development Index for 1999. These and other factors contribute to Yemen's low ranling - 133rd among the 162
countries that were rated - on the 1999 Human Development Index cited in the World Human Development
Report of 2001.

_ 
e 

76

9 

me 

a 

e

o 

S 

15

2

= 

e 

3. 
Physical Measures. Yemen's very meager water supply (less than 130 cubic meters per capita per
year, or 2 percent of the world average) leaves 90 percent of the population with less than minimum standards of
domestic water supply. In addition, poor access to safe drinking water (only 69 percent of the population) and
poor sanitation are daily reminders of poverty, especially onerous for girls and women in rural areas, who often
must walk for hours every day to collect domestic water. About three-quarters of the population is rural, much
of it dispersed among more than 100,000 small and isolated settlements. The largely mountainous geography
has cut off much of the rural population from good access to the market economy and public services. Less than

15 percent of the road network is paved, and much of the network (with the exception of most main highways)
is in poor or very poor condition. Electricity reaches only about 45 percent of the population and generating
capacity is falling behind demand. Telecommunications penetration, although increasing very rapidly, is still
quite low (telephone line density is only 19 per 1000 people, and internet access less than I per 1000 people,
about one-tenth that of Egypt).

... 

i 

'..!

Poverty and inequai*y Althoughthe Central Statistical'Organization has.conducted'thee houeholds u 
in the
1990s (1992,' 1998 'and 1999),,. the1998 household budget survey,F(HBS)',is tlh6t.best source t6 :esflmate. income.
poverty and establish a baseiine.. Aboit42% 
the.population lied beloW the'poverty linei (45%inrui:areas
31%'.i urban areas),then, and4i8% of the j pul"ti'i couild.not afford adequate'nutritio"i9 Since aizeabletpah of
the .p,pulaiion'livis, just abov'e the povrty' Iine,'a mod,erate shi&k cok1d .in6rease :: 
ncid 
e of poverty
dramatically. ,TheG iii coefficien,t 'of, 3'4.;4 indicates'.t,hat ncome inequalit is ess; severe m i Yemen
other coutes in the region. 
Geogr.aphy ofpodver. Poverty is' mrostly airural he,nomenon,!as 76%:.of the total population a'id 83% of the poor
live' in ur areas.:The 
are or 
arties'povert rates byregion. About half of the p'o,r, are in the four most
b, Sana'a region'and Hodeidah. The incidence of pverty ,is owest in -Al'
popuiIus(out o 20)' gover,norates:. 

Baida and Sadda, and 'inthe two major urban centers,,Sa'na'a city and Aden.
Characieristics of the poor. The poor iniYemen tend to avev'abov,e-average ho6uisehold sizes andicorrespondingly

ai, 

large depiindency"a"d child-to-adult ratios.. Many also have a widbwed headof,household. Most are e'6pl6yed(84/4%
live' in households'headed'by employed persons; though this statistic.may include an,y.underemployed), and wo,rk
nmanly in the 'low-productivity agfic,hitre-sector (.47.3%), folwedi'by services (359%) ,bid industry (168%)
W.orkers. 'rem,ances.;are an important surceof iicoreifor thp 'poor, blut they b,enefitmainly tWebetter off: onlyj26%
of;individuals,,receiving rex,iittances 
ive, in poor househol ds. 'Bsed on regressionanalysis, 'education has a 
gstrong
neg4tive correlation with poverty.- Not surprisingly, therefore, the PRSP places strongfenphasii on edcation. The
'I PRSP !'.s dis-usegd iat thi Boa on ba'2, 
0 
(IDA; 
109
;M00l 

B. 

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND ENDOWMENTS

4. 
Political and Governance Issues. Yemen's development efforts have. been handicapped by internal
factors whose influence remains pervasive. The major problems are in security and governance. Lack of
security is often cited as the greatest disincentive to investment by Yemenis and foreigners alike. Powerful
interests have not been fully controlled by the central govemment, leading to armed violence and kidnapping,
and virtual unenforceability of laws and policies in some regions. There are signs that this is changing for the
better. The President recently traveled by bus throughout the country to persuade local populations of the link
between security and development, with favorable response including the end of security problems in one
govemorate and $11 million in pledges from businesses to finance much needed local infrastructure. Poor
quality of governance is related to the security problem, and overall is the most important constraint on
development. Its main characteristics are weak government capacity to design and implement programs, poor
service delivery associated with lack of incentives and skills in the civil service, widespread corruption, and
absence until recently of accountable local governments.

5. 
Externally, Yemen experienced substantial losses from the cut-off of foreign assistance and the
expulsion of at least 800,000 Yemenis from the Gulf in 1991. The reduction of worker remittances by over two-
thirds also weakened community self-help organizations that had depended on them. Major assistance from
socialist countries ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union. Political and economic relations with Saudi
Arabia, Yemen's most important neighbor, remained uneasy until recently, at considerable cost to Yemeni
producers and traders.

6. 
Despite these problems, the Government deserves credit for recent political progress. It concluded
years of border negotiations with Saudi Arabia with a treaty in June, 2000, confuiming Yemeni sovereignty over
previously disputed 
land, and it secured pledges of major new Saudi economic assistance. 
Similar

2

normalization and aid resumption has taken place with Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
Domestically, several developments are notable. First and most important, Parliament approved the Local
Authorities Law in February, 2000, which set in motion a radical shift of power from the central govemment to
local authorities govemed by councils elected in February, 2001. 
Second, a new Elections Law and
establishment of the Supreme Elections Council are improving transparency and faimess in elections. Third,
religious schools or "scientific institutes" were converted in 2001 into standard schools run by the Ministry of
Education. Fourth, the Government took decisive measures against kidnappers, suspected terrorists, and those
who harbor them - all of whom have generally acted with impunity until recently. Fifth and most recent, the
Govemment banned the carrying of firearms in cities and offices - a common practice that had long threatened
the rule of law.

7. 
However, at the root of many of Yemen's social and economic challenges (see paras. 8-9) are difficult
political tradeoffs. These are expressed in choices regarding the civil service, judiciary, security forces, public
enterprises, public expenditure, and laws. All of these are recognized in the PRSP.

Siweof -h anin 

kin 

Shefthe 
ancien kingdom or Sheba and one'of the original fonts of Arab culture. Yemen was in ancient limes a prosperous land
Eiport of' frankincense and&':myrrh and:.co,mmerce between 
the Mediterrariean and.Indian Ocean linoral states supporteo the.
constructioniof sophisficate&cities, forts to preserve orderjap4d massive terracing of mountainsides for agricultlure. Changing cuSioms
in the M&diterraeaari'shrank the,market for frarnkincense and'myrrh,.causing' Yemen's economuc decline in the fourth centur) 'AD
Parts of Yermen were occupied,,by, foreign powers - Abyssifiians, Persians, Onomans, and Bntish - begin 
g in the sixthDcentur A.
* Thieir,contro'was relatively loose due to the mountainous'teraiJn, lack of good roads, and strong mbal structure&. '_

i-n ties 

prsp

co 

c~~~~ups, ab assassi 

The Ottomans, who ruled the Red Sea coast and the capitali,-Sana'a. were expelled in 1919 by the Imar,,, 
enforced an isolaionis
and strict lslamic regime ;An Egyptian-backldicoupirin'j962 overthrew the Imam and established the Yemen Arab Republic "'Internal
conflic't,ma-ked by coupsand asssinationsif6liowed utitibAli Abdallah S31eh, the current President, took power in 1978.
dmiireed7_o
The British took over Adein, in 1839- and gradually estabished a protectorateo'ver the rest:of south Yeffi6i.' Aden, arnunis
Bom'bay, became' one; of the world's major ports in the decade.s after the Sue? Canal opened in 1869. Froni,this cosmopolitan
popil,ationl!.carnmemr,inuc,h ,of.the lea,dership of a,.,jeftist' 6Citonalist movement that,wdn independence from the Bnnsh in 196'. The
People's Democer-atici Republic of Yemen (PDRY) was founded on socialist pnnciples, including nationalization ofmost formal
econormic'activities, which led to the decline of Aden as,aiport' and commercial center. PDRY's investments in human resources,

-

!i j ;; 

howev,er, hav been of lasting be,e 

.

' " 

* 

- l 

.

A

vitwas.discovered in 1984. Folobwimg a devastating civ'il war un the PDRY , the withdrawal of support for the PDRY by the collapsing
Soviit'Union and the recognition of1economic benefits from complementannes in oilproduction and marketing, the two Yemens
united in 1990i IThe niortho, with apopulon se%eral times that of the south; became dominant after elecnons in 1993. Resentmernt in
the south led to secession and civil war in mid-1994 The iwo-month war ended in reunification but destroyed much economic
infrastrutre in thejsouth, with armateriial costesiimaied'at USSI 1 13'billion, equal to about three ye:rs of GDP at that time. Tribal-
and rego, ,oal differencesi emain., -' 

'"~c 

d- " 

, .

s' 

' 

.' 

" : 

IH 

" 

* Security. The Government's capacity to maintain security is improving, but has been weak in the past,
limiting delivery of public services and economic activities. This has been exacerbated by cases of domestic
conflict. Further, although Yemen's notable recent diplomatic successes have established good relations
with all its neighbors, military expenditures are relatively high. There is evidence of substantial
improvement underway. The recent ban on carrying firearms in cities and offices, the military crackdown
on political kidnapping, and the President's amnesty for past transgressions combined with the promise of
greatly increased public investments in the most troubled governorates, have begun to improve the security
environment. The army will be reduced substantially and the quality of recruits and training improved. In
addition, there has been a major change in the management of police services.
* Civil service. Yemen's civil service is in need of drastic improvement. Overstaffing contributes to poor
civil service pay, which leads to low morale, low motivation, and corruption. The salary scale is tightly
compressed, 
there is no link between performance and reward/punishment, no training in service
orientation, 
little training to enhance skills, and too little non-salary support (supplies, 
transport,

3

maintenance, etc.) for proper service to the public. Signs of a turnaround include (i) the President's
designation of civil service reform as the Government's top priority, (ii) the replacement in January 2002 of
the entire top management of the Central Organization for Control and Audit (COCA) with respected
professionals to tackle corruption, including formulation of an anticorruption action plan and an initial list of
civil servants to face corruption charges, and (iii) basic groundwork laid for administrative reforms under
the IDA-financed Civil Service Modernization Project.
Judiciary. The judiciary has had a reputation for corruption, low level of professional qualification, delays,
and lack of ability to enforce rulings. However, 
there have been recent moves 
to improve 
the
professionalism of the judiciary, including launch of an Accountability Council led by the President which
has dismissed 21 judges and relieved from duties another 60 for unprofessional conduct. The new
management of the Judicial Inspection Authority has begun a program of surprise inspections of court
quality by trained inspectors based on transparent evaluation criteria and, mandatory retraining for judges
with poor inspection ratings. Salaries ofjudges have been increased and linked to quality inspection ratings.
Public enterprises. Public enterprises tend to be overstaffed, inefficient, a fiscal burden, and a source of
higher costs to customers. Nevertheless, a number of them enjoy strong political support. Reform
measures have recently accelerated. 
In addition to its anticorruption role, COCA is starting this year to
require state owned enterprises to publish operations plans and itemized budgets at the start of each year,
and will monitor their execution. Barriers to private entry into such markets as oil refining, cement
manufacturing, land transport, and air transport have impeded potential private investment and raised costs
to customers, but are gradually being dismantled, notably in refining, power production and road transport.
The privatization program continues, under the guidance of a Technical Privatization Office set up with IDA
support. Based on the Privatization Law of 1999, recently the Technical Privatization Office issued tenders
for five enterprises to be privatized, while tenders for over a dozen others will be issued by end-2002.
Public expenditure. Budget priorities show a consistent preference for salaries (and new hiring at least in
education and health) over non-salary operating expenses, and for investment over proper operation and
maintenance (O&M) expenditures. The elected councils of Yemen's more than 330 districts were recently
granted full power to define district investment programs, but most lack systems and skills for broad
consultation, budget formulation, expenditure control, transparent procurement, accounting, and audit. The
central government has been only partially able to resist political pressure from local leaders to undertake
far too many projects at once, whether budgeted or not, thereby greatly lengthening project completion
periods, increasing costs, and delaying onset of benefits. Public procurement and expenditure accountability
are weak. Sectorally, progress towards key MDGs has been hampered by the low level and poor
prioritization of health spending; and by a past bias in education budgeting towards university programs at
the expense of basic education (although dramatic improvements are being made here). Improvements are
underway but slow in realization. Past IDA technical support helped to improve budgeting especially in
education, while current support is aimed at creating a modern Accounting and Financial Management
Information System (AFMIS). Government capacity constraints are a serious impediment to progress in
this. COCA's new management is broadening COCA's role beyond accounting and audit to include public
agency perfornance monitoring. COCA is also working in parallel with AFMIS on automating the
accounting of the public sector, and is now undertaking a survey of the accounting systems of each public
institution.
* Laws. Although many important reforms have been legislated in recent years, many laws are not yet
attuned to economic and social needs. For example, the financial sector is hampered by the lack of strong
legal support for repossession of loan collateral and the absence of a law on leasing. Despite budgetary
overdependence on oil revenues, a recent General Sales Tax Law has been suspended. Laws protecting the
rights of women in many spheres have been enacted, but serious legal inequalities remain, some aspects of
economic and political participation of women are still not fully protected, and enforcement is often lacking.
On the positive side, a long agenda of legal reforms is working its way through the Cabinet and
Parliament, including recently enacted laws on water and investment and a revision of laws discriminatory
to women.

4

8. 
Social Constraints. Several aspects of social structure in effect remove resources from use in
development. Among them:
* Status of women. Women are largely excluded from the market economy. The employment rate of women
is less than one-third that of men, and this employment is mainly in low-productivity rainfed agriculture and
small livestock. Illiteracy, immobility, lack of control over fertility, limited access to credit or opportunities
for participation in decision-making, and limited legal rights in practice all reduce the immediate quality of
life of women, as well as their potential contribution to raising standards of living. Yemen's still-high rate of
population growth, with the high social costs it entails, can only be corrected in a sustainable way by the
education and empowerment of women. There is far to go in this, considering the low school enrolment
ratios for girls, and the near-absence of women in Parliament and local councils.
* Qat. Unparalleled amounts of time and resources are devoted to chewing qat, a leaf containing a near-
amphetamine stimulant. Qat is the largest single source of rural income, and a major source of employment.
Chewing qat in social and commercial interchange is so ingrained in custom that it will be a major economic
and social fact for a long time to come. But its economic and social benefits come at a high cost. Chewing
qat fills an inordinate amount of time that, before the rapid increase in qat consumption over the last 20
years, was used for sports, other social activities, or productive purposes. Long term use is associated with
cancers and other health problems.. Qat use by women is associated with low birth weight babies and higher
infant malnutrition and mortality. The Government has banned its use by on-duty civil servants and security
forces and launched a national dialogue on qat, including a major national workshop in April, 2002. The
workshop was important because it demonstrated to a large and diversified audience the social, economic
and health costs of qat use. The workshop also, however, concluded that any major reduction in use, will of
necessity come slowly, mainly as a result of public education and the popularization of other forms of social
interaction and entertainment. Technical support for introduction of alternative high-value crops, especially
those that need little or no irrigation, would help to maintain rural incomes as qat demand falls, as would
technical and financial support for new or expanded nonfarm rural enterprises.
Isolation. The mountainous geography of the westem highlands where 85 percent of the population lives
has kept people isolated. 
Peoples of the eastem desert region are similarly isolated. More traditional
beliefs and customs predominate in these areas, which makes more difficult the introduction of modem
practices (such as girls' education) and the launching of common efforts crossing local boundaries (e.g.,
groundwater management or local road maintenance). The coastal areas and eastern region (Hadramout),
for millennia the base of trade caravans and sea routes, are generally more open to the world.

* Civil society and cohesion. Informal social networks abound, and there is a strong traditional social safety

net of charitable support for the very poor. Charitable donations have been estimated to exceed significantly
the transfers of the Government's Social Welfare Fund, the main official cash transfer system for vulnerable
groups. However, as noted above, clan based allegiances often foreclose opportunities for broad
cooperation for the public good. Moreover, traditional sources of support and stability - social cohesion,
participation, and sense of community - are under threat by rapid urbanization, as rural inhabitants leave
stable social structures for less socially regulated or supportive urban ones. There are few organizations for
youth, and little opportunity for inclusion of youth in activities that create community spirit. Child labor is a
significant problem. Urbanization's social disruption and the lack of youth organizations and activities have
contributed to a rise in children at risk - school dropouts, often homeless and forced to beg, and subject to
drug use and sexually transmitted disease. Community organizations are often created to implement

specific projects, but there are relativelyfew stable and active associationsfor community betterment, even

in rural areas, and they are less active than they were in the early 1980s, when Local Development
Associations were a dynamic development force supported by worker remittances from the Gulf. The
South's 23 years of socialism destroyed many of the welfare-promoting social organizations it enjoyed at
independence in 1967, although many are being rebuilt. The Social Fund for Development has been the
major catalyst for the revival of local development-oriented nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) since
1998.

HIV/AIDS. By the end of 2001, a total of 9,900 HIV/AIDS cases were reported in Yemen. While HIV
prevalence is low, there are widespread concerns it may be significantly underreported. More than two-

5

thirds of the reported AIDS cases are in the age group 2040 years. Moreover, there are converging reports
of a changing trend in sexual behavior, particularly in urban and peri-urban areas, that are attributed to
several factors such as migration, high unemployment rates, urban concentration and growth, economic
dependency, access to satellite TV, and increasing intemational travel and exchange. This pattern indicates
that 
the HIV/AIDS pandemic 
is 
arriving late in Yemen, but can beBo 
expected to strike the country in an 
aggressive way. As the awareness of 

-

the pandemic has been 

low until 

recently, preparedness 
in terms of 
policies, IEC [Information, Education 
and Communication], outreach, peer 
education, condom provision, and the 
support through the network of public 
health facilities, is still low. In the last 
year, awareness at the managerial and 
governmental level has increased after 
a series of workshops. The National 
AIDS Control Program has so far 

focused on making blood transfusions 

eagrcultural 

A ekn 
.v
As noted in BoxJ, ,povertyin Yemen- is rural (83.- live ihruralas:eas) and
concnfratedin four Governorates. Thee of these compsise some of
oppofu4ities'are meagei
and where service delivery is extremely ,difficult.: Population growthirates,
in thesesremote areas exacserbatetproblem M 
in 
;villages are l.eihnj
progressively: abandone'd as 
i 
loyopme<seek 
et.op ortuniiies'a 'd:
!,educanon and health serces,:iA.imore irbanized plae'#s. -The curreni s`eady,
flow of Yemeris. frontJrura1II&eas to urb'ait'oHn'e-(aind'overseas)>.viIl'ikely
accelerate.o sAlithough this will increasb uirbtan podverty inc'tisho"rttede 
m it
w as s 
: 
t 
I: 
,u,j 
education and'isocial,safty anyedt:services. 
IDA'sA:'sipport' for rural poveny
alleviaton JiifYemetis based on tvofund 
'metal principles: (i) cseation of
empioymeiWropportunities outside agnculture In .illages, towns and:cities,
and (ii) comprehensive 
infras'tucture and' service- irnpr6vement: (smAall:

ne-ded-hea:th

delve 

E 

ugaeservices 

.p01i6'w6rks, schools,-linimcsLandiruralrdads)"'in iaigeted areas ui.order to
f 
must,pay:attention
to ihe ruraliurban connections (access roads, comprehefsiavebasin-defined

ji~ia~hi; Thbism eais'A 

.uride ri 

reIs'IDA 

.yittin

ose 

or.i 

th 

, 

.

sentinel surveillance, assisting persons 

ihrough the 'Social Fund and Local and Community Development:iFinally,

safe, addressing unsafe injections and 
mother-child 
transmission, 
initiating.'sater management and linking urban and rural power consumiers) 
.It -also
,means;continued rDA support for honzontal poveny targeted ,programs

twasmission, 

mother-child 

iniltiatinlg 

-.-.. 

!!,1

-- 

r 

with HIV/AIDS and preparing an 
HIV/AIDS strategy and policy. 

.'since no poverty alleviation strategies 'will be sustainablie;rwithout capable<
local, and district organizations, IDA su'pport'f6i. decentralization -is ahpigh

pn enty. ,.m, 
j S,;;lrr''q 

9. 
Economic Challenges. Most of
Yemen's political leadership is committed to economic modernization and integration with the world economy.
However, they face major economic challenges.

Laborforce growth, employment, and investment needs. Only the growth of productive employment can
reduce Yemen's high poverty rate (although targeted transfer payments can alleviate its worst aspects).

Productive employment requires private investment. The working-age population (9.3 million in 2000) is
growing by about 3.8'percent per year, and the rising participation rate of women increases the labor force at

an estimated 4.3 percent per year, or an average of 240,000 per year over the next decade. At recent levels

of investment and employment growth, however, the economy will not generate enough jobs to absorb new
entrants to the labor force and/or make a dent in already high unemployment 
levels. Thus, 
the
unemployment rate is on track to rise steadily. Reversing this trend is not only a matter of changing the mix

of investments to more labor-intensive ones; it would also require a major increase in the private investment
rate. The agricultural sector may, as in the past, be able to absorb many new workers at lower investment
cost per new job, but their productivity would be so low as to have little impact on poverty reduction.
Agricultural productivity has been nearly stagnant, as has labor productivity in general, which leaves little or
no room for real wage increases. Poverty reduction demands a major increase in productivity-enhancing
private investment.

* Private business environment. Private investment must increase substantially as a share of GDP, but the

micro-level environment facing private investors does not encourage this. They face a lack of dependable

jurisprudence, enforceable contracts, secure land titles, predictable taxation or tariff protection, and in some
cases, physical infrastructure and physical security. They must also contend with a web of unnecessary
regulations and licensing, a legal environment that is often unclear or inconsistent with international norms
and an often unresponsive or corrupt civil service. Many of these inhibiting factors are reported to be much
more serious as firns grow larger (more than ten employees), and thus seem to. suppress the growth of
individual firms and thereby foreclose the possibility of more Yemeni firms reaping the economies of scale
that are essential for international competitiveness. These factors also account for the fact that net direct

6

foreign investment in Yemen is negligible, that even strong Yemeni business groups invest only a small
portion of their capital in Yemen, and that in consequence, many Yemenis with advanced education and
skills - not only unskilled workers - attempt to emigrate in search of better opportunities.

Dependence on oil exports. Oil and oil products made up about 83 percent of goods and services exports
and 71 percent of government revenues in 2001. Non-oil exports have grown at only about the same rate as
overall GDP since 1997, not fast enough to reduce this oil dependence. The volatility of oil prices makes
planning difficult, and the imminent depletion of Yemen's limited oil reserves makes diversification away
from oil - measures to improve competitiveness in non-oil products - critically important. Oil production is
expected to begin to fall in 2003, and to fall sharply after 2006 (if no new oil fields are discovered), and
therefore non-oil exports would have to rise markedly to fill the gap - a daunting challenge given their small
base, and, in view of the environment for private investment noted above and the time required in any case
to develop the skills, markets and infrastructure for non-oil exports. The fiscal scale of this decline - oil
revenue falling by about 7 percentage points of GDP during 2002-2005 - would approach total social sector
spending in 2002 (10.8 percent of GDP). Unless Yemen aggressively diversifies out of oil, the fall in oil
production will have terrible consequences for Yemen's capacity to achieve most MDGs. Even if major
new oil discoveries occur soon, Yemen cannot avoid serious fiscal shortfalls and exchange rate pressure
during the several years required to build up exports from new fields.

Exhaustion of groundwater. The populous westem highlands have groundwater supplies for no more than
one or two generations, and in some major urban areas such as Sana'a, much less. Irrigated agriculture
nationwide uses over 90 percent of the water, mostly inefficiently. About 42 percent of cropped land is
irrigated, and over 75 percent of irrigated land uses groundwater. If groundwater supplies are allowed to be
exhausted, nearly 370,000 hectares producing over two-thirds of agriculture value-added would revert to
rainfed farming. Farm incomes would plummet, and massive migration of population to urban areas would
overwhelm infrastructure and employment prospects there, forcing down urban wages. Poverty would
sharply worsen, and social peace would be threatened. Differing supply-demand balances in different areas
will ensure that this change is gradual, but in many areas it has already begun. The strong implications are
that for the preservation of a sustainable water supply, which is essential to maintain reasonable standards of
living, (i) major investments are needed in aquifer recharge, runoff capture for irrigation, and irrigation
efficiency in highland, westem plateau and delta areas where most Yemenis will continue to live for the
foreseeable future; (ii) technical advice and credit are needed to support a shift of employment out of
irrigated agriculture and into more productive rainfed crops and nonfarm enterprises; and (iii) the prices of
municipal water and of power and fuel for pumping groundwater for irrigation should be increased to
encourage conservation.

* The financial system is unable to transform Yemen's savings into productive investments. It is estimated

that less than 2 percent of the population has any form of bank account and, concurrent with that, the ratio of
bank deposits to GDP is extremely low (25 percent, vs. about 60 percent in OECD countries and 86 percent
in Jordan). The intermediation of these deposits into private lending is among the lowest in the world (the
ratio of private sector loans to GDP is only 6.5 percent, vs. about 70 percent in OECD countries, about 50
percent in Egypt, Tunisia and Morocco, and a regional high of 73 percent in Jordan). Moreover, only about
10 percent of that lending is medium or long term. Banks react to the problems in the business and financial
environment -- judicial corruption and slow decision-making, judgments against interest payments, poor
capacity to enforce legal judgments, and the absence of secure collateral -- by concentrating their lending on
short-term import credit and by charging interest rate spreads of between 4 and 8 percentage points above
the risk-free rate of 14 percent. Despite strengthening of banking supervision capacity in the Central Bank
and resulting improvements in overall capital and provisioning levels and reductions in insider- and large-
loan exposures, following the reconmmendations of the FSAP/FSA in 2001, several banks continue to suffer
from heavy volumes of non-performing and insider loans, inadequate provisioning; and insufficient capital.
Finally, given the importance of money laundering and financing terrorism, the Central Bank of Yemen
(CBY) in collaboration with the Arab Banks Federation and Yemeni Banks Association organized a 3-day
workshop in May 2002 on "Fighting Money Laundering" in Sana'a. Training was provided to employees on
recent anti-money laundering practices and Parliament has passed a recent law on money laundering.

7

Physical infrastructure - roads, electricity, water, telecommunications -

is inadequate and difficult to

provide for a large proportion of the society living in tiny settlements in rough terrain, holding back
development of markets and suppressing business opportunities.

10. 
Endowments to Meet The Challenges. Against these formidable obstacles to development, Yemen
can draw on seven major endowments to address its many challenges:

• 

* Location. Yemen's position along the major sea route between Europe and Asia, which made Aden the
second busiest port in the world at one time, can again be put to use. Yemen's port cities are well situated to
become engines of growth. Its long coastline and large marine resources, if properly managed, have the
potential for sustained growth in export revenues and employment.
* Oil, Gas and Minerals. Revenues from Yemen's limited oil reserves can, before their exhaustion, help
build a competent state, good education and health systems, and a modem physical infrastructure capable of
supporting diversified commerce and industry. Large gas reserves have many potential linkages to the rest
of the economy, starting with cheap power production. With better infrastructure and a secure investment
climate, large reserves of minerals including gold, lead, zinc and other metals could be tapped for export, as
could high quality marble and other construction material.
Coastal Aquifers. As the densely populated highlands exhaust their groundwater reserves, many people
will be forced to seek other places to make a living. Certain barely tapped coastal aquifers, especially in the
east (Hadramout), could sustain much larger populations for centuries. Others already suffer from saline
intrusion, but their water could be desalinated affordably for nonagricultural uses.
* Trading Culture. Since antiquity, Yemenis have been oriented to international trade. This culture affords
Yemen a wealth of potential foreign trade and investment links, as well as a large population of expatriate
Yemenis, many of whom would help exploit those links as far as the internal business climate permits.
* Cultural Heritage and Tourism. Yemen offers unique cities preserving architecture from antiquity,
spectacular mountain vistas of ancient terraces still being farmed, remains of ancient kingdoms such as
Sheba, and other cultural sites and attractions that, with proper preparations and preservation, could generate
substantial tourism-related income.
* Decentralized Government. This "endowment" differs from those above in that it alone is the product of a
government decision, in this case the Local Authorities Law enacted in 2000. Although local authorities
have not yet developed to anywhere near their potential in staff, systems, local revenue generation, etc., the
legal basis for most government services to be delivered by the agencies closest to the people is now firmly
established. There is, however, a downside to decentralization in the face of weak institutional capacity at
the local level (see para 65 on risks).
* Human Capital. No list of endowments could be complete without recognizing the potential of Yemen's
human resources. Yemeni workers and entrepreneurs have demonstrated that if given the right incentives
and opportunities, they are as hard-working and resourceful as any in the Region. Although there are gaps
in literacy and technical skills, these are negligible in comparison to other constraints on business and local
initiatives, including constraints on women. Lifting those constraints would unleash the potential of
Yemen's human capital.

II. MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, PROSPECTS AND RISKS

RECENT ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

A. 
11. 
Yemen's macroeconomic situation has improved greatly in many respects since the FY99 CAS,
discussed at the Board on May 25, 1999 (IDA/R99-80; IFC/R99-65), due to a combination of much higher oil
prices, continued conservative fiscal and monetary management, and debt relief. Real GDP growth has been
moderately ahead of population growth, although non-oil sectors have grown more slowly than oil during 1999-
2000, which has not had positive implications for employment or income distribution. Real GDP growth
averaged 4.1 percent during 1998-2001. The high budget deficit recorded in 1998 turned into fiscal surpluses

8

during 1999-2001 (peaking at 7.3 percent of GDP in 2000). Similarly, the current account deficit (2.4 percent of
GDP in 1998) turned into large surpluses in 1999-2001 (averaging 10 percent of GDP in the last three years).
Fiscal expenditure restraint was the main instrument of adjustment, even amid rising oil revenues. With the
decline in government financing needs, indirect monentary policy instruments were used to support quantitative
monetary objectives and to sterilize rising foreign exchange inflows. Consumer price inflation remained at a
single digit during 1998-2000 and only increased to about 12 percent in 2001 mainly as a result of cutting the
diesel subsidy and increasing the prices of utilities (e.g., electricity). The Government continued also to build its
foreign exchange reserves in the last three years . By end of 2001, reserves covered more than one year of
imports. The external debt burden has continued to fall as debts have been rescheduled or reduced, such that the
debt service ratio is down to about 5 percent and the official debt-to-GDP ratio is down from 78 percent in 1998
to 56 percent in 2001. Yemen was largely shielded from the negative effects on the world economy of the
September 11, 2001 events, by the relatively high price and rising production of oil. Measures taken by the
Government since then have actually improved the security situation, boding well for future private investment.
Table 2 summarizes recent performance.

12. 
High oil prices also greatly increased government revenues as a share of GDP during 2000 and 2001
(peaking at nearly 40 percent in 2000), but in 2002 this

, _. 

19 

n

00 

-i'

=

share is expected to fall to about 32 percent. The windfall 

has been used mainly to pay down the public sector debt 
and grant long-overdue public sector salary increases.
Reversing the erosion of civil service salaries that took
place in the 1990s has, however, created a new expenditure 
commitrnent that heightens the need for civil service size 
reduction to offset expected declines in oil revenues. One
effect of the windfall 
has 
been 
to 
reduce 
the 
Government's external borrowing needs - hence 
the 
absence of quick-disbursing credits that were expected in
the last CAS. The improved macroeconomic picture has
also nurtured local opposition to unpopular reforms such as
increases in administered prices, civil service reform, and
privatization. Despite this, reforms are being implemented, 
albeit slowly and unevenly, across a broad spectrum of
areas.

a 

.

,

e _, 
c 

l

-

l 

9

13. 
Non-oil exports grew moderately 
from 1998
through 2001. 
In particular, commodity exports have
grown especially rapidly in recent years. Fisheries and 
coffee exports 
(the second and 
third 
largest export
categories after oil) each grew by an average of almost 19 percent per annum from 1994 to 1999. Fruit and
vegetable exports at the same time jumped from almost nothing to US$12.3 million. Manufactured exports, by
contrast, fell by 1.4 percent per annum between 1996 and 2000, owing to lack of competitiveness in quality
terms and to concentration on less dynamic markets.

-

14. 
Inadequate statistics make it difficult to judge how poverty and unemployment have changed since
1999. The agricultural economy is most important in this, since some 70 percent of the population depends
directly or indirectly on agriculture. Productivity in this sector has been stagnant - crop yields are low and
scarcely increasing, irrigation efficiency remains low, and labor productivity has not had the benefit of
appropriate mechanization. At the same time, costs have risen for imported inputs and consumption items as the
currency depreciates and subsidies are reduced. Higher oil prices have helped somewhat by permitting the
Government to improve civil service salaries and increase overall domestic spending, but this effect is relatively
small and has not been monitored reliably. Unemployment appears to have continued to rise, partly disguised as
underemployment.

9

B. 

MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND RISKS

15. 
Yemen's macroeconomic position is relatively strong, but likely to deteriorate in most respects as oil
revenues fall. This, along with the disincentives to private investment, will adversely affect the prospects for
poverty reduction. Real GDP is projected to growth by an annual average of 4.6 percent during 2002-2005,
slightly lower than the average rate achieved in the previous five years. Faster growth in the non-oil sectors is
expected to compensate somewhat for the fall in oil production, producing modest real GDP per capita growth
during the CAS period. The most promising sectors on which the Government is counting for achieving higher
economic growth (as contained in the SFYP and the PRSP) include agriculture and fisheries, mining and
quarrying, manufacturing, construction, tourism and other services (particularly in Aden Free Zone) as well as
trade and re-export. Improved access to the GCC markets, following the decision to accept Yemen's gradual
accession to the Council and improved political relations with the GCC countries, is likely to have a strong
impact on the performance of non-oil exports. The
contribution of these sectors to overall GDP growth 
appears generally achievable but will involve major
improvements in the policy and regulatory barriers to
private activity. Consumer price inflation, which is
expected to reach 16 percent in 2002, is projected 
to 
fall gradually, reaching 
about 5.0 percent by 2005.
The steady decline in oil production expected to begin
in 2003 will take many years to reverse even if major i 
_
new oil. fields are found soon. Unless the current 
export price can be sustained, Yemen will gradually 
slip into annual deficits 
in the budget (rising to 4 m
percent by 2004-2005) . The PRSP targets a reduction 

W 

l, 

-

_

_

'

-E 

.

)

a

-- 

in the non-oil fiscal deficit from 25 percent of GDP in 

2000 to 20 percent by curbing expenditure and raising
non-oil revenues through introduction of a general sales 
tax (GST), anti-smuggling measures and income tax 
reforms. Most of the expenditure adjustment comes
from elimination of fuel subsidies and a retrenchment
of defense spending while development spending is l
projected to increase under this scenario. The current 

a c4

-

' 

-

-

account surplus in the previous years will turn into a 

___ 

__

deficit during 2003-2005 at below 3% of GDP. Similarly, by 2005 official reserves will be drawn down to
about ten months of imports of goods and services, and the external debt service ratio will rise gradually. Table
3 summarizes Yemen's medium term macroeconomic prospects.

16. 
The projected changes, consistent with the PRSP, assume that the program of economic reforms that
began in 1995 will continue, and that growth will be led by non-oil sectors as the environment for private
investment improves. Growth in the non-oil sector is targeted to increase gradually from a recent average of 5
percent to 7 percent by 2005. The growth objectives remain relatively ambitious but are achievable provided:
(i) the government addresses the governance and security problems which hamper private sector activity
generally; (ii) the PRSP strategy is fully implemented; and (iii) the country does not face major external or
internal shocks as was the case in the early 1990s (e.g., civil unrest, drought, etc.). The governance issues as
they relate to private sector activity are especially important. Improvement in land rights, judicial processes,
security and reduction of violence, transparency in government, and improvements in the overall business
environment and public administration with respect to private sector activities will be important to secure the
growth targets. The deterioration in fiscal balance and other key indicators does not in itself threaten Yemen's
economic stability during the next three years, but the trend is clearly unsustainable. Even a completely
unprecedented increase in the growth rate of non-oil exports would not restore external balance unless it is
complemented by new oil discoveries and production, a painful reduction in imports, or an unlikely major
increase in remittance income. The chief risk in this scenario is that rising fiscal deficits emerging at the same
time as rising social pressures from unemployment and disputes over the depleting reserves of groundwater will

10

lead the government to shift expenditures even more towards salaries (through general civil service pay
increases or new hiring) and perhaps increase expenditures in a way that reignites inflationary pressures, as
happened ten years ago. This time, however, there may be no new stream of oil revenues to help finance these
needs. The government's macroeconomic framework (as contained in the PRSP) recognizes these issues and
strives to reduce non-oil fiscal deficit in the medium and long-terms.

C. 

EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT

17. 
Yemen's exports and overall GDP growth are particularly responsive to changes in the world price of
oil, both in terms of direct oil exports and from the changing demand for other Yemeni products in response to
oil revenues in Saudi Arabia. In addition, because its oil exports are concentrated on a few East Asian countries
(the top five purchase over 87 percent), changes in the economic strength of those countries can affect Yemen's
oil revenues. Even non-oil exports are relatively concentrated in a few products (fish, coffee, fruits and
vegetables), and a few markets (especially Saudi Arabia), which makes them vulnerable to fluctuations in
individual markets. There are, however, reasons for optimism about Yemen's relationship to external markets.
* Yemen's liber'al foreign exchange market allows the exchange rate to adjust daily, and Yemen has no
licensing or other restrictions on current or capital account transactions.
* Trade liberalization has simplified and cut the tariffs and licenses required for imports, also improving the
competitiveness of Yemeni exports.
* Yemen has demonstrated improved competitiveness especially in regional markets. This includes even
manufactured goods for which it is not competitive in world markets. Barriers to Yemeni exports in
regional markets are relatively low.
* Yemen has shifted its main trade partners to the more rapidly-growing economies of East and South Asia,
which should lend greater robustness to its export efforts there.
* The non-oil export product mix has shifted more to products where world demand is rising, which also
confers greater potential for growth in the future.

18. 
External assistance to Yemen has been modest since the Gulf War (see para. 5 and Box 6), but recently
has begun to increase in response to successful diplomatic efforts with Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
countries and since September 11, 2001. The Netherlands, Yemen's most consistent major bilateral donor,
pledged a major increase in its assistance earlier in 2001, and the United States, the largest bilateral in 2000
because of large food aid grants, also announced both new security assistance (including aid to the coast guard
which could become helpful in enforcing fishing regulations) and increased economic aid. France also
announced in 2001 a substantial increase in its aid program.

19. 
Yemen has benefited from greatly improved relations with its neighbors over the past three years. The
settlement of a territorial dispute with Eritrea and an old border dispute with Saudi Arabia helped to eliminate
some security-related uncertainties. Diplomatic efforts have also led to normalization of relations with Kuwait
and the first steps in accession of Yemen to the GCC. Trade, especially with Saudi Arabia has increased
substantially; investments in Yemen from Saudi Arabia are beginning to pick up; and the flow of workers there
has increased, although only very modestly in view of the shift in the Saudi market away from jobs that Yemeni
workers are equipped to fill.

III. DEVELOPMENT AND POVERTY REDUCTION PLANS AND THE CAS

SECOND FIVE YEAR PLAN AND PRSP

A. 
20. 
Yemen's Second Five Year Plan (SFYP), launched in 2001 and the recently completed PRSP provide
the basis for this CAS. 
It benefits, as well, from recent extensive joint work between Yemen and IDA on
poverty, public expenditures, trade enhancement and the investment climate. The SFYP includes a "Strategic
Vision to the Year 2025" chapter that identifies a status of Yemen in 2025 towards which all development plans
should be oriented, and the challenges that must be addressed starting now. Although like the rest of the SFYP

11

it was prepared completely by Yemenis, its analysis and priorities show a strong convergence with those of the
previous and present CAS, both in its four main thrusts and in its sectoral priorities. The SFYP set ambitious
priorities in such areas as the development of engines of technological innovation, gas-related industries, gender,
culture, youth, and reduction of population growth. In every quantifiable area, it sets achievable goals for 2025.
The SFYP is thus represented as the first phase of a 25-year effort that is meant to be comprehensive and
tailored to Yemeni conditions. It was developed with input from Yemenis from all quarters of society who were
invited to review and comment on drafts,- from donors and from the Bank's Comprehensive Development
Review in 2000.

21. 
The Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), completed in May, 2002, and discussed by the Boards
of the IMF and the Bank on July 31 and August 1, 2002, respectively, is derived from the SFYP, focusing on
analysis of poverty and antipoverty policies and programs. It, too, was the product of a Yemeni team that came
from all sectors of the Government and from civil society organizations. During the early stages of PRSP
formulation in July, 2001, a major workshop in Sana'a brought together a broad spectrum of Yemenis and
representatives of the Bank, the Fund, and the donor community to discuss best practice examples and to
develop, 
in separate smaller groups, recommendations 
for several specific areas (e.g., private sector
development, public sector management, etc.). Women and academicians were especially active in the
workshop. Later, early drafts of the PRSP were discussed in a series of town hall-type meetings in various cities
throughout the country. The PRSP is a good strategy statement, especially strong on analysis, but weaker in
priority setting.

22. 
The PRSP identifiesfour major challenges:
* high population growth, its distribution away from adequate natural resources (especially water), the related
problems of urbanization and poor labor market demand, limited prospects for women, and the rapid rise of
child labor;
* water shortages exacerbated by population growth and poor waste treatment, and the related negative
effects on agriculture;
* development of human resources, including improvement of health outcomes, better education standards
and vocational training, including more appropriate curricula at all levels, and enhanced capabilities and
opportunities for women; and
* poor institutional capacity of the State, including overstaffing, corruption, and the weak judiciary.

23. 
The PRSP sets out three basic goals, defines specific, monitorable targets within each goal, and
compares these to the relevant MDGs. The goals:
• 
achieving economic growth, creation of job opportunities and expansion of the economic opportunities for
the poor by remedying the structural causes of poverty, focusing on the prevention of poverty and providing
sustainable means of livelihood;
* enhancing the capacities of the poor, increasing their assets and the returns from assets, towards more
equity by improving the social, productive and economic conditions of the poor and near-poor; and
reducing the suffering and vulnerability of the poor by improving the social safety net.

• 

24. 
To achieve 
these goals, the PRSP proposes four main '~pillars" of interventions, all of them
underpinned by improved governance as the essential precondition for success:
* achieving economic growth that is stable, diversified, and reduces income disparities.
• 
developing human resources, emphasizing population programs, improved health conditions, and education
and training.
* 
improving infrastructure, particularly water and drainage, roads, and electricity.
* granting social protection, through social safety net and pension programs.

12

25. 
This CAS is the first one for Yemen to be based on a full PRSP. Overall, Yemen's PRSP provides a
good framework for the country's efforts towards sustainable poverty reduction. The strategy is a country-
owned document and was prepared in a participatory manner through wide consultation. It is coherent and has
well defined and realistic poverty reduction targets, grounded in an ambitious but realistic macro-economic
framework aimed at maintaining internal and external stability. The successful implementation of the PRSP,
however, requires filling several knowledge, policy and program gaps, and a strong commitment to reform
generally. As noted by Bank Board members in the discussion of the PRSP on August 1, 2002, additional
attention is needed in some key areas, notably to: (i) strengthen identification, costing and monitoring of
programs for poverty reduction; (ii) improve prioritization of government actions and budgetary allocations;
(iii) improve transparency and accountability; (iv) build the institutional capacity to implement, monitor and
evaluate the PRSP and strengthen coordination among the various agencies involved in the social safety net;
(v) better address environmental sustainability issues, especially water; (vi) develop better information on
population dynarnics and subsequently a multi-pronged population management program; and (vii) integrate
more effectively gender issues in the implementation of the strategy. The CAS has taken account of these
issues, also raised in the Bank/IMF Joint Staff Assessment, 
in setting out the support program described below.

B. 

PROGRESS TOWARDS OBJECTIVES IN PREVIOUS CAS

26. 
The Board discussed the previous CAS in May, 1999, along with the then recently circulated Country
Assistance Review by OED. Its major objectives, to create a well-functioning public administration, to attract
diversified productive private investments, to prevent a disastrous shortage of water, and to create an early
stream of social benefits that directly address poverty, are still valid, and consistent with the four intervention
areas of the PRSP. Most of these objectives can only be achieved over the long term, so the evaluation of
performance must be based on progress on intermediate steps towards the objectives. Implementation of the last
CAS was mixed but generally satisfactory. In general, CAS activities that were closest to govemment priorities
worked best - public works, social fund, rural roads, irrigation, municipal water supply, education and health are
the best examples. The more difficult or controversial areas, including some aspects of civil service reform,
budget and expenditure rationalization, groundwater management, reforms of the business environment, and
performance monitoring and evaluation, either lagged or were not taken up at all. Box 4 summarizes what
worked well, and what did not.

27. 

* 

C. 

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PREVIOUS AND PRESENT CAS

The previous CAS provides a context in which the present CAS should be viewed.

In the area of governance, 
it launched the Civil Service Modernization Project which remains the
centerpiece of IDA's governance support in the new CAS. It tested the feasibility of full scale support for
legal and judicial development which appears in the new CAS. 
It launched 
support for decentralized
government, which informs the design of an operation in the new CAS. 
It prepared ambitious quick-
disbursing credits for public sector management adjustment and accompanying public expenditure reviews,
whose mixed results also inform the design of planned new work in these areas.

* 

* 

In private investment support, it prepared much of the agenda for investment climate improvements which

the new CAS would attempt to support. It helped to formalize the present government strategy in favor of
coastal region development that both lending and advisory activities in the new CAS would help to realize.
And it helped relieve infrastructural (water, power, transport) and human capital (basic education and
vocational training) constraints to private investment, supported the launch of the privatization program, and
mapped out the main needs in financial sector deepening - conveying lessons (some of them negative but
nevertheless instructive) reflected in the new CAS.
In water management, on the agricultural side it supported a substantial expansion of sustainable "spate"
irrigation, and completed the forerunner of a vital new water and soil conservation operation in the new
CAS. On the municipal side, it launched a project piloting a replicable technique for community self-help in
building and operating rural town water supply and sanitation systems. It conducted essential studies on

13

aquifer recharge, water markets and other techniques for holistic water basin management programs that
will start with a project for Sana'a Basin in the new CAS.

In the social sectors, it featured a rich array of interventions being followed up in the new CAS. The Child
Development Project combines health, nutrition, and education interventions in an integrated approach
aimed at family units rather than only children. 
It launched the Basic Education Expansion series of
projects to be continued in the new CAS. And after supporting lengthy consensus-building on health sector
strategy, it launched the Health Reform Support Project as the flagship of health sector restructuring and
service improvement under the new CAS. 
Its small Higher Education Project will make a strong
contribution to the governance (budget and management) and private investment (better high-level skilled
workers) goals of the PRSP and new CAS. 
It supported an expansion of very popular community-level
(public works and social fund) projects as well as the launch of a series of rural access credits, all with
potential to be extended further in the new CAS.

28. 
The FY03-05 CAS would thus build upon the old, but differ from it in several respects. Among the
most important: It would direct much more support (mainly technical) to improving govemance and diversified
growth (key PRSP pillars). 
It would directly support girls' education as the most powerful single means of
attacking the causes of poverty and high population growth, and addressing the MDGs. It would have fewer
lending operations and more emphasis on analytical and advisory assistance, including long-term advisory
efforts instead of one-off reports, reflecting partly the governance emphasis of IDA-13 and partly the
recognition that as many of Yemen's most important constraints are in knowledge and policies as in
infrastructure. And it would devote much more attention to outreach, in order to build the broad consensus
needed to introduce and sustain reforms in vital policy areas.

D. 

PROCESS IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PRESENT CAS

29. 
The record of the previous CAS, as well as the OED Country Assistance Review, offers lessons for the
new CAS.
* Outreach. 
In addressing the above complex and controversial issues, IDA's efforts can easily be
misunderstood. This, in turn, can generate opposition, and will require that IDA reaches out to all
stakeholders and communicate actively the facts about the problem, the experiences of others, and the
actions believed 
to be needed. Outreach also permits feedback which can improve the realism of IDA's
message and the way it is presented.
* Technical support. The previous CAS underscored the importance of ample technical support to
accompany sectoral and structural adjustments. This was demonstrated in the performance of reforms under
the Financial Sector Adjustment Credit and the Public Sector Management Adjustment Credit, where
actions that were backed up by parallel technical assistance tended to be completed fairly well, while those
without it were not.
* Performance Monitoring and Evaluation. No system for regular "M&E" of basic performnance indicators
has been set up. The previous CAS depended on the Ministry of Planning's leadership for establishment of
an improved monitoring system for key indicators, but this has not been a government priority in the
competition for budget support. Household and demographic surveys and poverty assessments tend to
happen when donor funding is available. The present CAS would help directly to set up a cost-effective
performance monitoring and evaluation system for the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS), and make its
functioning a criterion for High Case support.
* Gender. The previous CAS pursued the goal of increased gender equality with a wide array of actions in
education, health, water, agriculture and livestock, transportation, microenterprise support, community
participation, legal rights, and qat consumption with some success. Yet it is difficult to measure the impact
of these actions, and the importance of the matter demands an even more integrated strategy that addresses
also such constraints as legal reform, the application of legally guaranteed rights, and labor policy promotive
of female employment. The present CAS would support a consultative process by which stakeholders would

14

design and take ownership of a gender action program, which all relevant government agencies and donors
would be invited to support.

-

;- 

, 

- Whatt-Worked 

,, 

,, 

.- 

'7! hat DidS,,t

* Aspects of Public Sector Management Adjust 
int that were :,, ,. lansfor continued,'public sector ranagerent
specific and, well supported with tecbhiical assistarnce 
, adjustenit credits,got no support budgetand
expenditure rationalizations did not last in most
, 
; 
, 
.
: 
............ 
. ~~~sectors ...... ;cs.( ;;......... 
' 
', Preliminaiy aspects of civil service reformt including 
CiVil Senice Fund to support ret6idi.nients did not
agreement?on agenida,.civil service census,-identification of ;,'- ' !",,,ostart 
e 
u A 
, 2002..

n 

-

' 

.

double-dippers" and "ghost workers," drafting of by-laws

andretrerchbm5tts.

,* Local Government Stre ngthening went better than expected,, * Independent ans rorruption com nission idea' got no
.;:,because of passjage of Local Authorities'Law and related 
bylaws, with-elections, training, and systernis ideveloprnent.:., 

support, but goverment, began forulating

anncorruption acnon plan on its own.

* Private investment envo,nent improvementthrough'. 

judi6ial and;legal reformrproject,,worklon,tide, and ', 

... ; 

.investrnent clirate. Moves to comnercialize watei uiilities.,. 
and privatize pover.prodiction. -Aden..GrowthT;le projec 
broadened to.behikey, part of coastal developiment stfaiegy. 
, Projects to relieve 'sectoral co,strain m unrban and-rur Ia 

't 

j 

-water, roads.'; r 

-j'" 

* Privattzanon SuppornProject canceled ,bhen

Parliament refused to ratify credit agreement, biit'.

.prix anzanon continued on different enterprises. Land
registration preparatory uork did no' start. 

,.. ,,, ..

" 
'' '' 
_ 

'' 

..' -

'

* Other donors did not take tip firnncialsecioarbiform,
fishenes or tourism as expected,' wheBank:ftjff.
''uFinancialcovenants vital-topower sectoripivate

t.w pte' 

.t 

ikept.

' ' " 

; 

-

' ' ' " ' '! 

;, 

,inves 

* Irrigation efficiency. enhincerniexts received good support 
and new groundwaterproject preparation began' 

.

* Sana'a Basn Water Managernent Projectilagd out of:
'K" CASjperiod and into FY,03:

* Educationi efforts went better than expecte 

ith Basic 
-Education Expansion and addition of Higli-r Education 

Health Sector RefornProjectasolauched'after some 
delays' .
' , 
.

', 

' 

' 

-

.

, ,.Cornmu ity Ievel-ir 
rp~,ovem, ents for direct poverty 
* Community lev~,el i 
aprovem,4-en 
foaS&n'
xpts 
,.alleviation*were more active than expeced, via:Second 
Public Works and Second Social Fund foriDevelopmenit, 
, , 

projects, Rural Access Project. 

- 'i; 

i -

' 

.,,

i

-

Budgting 
and expenditure reform in health.
agriculture, and roads did not last, and planned
-icooperatives study !did, ot get started although vrsion
nuited to agriculture vas'cbnducitd "'

4. Qat workshop was prepared and conducted. 
i* *Project:-Management; lnits'were. reditced iin size- 
id linked 
closer-toiiine ministri,es 'Coun,try Offi'es .,lead rdie 
.
, 
'dijalogue,on portfolioT Hissues was re 
ifirin,ec in practice. 

' 

,'';" 

-

;.,. , , ,, , i :~ r ;,,, -i. ,,,,, ;, ., *, jltI'disbursement rate fell. i4 

,, .IDA-IFC relationship was ciose, ,4and,IDA' over 
relationship.-as very good. ; 
. Closer workingrelaionship'wit ; 

3 andFAS:' 

tbished' 

I' 

ri" 

l

i 

, 

'ent 

' 

" ' 

.

* Cim il serxtice capacity to do without PMN1Us largely
.unchanged, with a few exceptions. Procuremezl and
other implermentanon problems remain common, and

IFC projects did not miatenalhze in the number 
expected, despite increased promotion efforts. 

.

'

*, Poverty analysii was done in supporl of PRSP. 
,,.; 
.
.
', i 
.

-. 

; 
.

- No systemanc progress was made,to set,up a
, performance monitoring and evaluation system. 

.

15

E. 

OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES

30. 
Objectives. The underlying objective of the present CAS continues to be sustainable poverty reduction.
The operational objectives, those whose achievement makes sustainable poverty reduction possible, are (i)
improved public sector govemance, (ii) an attractive investment environment, (iii) a strong system to build and
protect human capital emphasizing girls' education, health and capacity building, and (iv) environmental
sustainability with a strong focus on water management. Specific measurable goals in terms of MDGs would
parallel those in the PRSP. 
In terms of the above four operational objectives, specific goals by which CAS
progress would be measured are presented in Annex B9.

31. 
Basic Principles. The IDA allocation for Yemen over the CAS period is US$410 million equivalent in
the Base Case, roughly 12 percent higher than actual commitments under the previous CAS, but for fewer
projects.

* Selectivity. In the context of the Government's PRSP, the strategy would address sectors and issues (i)
which are the most binding constraints on development; (ii) where the Bank has the capacity to make
improvements; (iii) where the Government places priority ; and (iv) where the Bank has a comparative
advantage.
* Partnership. The strategy would maximize the potential synergies of joint or coordinated efforts with other
development agents, including private enterprise, NGOs, and official development assistance. Within the
Bank, WBI will play an active role in helping to strengthen capacity.
* Performance. The strategy would reward good performance in addressing PRSP objectives, and support
the creation of incentives for good performance in the public service.

* Knowledge and Capacity Building Orientation. The strategy would maximize opportunities to transfer

knowledge relevant to Yemen's problems, to facilitate informed debate within Yemen on development
issues, to enable Yemenis to use technology to improve technical skills and conduct their own research, and
to persuade key stakeholders in critical issue areas.
* Continuity. The strategy would avoid short-term, one-off efforts on long-term problems, but instead sustain
efforts on each problem area it addresses until the problem is well on the way to being solved without
further Bank help, another donor takes the Bank's place, or no further progress seems possible. Continuity
also means sustained follow-up on Bank analytical work and technical advice to ensure that our messages
are correct, understood, and lead to appropriate action (see para. 33).

INSTRUMENTS

F. 
32. 
IDA's main instruments to implement the strategy would continue to be credits and improved portfolio
performance. Most credits would be for investment operations, and all would include special provisions to
improve relevant aspects of govemance. Several investment projects would be first phases of Adaptable
Program Credits, and several others would be second or third credits in lines of activity with continuing needs.
One credit (in the high case) would be a Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) in support of governance
reforms.

33. 
IDA would invest heavily in Analytical and Advisory Assistance (AAA). In several cases this would be
for activities intended to lay the groundwork for possible future investments or policy reforms where IDA may
not itself invest. Most of the AAA would be in direct and sustained support of long-term reform programs,
mainly in the area of public sector govemance, including decentralization. Given the need for sustained close
support for reforms in budgeting, expenditure control, accounting, procurement, service delivery, incentives,
transparency, and control of corruption, the strategy would initiate a new class of AAA, Programmatic Non-
lending Services. These services would provide long-term support, often for process tasks rather than specific
products, to see various reforms through to actual implementation. Such programmatic support would in every
case require clear objectives and benchmarks for measuring progress. Where this AAA identifies needs for
capacity building, arrangements will be explored with other donors for grant funding. 
The World Bank

16

Institute (WBI) is expected to play an important capacity building and dissemination role, especially in the areas
of governance and poverty monitoring. At the end of the CAS period, a review of the effectiveness of the
Bank's AAA will be undertaken to guide our future analytical and capacity building work in Yemen.

G. 

BASE CASE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

34. 
Public Sector Governance. Amid the many political, social and economic constraints outlined above,
the PRSP and the CAS both recognize public sector governance as a core constraint whose solution would
make possible sustainable progress on other problems. Good governance means efficient allocation of public
resources, effective provision of public services, accountability, transparency, and reduced corruption. 
It is
essential to the proper use of IDA or donor resources by the Government for the reduction of poverty, the
attainment of other MDGs, and the many other objectives that contribute toward those Goals. It requires the full
commitment of the Government, in the context of which IDA would play an important supporting role. It
requires full cooperation by central ministries, line agencies, and ultimately the participation of the business
community and civil society - by constructive support wherever possible, and by intolerance of abuse of power
and incompetence in the public service.

35. 
Improving public sector governance in practice means dealing with the shortcomings of the civil service
(central and local), the judiciary, and the security forces, which involves a mix of policy reforms, procedural
institutional reforms, skill upgrading, and ultimately attitudinal change. 
It also requires
streamlining, 
establishing a feedback mechanism to monitor actual performance, public satisfaction with performance, and
longer-term impacts. The few reasonably successful examples of it in the developing world all demonstrate that
it is a long-term process. It should, however, lead in time to a capable civil service making optimal use of
external assistance and internal resources to provide the best possible service to the people.

36. 
A major portion of Yemen's governance challenge is rooted in poor capacity of the civil service.
Capacity building would therefore be treated as a central organizing principle for all UDA efforts over the CAS
period. This CAS envisages a strengthened and more integrated approach to capacity development, building on
progress made under the previous CAS in improving project implementation, as well as the results of the May
2002 portfolio review (para. 56). There are two elements to the strategy: (i) to emphasize financial and fiduciary
accountability of government and to integrate project management functions into line institutions, and (ii) to
strengthen capacity by continuing to build up human resources, organizations, procedures and policies. The
instruments proposed to implement this capacity building are a mix of analytical work, lending and grants. Civil
service modernization is at the center of this. Grants to improve public procurement and auditing are a part, as
are proposals to develop local training facilities. Finally, the approach to project implementation arrangements
will change from the past reliance on ad hoc administrative structures. This capacity building effort will require
strong donor coordination and an active role by WBI.
37. 
To achieve these goals, the strategy would emphasize intensive technical support for key innovations to
improve public services and accountability, and the internal functioning of government. All investment
operations would include active efforts to improve governance within their areas of influence. The main
elements of support would be as follows:

* Lending. The ongoing Civil Service Modernization Project (CSMP, FY00) would remain the core
instrument, handling problems of civil service personnel management, organizational and procedural
streamlining, service delivery surveys, and the Government's accounting and financial management system.
It would be followed up and deepened by a Second CSMP in FY05. To help the government implement
effectively its decentralization strategy through building local government capacity to raise revenues, design
and implement budgets responsive to local needs, and catalyze community-driven development activities, a

District and Community Development Project would be launched in FY04. This project would focus on

local authority governance improvement as both primary objective and criterion for access to a fund which
local authorities could use to finance the highest priority local projects. The WBI would provide training
and international best-practice experience in the design of this project. A Poverty Reduction Support Credit
(FY05) would, subject to adequate improvements in fiduciary practices and fulfillment of other high case

17

-

triggers, provide quick-disbursing budget support in the context of continued progress on key PRSP
priorities. An IDF grant for Procurement Capacity Building (FY03) would help the Government on this.
The newly decentralized public administration will receive technical training, systems development support,
and limnited physical facilities support through the ongoing Taiz Municipal Development and Flood
Protection Project (FY02) as well as the Port Cities Development Project (FY03)
Analytical and Advisory Assistance. Table 4 summarizes the delivery of core diagnostic reports in the
previous and present CAS. Building on
the work already done over the past few
years 
in 
improving public 
sector
performance, a multi-year review of
public 
sector management 
under
decentralization will be 
initiated 
in
FY03. The objective of this activity 
i
would be to identify key "entry points"
for capacity building 
in governance, 
e
prioritize activities, define the appropriate sequencing in Yemen's context, and identify local "champions"
to lead the effort. The exercise would be led by Yemeni counterparts with participation by the key
stakeholders, and would draw significantly on locaVregional resources. WBI plans to support the capacity
building aspects of this work over a 2-3 year period. Complementing this work (and as a pre-requisite for
the PRSC), substantial prior technical work will be undertaken on public accountability (a Country
Financial Accountability Assessment, FY03) and public services. This work would be provided through
Programmatic Non-lending Support beginning in FY03 for Public Expenditure Management. This would
encompass public expenditure reviews, a financial accountability assessment, and separate IDF grant to
improve public procurement standards. 
In parallel, and supporting 
implementation of agreed
recommendations of 
these 
reviews, a grant would 
support a 
set of quickly-implementable
institutional/procedural reforms in Public Service Delivery including advisory services for- setting up service
delivery surveys, introduction of e-government innovations, establishment and public posting of agency-
specific procedures and service standards, transparency in decision-making, establishment of public service
offices and ombudsmen to record and deal with service complaints, and formulation of incentive programs
for civil servants and agencies. The WBI would provide technical support in these tasks. A Development
Policy Review in FY05 would provide even more detailed analysis and recommendations on budget and
expenditure streamlining, to carry forward the dialogue on improving budget and expenditure processes, in
advance of a possible PRSC in FY05.

38. 
Enabling Environment for Private Investment. The second priority is setting up policies and
processes that make Yemen attractive to private investors to generate jobs for the rapidly growing labor force.
As the PRSP recognizes, this is essential to sustainable poverty reduction. Without a major improvement in the
environment for private investment, two of the strongest correlates of poverty - unemployment and low-
productivity employment - will continue to rise, external deficits will (through exchange rate adjustments) force
up the prices of imports on which the poor depend, and thus the scale of human needs will rise at the very time
when financial capacity to meet those needs is falling.

39. 
The problem analysis showed the importance of several key reform areas in creating this enabling
environment. These include modemizing and strengthening the judiciary, including its capacity to enforce
judgments; establishing clear and legally defensible land registration; streamlining all aspects of private
investment approval, regulation, and taxation; developing state-of-the-art laws and regulations for business;
providing strategic studies for new lines of business; and ensuring that infrastructure constraints do not hinder
the competitiveness of private investments. With the exception of infrastructure investments, there is very little
direct donor support for needed improvements in most of these enabling areas. The strategy would address them
with the following instruments:
* Lending. The strategy envisages a geographical and a sectoral thrust to improve the investment
environment. The geographical thrust would support the PRSP's strategy of coastal development through

18

the first phase of a three-phase Port Cities Development Project (FY03). This would focus on Aden's urban
management but also help the growth centers of Hodeidah and Mukalla to design city growth strategies and
build local capacity to implement them. Based on feasibility being established in phase one, it may support
the creation of a special privately managed industrial zone near Hodeidah to attract private investments
appropriate to local advantages (agricultural and fisheries exports, for example). The second aspect of this
geographical thrust would be the Second Rural Access Project (FY05), part of the Rural Access APC
whose first phase began in FY02. This major investment would have a direct impact on rural poverty by
linking remote areas with trunk roads, thereby making a new range of rural private investments feasible. In
the High Case, if the financial viability of the Public Electricity Corporation is established, a Power
Restructuring and Expansion Project (FY04) would support power sector refonns that would prepare the
sector for independent power producers (IPPs) and finance investments to improve the efficiency and
security of electricity supply.
Analytical and Advisory Assistance. The Public Services Delivery grant noted above would include
elements targeted at business needs: better information on licensing requirements, customs rules, etc. In
parallel, programmatic non-lending support for Investment Climate reforms would advance a very broad
program of policy reforms in areas that now discourage investors (e.g., duty drawback and bonded
warehouse systems for exporters). It would also help strengthen investment and export oriented institutions
such as the General Investment Authority and Export Supreme Council, and help launch new ones based on
international best practice. A Financial Sector Dialogue would extend in programmatic form IDA's past
assistance in this sector. Based on the recommendations of the last FSAP, the dialogue would be expanded
to include technical assistance to solve specific problems and coordination with other technical assistance
providers. A multi-donor, Bank-led diagnostic study under the Integrated Framework for Trade
Development (FY03) has helped Yemen identify the policy and technical assistance needs. Development
partners have agreed to fund the follow-up technical assistance needs. The Land Registration Note (FY03)
would help define the approach to be taken on land problems in subsequent projects in a long-term effort.
Recognizing the large untapped potential of tourism based on Yemen's unique cultural heritage, a proposed
grant would support the removal of policy and institutional constraints to Tourism Development (FY04).
An analysis of Infrastructure for Mineral Exports (FY04) would examine past studies and recent
information to propose optimal means of developing and marketing Yemen's untapped non-oil mineral
wealth. An Agricultural and Maricultural Export Strategy (FY05) would extend over at least two years as
programmatic non-lending support, working in tandem with the Port Cities project, to define specific policy,
institutional, and investment needs and opportunities for sustainable agricultural exports. Its mariculture
component would assess opportunities and constraints to coastal marine farming.

40. 
Building and Protecting Human Capital. The third major thrust of the strategy is of obvious
importance given Yemen's human development indicators, and is a major pillar of the PRSP. It must proceed in
parallel with the first two priorities. Programs to address human suffering and permanent loss of potential must
be launched or strengthened now, even while the economic base to sustain them is being built up.

41. 
These programns should build human capital through basic education expansion, especially for girls,
systems to improve the health and nutrition of children and mothers, early childhood development, efforts to
expand the education, skills and enterprises of the poor, improved access to information and communication
technology, and establishment of high-quality independent policy research capacity. Many other donors are
active in human development, but the scale of the needs and the absence of donors in some areas assure that the
selectivity criteria for IDA involvement are satisfied. New assistance under the CAS would emphasize
education, especially for girls, in view of Yemen's status as an Education for All pilot country. The PRSP
correctly identified high population growth as a key problem, targeting a reduction in the population growth rate
from 3.5 percent in 2000 to 3.0 percent by 2005. The instruments that the Government plans to utilize are
public media awareness campaigns on the importance of family planning, a larger role for religious leaders and
campaigns for youth. However, perhaps more important than these measures are the emphasis in the CAS on
basic education, and in particular, on girls' education. The latter would advance the most important long-term
determinant of reduced fertility.

19

* Lending. With a strong IDA portfolio including health and education projects launched in FY02, the CAS

would feature four new credits. First, a Second Basic Education Expansion Project (FY04) would extend

its successful predecessor's coverage to the entire country and deepen the qualitative improvements it
addressed. Like the first project, it would place great emphasis on the basic education of girls. Second, the
strategy envisages a Girls' Secondary Education Project (FY05), intended to provide the capacity for girls
educated at primary level to advance to secondary schools, which in Yemen are usually not coeducational.
This project would also respond to the PRSP's call for more modem technical skills by introducing an
Information and Communications Technology component for beneficiary secondary schools. Third, the
strategy would also support the PRSP's technical skill-building goal while improving the links between

supply and demand for technical skills through a Second Vocational Training Project (FY05). Finally,

ongoing successful support to the Social Fund would continue (FY04).

* Analytical and Advisory Assistance. The Bank would place particular emphasis on new nonlending
services to advance human capital priorities, as well as to build institutional capacity to monitor progress in
the implementation of the PRS. A Development Research Forum (FY03), independent of the Government,
would be established with joint financing from the Bank UNDP and other donors, the business community,
and the Government. It would act as an independent think tank monitoring and evaluating progress on the
various aspects of the PRSP and doing research on Yemeni policy issues. The WBI would provide guidance
especially during the startup phase. Establishment of a Development Information Center by FY04,
partially financed by the Bank, would offer broadband communications services for training, research, and
world-spanning discussions, helping to relieve the relative isolation of Yemen from world information
sources and development dialogue. This would ideally be set up in proximity to the Development Research
Forum. A Gender Assessment task (FY03) would involve consultations with a broad spectrum of Yemenis
to bring up to date past work on legal, social, and other constraints to full participation of women in
economic and social life, and propose specific actions or programs to address the constraints. The WBI
would provide technical support for this. A Population Policy Note (FY04) will pull together the work
already done in this area, make recommendations for addressing the population issue, and lay the basis for a
possible population project in FY06. A Vocational Training Strategy (FY04) would develop closer
linkages between suppliers of skills and private business demand, to reduce the waste of public expenditure
on training in skills that employers do not need, and to equip young Yemenis better to compete in job
markets in Yemen and abroad. Its findings would support future investments by the Government, Donors
and IDA. Also in FY04 the Bank would complete a Secondary Education Review (FY04), to help clarify
the needs (physical, pedagogical, personnel-related) for assistance at the secondary level (especially for girls
finishing primary level). A Japan Social Development Fund grant to develop programs for Children at Risk
(FY04) would address the growing problem of street children and youth involved with drugs and other
vices, who are also thought to be a growing reservoir of HIV infection.

42. 
Ensuring Environmental Sustainability. Few countries face as difficult a challenge as Yemen in
environmental sustainability, particularly regarding water. The depletion of groundwater has direct impacts on
poverty, employment, and social order. Given Yemen's heavy dependence on rainfall capture and diversion of
floods for irrigation ("spate irrigation"), the protection of watersheds is also of paramount importance.
Groundwater management requires a new emphasis on joint urban and rural planning. Soil conservation is also
a major requirement for sustainability of the rural economy. Coastal fisheries are a rich source of income and
employment for poor families, but as a "commons" they are at serious risk of being depleted in the same sense
as groundwater, and therefore need extraordinary management measures to stabilize valuable stocks.

43. 
Addressing the priority for environmental sustainability is, like the other three priorities, in large part a
matter of better management, but more than most others it requires very large investments, especially in rainfall
capture for aquifer recharge and water distribution, and for some aspects of soil and vegetation conservation.
There is relatively major donor involvement in water management, but it is dwarfed by the scale and urgency of
Yemen's needs, and IDA support is therefore well justified (see Box 5). Fisheries management is more
institutional and technical in nature; only the development of coastal mariculture and inland aquaculture (both

20

offering higher incomes and lower risks than capture fisheries) require substantial investments, and those are by
nature private investments. Specific activities:

* Lending. The Sana'a Basin Water Management Project (FY03) would employ several of the approaches
noted above to buy time for Sana'a to find permanent solutions to its water crisis. The Groundwater and
Soil Conservation Project (FY03) would spread efficient irrigation technology, formning user groups to
manage groundwater, trying out water markets, etc. The recently approved Urban Water and Sanitation
Project APC (FY03) would launch the first phase of a major urban water and sanitation program focusing
on basin-wide water management and loss reduction in several cities.

* Analytical and Advisory Services. To begin, an Environmental Safeguards review in FY03 would update
our knowledge of policies and institutions involved in environmental protection, assessing their adequacy
vis-a-vis environmental threats. 
In FY03, multisector work on a Water Sector Reform Strategy would
begin, stretching over three years. The Coastal Aquifers Development Strategy (FY04) would propose
plans for long-term development of coastal aquifers that are known to have potential to support much larger
populations, with the goal of phased public investments serving an orderly migration of highland farmers
whose water has been exhausted, avoiding conflicts caused by unplanned migration.

.

BAn Inlegraled; Donor-Supporied Water Strateg 

,', 

;;

As noted in the PRSP, efficient and equitbler-nanagenient ofYemen's searce%ater resources (at ss dsst 
F30 cu1-0 .
meters/capita per year, -Yemen'siwatei a,yailabilift 
is crily 22 of world average) will be cntical to die"impleihentation of its.
poverty.reduction ,srategy" The,'Government i§ working close ly with development panners; notablyIDA, Geffiany, the
NetherlandJi UAE, UNDP and UNICEF, to develop an ntegrated aid cobereor water sector strategy2. TIhe Bank's planned
analytical work on the Water Se'tor 'Refo'r Strategy (FY03) Will be coordinated closely v uh Otl,ie'developmentpartners
to refine the-strategy; 
.;
The key issi&s that the .Goverminetii!addjebsing. with suppon frori development partners are: aquifer recharge, capture
and use.of run-off, more productfiye ramfed farmiing, demand management'of drinkng.and rngarion water; ,waste water
recycling, greiter n6farrn activ 
and coastal zone developrnent
In addition to support fOP the traditional "spaie irrigation" and for construcnotn of large water mranagement structures in the
wadis.,(valleys) of'Tehama, more recently IDA is promoting water efficiency in utrig3nto through rehabilitation and,'
improvernent of'existingsystenns.aufWimproving on-farrn managmrneri 
through pariiipatory imganon, andiestablishmentwof
water~ user associationsi3LAnd a'nd-Water Conservation Project: Irngation Improvenient Project). lh.Iclose coordination with
ithe Netherlands,jGermany; U.NDP.and other donors,' IDA is also contrbufing to building up' waer management capacLt at
,the natiorial and,the,basih level (see para 43). With this internatLonal support,.the Nafionail WateraResources Authoity,
'(NM{RA):haisbeenable to prepaeza ,iaqonal water stralegy, a Water La%. which was approved.recently. as well as Basin
Water,Managemeit Plans 'f6rTaiz,SadahH Hadramout Tuban, Abyaii and Sana'a. 
-
The.need for a more ini,tegrated-nanagement approach is even more critical in the urbanized basins (Sana'a, TaniZafnd'
Sadah), where theipotefitial forcdnflicts i sm'uch greater. Inter-sectolraF'cooperatio'n has!been iriitiated under the 'TiaizPilot'
Water Supply Projectaewhereconmuniqwateim 
fkeenthas"ibeeiexperi 
xd&results'so far.' he 
recendt'approvedIbAUrbaan Wate' Supply and:S:anitiion; Proct¶ghs6en'4 the ', yfo.r fi9bater:c 
,peraoi amo$ n
.water managewater- upplyboth rurl aa ana uirbah), based oit the-''"
developmlent partners inv6lved in boit 
developmnent and'reuaioi,of watermark,e,ts;, promot,ion 
'ldibrrii 
ofw,ast,e w,ater rMe-' 
ads,tittioal 
:,g...
catatkbui 

', 

.

,

H. 
THE CAS AND THE MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS (MDGS).
44. 
The Yemen CAS is consistent with the MDGs, with a special emphasis on those goals which are
particularly critical; i.e., achieving universal primary education, reducing child mortality, promoting gender
equality and ensuring environmental sustainability, especially in water. However, as noted in the Joint
Bank/IMF Staff Assessment of the PRSP, the attainment of the PRSP targets (to be achieved by 2005) will
require improvements in the institutional and implementation capacity of public service delivery agencies.
Indeed, according to the PRSP, Yemen will not be able to meet the MDGs that focus on elimination of the
gender gap in basic and secondary education by 2005. The strong focus of the CAS on basic education,
especially for girls, is a reflection of IDA's effort to move closer to the achievement of these targets. However,
it will also need more concerted efforts by all development partners. 
In general, partnership is central to

21

progress on the MDGs in Yemen. The Netherlands, Germany, Japan and the UN agencies are active in
supporting the Government's efforts in education and gender equity. WFP, the European Commission and the
United Nations have significant food security programs. The Netherlands, UNICEF, and Germany work in
maternal health. Combating HIV/AIDS is emerging as a serious issue of public health for which UNICEF is
taking the lead among donors. Table 5 summarizes the links between the MDGs and IDA's and donors'
assistance programs.

I. 

OUTREACH AND CAPACITY BUILDING

45. 
The Bank would invest heavily in outreach to civil society, opinion leaders, and decision-makers to
stimulate active and constructive dialogue on important development issues. Outreach would disseminate the
latest research and useful knowledge from the Bank and other sources, and over time dispel misperceptions of
our work that have led to opposition and needless delays. Efforts will also be made to include outreach
components in new operations in cases where the probability of project success can be enhanced.

46. 
The program would go beyond past efforts, which have centered on events to inform the press and
provide news media with stories on Bank work. It would form the framework relating the various parts of a
"Knowledge for Development" strategy and linking knowledge to decision-making. The outreach program
would organize small seminars for senior policymakers to present the most relevant research or experience and
discuss their policy implications. It would also sponsor noted speakers from abroad. Through the Development
Information Center the program would maintain a website containing all available documents from all sources
on Yemen's development issues, and effort will be made to link this work to the Development Gateway
activities. 
In this context it would also involve active search and retrieval of non-Bank research relevant to
Yemen's major development problems. The outreach program would also provide for translation of Bank
documents into Arabic and dissemination within Government, Parliament, the universities, labor, professional
and business associations, and other NGOs, and serious, discussion of every Bank paper with appropriate
Yemeni and donor counterparts. The Development Research Forum proposed in para. 41 above would be
developed as the main venue for substantive discussions. To be led by the Country Office, the outreach program
would be launched in FY03 after the required additional skilled staff are recruited. The WBI would be called
upon to provide support in terns of both design and substance.

47. 
As part of the shift to a more knowledge-based, capacity-building assistance strategy, WBI would play a
much more important role than ever before in support of the strategy. Yemen is one of focal point countries in

the region for WBI. It would in any case conduct standard courses to which Yemenis would be invited, but it

would as well provide the best available international experience in the design of public sector reforms affecting
corruption, better public service delivery, monitoring and evaluation of public program performance including
poverty outcomes, and local authorities development. 
It would also provide advice on trade strategy, help
develop the Development Research Forum, and assist in the gender mainstreaming exercise and in outreach
activities.

22

ALTERNATIVE CASES AND TRIGGERS

J. 
The key criteria for increasing or decreasing IDA assistance are summarized in Box 6 (see also Annex
48. 
B9). The criteria were selected for their relevance to aid effectiveness and private investment growth, their
specificity, and their potential for measurable achievement within two or three years. The Base Case lending
allocation of about US$410 million would be maintained if Yemen continues to achieve satisfactory
performance in the implementation of its Poverty Reduction Strategy; satisfactory macroeconomic framework as
evidenced for example by satisfactory progress in its IMF Staff Monitored Program (SMP) ; if portfolio
performance is satisfactory; and if progress continues in key governance criteria specified in Box 6. The
program can move into the High Case, which would commit a total of about US$520 million, if the
implementation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy is strong; more governance criteria are met; a satisfactory
macroeconornic framework is in place, as indicated by an IMF Poverty Reduction Growth Facility (PRGF)
being in place (if the associated financing is needed), and portfolio performance is better. The High Case would
add two operations (Power Restructuring and Expansion, and the PRSC).

49. 
If progress in the SMP, or the Poverty Reduction Strategy implementation, is unsatisfactory, if the
portfolio deteriorates, or if the key governance measures are not implemented, then the CAS would move to a
Low Case of lending, with total lending commitments of about $230 million, retaining the Base Case program
for FY03 but scaling back to one social sector project per year thereafter. Under this scenario, the underlying
strategy will be knowledge-intensive rather than finance-intensive, although under a low case scenario certain
non core items of AAA would also be postponed. The objective is to facilitate reform through a focus on AAA
and scaling up capacity-building activities.

;'' 

:___'..__ 
;;' 

''i_` 

Box 6: Criteria for Lending Levels

Povrf'Ryeduction 
Strategy.' 

.

LowCase.':. 
: 
:,Poverty.Reduction i ' 
Strate'gy 
;iplemennon 

.Base Case 
overly Reduction Stiraegy 
sanslactory 

implementation 

.

L'

_ 

Hlgh Case
Pbverrj Reducnon Strateg)
inplernenration strong

i 

' 

.

.

; 

_

Extended progress in improving
integnty mn public resource management

r

and services, including. 
.

Strong progress-in ,mplementung 
the
"Accouhtirig'and Fdiancial NManagement
Inforrration SysteTm_ 
:
l iterated-anticorrupnon stralegy
I defined and %&idely disseminated.

Extended prog'ress in improving

, go%ernment effectivehnes, in.luding.
Ma. Mjor steps to Imp'rove budget
itfolmidanon 
and management. ,,.'

:. - 'Strong reforns in bu'simess 

-

. envir6nrent.I

, 

Accelerated reduction of civil

-

senice 
.
Sarisfactory macroeconomicf1amernwork
as Irid;dated'by an lMF PRGF being in
place, ifthe associated financing is
needed 1fftnancjg.is not needed,.the
LNIF Staff Mionitor6d Progrian should oe
on track.
Good implementation-of DA'
porifoliolcofrirmtmenis at risk below
.iO%., disbursement rano over 20%9b

i 

'

unsati'sfdbtotyt 

Govemance 
Imnprgvements 

"J,p ;'.' 

!,i'. ' ' 

Base'Casie:goverriance 
acti"rict6'' ' 
- ' j implemented. 

.

,: 
' .!,,,.: 
. .; 

, ,;, ; 

': ', 

-*.:, 

.. > ,'* 

j 

*;4 : ., 

.-' 

Macroeconomic 
olichy 

Unsatsfactory 
macroeconomic 
trarmeoik 

.

and sernices, includiiig 

Satisfactory progress in improving 
integroy in pubic resource nriœnagement 
.
,' tImplemenr 
recommendations of 
GOrYtlIDA procurement task force. 
3 
* Continued strengthenig of ludicial 
.. temn, to inrmprote coun manage'ment, 
;uah'iy ofjudges, and enforcement c'f 

decisions. 

.

.

:.. 

Satnsfactory progress in impro ing 
.gc.,emmelt iffecti%eness, including 
Launch ofan open senice deliery 

': 

, 

- ' 

system In key agencies. ,: ';:,, 

a tS SF1urvey 

-

*. L'nprovernent in civil service 
. management, including reducrion n.stze 
and improvement of compensation for .
key positions. 
Safisfactory macroeconomic framework 
as evidenced for example by the IMF 
'Stll, Monitored Program being on track. 

.

, 

.

Portfolio 
-Implementation 

r,,.>- 

... 

I 

.- ___________ 

Portfolio detenorates 
with commirments at 
nsk'over.l5%an 
id 

.
.~~disbursement ratio ,'........ 
' *, 

under15 % & -. 

Satisfactory'implementation of IDA 
pornfolio(commitments at nsk bel6w 157 
percent, ditbursement radio over 15%). ., 

, 

............ ;.|,.............

. a1' .:'". 

.

23

K. 

ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION (IFC)

50. 
EFC has a difficult history in Yemen. Two projects have been in jeopardy for many years, with legal
actions open since June, 2000. The inadequacies of the Yemeni judicial system are such that those cases have
not yet even had hearings. 
EFC's current portfolio includes two projects for a total commitment of US$15
million. One project, in ceramic tiles, is doing well. The other, in agribusiness, is over a year late in starting
and is not yet operational, while its costs have risen to open funding gaps. A third project, in water bottling, was
approved and is awaiting commitment.

51. 
EFC would emphasize support for non-oil investments. 
It is interested in helping Yemen to develop
construction-materials related investments, including cement, marble and granite. 
It is prepared to invest in
privatization transactions in cement, banking, telecommunications and refineries, and has offered its transaction-
oriented privatization advisory services in the areas of telecommunications, Aden water and sanitation, and
electricity unbundling and distribution privatization. 
IFC may also consider an investment in a leasing
operation, subject to enactment of intemational best practice leasing legislation. There is potential for IDA-IFC
synergy in agricultural exports, and possibly in industrial estate development, and power generation. Whether
these opportunities are exploited will depend on the outcome of technical studies yet to be done, the interest of
private financiers, improvements in security and a reform of power sector financial and regulatory conditions
(for power generation).

L. 

ROLE OF THE MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY (MIGA)

52. 
MIGA has had no activities in Yemen, and none are under preparation. Possible opportunities in areas
such as private power generation could open up. The Bank Group would continue to watch for such
opportunities.

IV. 

IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT

A. 
Portfolio Record. The Bank's portfolio in Yemen is currently the second largest in the Region with 19
53. 
operations for a total commitment of about US$609.9 million (excluding cancellations). For the past three years
portfolio performance has been good in terms of implementation and in meeting project development objectives.
It has deteriorated somewhat over this period, however, reflecting recurrent problems with procurement,
accounting, and special account replenishment. The disbursement ratio fell from a high level of 28 percent in
FY00 to 23 percent in FY01 and about 17 percent in FY02.

54. 
Remedial Actions. A Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) was carried out in May 2002,
which focused on improving sustainability of implementation. 
Early in FY03, a Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (CFAA) will be undertaken to address issues on accounting and financial control. A
Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) was completed in December 2000, and jointly with The

Netherlands IDA is working to strengthen the High Tender Board. 
The strategy also intends to improve
implementation performance, deepen development impact, and simplify project preparation by launching (or
continuing) Adaptable Program Credit programs whose 
later stages would benefit from continued
implementation by the same organizations.

55. 
The PIIU Dilemma. Given the civil service's poor capacity to implement projects, the Bank has used
Project Implementation Units (PIUs) to facilitate implementation of most projects. Despite its immediate
advantages in terms of successful implementation, this has weakened the ownership and commitment of relevant
line ministries and other project stakeholders, and it has not addressed larger problems such as delays in
processing caused by duplication of approval functions among central ministries, lack of coordination of
subproject investments in any particular location, or unavailability of local funds. Moreover, sustainability of
operations has been poor. During the previous CAS period, it was agreed with the authorities that these units
would be reduced in size and placed under direct ministerial oversight to address the problem of post-project
sustainability and to help build skills within the line ministries. As part of the May 2002 portfolio consultations,

24

the Country Office produced a review of PIUs which noted that the agreed reforms had not been implemented
and presented the pragmatic case for and against PIUs.

56. 

A New Direction. The May 2002 portfolio review led to a consensus on the root problems and a

program of remedial action. While the transition from PIUs to genuine capacity building has already started,
future operations would establish the conditions under which mainstreaming of PIUs into line ministries could
succeed. These include: 
reducing the size of the civil service and improving compensation and other
incentives; creating a capacity to replace the duplicative system of project-specific steering committees;
monitoring and evaluating project progress to ensure that they are meeting development objectives, and
improving strategic project planning and coordination; strengthening budget management to ensure counterpart
funds are available when needed; enforcing the discipline of "readiness filters" on all new projects, weeding out
duplications, ensuring that key line ministry staff are identified and trained, ensuring compliance with fiduciary,
environmental and social requirements, and guaranteeing 
that other essential prerequisites 
to smooth
implementation are met; and establishing a high quality and active program of project management training.
The move from PlUs to genuine capacity building would be gradual, and may slow down implementation at
first, but it is an essential part of the larger goal of governance improvement. With donor and government
commitment (details to be agreed in FY03) the above program would constitute a new compact for public
investment program implementation, one that directly addresses the PRSP priority of improving governance.

57. 

Role of Country Office. The role of the Sana'a Country Office will remain central in portfolio

management. 
It now has lead responsibility for managing the portfolio and on implementation issues. It will
also be the first line of contact with the Government in emerging areas of non-project services: training, grant
activities in support of government fiduciary and service delivery enhancements and civil society strengthening,
and an active program of outreach to improve understanding of the Bank's work and promote a well-informed
dialogue within Yemeni civil society on important public policy issues.

B. 

COORDINATION WITIH DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS

58. Official Development Agencies: Development agencies commit about US$300 million per year (US$17

per capita) to Yemen. While IDA's role is important, the family of UN agencies, Saudi Arabia, the Arab Fund
and Islamic Development Bank, EC, US, Japan, Germany and the Netherlands are key contributors to Yemen
development efforts (see Box 7). Coordination among donors in Yemen is satisfactory and improving. There
are certain sectors, highlighted in the PRSP, of interest to a number of donors. In other areas (for instance,
family planning, SME development and human rights) one or two particular donors take the lead. The donors as
a group were deeply involved in commenting on the PRSP and a small group is working together to ensure
success in the lead up to the Consultative Group Meeting (see para 60) and in monitoring the PRSP (see para
63). IDA will work with donor agencies to ensure that (i) policy or institutional advice of IDA and donors is
mutually consistent, (ii) investments in areas of common interest do not duplicate each other, (iii) no important
needs are left unaddressed, (iv) donors share a common base of information and analysis about government
policies and economic performance, and (v) IDA and donor operational procedures (e.g., for procurement,
accounting, and audit) are as standardized as possible to relieve the Government of unnecessarily complex
project implementation burdens.

59. 
Donor coordination in Sana'a is increasingly structured. Formal coordination among donors has been
intensified in the context of the Poverty Reduction Strategy. The participatory nature of the PRSP and the CAS
has provided a good nucleus for coordination among development partners. Subgroups for civil service reform,
water, health and education have been set up. The United Nations Development Assistance Framework features
donor subgroups on governance, gender and economic policy, and IDA chairs the subgroup on governance. The
number of such subgroups will be small, since donors generally share the same priorities. IDA will continue to
encourage the Ministry of Planning and Development to convene regular donor coordination meetings.

60. 
As Yemen prepares to implement the PRSP and as its external balance tips increasingly negative, the
need for a Consultative Group (CG) meeting will increase. The last CG meeting was held in Brussels in 1997,
and another is planned for October, 2002, in Paris. The new CG meeting would consider the new PRSP and its

25

financial requirements in anticipation of the likely emergence of a financing gap in 2003. In parallel with the
CG and based on the findings of the Integrated Framework on trade expansion, there will be a separate forum to
bring together Yemen and foreign investors. Depending on the financing gap and government performance, the
Bank may at government request convene an additional CG meeting during the CAS period.

The'matic Areas 

1 -

-

-r ~ ; 

B Box 7 -Donor Assistance Complemrenraritles1
Ke) Doniors 

.

IDAs-Role 

,

Covernance 

' 

,Civil Ser%ice 
Fiducia 
Judiciary 
Public Finance 
.DecentralizaLion 

.:Human 11htiDeriiocracy 

'NDP. 

.

, 

-'

NeLherlands; UN-DP, EC 
German, Netherlands .
Netherlands. LNDP US 
UK;IMF UNDP,Germa'ny- 
Netherlands UND. EU German 

EU US'UNDPNetherland ,,

: 

.' 

', 

y 

Lendmng AAA...
Lending AAA, Grarns 
Lending
AA
Lending .-AAA 

-

:

:Eeonom' Growz-h

C 

-. PC 
IF 

Policy Ern%ironmern 
.Indubtry,Services

I--l"-- 

''' 

Agriculture.: 

.-.

.

EC N 

EG, LIA

- | 

-, EC, Japd.an NeLherland 

iGermffany, Italy, UNDP 

,- 

* Fisheiies -

-Japan, E lI 

AAA, Len:ding';

AAA

-

AA

Human Capital. 
Educanion 
,Gender' 
*, -;;'caional ED 
;',~Heakth 
,- 
* * -

I.FamilyPlanning

Social Fund 
''. 
* : ~~~ -,r 
:.-: 
, 
-EnWonment " 
Wa.e. 
Wa 
t~g~r~erz' 

L 

* 

Bico-di%ersiiw 
Land'Soil 

' 

- , 

*. 

', .tNezhereands,US, Japan. Germany, UNICEF'WFP,;
NeLherlands, EU, Germany;Japan ' 
. Germariy, EUSaudi Fund, Netherlands,- 
:'NeLherlands. Germaiin US, Japan 
w 
HO 
- . :. Gei:,fiany.Japan EC LjNFPA 
CNeihermands, EC Arab FunddiD'B 

-

AAA, Lending, Grants-
AAA- Lendmng Grants
`AAA, Lendmg
kAAA Lending
AAA

' 

Ne; rlad- G~ 

,r 
-i*, 
NeYhedland German. UNICEF, UAE
NE,ri3gUNDP, laly, EU 

UN 

-

--

r 

f

Lending

2; 

AAA Lending

AAA 

ending.

Lendng

L ndig
.::; 

Lending

.: 

-

;.-E 

-:,': 

z. 

........................................ 

* 
Ecolnomic Infrastructure 

Roads 

'--. 

Ports

Power 
' ' .Public Wors 

i 

A~~~~~~~(r'a'b 
Fund ,Saudi Fund,~l., 
Arab Fund Saudi Fund 

-ending

.

i'i 

I 

* -

Fund ce 
,:'-;OPEC 
erlandh'r 

*Some interventions outside CAS period.

61. 
IFC investments, as noted above, could be catalysts for additional private investment in several key
sectors including power, cement and other construction materials, and export-oriented agriculture. IFC would
play an important role with IDA in convening the private investor forum mentioned above, at which the
Government and Bank Group would present recent and planned reforms and streamlining to improve the
investment climate, and some high priority projects awaiting private investment.

62. 
Nongovernmental Organizations. Civil society organizations until recently were mostly inactive,
weak, and rarely service- or development-oriented, with the exception of about 160 active agricultural
cooperatives and 140 Local Welfare Associations. A law on non-governmental organizations (NGOs), designed
in part with Bank assistance and passed in 2001, provides a better environment for NGOs, and a follow-up IDF
grant is intended to help with by-laws and implementing regulations, as well as public awareness. In addition,
the Bank-supported Social Fund for Development has spawned or reactivated many NGOs. In this improved
environment, the Bank will increase its outreach to NGOs as partners in its work. Specifically, the strategy
envisages support for NGOs involved in policy research and dialogue ("think tanks"), gender issues, education,
agriculture, and water.

26

C. 

MONITORING EFFECTIVENESS

63. 
PRSP Monitoring. Each year the Government will prepare a progress report on the implementation of
the PRSP, based on data prepared by the Development Research Forum (see para. 41) and other sources. The
donor community in Sana'a with UTNDP in the lead are working to provide integrated support for this. 
In
support of monitoring work, the Bank would provide long-term technical assistance for this through WBI and a
Programmatic Non-lending Support Program for Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity Building beginning in
FY03. This grant support would include dissemination of results and analytical lessons of the Poverty Update
conducted in FY02, and cover an additional poverty assessment following the next Household Expenditure
Survey in FY04. The impact monitoring surveys would monitor the indicators of the Millennium Development
Goals along with specific indicators as presented in Annex B9. For the purpose of evaluating the success of this
CAS in approximately three years, IDA and the Government will concentrate on the following core indicators:
1) reduction of civil service payroll by over 30,000; 2) promulgation of financing and fiduciary standards for
local authorities; 3) reduction of the gender gap in primary education by 25%; 4) increase number of girls
secondary schools by 25%; and 5) the water law implemented. The impact of policies and programs would be
monitored through selected Service Delivery Surveys beginning in FY03, conducted under the ongoing Civil
Service Modernization Project and the Public Service Delivery task outlined in the Public Sector Governance
section above. IDA would provide technical support for the analysis of Service Delivery Survey data. Findings
would be used in annual reviews of PRS progress. This analysis would also form the basis of monitoring the
achievement of CAS objectives. A mid-term progress Report summarizing the outcomes will be presented to
the Board.

64. 
Portfolio Monitoring. The Bank will continuously monitor portfolio performance, primarily through
the Country Office. Projects at risk and projects in unsatisfactory status will continue to receive special
attention. The Bank will regularly conduct Country Portfolio Performance Reviews with the Government, to
identify in particular the generic problems that impede project implementation or development effectiveness and
agree on specific remedies.

D. 

RISK MANAGEMENT

65. 
Yemen has maintained a very good record in servicing its debt to IDA. The Base Case level of about
US$4 10 million of new debt to IDA over the next three years would not materially change its capacity to sustain
its good track record. However, there are other risks to the strategy:

* Most serious is the risk that decisions needed to improve governance and support reform may be
deferred.
* There is also a risk that reforms may not be effectively implemented, owing to weakness in the civil
service or for other reasons. Both this and the first risk would be especially serious given the reforms
that are critical to attracting private investors.
* Yemen's heavy dependence on oil creates significant risks owing to potentially wide price swings as
well as uncertain prospects for future discoveries.
* While decentralization and increased community involvement in decision-making will have a positive
long-term impact, the process will be neither automatic nor easy. As indicated earlier, most of the
elected councils lack institutional capacity in budget formulation, execution and reporting. There is a
risk, therefore, that decentralization may lead to a new set of problems.
* Security concerns are a pervasive concern throughout the region and no less so in Yemen. Exogenous
events, or internal unrest, would slow reform and discourage investment.
* Finally, although donors have recently increased their support for Yemen, failure to deliver on reform
commitments, or subjecting a large proportion of public investments to non-economic considerations,
may lead major donors to withdraw much of their support.

27

66. 
The strategy's emphasis on outreach and persuasion is expected to reduce, but not eliminate, the first
risk. Early political benefits flowing from govemance reforms, and new investment caused by investment
climate reforms, should help further to reduce the risk. The Government is already moving decisively in the
right direction. The second risk would need to be addressed by careful monitoring of the reform formulation
and ample technical support, as well as the active outreach program. The risk emanating from increased
decentralization is a serious one, but can be addressed at least partially by a program of systemic local capacity
upgrading built into the programs financed by IDA and other development partners, as well as the strong
ownership and political will demonstrated by the authorities to make the process successful. Risks associated
with oil markets and security are largely beyond government and IDA influence, except insofar as domestic
conflict could be made less likely by early successes in governance measures and job creation and by
diversification of the economy beyond the oil sector. The Bank could minimize the risk of donor fatigue
primarily by the same active outreach and diligent support for governance reforms and other measures that count
most heavily with the donors. These Bank responses still leave the strategy with substantial risks. The
assistance program is flexibly designed with a very heavy nonlending component and a mix of higher-risk,
innovative projects and low-risk ones. It would be revisited to take into account the overall reform momentum
and changes in country circumstances.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter Woicke

By Shengman Zhang 

Washington DC
August 6, 2002

28

Annex Al
Page 1 of 1

Yemen Assistance and MENA Strategy - Key Linkages [Base Case]

The Bank intends to focus its assistance in the MNIA Region progressively on fewer, high priority lending
operations, to rebalance the mix of lending and knowledge management and to engage more actively with other
development partners to ensure a comprehensive and coherent approach to development. In the case of Yemen,
the Region's poorest country, lending will remain a high priority and a major vehicle for knowledge transfer.
The CAS, however, features a substantial increase in AAA-based knowledge transfer.

The MN'A strategy is built around five areas of focus: (i) improved public sector management and governance; (ii)
a better environment for private sector investment; (iii) universal access to quality education; 
(iv) equal
opportunities for men and women; and (v) effective management of water resources. These themes are of direct
relevance to Yemen, are reflected in its PRSP, and underpin the present CAS.

MENAT heme 
Public Sector 
Man,gementl. 
Governance 

: 

, 

1 

Yemen CA' S'.',

Lending 

,-,'- AAA(F. 

Distr'ict and! CormunitWty Dey (04),: 

Civil Service ModerizationIi (05), 

'CFAA ( 

-a B,dg. (IDFL 03), 

'Procureean 
PublhdExpend. Management (03-05), 
.&EvaCap' Bldg. (03:05) 
.,~~~~~~~~~~Pl'iub,,lic' Services,&belivery (ii,)F,, 03); 
Land Registration (04)
Environmental Assessment (03)
Poverty Assessmen1 (04)
Power (03 - 04) 
Finance (03 -. 05) 

' 

.

.

Private Sector 

Iiiv`stment and 

Employment 

Port Cities(03; 
,Rural Acc&ess (05' 

-d:i KeyPartners

Netherlands

(Cvl Service,
Modernization),
UNDP (IPov,
'............. 
Germany-i-; 

Saudi Fund,
Arab Fund, EC,

Germny

l

Netherlands.
Japan,
Germany,IEC,_

Islamic Bank,

Saudi Fund
Netherlands,

l* 
.- ,,,., 

.r 

.; f 51 

.

Basic Educationi Expansion 11 (04) 
Vocanonal Education 11 (05) 
Social Fund m (04, 

.

,- ,oday 
,, 
-, Girls' Secondary Educfati (05) 

n (05) 

-, 

i Investment Cliniate (03 - 05) -

Tourism Development (IDF - 03)3
lAfrastruct. 'for Mlineral Exports (04)
i; ; .. , . , 
Ag / M aricultural Exports (05) 

Developmeritllnfo. Center.(03) 
Vocational Training (04)' 
Secondary Education (04) 
Literacy (04) 
; 
, 
l 
,, 
Gender Assessment (03) 
Children at RiskV (JSDF - 04-05) 

,,, 

.

.

.

.. ;'I......', 

; 

..

.
".... ,' .., , l!vi............. German),

UNICEF

Sana'a Basin Waler Mgt (03) 
' 
, , , 
' ' , ,;IGroundwaterrSoil 
Conser'n (03) 
' ' 

Urban`Witr Sup, y &,Sanitatiofi (03),.:;!': i 

WaterSector Reform (03 - 05) 
Coastal Aquifers Development (04) 
,i, 

< 

Netherlands, EC.
Germany

UNICE

Education 

.' 

Gender 

Water 

, 

Yemen At-a-Glance

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

US$ bUlon) 

2001
Population, mId-war (m|iitons) 
GNI per cta (Aas mnutod USSI 
GNI (Atlaso meh, 
Awgo annual growth, 1995-01
Popuatin (%2.8 
Labor brc (XJ 
Momt reont estimate yeatt vo avalable, 1119660) 
Povet (% of poplt bow naon) lpovet lIne) 
Urban populaton (% of totaltpuaton) 
Ute exoecancyat birth (ys) 
Infant mrtit (par 1,00 lIve bIrts) 
Chtid manuton (% of dift n unWrJ5) 
Access to an Improved water source (% of poPulaIon) 
litac (% of popltio age 15+) 
Grss primary enrolhien 
Male 
Female 

(% of d-age poputabon) 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS nd LONG-TERM TRENDS
19is 

GOP (SSbws) 

Gross domestic vesbttGDP 
EqVors of goods and serAocs/GOP 
Gross domestic savrG P 
Gross natonal savings/GDP 
Current acout balance/GDP 
Interest pawments(GDP 
Total debtGOP 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.

M. Eat
& North 
Afrca 

296 
2040 
62 

Low-
Income 

2,459 
420
1,030

Yemen 

18.50 
450 
8.2 

Developmet dlamonr

Ufa eBxpectancy

2.8 

42
26 
56 
76 
46 
69 
52 
78 
100 

85 

1991 
.1 
16.1 
13.7 
-5.7 
15.6 
-13.0 
0.6 
155.2 

2.0 
Z8 

59 
88 
44 

.. 

89 
35 
95 
102 
88 

2000 
9.2 
17.8 
43.7 
25.6 
32.4 
14.6 
0.6 
612 

1t9 
2.4 

32
59
77

76
38
986 
102 
86

2001
9.3
17.8 
37.9 
19.9
26.1
5.2 
0.9 
56.0 

GN
GNI 
per 
capita 

Gross
pnfmary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

Y 
n
Low-inoet grow

Economic rast

Trade
r

Domesic
stic 

Irvestnen

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1981 

1991 

2000 

201 

Inflation (%)

(% cMne) 

1

Consumer prices 
Implict GDP deflator 

44.9 
17.1 

4.6 
22.2 

11.9 
2.3

50i

0
40 

Govenmtfntnfnance 

98 

97 

go 

99 

00 

01

(% of GDP, includes cuffent grants)
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

25.0 
0.7 
-3.5 

39.0 
13.2 
7.3 

35.2 
9.3 
1.9

-1005

GDP deflator 

CPI

TRADE

(US$ mIlions) 

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)

TotW exports(fob) 
Crude oil (govemment share) 
Crude oil (company share) 
Manufactures 
Total Imports (cfl 
Food 
Fuel and ernergy 
CapitW goods 

1,197 
454 
557 
4 
1,921 
581 
257 
337 

3,797 
1,969 
1,479 
39 
2,484 
984 
270 
470 

3,317 
1,585 
1,320 
42 
2,771 
906 n 

4,000

a.soo

3.000
2,500

2500 

i l l

310 50*-_1-1 

609

95 

go 

97 

es 

ti 

00 

01

Export price ndex (195=100) 
Import price Index (1899=100) 
Terms of trade (1996=100) 

109 
87 
126 

150 
82 
183 

135
80 
168

E4VortB 

*bntKorta

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

Exports of goods and service 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balarnce 

1311 
2,672 
-1361 

4s006 
3,294 
714 

3,519 
3,624 
-104 

le

14

12

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-486 
1,164 

-m 

-691 
1273 

8
a

140 

Current account balance 

-663 

1,337 

478 

2

Financnrg Items (net) 
Changes In net reserves 

455 
208 

-2,8655 
1519 

-1,197 
719 

-2 

95 

98 

97 

09 

00 

01

-4

Mlamo:

Reserves including gold (USS millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC locaVUS$) 

682 
29.7 

2,915 
161.7 

3,673
168.7

4.6 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

(USS nillions) 
TotW debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Compostion of 2001 debt (US3 milL)

2,040 
0 
163 

7,888 
0 

5,615 
0 
1,216 

5,194
0
1,289 

651 

774 

B 1,2

Totaldebtservice 
IBRD 
IDA 

116 
0 
1 

189 
0 
8 

221 
0 
23 

261
0 
28

F: 14r

CompositIon of net resource flows 
Officialgrants 
Offical creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 
World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 

C. 2t

170 
308 
102 

79 
50 
47 
283 
0 

114 
26 
0 
6 
0 

74
-11 
-3
97 
-1

; * .

-

D: 761

46 
27 
0 

125 
49 
3 

145 
65 
14 

142 
92 
19 

A - IBRD 

E - Biktarali

B - IDA 
C - IMF 

0 - Other mulrlateml F -PfNvWe
0-Shot-term

Notflows 

27 

45 

51 

73

Interest payments 
Nettransfers 

1 
26 

5 
41 

9 
42 

9
64

Development Economics 

6tY02

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

YEMEN - Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

(As of August 1,2002)

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Inplementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ 000) 1/ 
Average Supervision (US$ 000/project) 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002

22 
3.8 
13.6 
18.3 
13.6 
18.3 
27.5 

No 
1,605 
72.9 

20 
3.5 
15.0 
17.5 
15.0 
17.5 
29.2 

No 
1,783 
93.8 

20 
3.1 
10.0 
12.4 
10.0 
12.4 
23.2 

19
3.0
5.3
3.4
10.5
7.5
17.0

No 
1,393 
73.3 

Yes
1,356
71.4

Memorandum Item 
Project Evaluation by OED by Number 
Project Evaluation by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 
94 
1,136.5 
26.9 
23.0 

Last Five
FYs

15
345.6
26.7
26.4

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or IIU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page I of 3

YEMEN - Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IDA Base-Case Lending Program

(As of August 1, 2002)

Fiscalyear 

Project ID 

2003 

2004 

2005 

Urban Water Supply and Sanitation (APC) 
Port Cities Development (APC) 
Sana'a Basin Water Management 
Groundwater and Soil Conservation 
Total 

District and Community Development 
Social Fund III 
Second Basic Education Expansion 
Total 

Girls' Secondary Education 
Second Rural Access 
Vocational Training II 
Civil Service Modernization II 
Total 

Strategic 
Imple-
US$(M) Rewards 
R 
s I
Ia (HMIL)(HIMIL)
130.0 M 
M
23.0 M 
M
40.0 
H 
H
35.0 
H 
M
228.0

30.0 
H 
20.0 
H 
60.0 M 
110.0.

30.0 
H 
22.0 M 
5.0 M 
15.0 
H 
72.0

M
L
L

L
L
L
M

Overall Total, FY 2003-2005 

410.0

a. Strategic rewards and implementation risks are specified to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).

Annex B3
Page 2 of 3

YEMEN - Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IDA High-Case Lending Program

(As of August 1, 2002)

Fiscalyear 

Project ID 

2003 

2004 

2005 

Urban Water Supply and Sanitation (APC) 
Port Cities Development (APC) 
Sana'a Basin Water Management 
Groundwater and Soil Conservation 
Total 

Power Restructuring and Expansion 
Social Fund III 
District and Community Development 
Second Basic Education Expansion 
Total 

Poverty Reduction Support Credit 
Girls' Secondary Education 
Second Rural Access 
Vocational Training II 
Civil Service Modernization II 
Total 

Overall Total, FY 2003-2005 

Strategic 

Imple-

US$(M) Rewards mentaon
/a HIML)(H/M/L)
130.0 M 
M
23.0 M 
M
40.0 
H 
H
35.0 
H 
M
228.0

M
L
M
L

H
L
L
L
M

40.0 M 
20.0 
H 
30.0 
H 
60.0 
M 
150.0

70.0 
H 
30.0 
H 
22.0 M 
5.0 M 
15.0 
H 
142.0

520.0

a. 

Strategic rewards and implementation risks are specified to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).

Annex B3
Page 3 of 3

IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002
(As of August 1, 2002)

IFC approvals (US$Mn) a/ 

12.00 1.50 

0 

0

1999 2000 2001 2002

Sector (%)
FOOD & BEVERAGES 
Total 
Investment instrument(%)b/
Loans 
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other 
Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$Mn) 

100 
100 

100 

0 
0 

0 

100
100

100

0
0

0

0 

0 

0 
0 

0 

0 

0 

0 
0 

0 

aExcludes AEF projects.
bIncludes quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Yemen - Summary of Non-Lending Services

(As of August 1, 2002)

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

Product 

Recent completions
Higher Education Rationalization Strategy 
Education Sector PER follow-up 
Budget & Expenditure Strengthening 
Urban Management Strategy 
Financial Sector Development 
Sources of Growth Study 
Project Implementation Unit Review 
Poverty Update 

Ongoing
Decentralization Strategy 
Rural/Local Dev. Strategy 
Integrated Framework for Trade 
Rural Energy (ESMAP) 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Full PRSP 
Monitor PRSP 
Country Portfolio Performance Review 

Planned
Public Expenditure Management (PNS)c 
Monitoring & Evaluation Cap Building (PNS) 
Investment Climate (PNS) 
Water Sector Reform (PNS) 
Public Services Delivery (IDF) 
Tourism Development (IDF) 
Procurement Capacity Building (IDF) 
Power Sector Reform 
Development Research Forum/
Development Info Center 
Financial Sector Dialogue 
Gender Assessment 
Environmental Safeguards 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
Economic Monitoring 
Population Policy Note 
Secondary Education Review 
Children at Risk (JSDF) 
Poverty Assessment 
Land Registration 
Infrastructure for Mineral Exports 
Coastal Aquifers Development 
Vocational Training Strategy 
Violence Against Women (JSDF) 
Agricultural and Maricultural Export Strategy 
Development Policy Review 

Completion FY Cost (US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objectiveb

2001 
2001 
2001 
2001 
2002 
2002 
2002 
2002 

2002-03 
2003 
2003 
2003 
2003 
2003 
2001-05 
2004-05 

2003-05 
2003-05 
2003-05 
2003-05 
2003-05 
2003-05 
2003-04 
2003-04 

2003 
2003 
2003 
2003 
2003 
2003-05 
2004 
2004 
2004-05 
2004 
2003 
2004 
2004 
2004 
2003 
2005 
2005 

91.0 G, B, D 
16.3 G, B, D 
250.1 
G, B, D 
71.2 G, B, D 
100 G, B 
100 G, B, D 
50 G, B, D 
90 
B, G, D 

KG, PS
PS, KG
PS, Debate
PS, Debate
PS
PS, KG
PS, KG, Debate
PS, KG

60 
30 
20 
30 
30 
50 
140 
200 

G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B 
G, B 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 
G, B, D 

450 
G, B, D 
200 
G, B, D 
300 G, B, D 
260 
G, B, D 
200 G, B, D 
40 
G, B, D 
25 
G 
250 
G, B, D 

50 G, B, D 
70 G, B, D 
80 
G, B, D 
60 
G, B, D 
80 
G, B, D 
450 
G, B 
50 
G, B, D 
100 
G, B, D 
45 
G, B, D 
150 G, B, D 
75 
G, B, D 
100 
G, B 
100 
G, B 
200 
G, B, D 
20 
G, B, D 
200 
G, B, D 
200 
G, B, D 

PS, Debate
PS, Debate
PS, KG
KG, PS
PS, PD
PS, PD
PS, PD
KG, PS

PS, KG
PS, KG
PS, KG, PD, Debate
PS, PD, Debate
PS, KG
PS, Debate
PS
KG, PS, Debate

PS, KG, Debate
PS, KG, Debate
PS, PD, Debate
KG, PD, Debate
KG, PS, PD, Debate
KG, PS
KG, PS, PD, Debate
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS, PD, Debate
KG, PD
PS, PD
KG, PS, PD
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS, PD, Debate
KG, PS, PD, Debate
KG, PD, PS, Debate

/a B = Bank, D = Donors, G = Government
/b KG = Knowledge Generation, PS = Problem Solving, PD = Public Dissemination, Debate = Public Debate
/c PNS = Programmatic Nonlending Service

Yemen - Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY
(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME

GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNI) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 

Access to an improved water source

(% of population)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-99 

7.0 
2.0 
16.6 
7.9 

10.1 
3.3 
22.1 
7.7 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

45 
44 
46 

167 
303 

449 
388 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

,, 

.. 
.. 
..

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

13 
12 

30 

51 
50 
51 

121 
198 

382 
304 

.. 

.. 

18.5 
2.8 
26.5 
5.7 

41.8
30.8
45.0

450 
148 

34.4
7.3
42.0

2.4 
6.7 
0.7

62 
77 
44 

69 
85 
64 

74 
72 

46 

56 
56 
57 

76 
95 

311 
288 

351
22

M. East 
& N. Africa 

295.2 
2.0 
58.6 
3.4 

Low-
income

2,459.8
2.0
31.9
3.6

2,090 
112 

410
140

3.4 
5.2 

83
87
79

89 
96 
80 

86 
88 

15

68 
66 
69 

43 
54 

183 
151 

1.2
3.4

76
88
70

57
57

59
58
60

76
115

294
258

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to improved water
source data is 2000. 2001 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page I of 2

Yemen - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
1997 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2003 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

1996 

1998 

1999 

2001 

2002 

2004 

2005

100 
18 
44 
38 

100 
17 
46 
37 

100 
22 
35 
44 

100 
18 
44 
38 

100 
15 
50 
34 

100 
16 
52 
32 

100 
16 
44 
40 

100 
16 
39 
45 

100 
15 
35 
50 

100
15
31
54

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixedinvestment 
Govemment investment 
Private investment 

84 
21 
8 
14 

84 
21 
5 
16 

88 
31 
9 
22 

78 
23 
7 
16 

74 
17 
5 
12 

80 
17 
6 
11 

87 
18 
5 
12 

91 
18 
7 
11 

95 
19 
8 
11 

97
19
8
11

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

42 
49 

36 
44 

27 
47 

36 
38 

44 
36 

38 
36 

31 
36 

27 
38 

25 
39 

24
40

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

16 
25 

16 
25 

12 
30 

22 
34 

26 
32 

20 
26 

13 
21 

9 
18 

5 
15 

3
13

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas metho 

5794 

6937 

6316 

7466 

9176 

9276 

9760 

10110 

10636 

11212

290 

340 

390 

390 

430 

480 

510 

520 

530 

550

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Grossdomesticproductatmarke 
6.0 
8.0 
Gross Domestic Income 
6.0 
8.0 

6.5 
6.5 

2.7 
2.7 

4.4 
4.4 

3.1 
3.1 

4.1 
-2.9 

3.6 
1.4 

5.2 
4.0 

5.4
6.2

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at markc 
3.1 
5.0 
3.5 
Total consumption 
1.2 
5.1 
9.0 
Private consumption 
2.6 
5.3 
7.8 

0.0 
-11.3 
-12.0 

1.7 
-3.5 
-4.1 

0.3 
8.0 
8.1 

1.3 
0.8 
2.5 

0.8 
3.2 
3.5 

2.0 
4.0 
4.4 

2.3
4.5
4.6

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
of which Oil Exports 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

2448 
2263 
1976 
2849 
2294 
-400 
1141 
106 

2482 
2274 
1945 
3084 
2407 
-602 
1226 
22 

1678 
1504 
1229 
2982 
2289 
-1304 
1330 
-149 

2662 
2478 
2131 
2839 
2121 
-178 
1423 
769 

4008 
3797 
3448 
3294 
2484 
714 
1400 
1337 

3519 
3317 
2905 
3624 
2771 
-104 
1273 
478 

2988 
2758 
2262 
3483 
2847 
-495 
1301 
290 

2752 
2479 
1934 
3810 
3110 
-1058 
1387 
-108 

2579 
2256 
1657 
4155 
3385 
-1576 
1462 
-537 

2627
2250
1597
4505
3658
-1879
1534
-761

Net private foreign direct investn 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Othercapital(net,incl.enors&omn 
Change in reserveSd 

-60 
106 
106 
0 

-139 
87 
87 
0 
1 
28 

-219 
91 
91 
0 
587 
-310 

-194 
149 
150 
-1 
-1131 
408 

6 
26 
26 
0 
-2888 
1519 

97 
-14 
-11 
-3 
-1280 
719 

84 
-11 
147 
-158 
-729 
366 

93 
-43 
139 
-182 
114 
-56 

102 
-67 
131 
-198 
1001 
-499 

109
-89
142
-231
1480
-739

-446 

294 

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-6.9 

-8.7 

-20.6 

-2.4 

7.8 

-1.1 

-5.1 

-10.5 

-14.8 

-16.8

-2.0 
-3.9 
9.1 
22.9 

5.6 
6.0 
15.7 
12.6 

-6.7 
-7.1 
66.8 
3.3 

27.0 
25.5 
43.4 
-1.0 

4.3 
5.0 
-34.4 
17.2 

-3.2 
-4.7 
5.6 
13.4 

-4.3 
-6.7 
93.6 
3.1 

4.5 
-5.9 
7.5 
4.0 

-4.1 
-5.6 
7.5 
4.2 

-3.4
-5.0
7.5
4.1

(Continued)

Annex B6

Page 2 of 2

Yemen - Key Economic Indicators
(continued)

Indicator 

1996 

Actual 
1997 

1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

2002 

Projected
2003 

2004 

2005

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
28.8 
Current expenditures 
23.9 
Current account surplus (+) or de 
4.8 
Capital expenditure 
6.7 
Foreign financing 
2.2 

32.0 
27.2 
4.8 
6.5 
1.4 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
GrowthofM2(%) 
Privatesectorcreditgrowth/ 
total credit growdt (%)

Price indices( YR90 =100)
Merchandise exportprice index 
Merchandise inport price index 
Merchandiseternsoftradeindex 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f 

Real interest rates
Consumerpriceindex (%chang( 
GDP deflator (% change) 

36.3 
8.6 
76.0 

33.3 
10.7 
570.3 

92.0 
115.0 
80.0 
42.9 

87.5 
107.1 
81.7 
51.1 

25.8 
27.0 
-1.1 
7.3 
2.6 

38.8 
11.7 
22.0 

62.1 
98.6 
62.9 
45.4 

28.0 
22.9 
5.1 
6.0 
3.0 

32.6 
13.8 
-20.0 

39.0 
25.7 
13.2 
6.3 
0.7 

35.2 
26.0 
9.3 
7.7 
1.6 

31.2 
24.9 
6.4 
8.1 
-0.4 

29.8 
24.6 
5.2 
8.8 
-0.7 

28.0 
24.1 
3.9 
9.4 
-0.8 

26.5
23.8
2.7
10.0
-0.9

32.0 
25.1 
-7.5 

36.0 
18.7 
-101.1 

35.9 
12.3 
-93.2 

35.9 
8.8 
-111.3 

35.9 
10.5 
-134.7 

35.9
10.7
-169.8

80.5 
92.3 
87.2 
52.3 

118.3 
92.3 
128.2 
63.7 

106.8 
90.8 
117.6 
68.1 

92.8 
90.5 
102.5 
60.3 

87.3. 
95.1 
91.8 
58.1 

9.7 
5.0 

82.9 
99.3 
83.4 
56.7 

6.3 
5.0 

85.6
103.1
83.0
55.8

5.3
5.0

30.7 
35.9 

2.2 
11.8 

6.0 
-10.1 

8.7 
31.9 

4.6 
22.2 

11.9 
2.3 

15.8 
8.2 

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Yemen - Key Exposure Indicators

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Indicator 

Actual 
1997 

1996 

1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

2002 

Projected
2003 

2004 

2005

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)"

6362 

3856 

4907 

5383 

5615 

5194 

5165 

5102 

4999 

4861

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

228 

227 

163 

231 

-45 

-68 

127 

119 

195 

94

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
ConcessionaVTDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IDA DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)'
IDA DS/XGS 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

87 

99 

125 

154 

221 

261 

205 

212 

224 

243

178.2 
109.8 
2.4 
0.0 

104.8 
55.6 
2.7 
0.0 

166.1 
77.7 
4.2 
0.0 

135.0 
72.1 
3.9 
0.0 

102.4 
61.2 
4.0 
0.0 

105.4 
56.0 
5.3 
0.0 

114.2 
52.9 
4.5 
2.9 

117.1 
50.5 
4.9 
5.7 

117.5 
47.0 
5.3 
8.4 

18.3 
91.5 

0.4 
893 

18.1 
93.6 

0.5 
934 

15.3 
79.7 

0.6 
1075 

14.2 
68.8 

0.5 
1216 

12.4 
73.7 

0.4 
1216 

10.7 
53.6 

0.6 
1289 

19.4 
57.6 

0.8 
1375 

19.8 
54.3 

0.8 
1437 

20.6 
61.0 

1.0 
1470 

111.1
43.4
5.5
11.6

19.3
60.8

1.0
1480

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

IDA credits in the Operations Portfolio
(As of August 1, 2002)

Number of Closed Projects: 106

Active Prolects 

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Difference
Between
Expected &
Actual
Disbursements

Oridunal Amount in 

US$ ml

Project ID Project Name 

DeveloDment 
Oblectives 

Imniemen. 
ProIress 

Fiscal Year 

IDA Cancel. Undlsb. Orig. 

Formally
Revised

52.6 

-1.4

13.8 

45.4 

15.1 
8.9
20.7 
3.3
20.7 -1.4
28.0 
10.8

29.4
5.4

1.2 
11.5 
20.3 
11.6 

1.4
9.3 
3.1
11.4

30.1 
26.7 
5.9 
4.5
49.6 
20.9
2.7 
1.9
0.1 
0.0
45.4 
0.6
3.6 
6.2 
398.0 121.3 

4.0 

4.0 

2.6

7.0

9.9

3.0
22.5

P043255 
Basic Education Expansion 
P005911 Education Sector 
P070391 Rural Access Improvement 
P062714 Irrigation Improvement 
P050483 Child Development 
P050706 Civil Service Modem 
P043254 Health Reform Support 
P076183 Higher Education 
P057915 Legal & Judicial Dev 
P060132 Public Works II 
Rural Water Supply & Sanitation 
P005902 
S.Gov Agri. Privatization 
P050530 
Sana'a Emergency. Power 
P005907 
Sana'a WS/Sanitation 
P068830 
Second Social Fund for Devel 11 
P039171 
Seeds & Ag. Services 
P041199 
Social Fund Development 
P070092 
Taiz Municipal Dev & Flood Protec. 
P005912 Vocational Training 

P005906 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
HS 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
Result 

2001 
1994 

2001 
2001 
2000 
2000 

2002 
2002 
1999 

1999 
2001 

1998 
1999 
1999 
2000 
1998 
1997 
2002 
1996 

56.0 

33.0 
45.0 
21.3 
28.9 
30.0 

27.5 
5.0 
2.5 
50.0 
20.0 

24.7 
54.0 
25.0 
75.0 
12.5 
30.0 
45.2 
24.3 
609.9 

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

194.90
0.00
1,250.85
120.64
1,445.75
120.64
398.00
0.00
398.00

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
(As of June, 2002)

HELD 
(US$ Million) 

DISBURSED
(US$ Million)

FY
Approval 
2002 
1999 
1998 

Company 
Al-Ahlia Water" 
ACSM 
Radfan 

Loan EquityQuasi Partic. 
1.51 0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
12.00 0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.85 0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

Loan EquityQuasi Partic.
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0
8.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0
2.85 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0

Total Portfolio: 

16.36 0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

10.85 0.0 

0.0 

0.0

1/ Al Ahlia Water has not yet become effective.

0=4 

-- . DIAGNOSIS 

-

| 

- STRATGY/ACTION 

: 

- ; 

| 

Cz 
N.DICATORSIBENCHMARKS 

POGR|; 

BANK GROLP -

|INSTREMENS 

D: OR"

S SUPPORT-

YEMEN: COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX

Annex B9
Page 1 of 6

.----- 

----

:--- 

-5- 

Civil Service 
Overstaffing, lack of incentives, 
poor pay, and lapses in leadership, 
management, accountability, and 
transparency lead to corruption, 
waste, unresponsiveness. 

Decentralization 
Centralization weakens 
accountability, but local 
authorities' capacity very weak. 

~L 

--7

:: 

.

=I.OVERNACE 
* Re-engineer agencies to delegate decision-making 
* Three agencies streamlined and 
authority and enhance client orientation. 
re-engineered, and client satisfaction 
* Reduce civil service size, decompress salary scale to 
measured by survey. 
increase pay of technical and managerial staff to private 
* Payroll reduced by 30,000 over 3 
sector levels. 
years, salary structure raised and 
* Introduce strong personnel management and 
decompressed. 
training/retraining programs. 
* Service delivery standards set. 
* Set and publish service standards of each agency. 
* Link service delivery surveys to staff incentives. 
* Reduce public tolerance of corruption and provide 
ombudsman to investigate complaints.
* Devolve authority and financing for many essential 
services from center to local areas. Train local authority 
staff and introduce streamlined organization and processes. 

* Local financing and fiduciary 
standards for local authorities 
clarified and improved. 

* Port Cities 
Development 
* Poverty Reduction
Support
* Civil Service
Modemization
* Public Services
Delivery (IDF)
* Monitoring and
Evaluation

* Civil Service 
Modemization 
* Public Expenditure 
Management

* Legal and Judicial 
Development 
* Land registration

Netherlands
UNDP

Netherlands,
UNDP,
Germany

UNDP,
Netherlands

UK, IMF,
Germany

Judiciary 
Poor judicial training, lack of 
specialization, supervision, and 
support services, lead to corruption 
and slow processing of cases. 

Fiscal Management 
Operation and maintenance of 
public investments are inadequate, 
vs. wage bill. Overcommitment of 

investment program slows down 
implementation, raises costs. 
Procurement processes are not 
transparent or well managed. 
Accounting and auditing of public 
spending is very lax. 
Revenues are overdependent on oil. 

* Retrain judges; replace judges guilty of unprofessional 
conduct. 
* Raise training standards. 
* Equip courts with adequate facilities, enforcement staff, 
and case management systems. 
* Set up adequate numbers of specialized courts for land 
and commercial cases.
* Establish modem budget categories pennitting tracking 
of expenditure by program, and consolidating investment 
and recurrent costs. 
* Reduce number of investment projects to cut completion 

time and costs. 
* Introduce modem government financial management 
system to track spending, expedite supplier payments, 
strengthen financial controls. 
* Introduce procurement tracking system. 
* Broaden non-petroleum tax base.
* Identify and eliminate badly targeted subsidies.

* Judiciary qualifications 
substantially upgraded, corTuption 
down. 
* Enforcement mechanism
functioning.
* Specialized courts established.

* Share of social expenditures rises 
to 13.2% of GDP. 
* Adoption of functional 
classification of the budget. 

* Public Expenditure 
Management 
* Budget and Expenditure
Streamlining

* AFMIS functioning. 
* Procurement Capacity
* Fiscal deficit within limits 
Building (IDF)
specified in the PRSP and the SFYP. * Country Financial
* Inefficient subsidies cut. 
Accountability
Assessment

- DIAGNOSIS 

.

-

... 

.STRATEGV/AXCTION- 

.

PROGRANI .... 
I 
- -
- -
INDICATORS/BENCHMARKS 
--L INVESTTMENT ENVIRONMENT

-

.-

.

: 
Security 
Reports of kidnappings, bombings, 
extortion, theft of land, etc., repress 
investment and cause business 
failures.
Macroeconomic Stability 
Good macro management will be 
challenged by fall in oil revenues.. 

~ 

.

-
* Two-track program of (i) firrnly punishing those who 
engage in violence or threats, and (ii) public investments 
and service improvements to remove sources of discontent 
that lead to violence. 

* Actively diversify foreign exchange earnings out of oil. 
* Continue implementation of prudent fiscal and monetary 
policies. 

Annex B9
Page 2 of 6

BANK GROUP 

INSTRUMENTY1 

: 

DONOR-

SUPPORT

* Local and Community 
Development 

Netherlands,
Germany

IMF

FIAS

* Investment Climate 
* Tourism Development
* Trade Development
* Infrastructure for
Mineral Exports

* Port Cities 
Development
* Power Restructuring
and Expansion
* Legal and Judicial
Development
* Investment Climate
* Power Sector Reform
* Agricultural and
Maricultural Exports
* Tourism Development

* Legal and Judicial
Development
* Land Registration

* Locally-determined public 
investments in troubled regions 
increase to national average on per-
capita basis.

* Inflation rate below 10%. 

* Liberalized Investment Law 
issued. 
* Independent sectoral regulatory 
agencies set up in at least two 
sectors. 
* Complete privatization of 61 
public enterprises as targeted in 
SFYP. 
* Investment rate nses to 26% of 
GDP. 

* Enforcement mechanism 
functioning. 

Regulatory Environment 
Overregulation of economic 
activities breeds corruption, 
suppresses efficiency and 
investment. Regulations are 
unevenly applied. State ownership 
and control of commercial 
enterprises suppresses private 
investment. 

Land Tenure 
Bank lending and private 
investment discouraged by insecure 
land titles. 

* Reduce licensing and regulation to minimum necessary 
for protection of public interest. 
* Enhance staffing and equipment of commercial courts. 
* Set up privately managed export-oriented free zones. 
* Publish all regulatory rules and other business- 
regulatory infornation. 
* Privatize all commercial goods and services-providing 
public enterprises. 
* Replace monopolies with competitive markets.. 
* Introduce independent regulatory agencies for markets 
made private and competitive. 

* Establish or update land ownership cadastre. 
* Establish capacity and system to keep land titles up to 
date. 
* Equip land courts with strong enforcement powers and
use it vigorously to establish their authority in land
disputes.

Financial System 
Most commercial banks are in bad 
financial condition. Lack of secure 
collateral (land, buildings) prevents 
long-term finance especially for 
small enterprises. Weak accounting 
and audit standards and training 
make stock market impractical. 

* Strengthen Central Bank capacity to enforce regulations. 
* Privatize public financial institutions. 
* Establish clear land tenure. 
* Strengthen accounting and audit standards. 
* Establish commercial bank- and/or cooperative-based 
small and micro-finance, with income-based collateral, 
especially oriented to rural areas. 
* Establish over-the-counter securities market. 

* Accounting and audit standards 
modernized, regulatory board set up. 
* Commercial long-term lending 
rises 50%. 
* Amendment of the Banking Law 
enacted. 
* Anti-money laundering law 
enacted. 

* Legal and Judicial 
Development 
* Land Registration 
* Financial Sector
Dialogue
* Financial
Accountability
I Assessment

Netherlands,
IMF,
Germany

DtAGNOSI-i 

Physical Infrastructure 
Infrastructure is improving but still 
constrains investors in some areas, 
especially in power and water. 
Lack of good rural roads limits 
rural investment opportunities. 
Public sector fails to provide for 
adequate operation and 
maintenance (O&M). 

STnATEc/ACTION 
.
: 
-. 
-
-
. .- 
-~ 
* Prioritization of infrastructure needs by likely investor 
response, emphasizing sustainable water supply, 
electricity, and roads. 
* Encouragement of private provision of infrastructure 
services, especially of electricity, with full cost recovery 
for providers. 
* Fully fund O&M of existing public infrastructure before 
allocating budget funds for new infrastructure investments. 

PROGRANI 
INDICATORS[BENCHIMARKS 
* Contract for private provision of 
electricity to PEC signed. 
* Electricity coverage up to 40%. 
* Water supply network coverage 
up to 69% urban, 65% rural; overall 
sanitation coverage up to 7.4%. 
* Asphalt roads up by 3,300 krm, 
other paved roads up by 2,950 km. 
* O&M budget expenditure 
adequate. 

I t m .

* Presidentially-led export 
promotion council set up. 
* Non-oil private investnent up 
substantially.

* Establish presidentially-led export promotion council to 
solve generic exporter problems. 
* Improve General Investment Authority services to 
investors. 
* Improve information services for businesses.
-
, 
ROTECTING:.:_-H:-N C__TA_-
* Increase public education expenditure in poorer, 
* Basic education gross enrollment 
underserved areas. 
and completion rates up at least five 
* Rebalance O&M with salary and investments to provide 
points for girls and boys. 
good facilities and teaching support. 
* Percent of female teachers up by 
* Redeploy most teachers from administrative to teaching 
five points. 
duties as condition of continued public employment. 
* Basic education share of 
* Improve teacher, principal and inspector training, with 
education spending rises 10%. 
emphasis on female teachers and principals.
* Modernize curriculum.
* Devolve responsibility for building and managing
schools to local bodies, with national standards.
No fees for girls of poor falilies.
f 
sasion

Investment Support 
No effective means of providing 
investors with fast, rule-based 
interface with government, 
discouraging export diversification. 

______--______________ 

Basic Education 
Gross enrollment rates are very 
low, especially in rural areas and 
among girls. Too few qualified 
teachers are deployed in classrooms 
and too mnany in nonteaching jobs. 
Dropout rates high and pass rates 
low. Curriculum materials are out 
of date in some subjects. Schools 
absent or too small in many areas. 
Nonsalary budgets too smnall for 
proper teaching support. 
Teacher incentives and supN 
are inadequate.
Girls' Education 
Social expectations, lack of access, 
fees, and lack of separate toilet 
facilities reduce parents' 
willingness to send daughters to 
school; poor prospects for going on 
to high school exacerbate this. 

Annex B9
Page 3 of 6

BANK GROUP 
-INSTRUMNENTS/- 
* Power Sector Reform 
& Expansion (High Case) 
* Port Cities 
Development 
* Sana'a Basin Water 
Management 
* Groundwater and Soil 
Conservation 
* Rural Access 2 

* Infrastructurefor
Mineral Exports
* Power Sector Reform

* Investment Climate 
* Public Services
Delivery (IDF)

DONOR

SUPPORT
Arab Fund
Saudi Fund
Islamic Devt
Bank
EU
Netherlands
Germany
Japan
UNDP

UNDP

rII_B1_D_"ND 

* Basic Education 
Expansion 2 
* Rural Access 2 

Netherlands
Germany
EU
Japan
Islamic Dev't
Bank
UNICEF

* Redesign of new schools to provide separate toilet 
facilities for girls. 
* More high schools for girls. 
* More female high school teachers deployed. 
* No fees for girls of poor families. 

* Gender gap in basic education 
enrollment and completion rates 
down by one quarter. 
* Number of girls' high schools up 
by one quarter. 
* Share of females in universities 
up to 27%; female sciences and 
applied studies graduates up to 16%. 

* Basic Education 
Expansion 2 
* Rural Access 2 
* Girl's Secondary 
Education 
* Rural Energy 
* Gender Assessment 

Netherlands
Germany
EU
Japan
Islamic Dev't
Bank
UNICEF
WFP

- DIAGNOSIS 

-

. STRATEGY /ACTION 

-

Higher Education 
Mix of fields taught, and quality of 
graduates, do not match needs of 
the job market, leaving most 
graduates unemployed by private 
sector. Rapid expansion of 
facilities and enrollment have 
outpaced teaching capacity. Higher
education subsidy favors well-off
over poor children.

:--.: 
.

-

.-- ;: - -: .: 
.
-
-
. -- - .- 
--- .
* Hold constant enrollments in public universities. 
* Reallocate budget and teaching resources to skills 
needed by private employers. 
* Define and implement accreditation standards. 
* Replace subsidy with combination of tuition fees and
scholarships for poor students meeting good academic
standards.

Annex B9
Page 4 of 6

- PROGRAM 
.- 
IN DiCATORS/BENCIHItARKS 

* Enrollment in science, technology 
and foreign language fields up by 
one quarter. 

- BANIKGROUP2

INSTRUNIENTS/I 
* Higher Education 
(ongoing) 

DONORI-

SUPPORT .

Germany
EU
UNHCR
USAID

Vocational Skills 
Public technical education and 
vocational training (TVET) is 
costly but ineffective in equipping 
trainees with the kind and quality 
of skills needed by employers. 

* Establish well-monitored subsidy for employers who 
offer on-the-job training in place of public TEVT. 
* Establish job clearinghouse linking employer demand 
with worker supply of skilled labor.
* Establish labor demand database and use it to modify
periodically the mix of courses offered in TVET facilities

Health 
* Increase public health expenditure in areas with worst 
Health indicators are especially 
health indicators. 
poor in lower income areas. 
* Rebalance expenditures in favor of preventive and 
Resources for public health are 
promotive programs, in particular women's and children's 
inadequate, allocated inefficiently 
health. 
and with an urban bias, and 
* Privatize management of public hospitals and give them 
managed poorly. 
autonomy. 
Population growth rate is very high, * Decentralize primary care facilities management to 
and demand for contraception is 
community/subdistrict level. 
not fully met. 
* Rapidly expand family planning program, with public 
promotion campaign and incentives of participation.
I Implement public infornation program on health and
child development effects of qat consumption

Children at Risk 
Urbanization and socio-economic 
dislocations are leading to an 
increase in homeless children, and 
children and youth involved in 
begging, drugs and prostitution. 
Government has little institutional
capacity to deal with the problem.

. Assess and regularly monitor numbers and status of 
children at risk. 
* Design and implement programs of foster care, work- 
study, training, rehabilitation, etc. 
* Build awareness and involvement of parents and
communities in children-at-risk programs.

* Establishment of labor demand 
database and use in modifying 
TVET training curriculum. 

* Vocational Training 
Strategy 
* Vocational Education 2 

Germany,
Netherlands,
Saudi Arabia

* Health service coverage rises to 
65% of population 
* Government expenditure on 
health rises to 2.2% of GDP. 
* Private Health Establishment Law 
issued. 
* Child and matemal mortality 
down. 
* Contraceptive use up and fertility 
rate down.

* Health Reform Support 
(ongoing) 

UNICEF
WHO
WFP
EU
Netherlands
Germany
Japan
USAID
UNFPA

* Programs to deal with children at 
risk set up, including housing for 
2,500 homeless children and care 
centers for 6,750. 

* Children at Risk (JSDF) UNICEF,
* Poverty Assessment 
ILO
* Monitoring and
Evaluation

PROGRA1- 

- INDICATORS/BENCHMARKS 

_ + v N .

. STRATEGv/ACTION 
i -- .
. .
.
* Integrate special requirements of women into design of 
* Higher women's literacy rate. 
projects (e.g., provision of public transport along with rural * Higher women's employment 
roads) and selection of projects (e.g., health and family 
rate. 
planning, water supply and education particularly benefit 
women). 
* Amend laws to remove discrimination against women. 
* Select more women for positions to influence the 
selection and design of projects and the policies that affect 
women. 
* Expand programs to increase literacy among adult 
women. 

Annex B9
Page 5 of 6

DONOR

. SUPPORT

Netherlands
LUNFPA
UNICEF
WFP
WHO
Oxfam

-

BANK GROUP 
INSTRUMENTS' 
* Basic Education 
Expansion 2 
* Girls' Secondary 
Education 
* Second Rural Access 
* Rural Energy 
* Gender Assessment
* Vocational Training
Strategy
* Secondary Education
Review

* Set up independent policy research institute with 
goveming body including govermment and private sector 
representation. 
* Set up development information center open to the 
public. 
* Set up center for high-speed Intemet access to facilitate 
interchange with intemational development community. 

* Independent policy research 
institute established. 
* Public information center with 
high speed Intemet access 
established. 

LUNDP

* Development Research 
Forum and
Development
Information Center
* Monitoring and
Evaluation Capacity
Building

.DIAGNOSIS 

Role of Women 
Poverty and low quality of life are 
more serious among women. The 
large majority is illiterate, must 
work harder to bring water and 
fuel, prepare meals, care for 
children, etc. Nutrition is inferior, 
matemal mortality rate is high, 
legal rights are limited, access to 
public transport (hence most rural 
public services) is linited, and 
employment prospects are poor.
Analytical Capacity 
Policy decisions are made with 
very little high quality domestic 
policy analysis, and very few 
institutions do such analysis. There 
is little access to data and 
information on intemational 
experiences, and to policy

analytical work done abroad.
.__._ 
-__.______ 

-_ 

: 

I- 

. -ENSURIN E 

M 

* Pass Water Law providing legal basis for treating 
irrigation and municipal water as a single resource with 
stronger regulation. 
* Expand all efforts, on an urgent basis, to restore water 
sustainability (water pricing, water markets, irrigation 
efficiency, pumping limits, recycling, aquifer recharge, 
rainfed farming, non-farm employment, etc.). 
* Continue process towards privatization of municipal 
water systems under conservation-oriented regulatory 
framework.

Depletion of Water 
Overall supply cannot sustain both 
municipal and irrigation demand in 
most areas. Shortages are already 
critical in Sana'a and Taiz, with 
inadequate sanitation, present a 
health hazard. Institutional/legal 
capacity to manage basin resources 
(agricultural and urban systems) is 
inadequate. Water prices do not 
reflect scarcity value. Irrigation
efficiency, aquifer recharge,
wastewater recycling, rainfed
fimning yields and income, and
nonfarm employment can all be

greatly increased for sustainability.

SUSTAINABILITY 

.-

* Water Law enacted. 
* Water table declines slowed or 
reversed. 

* Sana'a Basin Water 
Management 
* Groundwater and Soil 
Conservation 
* Urban Water Supply 
and sanitation 
* Water Sector Reform 
* Coastal Aquifers 
Development Strategy

Netherlands
Germany
Japan
Arab Fund
EU
UNDP
UNICEF
FAO

- ~ - ~ 

-

-

NOSIs 

ODL 

-;-:- 

-H 

STRATEGNI/ACTION -- 

-

:- 

.

!E- -. -- -

...... 

Depletion of petroleum 
Oil output is expected to fall. 
Recovery rate of known reserves is 
below optimum rate. 
Gas development requires pipeline. 
No investment in processing 
industries. 

* Continue to encourage new exploration. 
* Negotiate long-term agreements with oil companies 
requiring pumping techniques that maximize proportion of 
oil recovered from each field. 
* Negotiate for private development of gas uses including 
power and pipeline. 
* Actively promote non-oil exports. 

Loss of soil and watershed 
Terrace deterioration, poor 
livestock management, and 
deforestation for fuel cause 
watershed and rangeland 
degradation, which exacerbate 
floods and loss of fertile topsoil, 
reduce groundwater recharge and 
carrying capacity of land, and 
contnbute to loss of grazing land 
and farmland to desertification. 

* Extend yield-boosting technologies-to rainfed farms, 
making worthwhile the maintenance of terraces. 
* Extend modem livestock management techniques, 
especially for small livestock raised by women, to 
encourage minimal or zero grazing. 
* Encourage private marketing of LPG to discourage 
cutting of trees and other vegetation for fuel. 
* Implement anti-flood measures including small dams 
and other runoff catchments, and planting of perennial
groundcover including cash crops such as coffee and
fodder crops for livestock.

-BANK 

-

PROGRAM 
INDICATORSABENCH MARKS 
* Private gas-fired power 
production. 
* Substantially higher level of non- 
oil exports. 

* LPG private marketing 
encouraged. 
* Small dams and water catchments 
program accelerated. 
* Incidence of floods reduced. 

Annex B9
Page 6 of 6

DONOR

. SUPPORT

Saudi Fund

Netherlands
UNDP
IFAD
CARE

GROUP 

.INSTRLJMENTS/ 
* Power Sector Reform 
and Expansion
* Rural Energy
* Power Sector Reform
* Investment Climate
* Tourism Development
* Trade Development

* Infrastructurefor
Mineral Exports

* Sana'a Basin Water 
Management 
* Groundwater and Soil 
Conservation 
* Rural Energy
* Water Sector Reform
* Coastal Aquifers
Development Strategy

Depletion of fish stocks 
Coastal (demersal) stocks of the 
most valuable species are 
overfished, and government has not 
been able to regulate the catch. 
Costs of capture fisheries rise and 
catch falls, further impoverishing

small scale fishermen.

Pollution 
Poor sanitation, polluted shallow 
aquifers, unregulated industrial 
waste discharge, and unregulated 
vehicle exhaust all contribute to 
health hazards and lower quality of

life, especially among the poor.

* Delegate coastal stock management duties to 
fishermen's cooperatives or other associations. 
* Train the cooperatives or other organizations in 
techniques of stock management. 
* Encourage coastal mariculture to free fishermen from
dependence on costly and unpredictable capture-fishing.

* Delegation of regulation in some 
* Fisheries Management 
areas to cooperatives. 
Support 
* Training program for cooperatives * Agricultural and
underway. 
Maricultural Exports

EU
IFAD

* Enforce laws against industrial waste discharge and 
excessive vehicle exhaust emissions. 
* Implement sanitation investments. 
* Monitor environmental pollution regularly and report 
findings to the public.

* Share of population with adequate 
sanitation rises. 
* Shallow aquifer quality improves. 

* Environmental 
Safeguard 
* Urban Water Supply
and Sanitation

EU
IFAD

1/ Project lending in regular font, nonlending services in italics

IRED 303A7RI

42° 

44' 

46 ° 

48 ° 

500 

520 

54'

SAUDI ARABIA/-

REPUBLIC OF YEMEN 

-- 

A 

_

o 
TOWNS AND VILLAGES 
o GOVERNORATE CAPITALS 
@ NATIONAL CAPITAL 

PRIMARY ROADS 

Sd- 

-' 

Z 

S 

.

-

SECONDARY ROADS 

',-/

WADIS 

6

f 

/

AIRPORTS 
$,PORTS 

GOVERNORATE BOUNDARIES 
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES 

/ 

' 

I 

j 

| 

'1- 

>

-18' 

-

j 

,. 

( 

" 

T."

To ZoIoh-, 

' 

'-.' 

, 

__-* 

'._ 

/ 

I,~ 

X 

? 

°a t ,Jz SA DAv )\ 
iM 

-' 
HARA
/' 4 oe° 

| a;M 

AL-JOWF 

Z.k 

A+r 

N, 

0I 

4 

Moyl 

-H 

J 

HkAR0 

AIHozmo°-D\G 

Nishlool
o ,> 

-16- \ 5 
'.___. M 

; 

8 4 

__--,ooy 
.; 

0 <> 

e yn 

,' 

+ 

J 

Q

\ 

yHdi~E 

AMA 

I H. U 

o 

HDW 

5 DA(cid:143)niAQn

Al 

° 

W\ 

A @n/J/'''~5;bAsl 
Sa 

/ 

/

t 

A d o U I f G 

( 

.4.t 

a 

6

\.s~ ~ ~~~: 

'< 

4~ 

~ 

At den/ 

Thisfmaop waspro
ocs

4

6

by lbS/Sap D"; 8n U,,il ,F PWorld BooS 

0 

25 

SO 

75 

IOOKILOMETERS 

\ 

(Y 

/ 

rn

ooospaooo~~~~ 

~~ 

oEoEl~drs.'b A 

2wDro

ETHIOPIA > -. 

*t \ 

\ 

O,,$< 

IodgaaoI on d~. I~ olsoas 
d 
b M 

/7 ar,IIO/SiO' en7en,T- 

0 

25 

50 

75 

IOOMILES 

' 

TheroMETERS 

r

42-' 

DJIB/ 

.-

-44.- 

44' 

4UT 

50- 

52' 

.

r_'- 

54'

_ I 

I l 

,, 

-__f 

JuLr200:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~JUY20

IMAGING

Report No.: 
Type: 

CAS

24372 YEM

