Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 24042-PH

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

April 30, 2002

Philippines Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(As of April 30, 2002)

Currency Unit = 

Peso

US$1.00 = 

PhP50.82

PhPl.00 = 

US$0.019

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

Metiic System

FISCAL YEAR

January 1 - December 31

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Task Team Leader: 

l:BRD 
IFC
Jemal-ud-din Kassum, EAP 
Assaad J. Jabre, CIOVP
Robert V. Pulley, EACPF 
Javed Hamid, CEAHK
Heidi Hennrich-Hanson, EACPQ Dileep Wagle, CEADR

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AAA 
ADB 
AFMA 

APL 
APJR 
ARCDP 

ARMM 

ASEM 
BSP 
CAS 
CDD 
CG 
CIDA 

CIDSS 

COA 
DA 
DAR 
DBM 
DENR 

DOF 
DPR 
DPWH 

ECD 
EXT 
FDI 
FSAP 
FY 
GDLN 
GDP 
GNP 
GOP 
HSRA 
HSRP 
IBRD 

IFC 
IMF 
IRA 
JBIC 

Analytical and Advisory Services 
Asian Development Bank 
Agricultural and Fisheries 
Modernization Act 
Adaptable Program Loan 
Action Plan for Judicial Reform 
Agrarian Reform Communities 
Development Program 
Autonomous Re-ion in Muslim 
Mindanao 
Asia-Europe Meeting 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Community-Driven Development 
Consultative Group 
Canadian International Development 
Agency 
Comprehensive & Integrated Delivery 
of Social Services 
Commission on Audit 
Department of Agriculture 
Department of Agrarian Reform 
Department of Budget & Management 
Department of Environment & Natural 
Resources 
Department of Finance 
Developinent Policy Review 
Department of Public Works and 
Highways 
Early Childhood Development 
External Affairs Division, World Bank 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Financial Sector Adjustment Program 
Fiscal Year 
Global Distance Learning Network 
Gross Domestic Product 
Gross National Product 
Government of the Philippines 
Health Sector Reform Agenda 
Health Sector Reform Project 
International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 
Internal Revenue Allotment
Japan Bank for International
Cooperation

MTPDP 

NEDA 

MILF 
MNLF 
MRDP 

JSDF 
KALAHI 
LAMP 

Japan Social Development Fund
Kapitbisig Laban sa Kahirapan
Land Administration and
Management Program
LGU 
Local Government Unit
LIL 
Learning and Innovation Loan
LOGOFIND Local Government Finance &
Development Project
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Moro Islamic Liberation Front
Moro National Liberation Front
Mindanao Rural Development
Project
Medium-Term Philippine
Development Plan
National Economic and Development
Authority
National Government
Non-Governmental Organiiation
National Irrigation Administration
National Powver Corporation
Non-Performing Loans
Natural Resources Management
Official Development Assistance
Presidential Anti-Graft Commission
Public Expenditure, Procurement and
Financial Management Review
Public Finance Strengthening Loan
Policy and Human Resources
Development
Private Provision of Infrastructure
Social Expenditure Management
Program
Special Purpose Asset Vehicle
Social & Structural Review
Technical Assistance
United Nations Development
Programme
United States Agency for
International Development
World Bank Institute
World Trade Organization

NG 
NGO 
NIA 
NPC 
NPLs 
NRM 
ODA 
PAGC 
PEPFMR 

PFSL 
PHRD 

PPI 
SEMP 

SPAV 
SSR 
TA 
UNDP 

MDG 
MIGA 

USAID 

WBI 
WTO 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHILIPPINES
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Fiscal Years 2003-05

CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................... 

1. COUNTRY CONTEXT 
..
A. Political Developments since the last Country Assistance Strategy .1
B. State of the Economy 
.I
C. Main Challenges and Government Priorities. 
D. External Environment, Country Risks, and Economic Prospects. 

2. PROGRESS WITH RESPECT TO THE 1999 COUNTRY ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY 
..
A. Own Assessment .10
B. Findings of the Quality Assurance Group and the Operations Evaluation Department .
C. Client and Country Team Surveys .14
D. Key Lessons Emerging for Future Assistance .14

3. BANK ROLE AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES IN THE
PHILIPPINES FOR FY2003-05 
..
A. The Country Assistance Strategy Process .15
B. Bank Strategy .16
C. Bank's Assistance Program .18
D. Assistance Instruments .31
E. Multistakeholder Approach, Partnership, and Selectivity .36
F. Lending Program: Scenarios, Exposure, and Triggers .37
G. Risk Management and Country Program Monitoring .39

TEXT TABLES
2-1 
Lending, Nonlending Activities, and Portfolio Performance .12
3-1 
Linking the Bank's Assistance Strategy with the Medium-Term Philippine
Development Plan .17
Lending Program Triggers .......................... 

3-2 

TEXT BOXES
1-1 
Poverty Profile .......................... 
1-2 
Philippines Progress with respect to Millennium Development Goals. 
2-1 Working in Partnership with Others 
.1
3-1 
Philippines Gender Profile and Strategy .24

Page No.

i

1

3
8

10

13

15

38

4
6

ANNEXES
Al 
A2 
B2 

B3 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
B8 
B8 
B9 

B110 
C 
D 

E 
F 
G 
H 
I 

Key Economic and Program Indicators
Philippines at a glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management & Development
Effectiveness Report
Proposed IBRD/IDA Lending Program for Next Three Fiscal Years
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002
Summary of Nonlending Services
Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
CAS Program (2003-05) Matrix Based on the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan
(MTPDP) 2001-04
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
World Bank Philippines-NGO Collalboration, by Project Cycle, Fiscal Years 1999-2001
CAS FY2000-02 Capacity Building Initiatives Implemented and/or Mobilized During CAS
Period
Achievements and Sector Objectives during the Previous Country Assistance Strategy Period
Alignment with Corporate Priorities
CAS Consultations and Stakeholder Recommendations
Private Sector Strategy
Programs of other ODA Partners in the Context of the Medium-Term Philippine
Development Plan

MAP OF THE PHILIPPINES (IBRD 27408R2)

This Country Assistance Strategy was produced by a team led by Heidi Hennrich-Hanson, and including
Carol Figueroa-Geron, Leonora Gonzales, Arvind Gupta (in particular on the Private Sector Strategy),
Teresa Ho, Lloyd Mckay, Keith Oblitas, May Olalia, Rajashree Paralkar, Christian Rey, Ma. Bella
Tumaliwan-Belizario, Ming Zhang and Maribelle Zonaga as core team members. Dileep Wagle led the
team on the IFC side. Many other members of the Bank-wide Philippines Country Team (including
IBRD, IFC and MIGA) also contributed. Dharshani de Silva and Monserrat Balce assisted with document
processing.

PHILIPPINES COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FISCAL YEARS 2003-05

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) builds on the directions set in the last CAS (May
1999)', taking an integrated approach to development that balances macroeconomic and
structural, human, and physical development needs. Based on the Philippine government's longer
term vision and strategy, it was developed in consultation with both government and non-
governmental stakeholders. Building on lessons from the implementation of the 1999 CAS, it sets out
some strategic adjustments in the Bank Group's instruments to respond to the country's needs,
including renewed program lending and more lending in support of local and community needs.

Recent Developments

ii. 
Following the transfer ofpower in January 2001, the administration adopted sounder
policies that enhanced public confidence in its capacity to manage the economy. The Philippines
had gone through a turbulent political period from 1999 to early 2001, with modest economic
growth, weak poverty performance, and faltering investor confidence, undermnined by governance
concerns. But since the transfer of power to the new administration in January 2001, the government
has managed to lessen macroeconomic concerns by adhering to macroeconomic (including
budgetary) targets, initiating governance reforms, and moving ahead with structural reforms such as
passage of the Power Sector Restructuring Bill. The new administration has also emphasized a
"peace and development" approach to conflict-affected Mindanao, but risks remain high. Economic
growth held up reasonably well in 2001, interest rates and inflation came down, and the stock market
recovered sharply from its October 2001 low. The economic outlook for the Philippines has
improved overall since a year ago. Nonetheless, some indicators related to public finance and the
financial sector raise concerns and economic vulnerability persists, with external risks related to
global demand and internal risks related to peace and order and possible policy slippage.

Development Challenges

iii. 
The Philippines' main challenge for the medium-term remains to reduce poverty. Poverty
is still largely a rural phenomenon. Its causes include: high dependence on agriculture where
productivity has been declining and per capita economic growth is low; lack of adequate social safety
nets, especially for poor women and children; and lack of educational attainment in terms of school
drop-outs and low educational quality. Population pressures and a declining natural resource base
have exacerbated these problems. To alleviate poverty, the Philippines has to overcome external and
internal challenges. On the external side, it must cope with fluctuations in global markets on which it
depends heavily. On the internal side, it needs to win back the confidence of investors in order to
raise the currently low volume of investment that is necessary for the country's development.

'World Bank, Country Assistance Strategy 1999-2002 (Washington, May 1999).

Moreover, institutional capacity must improve, esjpecially at the level of local governments whose
responsibility for delivering development services is growing.

The Government's Program

iv. 
Based on the overarching goal of reducing poverty, the administration's medium-term
policy agenda, as expressed in its updated Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan (MTPDP,
200104)2 is designed alongfourfocal areas: (1) macroeconomic stability and equitable,

accelerated, and broad-based growth, based on free enterprise; (2) socially equitable modernization
of agriculture and fisheries to achieve sustainable increases in rural-incomes and to include improved
access to land tenure, extension services, rural infrastructure, and credit; (3) comprehensive human
development, addressing quality and access to education, health and housing services, protecting the
vulnerable, and addressing regional disparities and the particular challenges of Mindanao; and (4)
good governance and rule of law, including improved service delivery, institutional strengthening,
and judicial reform. The Bank supports the MTPDP's focus and believes it could be sharpened by
indicating priorities among proposed actions, costing of public investment projects, and elaborating
on plans to strengthen public revenue mobilization and ensure adequate financing for development
programs.

Lessons from Past Experience

v. 

The World Bank Group CAS for FY2003-05 is based on a detailed analysis of the outcome

of the 1999 CAS. The overall finding is that, despite good progress in some areas, the Philippines'
economic performance and some of the outputs and development outcomes were less than projected
and less than the potential in1999-2001. Over the past three years, financial assistance to the
Philippines was much lower than expected, while nonlending activities, including knowledge sharing
and technical assistance for capacity building, exceeded plans. Investments in the Philippines by the
International Finance Corporation (IFC) have been on an upward trend over the past five years, and
the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) has provided both political risk insurance and
advice on investment promotion. A client survey among government and non-government
stakeholders shows that clients have a relatively positive view of their interactions with Bank Group
staff and the institution's effectiveness and value the collaboration and partnership with the Bank
Group. However, the survey also identified areas where the Bank Group was seen as relatively less
effective, notably in reducing poverty, building capacity at community level, and providing practical
recommendations. Key lessons point to the need to emphasize capacity building, work at the local
level, focus on measurable outcomes, and prepare high-quality but less complex operations.

The World Bainik Group Program

vi. 
The World Bank Group's objective for the next three years will be to assist the Philippine
government in reestablishing a pattern of rapid and sustained poverty reduction. This will require

actions both to accelerate growth and to empower the poor to participate more fully in development.

vii. 
To help accelerate growth, the Bank Group plans to help the Philippine government ensure
that the key building blocks-increased investment and productivity within both the private and
public sectors-are firmly in place. This involves supporting the Philippine governrnent's efforts to

2 The Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan 2001--2004 with the 2001 State of the Nation Address by
President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, Manila, October 2001.

- 111 -

(i) strengthen fiscal policy by improving the tax effort and containing contingent liabilities; (ii)
address banking vulnerabilities and deepen the capital markets; (iii) enhance competitiveness through
trade and regulatory reforms, especially in the agriculture, services, and small and medium enterprise
sectors; (iv) raise productivity by alleviating key infrastructure bottlenecks, especially transport and
rural power; and (v) improve governance in both the public and corporate sectors. The CAS also
includes a joint Bank Group-Private Sector Strategy which outlines ways of addressing some of
these areas. Accelerating rural development and reversing the decline in agricultural productivity are
particularly important for equitable economic growth.

viii. 
To support national efforts to empower the poor to participate more fully in development,
the Bank Group's assistance will focus on (a) improving investments in human resources (education
and health) and ensuring access by the poor; (b) the efficient provision of other basic services such as
shelter, water supply and sanitation, and rural infrastructure; (c) increasing access to productive
assets such as land, technical extension services, and credit; (d) strengthening the organizational and
financial capacity of the poor so they can more actively engage in local development activities; and
(e) initiating programs to protect the environment and natural resource base so these resources can be
sustained over time. Strengthening resource management and governance improvements will be
important for both of these major pillars of the Bank Group's assistance program.

ix. 
This strategy links directly with the four-part framework of the Philippine government's
updated MTPDP. In addition, the CAS also addresses four challenges that cut across these areas: (i)
helping local government units to deliver public services more effectively; (ii) providing assistance to
the conflict-affected region of Mindanao, which has large development potential, but poor service
provision; (iii) ensuring environmental sustainability; and (iv) improving performance monitoring to
measure progress with regard to both economic growth and empowerment of the poor.

World Bank Group Instruments

x. 
Instruments to pursue these objectives will include lending and nonlending services of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), as well as interventions by IFC
and MIGA. IBRD will continue to emphasize improvements in ongoing World Bank-financed
operations, particularly with regard to accelerating project implementation and delivery of
development benefits. Portfolio management will address this challenge and also be a key instrument
to improve long-term implementation capacity and governance at the national and local government
levels.

xi. 
The composition of new IBRD lending to the Philippines is expected to shift over the CAS
period. Lending will continue to include Adaptable Program Loans in areas such as water supply,
national road improvement, and rural development in Mindanao, and through continuation of
projects intended to improve management of budgeted expenditures. Other new project lending will
be poverty-focused, respond more directly to local and community needs, and draw on experience
with workable delivery mechanisms in both the Philippines and neighboring countries including
social funds. Renewed program lending as a strategy for effective assistance to the Philippines is
based on an enhanced commitment by the Philippine authorities to an extensive medium-term
program of policy and institutional reforms, especially in the areas of public finance, including fiscal
measures to support investment spending directed towards development objectives.

- iv-

xii. 
Nonlending assistance will remain an integralfeature of IBRD's assistance progranL It is
designed to enrich policy debate, help government design and implement effective reforms, underpin
future lending operations, and systematically build capacity. The assistance will continue to be a
blend of core-diagnostic assessments and other advisory work.

xiii. 
IFC's strategy is intended to help the Philippines meet the challenges of increasing
competitiveness, promoting inflows offoreign direct investment, and improving corporate
governance. Its focus is on assisting the government in: (a) addressing structural weaknesses in the
corporate sector; (b) supporting viable projects and strengthening the regulatory frameworks
necessary to enhance internal competition in the infrastructure sector; (c) stimulating growth of small
and medium enterprises; (d) expanding private sector participation in social sectors; (e) strengthening
the financial sector; and (f) developing the private contractual savings sector and local debt markets.

xiv. MIGA will continue to provide guarantees based on demand and may expand technical
assistance for investment promotion.

xv. 
The Bank Group will continue to work with both government and non-governmental
stakeholders in the Philippines. The preparation of this CAS included multi-stakeholder
consultations. Selectivity in the Bank Group's assistance must be seen in the context of its partners'
activities in the country, including the private sector, civil society organizations and ODA partners.

xvi. 
The CAS foresees a most likely IBRD base lending program of about $1.1 billion over the
three-year period of FY2003-05, including three to four investment operations a year and two
adjustment operations, provided that policy reforms and portfolio management measures proceed
as planned. The IBRD is prepared to increase its financial assistance up to $1.7 billion in FY2003-
05 in response to improvements in portfolio performance, absorptive capacity and deeper policy
reforms.

Risks

xvii. An open economy, high public debt, fiscal risks from contingent liabilities, banking and
corporate stress, and substantial externalfinancing requirements make the Philippines vulnerable
to both external shocks and policy slippage. Bank-financed operations face additional project risks
with regard to procurement, financial management, and safeguard issues due to capacity constraints,
plus additional security risks in Mindanao. The strength of the Philippine government's policy
actions will determine the scope of Bank interventions. In the most likely base case lending scenario,
the IBRD's exposure in the Philippines is expected to decline slightly. Close monitoring of risks and
project performance is a key feature of this CAS. So, too, are close supervision and up-front
assessment of institutional capacity, as well as assistance to strengthen capacity where needed.

xviii. Executive Directors may wish to address the following questions:

Issues for Board Discussion

* Are lessons learned from the implementation of the previous CAS sufficiently taken into
account in the design of the assistance program for the next three years?

* Do the priorities of the assistance programs, including the joint Bank Group Private Sector
Strategy, respond adequately to the Philippines' current development challenges?

* Are the size and composition of the proposed lending and nonlending program adequate?

* Are risk management and performance monitoring features appropriate?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION
AND DEVELOPMENT AND THE INTERNATIONAL
FINANCE CORPORATION TO THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

1. COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. 

POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS SINCE THE LAST COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

1.1 
The Philippines has gone through a turbulent political period since the last World Bank
Group' Country Assistance Strategy (CAS, May 1999).2 President Josef Ejercito Estrada, elected by
popular vote in 1998, was removed from office in January 2001 following allegations of corruption,
impeachment proceedings, and withdrawal of support by his cabinet and the military. The political
economy in the southern island of Mindanao also deteriorated in 2000, and the president was unable
to quell the resurgence of armed conflict with his policy of "all-out war, to be followed by peace and
then development." Renewed hostage taking by the Abu Sayyaf Group as well as kidnapping for
ransom of business people in Manila inhibited the country's investment climate, tourism, and
development in general.

1.2 
Since the transfer ofpower in January 2001, improving governance and reducing poverty
were reinforced as national priorities, a new policy toward Mindanao is yielding progress, and the
administration has taken a firm stance against terrorism. Vice President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo

was sworn in as the new president in January 2001. She consolidated her support in congressional
elections in May 2001 and gained political support for difficult policy measures. Her administration
has emphasized the need for good and effective governance and has initiated a number of measures
to improve governance. The new administration made a strategic shift in Mindanao to pursue "peace
and development in tandem," opening space for negotiating a ceasefire with the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front (MILF) and relatively peaceful elections of local government officials in the
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) last May, followed by an ARMM-wide election
in November. Concomitantly, the Government of the Philippines was able to fulfill its obligations
under the 1996 Peace Agreement with the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF).

B. 

STATE OF THE ECONOMY

1.3 

The Philippines has gone through four years of modest economic growth and weak poverty

reduction performance. The country recovered to some extent in 1999 and 2000 from the negative
growth of 1998 as it emerged from the East Asian financial crisis. GDP grew by 3.4 percent and 4
percent in 1999 and 2000, respectively. However, export growth declined to single digits (9 percent
in U.S. dollar terms) in 2000, and exports fell sharply in 2001 (16 percent in U.S. dollar terms). A
widening "governance deficit" in 2000 (e.g., a widening of the fiscal deficit to more than double its

' Henceforth referred to as the "Bank."
2 World Bank, Country Assistance Strategy1999-2002 (Washington, May 1999).

- 2 -

planned level and growing accusations of corruption against national leadership), together with
renewed conflict in Mindanao, adversely affected business confidence and investor sentiment. The
peso (PhP) depreciated about 20 percent for the year, breaking the PhP 50 per U.S. dollar level, stock
values declined and the percentage of nonperforming loans in bank portfolios continued to rise. The
Philippines has failed to achieve substantive increases in per capita income since 1997, due to the
combined effect of modest economic growth and continued high population growth.

1.4 
After the transfer ofpower in January 2001, the confidence in the administration 's
capacity to manage the economy was boosted by its adherence to macroeconomic targets,
including the size of the budget deficit, adoption of sounder policies, and accelerated
implementation of important antipoverty programs. Despite a deteriorating external environment in
2001-in particular, the global downturn in the electronics sector (which accounted for close to 60
percent of Philippine exports) and weakening demand in the Philippines' two largest export markets
(the United States and Japan)-economic growth in 2001 held up reasonably well (GDP growth of
3.4 percent and GNP growth of 3.7 percent). Indeed, it was one of the highest among market
economies in the region despite the 16 percent fall in export earnings. Inflation has continued to fall
from 6.3 percent in January 2001 to 3.6 percent in March 2002, and the budget deficit target for 2001
was essentially met despite the difficult environment. The exchange rate has also stabilized. The
Central Bank has eased interest rates as inflation has declined, and T-bill rates have dropped to 4.3
percent, an all-time low. The stock market fell to a 10-year low in early October, but has recovered
by 46 percent since then (as of April 4, 2002) in response to improved investor sentiment. However,
export, investment and banking sector performance still raise concern. Export receipts fell by 9
percent in U.S. dollar terms in January 2002 (year-on-year). Nonperforming commercial bank loans
have increased to comprise about 18.4 percent of total loan portfolio (end-February 2002). The
investment-to-GNP ratio has remained low (17-18 percent for 1998-01, compared with 23 percent in
the mid-1990s). 3

1.5 
Government's move to sounder policies was demonstrated by passage of critical reforms
such as the Power Sector Restructuring Bill and the Anti-Money Laundering legislation. Improving
governance became a national priority, and several new initiatives were launched to improve the
private and public sector governance environment. Examples are initial steps to streamline the public
procurement process and enhance transparency and accountability by promoting e-procurement,
adoption of a new government accounting system, steps to strengthen internal and external auditing
of government agencies, and adoption of the Action Plan for Judicial Reforms (APJR). Executive
Order No. 12 also created the Presidential AntiGraft Commission (PAGC) to combat graft and
corruption by high-ranking government officials. Recognizing that most of the poor in the country
live in rural areas and depend on agriculture as their main source of livelihood, government
accelerated the implementation of the Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act (AFMA). 4
Moreover, in its efforts to directly target the poor and vulnerable population, the government
aggressively implemented the Comprehensive Integrated Delivery of Social Services (CIDSS), a
major antipoverty program. Based on the CIDSS approach, a new antipoverty program, Kapit Bisig
Laban sa Kahirapan (KALAHI), was launched by the government. In addition to basic services, this
program focuses on asset reform and participation of the poor in governance and so far has been
implemented in three regions. Finally, in terms of ODA use, the government took steps to improve
ODA portfolio performance and address implementation problems.

3 For further details on economic developments, see World Bank, Philippines Development Policy Review: An
Opportunity for Renewed Poverty Reduction (Washington D.C.: February 22, 2002).
4National Economic Development Authority, Socioeconomic Report 2001 (NEDA: Manila, March 2002).

- 3 -

C. 

MAIN CHALLENGES AND GOVERNMENT PRIORITIES

Long-Term Vision and Poverty Focus

1.6 
"Our development visionfor the 21" century is to create a modern and humane society,
raise the quality of life of all Filipinos-children, youth, women and men alike-and bequeath
this society in an ecologically healthy state tofuture generations. " This was the country's long-term

goal in 1998 as articulated in the Philippine National Development Plan (Plan 21), which was
anchored on the global agenda for change resulting from the 1992 Earth Summit. In attaining that
vision, the plan recognized the need for industrialization, agricultural modernization, investments in
human capital particularly through education, protection of the environment and natural resources,
and global competitiveness. Plan 21 is still the long-terrn framework for the Philippines' medium-
term development plan.

1.7 
"Our challenge is clear: to eradicate poverty." 5 The government's main challenge for the
medium-term remains to reduce the number and proportion of people living in poverty. The
incidence of poverty in the Philippines fell rapidly from 34 percent in 1991 to 25 percent in 1997, but
poverty reduction has stagnated since then. The administration is aware that the key to winning its
fight against poverty is its success in maintaining macroeconomic stability, achieving and sustaining
increases in growth and income, and achieving broad and geographically disbursed participation in
this growth, as well as progress in containing the rapid population growth (Box 1-1).

External and Internal Challenges

1.8 

To reduce poverty, the government has to overcome external and internal challenges. On

the external side, the slowdown in global economic growth, combined with lower demand for
electronics, has implications for export, the main growth engine over the last few years. Finding
alternative sources of growth will relieve pressure on the export sector, which needs to work toward
diversifying products and markets over the medium-term.

1.9 
On the internal side, the major challenge is to win back the confidence of now cautious
investors in order to increase the currently low volume of investments by improving the credibility of
government actions and programs. This is all the more important as the national government's own
ability to intervene is severely constrained by low revenue collections, high nondiscretionary
expenditures (personnel and debt service), and the large Local Government Unit (LGU) share of the
national budget. In this respect, focusing attention on the sources of growth, improving the
governance environment, and establishing peace in Mindanao will be critical. Moreover, in view of
the constrained fiscal environment, it is doubly important for the national government to focus on
revenue collection to generate resources for key development priorities and programs, and enhance
the efficiency and equity of public expenditures as far as possible.

5 President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, State of the Nation Address to the Twelfth Congress of the Philippines, Quezon
City, July 23, 2001.

- 4 -

Box 1-1 Poverty Profile

Poverty reduction has stagnated The incidence of poverty in the Philippines fell rapidly from 34 percent in 1991 to 25 percent
in 1997, but poverty reduction has stagnated since then.' Preliminary data collected from the Family Income and Expenditure
Survey (FIES) for 2000 suggests that the incidence of poverty actually rose slightly. In addition, there were no reductions in the
percentage of the population living on less than $1 per day (12-13 percent) or in the percentage living on less than $2 per day
(between 45 and 46 percent) between 1997 and 2000. This means that many near-poor remain vulnerable to slipping into poverty
with only a modest reduction in their income.

The preliminary official poverty estimates using income-based poverty lines that are substantially higher than the needs-based
poverty lines underpinning the above estimates, indicate a somewhat larger increase in poverty incidence, from 36.8 percent of
the population in 1997 to 40.0 percent in 2000. Meanwhile, income inequality changed little between 1997 and 2000, with a Gini
coefficient of about 0.46 in both years.

Poverty in the Philippines still remains apredonmnantly ruralphenomenon, with a rural poverty incidence of 37 percent vis-a-
vis an urban poverty incidence of 12 percent in 2000. The four regions with the highest incidence of poverty in 2000 were
ARMM, Bicol, Western Mindanao, and Eastern Visayas.

The Bank's recent poverty assessment (2000) concluded that the underlying causes ofpoverty are still heavy dependence on
agriculture, lack of adequate social safety nets, and lack of educational achievement. It suggested that achieving higher growth
and enhancing the ability of the poor to participate in that growth by building up their assets through investments in their human
capital and their physical environment would be the main engine for poverty reduction. In this context, the poverty assessment
recommends liberalizing rice policy, fast-tracking the implementation of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program, and
targeting development programs in the poorest regions like the Eastern Visayas and Muslim Mindanao. Building the human
capital of the poor is important for enhancing productivity and for empowering them. Local government units in the rural areas
are the key in this process, especially if strengthened and equipped to provide adequate and timely agricultural, environmental,
and natural resource management extension services. Finally, the report suggested that pursuing sound macroeconomic policies
will not only be important for attaining sustained higher growth but also for helping reduce the vulnerability of the economy and
the poor to another adverse shock. These findings have been integrated into this Country Assistance Strategy.

The 2000 Social and Structural Review pointed out that higher population growth is constraining increases in per-capita incomes
and concluded that curbing population growth will make the poverty reduction task much easier. The Philippines has a high
fertility rate by Asian standards (3.5), despite its decline in recent years. As a result, population growth (2.1 percent in 2000)
remains one of the highest in the region, which puts a higher burden on economic growth to reduce poverty. According to the
population projections conducted for the review, if the current trend continues, population will increase to about 95 million in
2010 from about 78.6 million in 2000. This has implications for delivery of basic services (food, health, education), especially
maternal and infant health care and health insurance systems, and on the need to enhance growth of incomes in rural areas,
especially in impoverished regions.

a/ This analysis employs consumption-based poverty lines constructed to reflect a basic needs consumption basket-access to a food basket
providing 2,000 calories per person per day valued at consumer prices in each province, plus a basket for nonfood spending. The government's
official poverty estimates, which are higher, are based on a more expensive basket of goods.

1.10 
The second internal challenge is to build capacity and strengthen institutions and processes at
the LGU level. LGUs have been taking increasing responsibilities in service delivery, project
implementation, and infrastructure development, yet often lack sufficient capacity to deliver required
services, despite the national government's training and technical assistance initiatives. Nor is there
any effective process to link national and LGU-level planning, priority setting, and implementation
of poverty alleviation programs and pro-poor services. As the relative importance of national
government-led activities declines, empowering LGUs and local formal and informal institutions
with appropriate skills (planning, appraisal, procurement, financial management), knowledge and
resources (financial and human) will help ensure that the poor benefit from LGU-led activities.

-5 -

Medium-Term Plan

1.11 Based on the overarching goal of reducing poverty, the administration's medium-term
policy agenda, as expressed in its updated Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan (MTPDP,
2001-04) is designed along four strategies: (1) macroeconomic stability and equitable growth based
on free enterprise; (2) agriculture and fisheries modernization with social equity; (3) comprehensive
human development and protecting the vulnerable; and (4) good governance and the rule of law.
While working toward the United Nations member countries' Millennium Development Goals (Box
1-2) is not specifically mentioned, the MTPDP does implicitly share these objectives. It incorporates
the government's poverty reduction strategies: (i) asset reform, including agrarian reform and urban
housing; (ii) human development services, especially basic education, health and nutrition, water and
sanitation shelter for the poor; (iii) employment and livelihood opportunities for the poor and
strengthening the capacities of marginalized groups to engage in productive activities; (iv)
participation of the poor in governance and institution building and inclusion in policymaking at
national and local levels; and (v) security from violence.

(1) Macroeconomic Stability and Equitable Growth Based on Free Enterprise. The
MTPDP emphasizes the need for accelerated and sustained broad-based growth, as well as
promotion of full, decent, and productive employment to make a significant dent in poverty.
To fulfill this broad objective, the government strategies are directed toward: (a) achieving
macroeconomic stability by improving the fiscal stance, maintaining price stability and sound
external balance, strengthening the banking and capital markets, and promoting corporate
recovery and governance; (b) generating, preserving, and enhancing productive employment;
(c) enhancing international competitiveness in services and industry; (d) pursuing
development and increased use of information and communications technology; (e)
promoting tourism; and (f) strengthening the government and private sector partnership in
infrastructure development.

(2) 
Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization with Social Equity. The majority of poor
Filipinos still reside in the rural areas and depend on farming and fishing as their main
sources of livelihood. Growth in per-capita rural incomes has been slow and is also
threatened by a declining natural resource base due to high population pressures and weak
resource management of land, forests, water, and coastal fisheries. To increase rural incomes
and reduce poverty in a sustainable manner, rural development through agriculture and
fisheries modernization, linked with sound natural resource management should be
undertaken aggressively. This includes access to secured land tenure, reliable and predictable
agricultural and extension services, value-enhancing post-harvest facilities and markets,
support systems for improving productivity, infrastructure development, (farm-to-market
roads, irrigation, rural water supply), provision of a well-functioning rural credit and
microfinance delivery mechanisms, and introduction of community-based natural resource
management practices. Asset distribution reform is seen as an integral component of rural
development. To accelerate comprehensive rural development, the government intends to: (a)
improve the effectiveness of public sector interventions in the rural sector, including service
delivery and capacity building programs for LGUs; (b) mobilize private sector investment in
agriculture and fisheries; (c) encourage value-added technology-based activities in
agriculture, fisheries, and natural resources; (d) promote equitable access to productive
resources, particularly land through agrarian reform; and (e) promote sustainable
management and use of natural resources by supporting environmentally sound practices.

-6-

Box 1-2 Philippines Progress with respect to Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)

The MDGs as formally endorsed in September 2000 by the member countries of the United Nations, focus on
developing countries achieving 7 major goals and targets by 2015 (UN Millennium Declaration, September 18,
2000)Y:
(i) Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger (halving share of poor andpeople sufferingfrom hunger over 1990)
The Philippines made good progress in reducing the mnmber of poor living under $1/day until 1997, as the share of
the population living on less than $1/day fell from 19.1 percent in 1990 to 12.1 percent in 1997, but progress has
stagnated since then. If economic growth increases in line with the MTPDP targets, the Philippines is likely to reach
the target by about 2006. However, analysis based on official estimates of national poverty lines (consumption-
based) is not so encouraging. The incidence of poverty was reduced from 34 percent in 1991 to 25 percent in 1997
but has yet to fall further. The incidence of poverty can still be halved well before 2015, but doing so will necessitate
a combination of sustained economic growth of at least 5 percent per year and pro-active efforts to increase
participation by the poor, the two pillars of the Bank's CAS.

(ii) Achieve universalprimary education (boys and girls to complete primary schooling)
The Philippines has made significant progress at the universal primary education level with a current net primary
school enrollment ratio of 100 percent. However, it still has a long way to go in terms of improving primary
education completion rates (66 percent in SYOO-01). Government's target is to reach 81 percent by SY04-05. The
CAS addresses the issue of drop-outs.

(iii) Promote gender equality and empower women (elininating gender disparities at aUl levels of education)
Elementary enrollment is almost equal between boys and girls, secondary enrollment is slightly higher for girls.
Functional literacy has been found higher for women.

(iv) Reduce child mortality (by 2/3 over 1990)
Reducing infant mortality rate (49 per 1,000 live births in 1998 according to the National Statistical Coordination
Board data) remains a challenge. Government's target is to bring this number down to 35/1,000 by 2004. Health
Sector Reform Agenda (HSRA) includes interventions to achieve this goal and the Bank plans to support this reform

program.

(v) 
Improve maternal health (reducing maternal mortality by 3/4)
Maternal mortality declined to an estimated 60/100,000 live births (Department of Health statistics), but not at a
pace required to meet the MDG target. Moreover, discrepancies among provinces remain large. Government's target
is to reach 40/100,000 by 2004. The Bank will support the government's efforts through the Health Sector Reform
Project and family planning interventions.

(vi) Combat HIVIAIDS, malaria and other diseases (reversing the spread of HIVIAIDS and incidence oj
malaria and other major diseases)
The number of confirmed HIV/AIDS cases and rate of increase in number of cases are low. The Bank, jointly with
other donors, is monitoring the situation. Tuberculosis is a major issue. The HSRA and the Bank's Social
Expenditure Management projects are providing support in this regard.

(vii) Ensure environmental sustainabiity (reversing loss of environmental resources, halving share of people
without safe drinking water, and improving lives of slum dweUers)
Reducing carbon dioxide emissions and arresting the adverse impacts of a deteriorating natural resource base on
productive assets such as arable lands and fishing grounds are major challenges. A high share of urban poor still do
not have access to shelter. Water supply coverage has increased to 77 percent in 1998. Government's target for
access to safe water is 92 percent in 2004. The Bank's program focuses on water supply through an adaptable
program loan (APL).

The Country Program Matrix (Annex B9) shows the lik between the strategic objectives and expected outcomes of
the CAS and those MDGs where significant effort is needed over the next few years.

a/ UNDP has sponsored a detailed analysis on the Philippines' progress with respect to MDGs which is expected to be available shortly.

- 7 -

(3) 
Comprehensive Human Development and Protecting the Vulnerable. The MTPDP
stresses that achieving and maintaining growth across every sector, region, and group
requires investment in human capital and targeted social sector programs that reach the
country's most vulnerable people. First, addressing low quality and limited access to
education, health services, and housing remains a challenge. Specifically, improving the
cohort survival rates in elementary schools and enhancing the health care and housing
financing systems are some of the key issues in these subsectors. Second, in addition to
targeting the poor population, the government is also committed to protecting vulnerable
groups. The 1998 financial crisis revealed the government was not very effective in
protecting these groups through well-placed social welfare, social security, and social safety
net programs. Third, the differences in poverty incidence across regions reflect unbalanced
growth within the country. LGUs can play a significant role in this area. Finally, the
government also realizes that Mindanao, the Philippines' second largest group of islands,
already contributing about 18 percent to GDP, holds high prospects for agri-industrial
development. However, the recurrence of armed conflict and the existence of diverse cultures
pose a major developmental challenge in this region. In the above context, the government's
program focuses on: (a) enhancing human development services for education, health,
housing, water, and electricity; (b) implementing social protection and assistance programs
for the poorest and vulnerable sectors; (c) reducing regional disparities through regional and
urban development; and (d) pursuing sustained peace and development in Mindanao.

(4) 
Good Governance and the Rule of Law. Governance problems that emerged during
1999 and intensified during 2000 had an adverse impact on the economy in terms of
increasing the perception of corruption in the eyes of local as well as international investors.
The government, recognizing the perverse environment that bad governance can create for
implementation of productive pro-poor activities, has made good governance one of the key
pillars of its administration. In this context, the MTPDP envisions advancing good
governance through the collaborative efforts of government, business, and civil society by:
(a) improving service delivery; (b) improving ethical standards in government and society;
(c) creating an enabling environment for sustainable private sector-led development; (d)
strengthening public and private sector institutions, and engaging civil society; (e) improving
peace and order, law enforcement, and administration of justice; and (f) cooperating in
international collective actions.

1.12 
The Bank as well as other ODA partners, supports the MTPDP's focus on equitable
market-oriented growth, agriculture, human resources and protection for the vulnerable, and
governance but believes that it could be sharpened by indicating priorities and closely costing out
public investment projects. The Medium-Term Public Investment Program (MTPIP), which
complements the MTPDP and costs out needed investment expenditures, also needs to be assigned a
priority within the context of available financing. If everything planned could be achieved at the
same time, poverty would quickly contract. But budget constraints make it unlikely that everything
can be done at once. This suggests two areas in which the MTPDP could be strengthened: first,
elaborating on plans to strengthen revenue mobilization and increase government revenue as a share
of GNP, as this is critical for investing in development programs; and second, clearly indicating
which of the many subparts of the MTPDP are the most important or critical for attaining the desired
outcome of renewed rapid and sustained poverty reduction. Finally, the challenge of integrating
national and subnational planning remains. However, government, in its 2001 Sectoral Efficiency

-8 -

and Effectiveness Review-SEER) has taken important steps to evaluate the effectiveness of
expenditures in the various sectors in an attempt to link sectoral inputs to outcomes described in the
MTPDP.

D. 

EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT, COUNTRY RISKS, AND ECONOMIC PROSPECTS

1.13 Political vulnerability is lower now than it was before the change in administration, but
economic vulnerability persists because of both external and internal risks. Concurrent slow
growth in the United States, Japan, and Europe in 2001 constrained exports and contributed to slower
growth in the Philippines. Continuation of this unfavorable external environment would delay the
Philippine export recovery. Recently renewed growth in the United States provides hope for an early
recovery, but a risk of "double dip " recession persists, with the associated difficulties it would pose
for exporters. The Philippines is one of the Asia cotntries most exposed to the U.S. economy and is
heavily dependent on electronics exports. Its tourisrn industry is likely to continue to suffer from the
negative impact of heightened security concerns both internationally and domestically. Earlier
growth of worker remittances has also been interrupted by the adverse global economic
developments of 2001, although they still amount to about $5.5 billion and are expected to expand
again as global economic growth recovers. Through all this, the Philippines has managed to maintain
an external account surplus since 1998, though sharply reduced in 2001. Looking ahead, as export
growth returns, import growth should also rise due to a combination of the high import content of
exports, consumer demand, and renewed investment, thus further compressing the current account
surplus. But renewed rapid export growth depends in part on renewed foreign investment, and hence
on the success of efforts to rebuild foreign investors' confidence and to strengthen the
competitiveness of the Philippines as an attractive investment destination. This points to the
importance of ongoing efforts to improve governance and to alleviate infrastructure constraints.

1.14 Although the Philippines high external debt increases its vulnerability to external shocks,6 the
debt-service ratio remained comfortable at about 12 percent of exports of goods and services in 2000.
However, this ratio rose sharply in 2001 to 17 percent, as debt-service obligations rose and export
earnings declined. Renewed export growth will be important to keep this debt-service ratio from
further deteriorating and to provide the foreign exchange needed to finance renewed imports of
investment goods and the continued rise in consumer imports. The high public debt7 results in a large
debt-service burden, increases vulnerability to extemal as well as domestic shocks, and constrains the
scope for counter-cyclical fiscal policy in response ito such shocks. Significant contingent liabilities
and declining tax revenue in recent years heighten this risk. Addressing the decline in public
revenues and improving the management of fiscal risks are central parts of the government's agenda.
Finally, structural weaknesses, persistent high stress levels in the banking and corporate sectors, and
continued concerns about public governance and accountability may keep private external financing
costs high-although those costs have declined since late 2001. Large debt-service obligations will
maintain the need for significant external financing in the medium-term.

1.15 
The adverse impact of external developments on growth has also made tackling
fundamental policy issues more difficult. These issues include containing the fiscal deficit and
public debt, reviving the banking and corporate sectors, and mobilizing long-term savings.
Domestically, the main risks are delays in undertaking key reform measures, especially in the public

6 The external debt to GDP ratio increased from 53 percent at end-1996 to 72 percent at end-2000, largely due to exchange
rate effects.
7Total nonfinancial public sector debt as a share of GNP rose from 72 percent in end-1996 to over 90 percent at end-2000
due to the combined effect of peso depreciation and new public debt.

- 9 -

sector, effectively implementing the recently passed laws (Power Sector Restructuring Bill, Anti-
Money Laundering Act), and pressing ahead with further structural reforms. Bad weather, natural
disasters, and the security situation in southern Philippines could compromise these tasks. The
worsening fiscal deficit up to 2000 and public debt have curtailed public expenditures on other
fundamentally important services and programs as well (e.g., education and health services;
programs for biodiversity conservation, protection and management of watersheds, maintenance of
nationally managed irrigation systems, protection of municipal fishing grounds; and delivery of
extension services in agriculture and natural resources).

1. 16 

Steps to manage internal risks will be crucialfor long-term stability and investor

confidence. These steps include implementation of recently passed legislation (e.g., power sector
reform and anti-money laundering), effective visible measures to reduce corruption, sustaining
renewed trust in economic management by consistently meeting targets for limiting the fiscal deficit,
improving revenue mobilization, managing fiscal risk and public expenditure at both the national and
local levels, and improving the country's security situation.

1.17 GDP growth in 2002 is projected at around 4 percent. The MTPDP projects average

growth of more than 5 percent a year in 2001-05. Growth on this order can be achieved only if
sound, confidence-boosting economic measures are undertaken to renew investment and improve
productivity and if the global downturn of 2001 is short-lived. The major risks to the success of the
Philippines' renewed efforts to reduce poverty are slippages in the implementation of policy reforms,
inadequate progress in addressing law-and-order problems and achieving peace, and exogenous
factors such as El Niho or other natural disasters, a prolonged downturn in world growth, or
increased risk aversion vis-a-vis emerging economies in global capital markets. Hence, the
government's continued commitment will be critical to improving governance, developing
infrastructure and human resources, seeing through structural reforms, for example, in the public
sector, as well as to bringing peace and order to Mindanao. On the external side, exports are assumed
to bounce back over the medium-term and once again play a vital role in economic growth. But, as
noted, this depends on the success of the export sector in attracting new investments and remaining
competitive in the increasingly integrated export market.

1.18 

The outlookfor the Philippines has improved over the pastyear. The new administration

demonstrated its resolve by undertaking crucial reform measures and by keeping the budget deficit
for 2001 under control, a first milestone toward its commitment to move toward fiscal consolidation.
Although external debt has increased, the maturity profile of outstanding debt is still favorable, with
medium- and long-term debt share of about 89 percent of the total debt and weighted average
maturity of more than 16 years. The Philippines' foreign reserve position also remains sound, with
gross international reserves slightly more than short-term debt plus amortization due within 12
months on medium- and long-term debt. Moreover, improved investor perceptions since late 2001
have reduced lending spreads and increased Philippine access in the global bond market.
Continuation of this trend would help the country mobilize private capital to meet its external
financing needs.

- 10 -

2. PROGRESS WITH RESPECT TO THE 1999 COUNTRY ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY

2.1 Monitoring CAS implementation and progress toward its objectives is an important feature
of the 1999 CAS, which was designed as a self-evaluation pilot. Its framework includes both self-
evaluation features (indicators in program matrix., portfolio indicators, provisions for monitoring of
business processes) and emphasis on country-performance monitoring (indicators in program matrix
and provisions for enhanced monitoring of progress toward comprehensive development). The CAS
was also designed as a "living document," with provisions for fine-tuning, in consultation with
partners. In this regard, the Bank carried out a comprehensive CAS mid-term review with the
Philippine government in October-November 2000 that resulted in some adjustments in Bank-
supported activities for the remaining CAS periocl. In developing this CAS, the Bank is drawing on
its own findings regarding progress in implementing the 1999 CAS and reaching its objectives, as
well as those of independent evaluations, both in the Bank (Quality Assurance Group and Operations
Evaluation Department) and through a client survey.

A. 

OwN ASSESSMENT

2.2 
The Bank's overallfinding is that good progress was made in putting in place the key
elements of the 1999 CAS, particularly the strongerfocus on poverty reduction, governance-
improving initiatives, long-term development, partnership, and participation. Applying a country-
driven approach, the Bank increased selectivity and focus on a few key long-term issues through
Adaptable Program Loans (APLs, three ongoing); increased its outreach, external communications,
and transparency in Bank-financed operations; made progress toward mainstreaming civil society
and beneficiary participation in all assistance activities (Annex C); worked in partnership with others,
including ODA partners, private sector and civil society (Box 2-1), increased knowledge-based
services and capacity-building initiatives (Annex D), and improved monitoring and evaluation of
operations.

2.3 
At the same time, the country's economic performance and some CAS outputs and
outcomes were less than projected and less than their potential in 1999-2001. During the period of
deteriorating investor confidence and growing deterioration in governance in 1999-2000,
implementation of all development activities suffered including the Bank's portfolio, and a recovery
under the new administration is still underway. W'ith implementation of policy reforms and new
investments behind original plans, many of the intended development outcomes of the 1999 CAS and
the government's earlier MTPDP are in danger of'not being met by the targeted dates. This includes
the primary objective of poverty reduction (see above), as well as economic growth and investment,
employment, and sectoral objectives, for example, regarding health and education services, agrarian
reform, or rural electrification (Annex E).

- I1 -

Box 2-1 Working in Partnership with Others

The Bank has scaled up its partnership and formed strategic alliances with partners in selected areas to enhance
impact:
* With government. Government ownership of the Consultative Group (CG) process was enhanced by holding
the 2000 and 2002 CG meetings in the Philippines, chaired by the government and co-chaired by the Bank.
With Bank encouragement, the government also chaired subsequent meetings organized by the Bank with the
donor community, establishing this partnership trend for future CGs and aid coordination events and meetings.
* With other ODA partners. The Bank has intensified aid coordination meetings with other official
development assistance (ODA) partners and forged several new partnerships such as with the Asian
Development Bank (ADB) and Japan on portfolio review, with the International Monetary Fund on a joint
Financial Sector Assessment Program, with ADB on joint programming discussions and the Public
Expenditure, Procurement and Financial Management Review (PEPFMR), and with five donor agencies on
anticorruption. The Bank is also leveraging its resources through strategic partnerships on particular programs
(e.g., the Agrarian Reform Communities Development Program with financing from more than a dozen ODA
partners.)
* With civil society. More than 30 major meetings and workshops took place in FY00 with nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) for consultations on the Bank's CAS implementation, projects and sector studies.
Partnership with NGOs was also advanced by implementing the Small Grants Program, sponsoring a winning
NGO entry at the Development Marketplace involving NGOs in projects and providing grant support to various
NGO-led initiatives (e.g., a microfinance development project in Mindanao).
* With the private sector. A joint World Bank Group effort is being pursued toward common objectives for
private sector development. The Bank holds regular consultation with private firms and financial institutions on
business environment issues. Together with the World Bank Institute and the Institute of Corporate Directors of
the Philippines, it has developed and delivered training programs and seminars to company directors on
corporate governance.
* With Government, Civil Society, Business Community, and the Media. The Bank sponsored a major
Philippine Civil Society-Govermnent-Business Conference in early 2000 to promote Partnerships for
Governance and Development. It was attended by more than 400 people from academia, the donor community,
the media, business, NGOs, and labor groups, and all three branches of govermnent. Addressed by President
James D. Wolfensohn, the conference helped to position the Bank as a champion of poverty reduction and good
governance. A Consortium Agreement was signed among the Bank, Govermnent, Civil Society, and Business
to develop and implement an Out-of-School Youth Development Program, with 19 subprojects now approved
and launched. Through an Asia-Europe Meeting grant and in partnership with the Philippine Center for
Investigative Journalism, journalists and mass communication teachers were given training on investigative
journalism skills to help promote good governance and transparency.

2.4 
Over the past three years, the Philippine government largely used Bank services as
foreseen in the CAS, but actual levels of resource transfer were much lower than expected (Table

2-1). The Philippine portfolio was streamlined, its size reduced by about one third over the past three
years. Regular, thorough portfolio reviews were undertaken jointly with both government and the
other two key ODA partners (the Asian Development Bank [ADB] and Japan). It has also assessed
the monitoring and evaluation arrangements of the portfolio and piloted realignment of these systems
in individual projects in conjunction with the government. A pilot for development of benchmarking
performance indicators for the rural sector is being implemented under the sponsorship of the Bank
and the National Economic and Development Authority. With all these efforts, several portfolio
performance indicators improved relative to the pre-CAS period. However, due to a growing backlog
of undisbursed funds (only in part due to savings) and realization of absorptive capacity constraints,

the government decided to cancel some partial loan amounts, and constrain new lending. As a result,
the number and volume of operations were lower than anticipated.

- 12-

2.5 
Nonlending activities, including knowledge sharing (e.g., through the Global Distance
Learning Network) and technical assistance for capacity building, have exceededplans, and Bank
funds have been effectively leveraged with trustfunds (Table 2-1). Trust funds play an increasingly
important role in knowledge sharing and technical assistance and have covered activities in areas
such as post-conflict assistance for Mindanao, public and corporate governance, financial
management and performance measurement and management, out-of-school youth, community-
driven development, innovative approaches to agrarian reform, capacity building of rural NGOs,
environmental management, urban poverty, and microfinance projects. Among these trust funds, the
Japan-funded Policy and Human Resource Development trust fund has continued to finance priority
project preparation activities. As a response to the EIast Asian financial crisis in 1997, the Asia-
Europe Meeting (ASEM) trust fund facility was launched in 1998 to support activities that responded
to mitigating the social impact of the crisis. This facility has been crucial for initiating critical
reforms in the social, financial and corporate sector. Also, the recent launching of the Japan Social
Development Fund (JSDF) grant facility has provided a new avenue for involving NGOs and civil
society in implementing pro-poor activities that are expected to have the greatest impact on the
country's poorest and most vulnerable population. But even these "free standing" trust funds
(supporting technical assistance and capacity-building activities rather than project preparation) have
not disbursed as quickly as planned, and some balances were cancelled for a variety of reasons,
including the earlier administration's lack of commitment to proposed reform measures and
inadequate information of some implementing agencies regarding the Bank's policies and
procedures.

Table 2-1 Lending, Nonlending Activities, and Portfolio Performance

Lending 

_______

FYOO 

FY01 

FYV02 

TOTAL

___________________ 

(3 years)

Expected number of operations. 
Actual number of operations/current program 
Expected volume (base case) 
Actual volume, current program 

4-5 
4-5 
3 
2 
$300-500 million $300-500 million 
$278 million 
= $65 million 

4-5 
3 
$400-500 million 
$135 million 

12-15
8
$1.0-1.5 billion
$478 million

Nonlending activities 

Expected number of studies 
Actual/programmed number of studies 
Informal papers 
Grants mobilized for technical assistance and 
capacity building a _

-

Portfolio indicators

Number of projects 
Net commitments 
Projects at risk 
Commitments at risk 

.

_

FYOO 

3-4 
6 
3 
$2.24 million. 

FY00 
25 
$1.8 billion 
16%(4) 
$617 million 

(33%) 

FY01 

3-4 
2 
6 
4 

FY02 

3-4 
4 
3 

4 

FY01 
24 
$1.4 billion 
13% (3) 
$128 million 

(9%) 

FY02 (03/31/02)
25 
$1.4 billion 
28% (7) 
$338 million 

(24%)

TOTAL

(3 years)

9-12
12
12
$10 million

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Problem projects 
Disbursement ratio 
n.a. not applicable.
a. Global Environmental Facility, Policy and Human Resources Development Fund, Asia-Europe Meeting, Institutional Development
Fund, Japan Social Development Fund.

3 
11.9% 

4 
17.3% 

5 
9.5% 

n.a.
n.a.

- 13 -

2.6 
International Finance Corporation (IFC) investments in the Philippines have been on an
upward trendfor the pastfiveyears. IFC investment approvals amounted to $126 million in FY01,
up from $80 million in FY00. IFC's held portfolio in the Philippines is about $717 million, $393
million of it on IFC's own account ($295 million loans and $98 million equity and quasi-equity), and
$325 million on participants' account. The portfolio covers 29 projects, especially in the power
sector where IFC had earlier supported a number of projects in infrastructure (e.g., transport) and in
the financial sector, including a venture capital fund, leasing services, and trade finance and risk-
sharing facilities. In FY02, IFC expects to undertake investments worth between $120 million and
$140 million on its own account.

2.7 
The Philippines is the largest exposure in Asia for the Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency (MIGA), representing about 3 percent of the agency's gross exposure at $130.5 million and 4
percent of its net exposure at $121.0 million (as of February 28, 2002). MIGA's current portfolio
consists of four active contracts in the financial and infrastructure sectors. In FY01, MIGA provided
guarantees totaling $87 million to the Manila North Tollway Corporation sponsors and lenders. This
project involves widening and rehabilitating 82 kilometers of the Manila North Expressway,
Southeast Asia's oldest toll road, in collaboration with IFC and ADB. Since January 2000, MIGA
has also been providing technical assistance to the Board of Investment (the lead agency for
investment promotion), under the Miyazawa initiative. It has also assisted other key national and
regional entities (Bases Conversion Development Authority, Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority,
Clark Development Corporation, Philippine Export Zone Authority; regional investment promotion
entities, and other units of the Department of Trade and Industry) in developing the capacity to
promote the Philippines as a location for foreign direct investment and to adopt the techniques
needed to compete effectively regionally and globally.

B. 

FINDINGS OF THE QUALITY ASSURANCE GROUP AND THE OPERATIONS EVALUATION

DEPARTMENT

2.8 
The 1999 CAS, prepared right after an Operations Evaluation Department Country
Assistance Review, 8 incorporated its recommendations-specifically, sharpened focus on poverty, a
new rural strategy and program, more emphasis on the financial sector, inclusion of judicial reform,
and enhanced partnership with ODA partners and civil society.

2.9 

Since then, trend analysis of quality indicators over the last three fiscal years by the
Operations Evaluation Department and the Quality Assurance Group indicates that the quality of
Philippine "products" has been mostly at par with or better than the Bank's averages (Annex B2),
especially regarding quality at entry, Bank supervision performance, and quality of economic and
sector work. However, these reviews repeatedly brought out a number of issues, in particular, (i) the
need to assess institutional capacity realistically before project start-up and to avoid complex and
overly ambitious projects and those out of sync with existing laws or institutional structures; (ii) the
importance of quality at entry; (iii) the need for better financial management, procurement, and
logistics capacity and for outcome-focused monitoring and evaluation especially at LGU level; and
(iv) the need for better coordination between LGUs and national agencies.

sWorld Bank. Philippines: Country Assistance Review, Report No.17417 Washington: (World Bank, Operations
Evaluation Department, March 2, 1998).

- 14-

C. 

CLIENT AND COUNTRY TEAM SURVEYS

2.10 As planned in the 1999 CAS, the Bank carried out a new client survey in 2001

complemented by interviews with a few selected individuals who have been involved in Bank-
assisted activities for at least four years. The Bankc has complemented this for the first time by a
country team survey in an effort to uncover any differences in the Bank's and its clients' perceptions
of the Bank's services.

2.11 
The client survey was administered to the Bank's broad clientele in the Philippines, including
representatives of government oversight and implementing agencies and nongovernmental
representatives (NGOs, private sector, donor community, and other). Survey results showed that
these clients have a relatively positive view of their interactions with Bank staff in terms of
reliability, honesty, technical competence, and clarity of communications. The Bank's partnership
with government in formulating and implementing the assistance strategy was seen as particularly
effective. In addition, stakeholders reported that the Bank collaborated well with government, civil
society, and the private sector. However, the survey also identified a few critical areas where the
Bank was seen as less effective than in other areas: achieving poverty reduction, building capacity at
community level, and providing practical recommrrendations through nonlending services. The Bank
could also do more in terms of helping government obtain synergy between private and public
investments. Finally, the qualitative indepth interviews show that the Bank is improving in terms of
the way it communicates with stakeholders and that its decentralization to the field office is viewed
quite positively by stakeholders and partners becatuse it has eased access.,

2.12 
The country team survey showed that the Bank team's perception was accurate with regard to
the evaluation of some aspects of its support. However, the client survey made the team more aware
of some areas of limited effectiveness. These areals are now being addressed forcefully in this CAS.

D. 

KEY LESSONS EMERGING FOR FUTURE ASSISTANCE

2.13 

The Bank draws the following conclusions from the past three years' experience:

* The Bank effectively changed processes and demonstrated that it is a partner of the country, as
well as the government, as its client.

* The Bank helped increase country ownership of the development assistance program (through
the participatory CAS process, joint prograrrmming exercises, joint ODA portfolio reviews, and
country chairmanship of the Consultative Group).

* The focus of the Bank's work was relevant and appreciated by the client who continues to seek
the Bank's services.

* Progress is noteworthy in many areas, but achievements in terms of development outcomes fell
well short of the Bank's expectations in many sectors. The Bank was too ambitious and not
realistic enough regarding the difference it can make given other constraints. It also needs to
continue to improve ways of monitoring and evaluating results and measuring development
outcomes.

* The Bank improved several portfolio performance indicators, but at the cost of cancellations,
and was overly optimistic regarding the Philippines' absorptive and institutional capacity.

- 15 -

* The Bank increased its portfolio management efforts substantially, but, in hindsight, it needs to
give further attention to implementation issues.

2.14 

The Bank sees thefollowing key lessons emergingfor itsfuture activities:

* Reduce expectations for a high volume of new lending for regular investment projects in the
near future and avoid triggering increases in public expenditures beyond a manageable level.

* Reduce project complexity and concentrate on delivery mechanisms that are practical and
effective on the ground.

* Support community-driven poverty reduction programs that give voice to the needs of the poor,
understand how development decisions are made in local communities, and put opportunities
and resources into the hands of the poor.

* Build up management and institutional capacity to carry programs through, focusing more on
project management (by the client), including financial management, procurement, and
monitoring and evaluation.

* Emphasize LGU capacity building and sensitivity to the local election cycle for LGU projects.

* Focus more on the complexity of lending at the LGU level, including expenditure management,
development planning and governance, and capacity building of both provincial and municipal
LGUs in financial and technical areas.

* Emphasize high quality at entry for all operations, including institutional readiness.

* Strengthen outcome-focused monitoring and evaluation in Bank-supported operations and
support government efforts to move toward performance-based systems for monitoring and
evaluation and benchmarking in central and line agencies, LGUs, and civil society.

* Base the Bank's future support to private sector development on an in-depth assessment of
areas for possible effective support by IBRD, IFC and MIGA.

3. BANK ROLE AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES IN THE PHILIPPINES FOR
FY2003-05

A. 

THE COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROCESS

3.1 
The process followed in preparing this CAS built on earlier consultations, both during
preparation and implementation of the 1999 CAS. It included several multistakeholder consultation
meetings on various aspects of the proposed strategy-both sectoral and thematic-to bring out the
views of both government (national and local) and nongovernment participants (private sector, civil
society, and labor). It also included a retreat between the country team and government on the
proposed strategic direction. The draft CAS was reviewed with government and will be published
after Board discussion (see Annex G for details on consultation process).

- 16-

3.2 
The consultations brought out that poor governance, weak implementation capacity, and
related issues in project implementation were hindering development. On the macroeconomic side,
fiscal and financial sector weaknesses were key areas of concern. High costs of doing business,
stemming from inadequate infrastructure, high transport costs, and difficult access to microfinance
were affecting private sector development. Capacity building for LGUs, participation of civil society
and local communities, synchronization of services from different levels of government, and need for
closer attention to cross-cutting issues of population management, gender issues, governance, and
empowerment of the poor, were some of the key issues identified in consultations on human and
urban development. A specific consultation meeting on good and effective governance focused on
the areas of local governance, public sector reforrn, procurement, financial management, and the
judiciary and pointed to the need for'clear, less fragmented rules and regulations, participation of
stakeholders, and improving systems of oversight, monitoring, evaluation, and accountability.

B. 

BANK STRATEGY

3.3 
The Bank's objective for the next three years will be to assist the Philippine government to
reestablish a pattern of rapid and sustained poverty reduction. This will require actions both to
speed up growth and to empower the poor to participate more fully in development. To help
achieve more rapid growth, the Bank plans to help the Philippine government ensure that the key
building blocks for sustained growth-increased investment and productivity in both the private and
public sectors-are firmly in place. This involves supporting the government's efforts to (i)
strengthen fiscal policy by improving the tax effort and public expenditure management and by
containing contingent liabilities; (ii) address banking vulnerabilities, and deepen the capital market;
(iii) enhance competitiveness through trade and regulatory reforms, especially in agriculture,
services, and small and medium enterprise development; (iv) raise productivity by alleviating key
infrastructure bottlenecks; and (v) improve governance in both the public and corporate sectors.

3.4 
To support national efforts to empower the poor to participate more fully in development, the
Bank's assistance will focus on (a) improving investments in human resources (education and health)
and ensuring access by the poor; (b) the efficient provision of other basic services such as shelter,
clean water and adequate sanitation, and rural infrastructure; (c) increasing access to productive
assets such as land, technical extension services, and credit; (d) strengthening the organizational and
financial capacity of the poor so they can act for themselves; and (e) improving programs to protect
the environment and natural resource base so thatl these vital resources can be sustained over time.
Strengthening the sustainability of resource management and improvements in governance will be
important for these two major pillars of the Bank's assistance program. 9

3.5 
This two-part strategy links directly with the four-part framework of the Philippine
government's updated MTPDP-namely, macro economic stability and equitable growth,
environmentally sustainable rural development, comprehensive human development, and good
and effective governance (Table 3-1). To facilitate effective partnership with government, the
components of this assistance program will hereafter be discussed throughout this CAS in terms of
these four parts of the MTPDP. Annex B9 provides a CAS program matrix of the Bank's proposed
strategies in each of the four areas. But the fundamental strategy remains one of increased growth
and increased participation of stakeholders in development to speed up poverty reduction.

9 See Annex F for alignment of the Bank Group's strategy vith corporate priorities.

- 17 -

Table 3-1 Linking the Bank's Assistance Strategy with the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan

MTPDP theme 

Achieve more rapid sustained growth 

Empower the poor to Increase their participation in

I. Macroeconomic 
stability and 
equitable growth 
based on free 
enterprise. 

2. Environmentally 
sustainable rural 
development with 
social equity. 

* 

* 

Strengthen fiscal policy by improving 
tax effort and containing contingent 
liabilities 
* Deal with banking sector problems and 
deepen capital markets 
Improve the investment climate and 
enhance competitiveness, especially in
agriculture, services and small and
medium enterprises
* Alleviate infrastructure bottlenecks
* Enhance agriculture sector 
competitiveness and productivity 
Support a decentralized, devolved, and 
deregulated system for providing 
agriculture and natural resource 
management services to ensure
accountability and sustainability of
project assistance
Protect the environment and natural 
resource base 

* 

* 

3. Comprehensive 
human development 
through access to 
basic social services. 

4. Good and effective 
governance 

* Enhance LGU technical implementation 
capabilities at provincial, municipal and 
barangay levels 

* 

* 

* 

Improve human resources to strengthen 
workplace skills and international 
competitiveness 

Improve governance in both the public 
and private sectors to help rebuild 
investor confidence and improve 
investment efficiency
Increase confidence in the rule of law 
and in the judiciary in particular, 

through judicial reforms

* 

* 

* 

* 

development

Increase access to productive assets such as land,
technical extension services and credit
Increase assistance to LGUs to empower and
capacitate them to effectively and adequately help
their constituents-urban and rural poor
communities

Implement community-based rural development and
natural resource management approaches
Focus on the poor in development program and
target poorer regions, especially Mindanao and the
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao

* 

* 

* Ensure the participation, benefits, and ownership of
local stakeholders in and management of the
environment and natural resources
Scale up the Land Administration and Management
Program and rural credit and expand microcredit to
encourage rural investment, especially by the poor
Improve investments in human resources (education
and health) and ensure access by the poor
* Provide other basic services efficiently (e.g., shelter,
water supply, and sanitation) and ensure their
environmental sustainability
Improve governance to strengthen service delivery
Improve local governance through capacity
enhancement of local institutions

* 

* 

* 

Improve access to justice and confidence in the
judiciary.

3.6 
The strategy builds on the directions set in the last CAS, taking an integrated approach to
development that balances macroeconomic with structural, human, and physical development
needs, andfollows the four principles of the Comprehensive Development Framework. First, a

long-term vision remains the basis for this strategy, building on the government's medium-term plan
which, in turn, describes the actions needed to achieve the country's long-term goals as expressed in
its Plan 21 (para. 1.6). The Bank's strategy incorporates a programmatic approach, both through
Adaptable Program Loans in selected subsectors, a series of adjustment loans in support of structural

- 18-

change, and a more thematic approach to nonlending services. Second, country ownership is strong,
not only within government but also within civil society organizations, which both government and
the Bank have consulted extensively-government as part of its institutionalized broad consultation
process in the preparation of its plan, and the Bank during both implementation of the 1999 CAS and
the preparation of this one. The Philippine government has increasingly taken more ownership,
particularly in the aid coordination process, through chairmanship of the Consultative Group with the
Bank as co-chairman. Third, strategic partnerships among stakeholders, including civil society
organizations, the private sector, and donors, have -developed over recent years and are expected to
grow stronger under government leadership. (Details on partnerships are described in para. 3.68.)
Fourth, the CAS focuses on accountability for results in two ways: it supports strengthening the
government's focus on results as a tool for improved governance (paras. 3.47-3.48) and it links the
Bank's assistance to the government's strategy and relevant targets (including Millennium
Development Goals) where targets are quantified (para. 3.77 and CAS Program Matrix in Annex
B9).

C. 

BANK'S ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

1. 

Macroeconomic Stability and Equitable Growth Based on Free Enterprise

3.7 
This CAS continues to support the government's policy and institutional reform agenda
and investments to promote equitable growth. Several current diagnostic reports point to the

following key development challenges in this regard:10

3.8 

(a) Macroeconomic stability and soundfiscal management. The Bank's assistance will

include a stronger focus on several key aspects of public finance and public sector management: (i)
increasing tax revenues; (ii) containing contingent liabilities arising from government guarantees in
the context of infrastructure projects, pension obligations and the banking system; (iii) improving
public expenditure and financial management; (iv) reducing debt servicing as a share of government
revenue to increase fiscal flexibility; (v) civil service reform to professionalize it and improve service
delivery at both local and national government levels; and (vi) strengthening subnational level budget
planning and its link with national priorities, procurement and financial management capabilities, and
monitoring. The national government's very limited discretionary spending constrains its ability to
fund key social and economic services. The Bank plans to support the government's efforts to
address these problems with a combination of adjustment lending and nonlending services, including
capacity building through strategic use of the Institutional Development Fund. In FY03, this capacity
building effort will focus first on the Bureau of Internal Revenue and on the implementation of
procurement reforms and then on broad civil service reform. The IMF has been providing advice and
technical assistance in areas such as tax policy, monetary policy, and exchange rate management and
is expected to continue to do so.

3.9 
(b) Financial resiliency. In the banking sector, legal constraints limit Bangko Sentral
Pilipinas' regulatory and enforcement authority in key areas. Ownership of the bulk of banking assets
by a few corporate conglomerates may constrain lending to small and unconnected enterprises, and
the predominance of large interconnected corporations in banking may limit the effectiveness of
regulatory supervision. On the legal side, the Anti-Money Laundering Act was approved in
September 2001 and Implementing Rules and Regulations have since been approved. In March 2002,

 Public Expenditure, Procurement and Financial Management Review and the Financial Sector Assessment Program,
both in preparation; Philippines Development Policy Review, 2002.

- 19 -

the Lower House approved the Special Purpose Asset Vehicle (SPAV) act of 2002, so efforts are
underway to facilitate the disposition and reduction of nonperforming loans. In this, the Philippines
has eschewed a centralized public asset management company model, preferring an approach that
authorizes the creation of SPAVs, which will enjoy certain tax exemptions for a limited period to
address the nonperforming asset problem of the financial sector and help in the rehabilitation of
distressed businesses. The Bank's focus will be on assisting the authorities in developing a consensus
on the need for further legislative reform that would (i) facilitate rapid intervention in and resolution
of distressed banks; (ii) provide stronger protection to bank regulators from litigation; (iii) promote
ownership reforms to stimulate competition; (iv) address weaknesses in the legal enforceability of
contracts; (v) further develop the effectiveness of consolidated supervision; and (vi) help ensure the
effective implementation of the Anti-Money Laundering Act. Enhanced management of the
contractual savings system to limit contingent liabilities and strengthen the system's viability are also
of high priority. The IBRD plans a combination of program lending, advisory work, and technical
assistance to help the Philippine government address these issues together with other development
partners. To make the banking sector more resilient, IFC would assist in strengthening the capital
base and operational capacity of financial institutions, in consolidating the banking system and
building of specialized institutions to reduce nonperforming loans.

3.10 
The government is promoting the passage of capital market bills to accelerate development of
the domestic capital market. These include the Securitization Act of 2002 providing the regulatory
and tax framework governing the issuance and sale of asset backed securities, the Personal Equity
Retirement Account Act of 2002 providing tax incentives for voluntary retirement savings options,
and the Revised Investment Company Act, which will provide a more conducive environment to the
development of the Philippine mutual fund industry, while at the same time addressing the concerns
about the adequacy of investor protection. IFC's strategy for the nonbank financial sector focuses on
(i) developing the local currency bond market; (ii) expanding the pool of contractual savings for
mobilization of long-term financing; and (iii) reforming the housing finance and social security
system to make them more efficient vehicles for capital market development and domestic long-term
savings mobilization.

3.11 
(c) Investment climate and international competitiveness. IBRD and IFC have jointly
prepared a Private Sector Strategy (Annex H) built around three themes:

(i) 

(ii) 

Support government and the private sector to improve the business environment. This
includes assisting the private sector in the development of a national corporate governance
action program for the corporate, banking, and securities market sectors; capacity upgrading
in the judicial sector, especially regarding insolvency law and related commercial issues;
eliminating investment impediments in the trade regime, competition laws, and business
regulations at LGU level; and leveling the playing field for small and medium enterprises.

Support efforts to increase domestic resource mobilization and availability of long-term
credit. This includes support and capacity building to strengthen the framework for financial
market regulation; support for microfinance institutions; support to expand the role of
nonbank financial and contractual savings institutions; and direct investment support through
use of new financial instruments (such as asset securitization, mortgage financing, and
guarantee instruments).

(iii) 

Support infrastructure deepening through enhanced private sector participation, including
financial and capacity-building support for LGUs. This includes completing the regulatory

- 20 -

reform agenda especially at LGU level, using concepts like output-based aid and competitive
bidding for long-term maintenance contracts and innovative IFC investments.

3.12 
The Bank will provide policy analysis and technical assistance in improving the business
climate, financial market development, and framework for enhancing private participation in
infrastructure. IBRD investment projects will focus on sectoral policy reforms that increase private
investments in rural areas and in infrastructure. To enhance competition and growth of small and
medium enterprise, an important priority is the rernoval of hurdles to accessing finance, information
and technology, and skills needed to compete with the large firms dominating the economy. Toward
this end, IFC has been focusing on investing in intermediaries specialized in lending to small and
medium enterprises, on the establishment of ventures to provide small and medium enterprises with
quick and affordable access to internet and e-commerce services, and on investing more outside the
Manila area, especially in poorer regions.

3.13 With multiple national and subnational institutions and organizations, the Board of
Investment and other key agencies have expressed interest in developing a coordinated approach.
This is consistent with the government's strategy as outlined in the MTPDP. MIGA and the Foreign
Investment Advisory Service are prepared to provide assistance to the investment board and other
organizations in defining and implementing a coordinated strategy for foreign direct investment in
the Philippines, including possible strengthening of the strategic and operational coordination
between the various investment promotion agencies, provided that funding is available.

3.14 

(d) Infrastructure improvements. IBRD lending in infrastructure would remain highly

selective, focusing on the rural power sector, roads subsector, rural infrastructure such as irrigation,
marketing infrastructure, and water and sanitation facilities. IFC's approach is to finance projects
with a high demonstration-effect potential, whose success would help reduce investor perceptions of
risk in the sector.

(i) 

(ii) 

The key challenges to address in the power sector are the government's high level of
contingent liabilities on one side and inadequate rural electrification on the other. The Bank
proposes to continue its engagement in the dialogue on power sector restructuring and
privatization of the National Power Corporation, together with other ODA partners, with
ADB taking the lead in public lending. IBRD lending and technical assistance will focus on
the rural power sector. IFC had been active in financing pioneering power projects under
build-operate-transfer schemes.

In the transport sector, the key challenges are persistent bottlenecks and high transport costs,
especially for shipping, which inhibit economic growth. Road upgrading and rehabilitation
and improved maintenance are urgently needed and will continue to command the largest
share of Bank assistance in the sector. The Bank will focus on national roads (as part of an
ongoing Adaptable Program Loan). Farm-to-market roads are managed at the LGU level,
where other ODA partners are more involved, but small investments are included in Bank-
supported rural development projects. The Bank's planned involvement in transport would
not extend beyond the roads subsector and analytical work on shipping costs, unless
government accelerates reforms in the other subsectors such as ports and railways. IFC has
recently been involved in toll roads (Manila Tollways project involving expansion,
rehabilitation, and maintenance of the North Luzon Expressway) and airports (construction of
a new passenger terminal at Manila airport).

- 21 -

(iii) 

(iv) 

In the water and sanitation sector, IBRD will continue to support LGUs in less urbanized
areas, which are beginning to access loans for water supply investments, with demonstrated
willingness to pay by residents and active private sector responses to bids solicited by LGUs.
The focus is on improving water utilities' efficiency and accountability to consumers;
deepening private sector participation through new approaches such as output-based aid; and
leveraging local resources for private financial flows into the sector. IBRD will continue and
possibly expand its support to improve sewerage and sanitation management in Metropolitan
Manila. It will also continue the dialogue on corporate restructuring of Local Water Utilities
Administration and water sector regulation. IFC's recent involvement in water supply has
included advisory assistance to the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System
privatization. IFC is currently looking at a project to finance the Manila Water Company's
capital investment program.

In view of the Philippines' high urbanization, with growth sectors concentrated around urban
areas, the efficiency of urban services and the quality of urban life will directly determine the
country's investment climate. The deteriorating quality of the urban environment and
services in major Philippine cities is hurting the economy's competitiveness. The IBRD will
support the efforts of cities and municipalities to enhance their competitiveness and livability
by promoting investment in, for example, drainage, solid waste and wastewater treatment,
and air quality management to improve the urban environment. It will also promote better
urban governance and municipal entrepreneurship in local economic development by
supporting comprehensive city development strategies.

2. 

Environmentally Sustainable Rural Development with Social Equity

3.15 
Poverty pervades rural areas, remote upland areas, and indigenous populations,
exacerbated ty population pressures on the declining natural resource base. Broad-based rural
development and management of the natural resources, thefoundations of sustainable rural
livelihoods, are core elements of the Bank's assistance to the Philippines. In the 2003-05 CAS
period, the Bank will emphasize the following goals, to stimulate broader growth and enable
participation in development:

3.16 
(a) To put the rural sector on a higher growth path, the declining competitiveness of
Philippine agriculture must be reversed. Policy and institutional adjustments are needed to create
an incentive framework for market-led growth and to stimulate private sector investment in
agriculture. These are made all the more urgent as the Philippines adjusts to the phasing-in of trade
liberalization under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the World Trade Organization
by 2004. The government's traditional focus on rice and corn production has meant that inadequate
attention has been given to tapping small farmers' potential to develop diversified and
commercialized production systems. The opportunities from globalization of agricultural markets are
therefore not being captured. The needed stimuli include: reduced protection for rice, corn, and
sugar; streamlined institutional and regulatory procedures; inter-island shipping reforms; further
development of rural credit and microfinance; provision of market infrastructure including farm-to-
market roads; improved effectiveness of agricultural research and extension services for
diversification and higher productivity; and increases in the volume and effectiveness of funding for
investment in badly needed rural infrastructure. Several ongoing Bank-financed operations and the
planned Diversified Farm Income and Agricultural Modernization project will contribute to the
government's ongoing efforts in these areas, as outlined in the Agriculture and Fisheries
Modernization Act of 1997. The Philippine government emphasizes that reciprocity in trade

- 22 -

liberalization by developed countries will be equally important for the Philippines' future
competitiveness.

3.17 
(b) Several planned interventions (the Agrarian Reform Communities Development
Program [ARCDPJ 2, ARMMSocial Fund, and Kapitbisig Laban sa Kahirapan [K4LAHII
projects) will build on existing programs that involve community-driven approaches to rural
development and natural resource management I(e.g., the ongoing national ARCDP, and the
Southern Mindanao Zone for Peace and Economic Development [SZOPAD] Social Fund project).
The Bank will also pilot further initiatives in microfinance, in community-based resource
management, and in the Land Administration and Management Program (LAMP), involving titling
of land and security of tenure for poor farmers ancl also ensuring their responsiveness to gender-
balance needs. LAMP can be scaled up to a national program after piloting demonstrates replicable
models and the government establishes the legal and institutional basis. The community-based
projects should reach the poor-men, women, indigenous peoples, and people in remote villages-so
as to involve them in the development process. The participatory process can also help ensure
sustainability through community ownership and management and community pressure to raise
standards of public and private services, as well as build the enabling environment for peace in
conflict-affected areas.

3.18 
(c) At the same time, Bank programs will be designed to better involve LGUs in the
development process and cultivate effective partnerships of national and local governments,
community stakeholders, the private sector, NGOs, and the academic community. This is a
particular challenge, as many LGUs, though institutionally still weak, are responsible for much of the
now decentralized rural development process. The Mindanao Rural Development Adaptable Program
Loan, implemented primarily by provincial and municipal LGUs, emphasizes this approach. Other
national government projects such as the Local Government Finance and Development project also
aim at strengthening LGUs' capacities in implementation of development projects. To ensure
sustainability, new Bank-financed operations will be based on careful analysis of the roles of
different levels of govemment and community organizations in the decentralized development
process.

3.19 
(d) Programs will continue to focus on natural resource management, as the declining
resource base-land, forest, watersheds and river basins, and coastal habitats-threatens not just the
environment but the very welfare of rural people and the sustainability of their livelihoods. Further
analytical work is planned on natural resource management issues. In addition to the ongoing
Community Based Resource Management project and community-based coastal marine biodiversity
conservation program in Mindanao, two projects are under preparation: the Laguna de Bay project
(FY02 Learning and Innovation Loan) and the River Basin Development project, which will pilot
water and watershed management in selected basins as a step toward protection, conservation, and
further replication.

3.20 
(e) Leveraging the Bank's resources through partnership with government and ODA
partners is an attempt to magnify the impact of support. Noteworthy examples are the national
ARCDP involving more than a dozen ODA partners, the Mindanao program below, and the likely
LAMP program. Partnerships with government and ODA partners in lending and nonlending
activities such as the National Economic Development Authority's rural sector performance
benchmarking program will likely enable a much larger impact than the Bank's resources alone
could achieve.

-23 -

3.21 
6/ Regional development for particularly impoverished regions is needed, with the primary
focus at this time on Mindanao (see also paras. 3.42-3.43). Further to the Philippine government's
request, particular effort will be put here through the Mindanao-dedicated projects and the Mindanao
components of a number of other projects. This will be complemented with substantial nonlending
support to the Mindanao Task Force, the ARMM govermnent, and improved coordination of the
donor-assisted programs.

3. 

Comprehensive Human Development through Access to Basic Social Services in
Education, Health, Social Protection, Shelter, Water Supply, and Sanitation

3.22 A large proportion of the Philippine population is still without opportunities for basic human
development. The Bank will support government efforts to improve access for the poor to basic
social services through ongoing and planned projects. To accomplish this, it will continue its long-
standing support to strengthen the delivery of social services in the most needy areas. These "supply-
side" interventions will be complemented with pilot "demand-side" measures that would target
public funds to needy families to enable them to benefit from social services. In light of government
agencies' weak implementation record on Bank-financed projects in the social sectors, especially
project management and procurement, the Bank will focus on helping government improve the
performance of social sector agencies and public sector providers, building on successful government
programs. To improve the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditures, Bank support aims to
consolidate ongoing improvements in financial management and procurement, initiate reforms in
resource allocation, and enhance performance of decentralized and devolved public social services. It
attempts to strengthen accountability by promoting community participation in identifying priorities
for social programs and in implementing them. In every aspect of the human development program,
Bank support will reflect the gender concerns identified in the earlier Bank work on gender (Box 3-
1).

3.23 
(a) In the education sector, planned Bank activities will help address deficiencies in the
quality of education, fill skill shortages and meet emerging training needs. Project activities will help
ongoing efforts to simplify the basic curriculum, increase the textbook-student ratio, and improve
teacher performance through better pre- and in-service training. The Bank is also helping the
Department of Education improve the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditures through
better teacher deployment and management. The main unmet Millennium Development Goals in the
area of education is retention of students in schools. A number of interventions are thus being
implemented to reduce the high drop-out rates, especially in the first six grades, including expanded
pre-school education and a special curriculum for the first eight weeks of Grade 1. Alternatives to
formal education for out-of-school youth will also be explored through a possible Learning and
Innovation Loan, building on the gains of the government's Nonformal Education Project (1 994-
2001) in terms of learning scope, assessment methodologies and accreditation, and equivalency
schemes. IFC is also looking to support projects for private provision of education services.

- 24 -

Box 3-1 Philippines Gender Profile and Strategy

A Country Gender Profile and Strategy was prepared in 1999. In consultations with government and civil society, the following
gender-related priorities were identified: eliminating violence against women and children, mainstreaming gender in governance,
promoting reproductive health, and supporting workers in the informal sector.

Regarding violence against women and children, President Arroyo recently certified two bills as urgent: the Anti-Trafficking Bill,
which seeks to institute policies to eliminate the trafficking in persons especially women and minors, and the Domestic Violence
Bill, which defines domestic violence and seeks to protect victims and set penalties for violators. The Department of Social
Welfare and Development provides emergency services and rehabilitative care to women in especially difficult circumstances. A
Women's Help Desk hotline provides counseling and temporary shelter. The Bank, through its Social Expenditure Management
Project (SEMP), has supported these programs. Today, although the government is in a better position to deal with these issues
than it was two years ago, violence against women and children nonetheless emerged as a key gender concern across sectors
during consultations for this Country Assistance Strategy.

The mainstreaming of gender in govemance recently received a boost with the release of two memorandum circulars to guide the
development of agency and local government unit Gender and Development Plans.0 However, reporting on the designated use of
5 percent of agency and local goverrnment unit budgets for gender and development activities has been sketchy, and these
activities are often not grounded on real gender needs. For the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women, therefore,
the challenge is still to provide technical assistance to agencies and local govermment units in the preparation and
operationalization of their gender and development plans.

Regarding reproductive health (including matemal health and nutrition, access to family planning, reproductive tract infections,
and sexually transmitted illnesses), the Bank has supported various govemment initiatives in the areas of women's health and
integrated matemal and child health, through its Women's Health and Safe Motherhood project as well as through the Urban
Health and Nutrition project. It has helped build, renovate and equip health facilities, stock health units with much-needed drugs,
and train local health workers. The Philippines' matemal mortality rate remains unacceptably high, however, and access to family
planning is still lacking or difficult

Under this CAS, the Bank will continue its support for activities to counter violence against women and children through SEMP.
It will also seek grant funding for a consortium involving government and nongovernmental organizations that will provide
subgrants for studies of this type of violence and projects in identified high-incidence areas across the country. With respect to
mainstreaming gender in govemance, the Bank will seek to mobilize funds to strengthen the capacity of the National
Commission on the Role of Filipino Women to provide technical assistance to agencies and local govemment units by enhancing
the capabilities of its staff, establishing internal mechanisms, and developing a range of technical assistance packages for
agencies and local govemment units. The national commission has submitted a project concept to the Bank as a first step toward
the development of a full-blown technical assistance package.

Initial thinking is also underway for a project to support the govermnent's population management program under a follow-on
Women's Health and Safe Motherhood project. The fourth gender-related priority identified-support for workers in the informal
sector, remains an important challenge. This area is being covered by the Intemational Labor Organization through its various
projects in the country.

a/ "Guidelines to Implement Gender Mainstreaming and Institutionalization in the Existing Agency's Programs, Activities, and Projects," DBM-

NEDA-National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women (NCRFW) Joint Circular No. 2001-1, August 15,2001; and "Guidelines for

Integrating Gender and Development in the Local Planning and Budgeting System Through the Formulation of GAD Plans," DILG-DBM-
NCRFW Joint Memorandum Circular No. 2001-01, December 19,22001.

3.24 
(b) In the health sector, the Bank will participate in efforts by the Department of Health to
organize international donor assistance under the- umbrella of its Health Sector Reform Agenda
(HSRA). Its reform program will introduce the live components of the HSRA-health insurance,
local health systems development, hospital development, public health services, and health regulation
(especially for very costly drugs)-in a limited number of convergence sites, with particular attention
to ensuring improved access for the poor. In addition, the Bank will continue support for health and

nutrition interventions to enhance physical and mental development of children ages 0 to 6 years.

- 25 -

3.25 
(c) While government struggles to protect and maintain social services on its limited budget,
the high population growth rate continues to exacerbate the difficulties by increasing the numbers
needing to be served, undermining hard-won gains in human development. High population growth
substantially cuts into the income gains from rural and urban economic growth. In addition, high
fertility rates constrain possibilities for achieving more significant gains in women's health or their
children's health. The Bank plans to provide support to revitalize the Philippine Population
Management Program, based on the principle of free choice and full information for couples, and to
implement the government's recently issued Population Policy.

3.26 
(d) Social protection of vulnerable groups will continue to be a growth area for Bank
assistance. The Bank will continue to help enhance the performance of Community Development
Workers who help parents obtain integrated early childhood development services (pre-school
services, health, nutrition and parent-support services). It also plans to help develop a pilot income-
support system for the poorest families conditional on their children's regular school attendance and
participation in critical social services. It will also help mobilize grant funding to support government
and NGO programs to reduce violence against women and children.

3.27 
(e) A high proportion of the urban poor do not have access to shelter and basic urban
services. Most do not have titles to the properties they own and often have little means to support
their livelihood. The Bank plans to support programs that provide assistance to poor urban
communities through acquisition of secured titles, financing for shelter improvement, upgrades of
community-driven basic infrastructure (e.g., water supply, sanitation, electricity, and waste
collection), and livelihood support. The Bank's assistance in the water and sanitation sector (para.
3.14) will also try to expand services to low-income local government units. In rural areas, the Bank
will support the government's efforts in rural electrification, as well as investments, through
community-based approaches under Bank-financed rural development projects, in village water
supply and sanitation.

3.28 
(f) Community-based Social Services. Many cultural, economic, and political barriers prevent
the poor from participating in development activities. To better reach the poor, the Bank's planned
program emphasizes various investments in human capital (e.g., education and health, improved
participatory processes) and investments in social capital (e.g., strong local organizations for agrarian
reform beneficiaries, indigenous peoples, service providers that cater to the poor, and local-level
institutions. These activities will be carried out, for example, through the Mindanao Rural
Development Program and the forthcoming ARMM Social Fund project. The Bank's most
significant effort to promote community-participation in development will be through support for
community-based development efforts planned and executed from the bottom-up under the new
KALAHI project" and in the ongoing Agrarian Reform Communities Development Program, and its
planned follow-on project.

4. 

Good and Effective Governance

3.29 
The Bank's strategies to promote good and effective governance will focus on: (a) keeping a
tight 'firewall " against graft and corruption in Bank-financed operations and rigorously pursuing
any allegations of wrong-doing; (b) improving citizen's access to information, promoting civil
society participation in the budget process, and institutionalizing citizen feedback on quality and

" "Kapitbisig Laban sa Kahirapan" "[Linking Arms against Poverty]"-the poverty reduction framework of the new
administration.

- 26 -

access to government services; (c) strengthening public sector rules and capacity (judicial reform,
civil service reform, procurement, financial management, environmental management), such as to
enforce procurement and anticorruption legislation; and (d) promoting policy and regulatory reforms
to promote competition and good corporate governance. Building on past practice and experience,
the Bank will work closely with other ODA partners and local stakeholders to push for these
improvements in governance.

3.30 
(a) Preventing corruption in Bank-financed operations. Key to this will be careful
assessment of the borrower's project-management capacity (planning, monitoring, evaluation,
procurement, and financial management) both at the national and LGU-levels, and strict enforcement
of the anticorruption provisions of the Bank's procurement and auditing guidelines. The Bank's
strategy foresees technical assistance and training for implementing-agency staff to strengthen their
management capabilities. One thorough, annual, ex-post review per project will be conducted, with
additional independent procurement audits as needed.

3.31 
(b) Civil society participation. Measures to increase the information available to the public
on the nature, extent, causes, remedies, and location of corruption play a crucial role in combating
corruption. The Bank's assistance will, therefore, include support for promoting efforts to increase
transparency and feedback among beneficiaries of government services; civil society involvement in
design, delivery, and monitoring of development projects; civil society-based monitoring of the
government procurement process; and activities to enhance public awareness. In addition to the
participation of NGOs in bid opening and evaluation in main national agencies and in LGUs, the
Bank will also engage the participation of various concerned LGU leagues (e.g., League of Barangay
Captains, League of Mayors, League of Governors).

3.32 
(c) Strengthening the public sector. Addressing issues of structural reforms in the civil
service, public expenditure management, and revenue mobilization are critical over the CAS period.
Bank's support will be a blend of generic across-the-board actions and targeted initiatives for
selected institutions or government departments. T he main building blocks for judicial sector reforms
and financial management and procurement reforms were put in place under the 1999 CAS, and this
assistance will be continued at a much accelerated pace during this CAS period. Diagnostic analysis
undertaken as part of preparation for the proposed Judicial Reform Support Loan identified key
needs-systems reforms, human resource development, and institutional infrastructure and integrity
strengthening-to address concerns about case decongestion, to reduce corruption, and broaden
access to justice. These problems are being addressed in the Philippines judicial reform program with
support from development partners, including the Asian Development Bank, Australia, Canada,
Japan, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United States, and the World Bank.

3.33 
The Commission on Audit (COA) started, in January 2002, the implementation of a New
Government Accounting System in all government entities. The commission is working on the
computerized version to move toward a government integrated financial management information
system. The main agreements with government in the context of the ongoing Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (CFAA)12 are to: (i) establish an inter-agency committee to take charge of
the comptrollership function; (ii) design an Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual for the new
accounting system; (iii) restructure COA, specifically its audit function, and gradually move toward
risk-based auditing; (iv) introduce peer review of COA; and (v) restructure the Bureau of Local
Government Finance to play a focal role in LGU financial management. The initial agreements with

12 A component of the Public Expenditure, Procurement, and Financial Management Review (PEPFMR).

- 27 -

government in the context of the ongoing Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR)'3 are to:
(i) promote passage of the Procurement Bill (under discussion in the Senate and Congress) to
consolidate and improve rules and regulations for national agencies and LGUs; (ii) professionalize
the procurement function at national and decentralized levels; and (iii) create a procurement entity to
oversee the quality of the procurement function in govermment agencies. An Institutional
Development Fund grant was mobilized recently to support these procurement reforms.

3.34 
(d) Policy and regulatory reforms. These reforms are vital for improving the investment
climate in the Philippines. IBRD and IFC will support improvement in corporate governance by
providing further policy analysis and technical assistance to heighten public understanding of
corporate governance programs and promote activities that increase transparency and accountability
of financial institutions. It will also support the Capital Market Development Council in advocating
legislative reforms to improve bankruptcy law, strengthen creditors' rights and protect minority
investors. Both IBRD and IFC have supported the Institute of Corporate Directors to train directors
in good governance, and a diagnostic study in public and private sector accounting and corporate
governance, to identify areas for improvement. They are now working together to develop a national
corporate governance action program to improve governance in the corporate, banking, and securities
market sectors.

5. 

Cross-Cutting Challenges

3.35 Four challenges cut across the above areas, and the Bank's assistance strategy attempts to
address them comprehensively. First, its attempt to help LGUs, broadly defined, deliver public
services more effectively, touches on several aspects of this basic strategy-including fiscal
management, delivery of human resource investments, and agricultural services, management of
municipalities, cultivation of local conditions friendly to private investment, strengthening of local
infrastructure, and governance improvements. Second, it provides assistance to the conflict-affected
region of Mindanao, which has great development potential but poor services. To build sustainable
peace and development, the island needs assistance to promote local economic growth and to involve
local people in these activities. Third, it attempts to ensure environmental sustainability so as to
relieve constraints on economic development in rural and urban areas and reduce the threat to social
cohesion posed by unrestricted development. Fourth, it attempts to improve performance monitoring
and evaluation to measure progress with regard to both growth and empowerment of the poor at the
national, local, macroeconomic, and sectoral levels.

(1) Dealing Effectively with Local Government Units and Managing Municipal Development

3.36 
The Local Government Code of 1991 fundamentally shifted the way resources are
administratively andfinancially managed at the regional, municipal, local, and barangay levels.
The code granted substantial financial autonomy and accountability to the LGUs and decentralized to
them functions directly affecting them. A substantial annual transfer of revenues through the Internal
Revenue Allotment formula provides LGUs with core funding to support their enhanced functions.
The LGUs were also authorized to raise revenue through property and other taxes and assume debt as
a means of leveraging their own financial resources to expand their overall investment envelope. By
increasing LGUs' taxing and spending responsibilities, the code resulted in significant fiscal
decentralization.

" Ibid.

- 28 -

3.37 
Improvements are needed, however, to make decentralization more effective. Few LGUs
have stepped up to the opportunities provided by fiscal decentralization-by broadening their local
tax base, setting investment priorities and attracting investments, protecting the environment to
ensure sustainability of development interventions, safeguarding the poor and vulnerable and, more
fundamentally, leveraging the powers vested by the Local Government Code. To finance investment
activities, political leaders rely largely on the substantial Internal Revenue Allotment transfers
instead of raising local taxes. The Internal Revenue Allotment formula itself is biased toward LGUs
with large land areas and populations, rather than the low-income LGUs, which encourages
development around established metropolitan centers.

3.38 
LGUs, though the main players in urban and rural areas, are handicapped by limited technical
capacity. They have the sole mandate to deliver local public services to growing populations, and
their performance is important to attract private investments. Technical capacity in terms of planning,
financial management, and administration is weak at the LGU level. Further, the lack of
collaboration between neighboring municipalities hampers the promotion and coordination of
environmental mitigation and economic activities that benefit an entire region, instead ofjust a
municipality or city administration.

3.39 
The Bank's objectivefor the next three years is to strengthen decentralization and
partnership with LGUs through assistance at both local and national levels to improve rural,
urban, and metropolitan governance. Many Bank-financed operations have LGUs as the

implementing agencies for the subloans, and the Bank foresees that LGUs will continue to be its key
partners in urban and rural development. The three-year term of local governments requires
particular attention in project preparation and implementation, including shortening the processes,
and necessitates national government enforcement of the LGU commitments when elected officials
change.

3.40 

The Bank's assistance at the local level is directed toward promoting better information,
broadening community participation at LGU levels, and ensuring transparent and efficient
procurement practices andfinancial management. These activities complement past and ongoing
government efforts in some related areas. LGUs must introduce better accountability to residents

and better standards for monitoring performance and adopt sound commercial and financial
management practices and reporting principles. T.hese reforms are particularly important if LGUs
seek debt financing for capital investments or have to provide guarantees to private financiers, where
their creditworthiness will depend heavily on the accuracy, interpretation, and strength of their
financial statements. Comprehensive LGU Development Strategy programs (endorsed and approved
by both legislative and executive branches of local governments) and possible follow-up operations
will establish partnership for capacity building with selected LGUs who are committed to better
governance. Localizing budget tracking and performance monitoring by civil society and concerned
citizens will help enhance accountability of LGUs to their constituents. Recently a "LGU Assistance
Portal" was launched in an attempt to improve the information given to LGUs about Bank-supported
products and services.

3.41 At the national level, the Bank will support the national government's efforts to strengthen

the decentralization process. Policy advice would support ongoing efforts to improve the delivery of
basic public services by enhancing LGUs' capacity in areas such as revenue mobilization, planning
and budgeting, personnel management, procurement, financial management, and improved
governance arrangements. Planned nonlending work will also provide guidance on approaches to
strengthen inter-LGU collaboration in metropolitan regions and in geographic areas such as river

- 29 -

basins and watersheds. The Bank will also support national initiatives to publish and benchmark
performance data so as to improve LGU accountability. Policy measures regarding LGU finance
could be addressed in the context of program loans or nonlending assistance.

(2) ProvidingDevelopmentAssistance to Conflict-Affected Areas

3.42 
The Bank's assistance to Mindanao is already significant. Of the Bank's 25 ongoing
financing operations, 18 include components in Mindanao, and 2 of them operate primarily in
Mindanao. Several trust funds also support development efforts as part of post-conflict assistance. A
social assessment now underway is expected to generate important information from Mindanao
stakeholders on their priority development needs.

3.43 
The Bank's proposed strategy has four components. (i) additional lending assistance based
on community-driven approaches working with the LGUs, including new projects as well as
reallocation of funding under existing projects toward Mindanao. For instance, the fast-disbursing
SZOPAD Social Fund project is to be succeeded by the ARMM Social Fund project targeted to the
ARMM area; (ii) continued nonlending assistance through post-conflict funding and trust funds for
microfinance, livelihood, and other projects and for elaboration of a Human Development Strategy
for ARMM; (iii) enhance coordination of Mindanao peace and development work among ODA
partners. Mobilization of additional resources would be contingent in part on the development of a
more detailed investment program for Mindanao based on the framework plan outlined in the
MTPDP and sufficiently peaceful conditions to enable development programs to be implemented.
Moreover, although institutional responsibilities at the Mindanao level for ODA-assisted programs
have been clarified, further clarification is needed at the national level; and (iv) capacity buildingfor
the ARMM and technical assistance in the formulation of a comprehensive ARMM Development
Framework Plan, which will identify the activities and public investments required to support peace
and development in the ARMM. The ARMM is one of the poorest regions in the Philippines,
suffering from endemic armed conflict and inhabited by people from multiethnic and varied religious
backgrounds. In addition to the important welfare impact for the communities in that locality, the
Bank's development-assistance support to Mindanao is expected to have important benefits for law
and order and investor confidence in the Philippines generally, and in Mindanao specifically.

(3) Ensuring Environmental Sustainability

3.44 Unsustainable resource management and environmental quality problems have become a
critical constraint to economic development and social cohesion, necessitating a closer linkage of
environmental strategies with key economic objectives and poverty reduction efforts. Population
increases and poor land-use planning have led to the massive depletion of natural resources and
destruction of the environment. Communities in both rural and urban areas are feeling the effects.
Widespread depletion of land, aquatic, and biological resources has resulted in the continuing loss of
the nation's natural capital base, with particularly severe impact on poorer communities that depend
heavily on natural resources for their welfare and livelihoods. In urban areas, the deterioration of the
quality of air and water has led to serious health and labor-productivity problems. Municipal and
hazardous waste, lack of water supply and sanitation facilities, contamination of surface and ground
water, air pollution, and industrial pollution all combine to jeopardize Filipinos' quality of life.
Similarly, in rural areas, continuous deforestation, uncontrolled soil erosion, and watershed, river
basin, and marine degradation pose major threats to overall agricultural productivity, coastal and
marine resources, sustainable supply of surface and ground water, and the overall sustainability of
the ecosystem.

- 30-

3.45 

The Bank's assistance program includes thefollowing areas of support to promote

environmental sustainability. (i) delivery of safe and reliable drinking water; (ii) affordable and
dependable sanitation, drainage, and solid waste management facilities; (iii) an integrated approach
to watershed management; (iv) advice regarding pollution charges and fiscal and other incentive
mechanisms to improve environmental performance; (v) promotion of nonmotorized transport; and
(vi) use of renewable energy in rural electrification. Projects supporting environmental management
include the Laguna de Bay Learning and Innovation Loan (FY02), the ongoing Community-Based
Resource Management project, Manila Second Sewerage project and possible follow-up, the
proposed River Basin Development project, and Global Environment Fund and Montreal Protocol
projects.

3.46 Environmental governance needs improvement at both national and local levels of
government, which are mandated by law to protect and manage the country's natural resources.

The lack of awareness and slow action on matters related to poor environmental management and its
effects on health and poverty have aggravated the Philippine's economic problems. Current and
planned technical assistance is designed to strengthen: (i) a decentralized, and LGU-oriented
enforcement of environmental laws and standards; (ii) the capacity of national agencies and LGUs to
conduct social and environmental assessments; (iii) the environmental performance-monitoring and
evaluation system of the Philippine Environmental Impact Statement System; (iv) capacities of
LGUs and technical agencies' field offices to protect and manage watersheds, critical protected areas,
and fishing grounds; (v) the environmental units of various agencies such as the Subic Bay
Management Authority, Land Bank, the Department of Public Works and Highways; and (vi) civil
society's participation in advocacy work, promotion of transparent processes of policy formulation
and resource allocation, and provision of third-party assessments of key environmental legislation
and public and private sector investments.

(4) Improving Performance-Based Monitoring and Evaluation

3.47 A culture and system that emphasikes performance is keyfor the Philippines to reach its
poverty reduction and growth objectives. The administration is committed to improving performance

through the better matching of priorities, resources and results on the ground and recognizes the
critical role of results-based monitoring and evaluation systems in supporting this goal. Current
initiatives include (i) improved monitoring of public expenditures, focused on services reaching the
poor; (ii) a phasing in of performance-based budgeting linked to the medium-term expenditure
framework; (iii) sectoral efficiency and effectiveness reviews; (iv) performance-indicator
frameworks (both agency and sector); (v) improved quality at entry, monitoring and evaluation, and
oversight of foreign-assisted projects; and (vi) performance indicators at the LGU level. Civil society
is also demanding information about government expenditure, public service delivery, and progress
toward national development goals. The Philippines needs to deal with three key sets of issues: the
existence of several fragmented, uncoordinated, and overly ambitious initiatives in performance-
based monitoring and evaluation; weak incentive structure and human resource capacity to use
performance data; and existence of pockets of innovation that could serve as models.

The Bank will support government strategies to build upon current efforts. The CAS

3.48 
proposes to support the government's monitoring and evaluation efforts in both lending and
nonlending services by focusing on: (i) improving the institutional architecture'and management
capacity needed to use reliable results information in managing public expenditure and finance at the
central and local levels; (ii) building capacity to make the Rural Development Performance
Monitoring Indicator System an operational reality; this initiative could serve as a model to scale up

- 31 -

in other key sectors; (iii) improving citizen's access to information, promoting civil society
participation in the budget process, and monitoring and institutionalizing citizen feedback on public
services; (iv) assisting the Philippine government in coordinating a strategic approach to results-
oriented monitoring and evaluation initiatives: performance budgeting, foreign-assisted project
monitoring, data dissemination, and capacity building. Tools might include implementation
scorecards and a joint website for sharing and monitoring results; (v) improving the outcome focus
and usefulness of the monitoring and evaluation in all lending operations and supporting government
efforts to move toward performance-based monitoring and evaluation systems in national line
agencies and LGUs; and (vi) integrating project-management capacity building with the use of
project-level monitoring and evaluation information to improve implementation and realization of
outcomes. The Bank will continue to work closely with other ODA partners that also support the
government's efforts to improve its monitoring and evaluation capacity.

Portfolio Management

D. 

ASSISTANCE INSTRUMENTS

3.49 One of the Bank's greatest continuing challenges is to accelerate project implementation

and delivery of development benefits. Key to speeding up results will be mobilizing the government
revenues needed to support development programs and strengthen project management in terms of
planning, procurement, and financial management. Strengthening project management will require
the following key actions:

* Continue with the regular joint ODA portfolio reviews with ADB, Japan, the World Bank,
and the Philippine government and, jointly with National Economic and Development
Authority, quarterly monitoring of compliance with procurement planning and disbursement
targets.

* Work simultaneously with sector agencies and project-management units to address
implementation issues systematically at regularly scheduled clinics for country office teams,
focused especially on planning, monitoring, evaluation, financial management, procurement,
and safeguard policies.

* Apply realistically the "project readiness filter" to ensure project preparedness for
implementation (even at the price of potential slippage), possibly including an "institutional
capacity filter" in all new projects.

* Assist the Philippine government in developing scorecards and joint websites for sharing and
monitoring results and continue to work with the government to realign project monitoring
and evaluation systems in the portfolio, including piloting and subsequent broadbasing of
benchmarking and other management informnation systems.

* Assist the Philippine government in establishing a real information system at the project,
sectoral, and national oversight levels, focusing on the quality and accuracy of information.

* Support the government's ongoing reforms of the procurement process and other capacity-
building initiatives in financial management and social and environment assessment.

- 32 -

3.50 Portfolio management will also be a key instrument to improve long-term implementation
capacity and strengthen governance at both national and local government levels. On the national
implementing agency side, the focus will be on improving management in a decentralized system and
on more speedy processes. On the local government side, technical and management capacity will be
key to improve implementation and reduce the risk of graft and corruption. With LGUs handling
about 40 percent of the Bank-financed portfolio, to reduce governance risks the Bank will: (i)
evaluate procurement processes systematically and regularly by strengthening the frequency of "ex-
post reviews;" (ii) train LGU staff handling Bank funds in project management, procurement, and
financial management; (iii) evaluate the competency of LGUs involved in Bank projects, developing
any necessary action plan for the LGUs, and turning funds over to LGUs only after they comply with
the action plan; and (iv) strengthen the Commission on Audit's powers to audit LGUs.

Lending

3.51 
The composition of new Bank lending to the Philippines is expected to shift over the CAS
periodL'4 Absorptive capacity at the national level (both fiscal and management) for regular
investment operations is currently constrained, and there is large unmet demand for basic services as
well as "targeted budget support"-type operations like the SEMP,N5 as well as demand for program
loans to support government priorities (see Annex B3 for details on the lending program). New Bank
lending to LGUs will proceed cautiously in view of their capacity constraints. Over the next three
years, it will be crupial to develop and strengthen I,GUs' capacity to manage the implementation of
development projects in line with the responsibilities assigned to them under the LGU code.

3.52 
The Bank plans to maintain its programmatic approach to investment lending through
future loans under the three ongoing APL prograns (in water, transport, and Mindanao rural
sectors), and through continuation of the "SEMP-approach. " The Bank will evaluate the need and
country capacity for any additional APLs before proceeding selectively (one-for rural power-is
currently in the program). New APLs will require strong rationale and policy commitment upfront
for preparations to move ahead. The Bank plans to expand the "SEMP approach" into the health
sector (Health Sector Reform project) and possibly other areas such as the Diversified Farm Income
and Agricultural Modernization project, in response to the government's demand for operations that
help better manage expenditures already made a priority in the national budget.

3.53 Other new project lending will, upon government request, shift more toward community-
driven projects, drawing on the Bank's experience with workable delivery mechanisms both in the
Philippines and neighboring countries. This will include a follow-up project to the Agrarian Reform
Communities project (ARCDP) which finances local community initiatives. Preparation is also
underway for another community-based, poverty-focused intervention (the KALAHI project). This
project would improve local governance by empovvering some of the poorest communities to plan,
implement, and manage development investment and scale up and improve an existing government
antipoverty program, called "Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services (CIDSS)." A
new social fund project for the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, the ARMM Social Fund
project, would follow the successful completion (fastest disbursement of all projects) of the ongoing

14 Specific operations and their timing are preliminary, based on CAS consultations with government. The detailed
composition of the lending program is subject to annual programming discussions with government.
15 The FYOO Social Expenditure Management Project ftnances selected budgeted expenditures for social services while
pushing ahead with deep changes in the way goods are procured and financial and expenditure management are carried out
in the key departments of Education, Health and Social Welfare and Development.

- 33 -

SZOPAD Social Fund project in Mindanao which has been disbursing faster than other ongoing
projects.

3.54 Renewed adjustment lending as a strategy for effective assistance to the Philippines is
based on an enhanced commitment by the Philippine authorities to an extensive medium-term
program of policy and institutional reforms. Planned adjustment operations would address, in
particular, public expenditure and financial management, budget reform, resource mobilization,
contingent liabilities, public enterprise reform, civil service reform, corporate governance, the
investment climate, LGU finance, and financial sector strengthening encompassing banking and the
contractual savings systems. Adjustment lending is envisaged in both the base and high cases, with
higher lending volumes associated with such lending in the high case predicated on a deeper and
more aggressive implementation of reforms in the above areas (Section F below discusses triggers
associated with the various lending scenarios). The Bank is considering a series of carefully
sequenced single tranche operations with upfront policy actions. The provision of policy-based
guarantees in lieu of an adjustment loan for the same exposure amount will be considered, if the
government so wishes, and if justified by market conditions at that time.

3.55 
LGUs, with their responsibilities and resource potential, are key to future lending, but the
Bank will approach new lending to LGUs with great care. Such lending will require prior
assessment and building of institutional and technical capacity, particularly regarding planning,
procurement, financial management, and emphasis on accountability through monitoring and
performance review, which in turn require the availability of better information systems. Future LGU
projects should also be catalysts for broader reforms and improvements in the decentralized system.

3.56 Principles of choice for new lending. The composition of the Bank's lending program was
based on the following principles: (i) impact on the poor, focus on poorer segments of the population
and poor areas; (ii) expressed country and implementing agency priority and commitment, including
possibly competitive selection from among eligible LGUs; (iii) feasibility of project
"implementation" and likelihood of success, including fiscal sustainability and institutional readiness
based on a thorough assessment or proven institutional track record; (iv) community involvement; (v)
potential for scaling up (e.g., ARCDP II, LAMP, KALAHI); and (vi) clear division of labor with
other ODA partners (see para. 3.66). The planned lending program is a result of the application of
these principles, responds to the client's priorities as expressed in the MTPDP, and focuses on
projects that have relatively less impact on the government's budget as the government moves
toward fiscal consolidation. It excludes areas where government commitment to extensive reform is
not yet apparent (e.g. transport sector other than roads). APLs, Learning and Innovation Loans, and
some other operations attempt to start small but have potential for scaling up to achieve country-wide
impact. The lending program also follows a division-of-labor approach, focusing within each of the
broad chapters of the government's MTPDP only on selected subsectors, e.g., rural electrification in
the power sector or primary education and sectoral management issues in the education sector.

3.57 Choice of loan products. In the context of efforts to implement a prudent debt management
strategy, the authorities have expressed interest in making more use of the flexibility in the IBRD
financial products for the proposed new lending operations. The authorities are also interested in
pursuing a Master Derivatives Agreement in order to have the option of using the Bank's hedging
products on existing IBRD loans. As a necessary condition for the active use of these instruments,
the government is also pursuing grant funding to finance the establishment of a risk-management
system.

- 34-

Nonlending Assistance

3.58 
In the past fewyears nonlending services have combined core poverty, policy, and
fiduciary analyses,'6 as well as country advisory work and technical assistance on selected key
issues. 17 The assistance has informed the policy debate, helped government design reform programs,
and provided a foundation for proposed lending (e.g., Judicial Reform, and the Public Finance
Strengthening Loan, KALAHI project). These Analytical and Advisory Services have been critical in
maintaining the Bank's contribution as a knowledge center.

3.59 Nonlending assistance will remain an integralfeature of the Bank's assistance program. It
is designed to enrich the policy debate, help government design and implement effective reforms,
underpin future lending operations and systematically build capacity. The Bank's assistance would
continue to be a blend of core-diagnostic assessments and other advisory work (Annex B4). Core
diagnostic analyses will include an in-depth poverty analysis as warranted by the emergence of new
data and strategies, follow-up policy implementation tasks emanating from recent work in the
fiduciary, financial sector (the Financial Sector Assessment Program) and public expenditure areas,
and periodic Development Policy Reviews.

3.60 
The other country advisory work will focus on strategic policy and sectoral issues pertaining
to four themes that are critical to the attainment of renewed poverty reduction through sustained
growth and broad participation. These are: (a) ensuring the effective delivery ofpublic services
especially for the poor (e.g., public resource mobilization, decentralization and strengthening local
government capacity, civil service reform, civic engagement in tracking public expenditures,
improving public sector governance); (b) strengthening the environment for private sector
development (e.g., urban infrastructure, transport cost study, public enterprise reforms, capital market
development, improving corporate governance); (c) building human resources (e.g., Mindanao
human development study, health sector issues); and (d) addressing natural resource, rural
development and regional concerns (e.g., natural resource management, environmental analysis,
environment monitors, Mindanao post conflict). In addition there will be regular economic and social
indicator monitoring, demand-driven policy notes on selected key issues as they arise, and
participation in East Asian regional studies. Each proposed nonlending task will be evaluated in the
context of this strategic approach, and will be expected to respond directly either to client demand or
to the Bank's corporate priorities and fiduciary responsibilities. Focusing on selected themes in this
way, the Bank anticipates achieving greater complementarity in the use of the Bank's different
nonlending instruments, including a more strategic use of trust funds.

3.61 World Bank Institute activities will continue to complement planned capacity-building
activities with further programs in topics such as fiscal and risk management, international
competitiveness, governance and decentralization. These will often be in partnership with local
academic institutions. Global Distance Learning will continue to be part of this and will expand as

16 World Bank. Philippines Poverty Assessment (Washington D.C. May 31, 2001); World Bank. Report on Observance
and Standards of Codes (ROSC) 2001; Public Expenditure Review/Country Financial Accountability Assessment/Country
Procurement Assessment Review 2002 (under preparation); World Bank. Philippines Growth with Equity: The Remaining
Agenda-A World Bank Social and Structural Review, (Washington D.C. May 3, 2000); World Bank, Philippines
Development Policy Review: An Opportunity for Renewed Poverty Reduction (Washington D.C.: February 22, 2002); and
the FSAP-2002 (under preparation).
17 For example, governance, judicial reform, pension funds and contractual savings, pro-poor report card, environment,
corruption, health, education sector, and an expanded GDLN program (e.g., decentralization, debt management).

- 35 -

technical capacities allow. An expanding communications technology will be used to increase
sharing and learning from analytical and advisory service work.

3.62 
The CAS supports the current administration's selectivity in requesting technical
assistance. For project-preparation support, PHRD grants are expected to continue to play the same
supporting role as they have until now, which has been important in developing the lending program.
Their selection will be determined by the lending pipeline. The Bank will continue to use the ASEM
trust fund facility to build on the reforms that have been initiated and deepen their impact, especially
in the social development and governance areas. The thrust in capacity-building activities will be
supported by Institutional Development Fund grants, used to build capacity especially within LGUs
and in governance, financial management, procurement, tax administration, civil service, and
portfolio improvements. Projects that have relatively more need to engage the civil society are
expected to tap into the Japan Social Development Fund facility to increase their outreach and
supplement project work, such as for community-driven projects, an increasingly important part of
the Bank program.

IFC and MIGA Assistance

3.63 
To meet the Philippines' challenges of increasing competitiveness, promotingforeign
direct investment flows, and improving corporate governance so as to attract more private
investment, the focus of IFC strategy is to assist the government in: (a) addressing structural
weaknesses in the corporate sector, especially through improved corporate governance with respect
to creditors' and minority shareholders' rights; (b) supporting viable projects in infrastructure as well
as in manufacturing and services, and the strengthening of regulatory frameworks necessary for
enhancing internal competition in these sectors; (c) promoting growth of small and medium
enterprises; (d) expanding private sector participation to social sectors, such as health and education;
(e) strengthening the financial sector by shoring up the capital base and reducing banks'
nonperforming loans; and (f) developing the private contractual savings sector and local debt markets
so that infrastructure and other capital intensive projects can begin to tap local currency financing.

3.64 
In implementing this strategy, IFC supports, to the extent possible, pioneering or innovative
projects, with replicable structures, that are likely to have a high demonstration impact. The current
shortage of long-term financing available for private sector projects in the Philippines provides the
basis for IFC's comparative advantage in provision of debt and equity financing for projects. For
FY03, IFC aims to increase its program approvals to around $160 million. IFC is also able to provide
focused advisory services to help improve the legal or regulatory framework essential before
undertaking such projects.

3.65 MIGA will continue to provide demand-based guarantees and possibly more technical
assistance. Its current exposure ($121 million net-para. 2.7) is well below the current country limit
($420 million net), giving MIGA significant room for additional guarantees, which could encourage
private political risk insurers to get involved. It has conducted promotional activities in the
Philippines to publicize its guarantee product, but MIGA's future involvement will ultimately depend
on investor interest in investment opportunities in the Philippines. The extent of MIGA' s future
technical assistance will depend on the availability of its own funding. This funding would continue
to be used to help the Philippines promote itself proactively and energetically as a location for
foreign direct investment by strengthening strategic and operational coordination among the
investment promotion agencies.

- 36 -

E. 

MULTISTAKEHOLDER APPROACH, PARTNERSHIP, AND SELECTIVITY

3.66 
The Bank will continue its current way of doing business, focusing on the country,
including government and nongovernmental stakeholders as its clients. Its selectivity must be seen
in the context of its partners' activities in the country, including the private sector, civil society

organizations, and ODA partners. This requires ifurther outreach, including wider, better, and more
pro-active dissemination of information, consistent with the Bank's new public disclosure policy;
expansion and/or deepening of relationships with strategic civil society leaders (including
nongovernmental organizations, academia, think tanks, labor groups, and people's or community-
based organizations); strengthening media relations through media tours, news conferences, and
news releases to improve transparency and accountability; expanding networks with nontraditional
contacts through knowledge-sharing activities (Global Distance Learning Network activities, external
website, LGU portal, workshops, and conferences);'8 and working on enhancing the effectiveness of
the local Manila Public Information Center and local depository libraries.

3.67 
The Bank will also encourage its partners in government to engage civil society in meetings
that have been traditionally open only to government. NGO representation at Consultative Group
meetings has been standard practice since 1996. In the April 2001 joint portfolio review, government
committed itself to involve civil society in the results monitoring of old and recently closed ODA
projects and to facilitate civil society's access to information on foreign-funded projects. The latter is
in line with the Bank's focus on partnering with civil society in projects, especially in project
monitoring and evaluation.

3.68 
Selectivity and partnerships. The Bank will sustain itsfocus on and deepen its partnerships
with other ODA partners at various levels to help the Philippines attain its development goals.

Annex I describes the programs of other ODA paitners in the framework of the MTPDP. At the
policy level, close collaboration with IMF, ADB, and other ODA partners and agencies will continue
in banking, finance, and other sectors where policy issues are crucial to the Philippines' development
and where common policy matrices can be developed. The Bank has led a small group of ODA
partners'9 which developed joint recommendations on anticorruption actions for the government's
consideration, and the Bank will sustain this partnership. It is also part of a donor group that jointly
supports the government's Action Program for Judicial Reform. At the program level, it will continue
to collaborate with ADB on joint portfolio reviews and on programming discussions, and with
UNDP, the European Union, and other ODA partiers on strategy and program development. In the
context of specific projects, co-financing or parallel financing is being used in a few projects (4 of
the 25) and may increase only slightly (possibly in program lending with Japan) and for the ARMM
Social Fund, but the Bank will pursue new partnerships where opportunities arise and openly discuss
with ODA partners issues of division of labor. Finally, on the broader aspect of aid coordination, the
Bank will continue to support country ownership of the process and support government and Bank
co-chairing future Consultative Group meetings.

3.69 
There is room for closer and more effective collaboration among ODA partners through
thematic and sectoral working groups. 2 0 These groups already serve as vehicles for ODA partners to

18 The media campaign has spread the Bank's reputation in the Philippines as a knowledge Bank as well as a source of
funding.
19 ADB, AusAID, the Canadian International Development Agency, UNDP, the U.S. Agency for International
Development, and the World Bank.
20 Eight such informal thematic groups in the areas of poverty alleviation, Mindanao governance, anticorruption, judicial
reform, rural power, health, LGU/decentralization, and agrarian reform, have been in place for several years.

- 37 -

share information, pursue partnerships in specific projects and activities, and agree on delineation of
roles in certain areas. As chair of the Consultative Group, the Bank will continue to play an active
role in the overall aid coordination process and will work on better defining the roles of these
working groups within the context of the government's development priorities and targets while
accelerating the shift to government-led coordination.

F. 

LENDING PROGRAM: SCENARIOS, ExPoSURE, AND TRIGGERS

3.70 
Scenarios. The base-case lending program of about $1.1 billion in FY03-05 will include
three or four investment operations a year (about $770 million total, including APLs) and two
adjustment operations of ($350 million combined). Investment lending would hence average about
$220 million a year, well below the $400 million foreseen in the last CAS. The reduction reflects
both absorptive capacity and fiscal constraints and the need to concentrate on improving
disbursements. Investment lending will focus on the rural, health, and transport sectors or be cross-
sectoral. In addition, three or four selected Learning and Innovation Loans over the next three years
could test and pilot institutional arrangements, for example, for Community Agrarian Reform, Urban
Shelter and Community Development, Microfinance Strengthening, Family Income Support, and
Alternative Learning Systems. The high-case scenario (see triggers below), includes up to three
adjustment operations of $250 million each, larger volumes of investment lending and possibly an
additional investment project over the three-year period, based on improved portfolio performance
and absorptive capacity, leading to lending of up to $1.7 billion in FY03-05. In a low-case scenario
(see triggers below), the lending program would be restricted to a core set of investment projects,
particularly for addressing poverty and regional needs through targeted lending in the rural and social
sectors, and only about half the lending volume of the base case (about $0.5 billion). See Annex B3
for details on the lending program.

3.71 
IBRD exposure to the Philippines has declined significantly since the mid-1990s, from a
high of US$5.5 billion (4.5 percent of portfolio) at end-FY95 to US$3.4 billion (2.9 percent of total
portfolio) at end-FYOI, and debt service to the Bank as a proportion of public debt service has
declined from 20 percent in 1997 to 12 percent in 2001, and from above 2 percent of exports prior to
1996 to 1.5 percent in 2001. Under the base-case scenario, exposure would decline slightly from its
FYO 1 level to 2.7 percent of the total portfolio by end-FY05. With the higher volume of adjustment
lending envisaged in the high-case scenario, Bank exposure would rise slightly to about $3.8 billion
(3.1 percent of portfolio). All exposure ratios would remain within the Bank's prudential guidelines
under both scenarios.

3.72 
The triggers for the base-, high-, and low-case assistance programs are summarized in
Table 3-2. The base-case is predicated on the assumption that the improvement in economic
management initiated by the current government will be sustained and is accompanied by satisfactory
progress in reversing the trends of falling tax revenue and rising public sector deficits and public debt
witnessed in recent years. Such progress would also be facilitated by a higher average growth rate
than achieved during 1999-2001 and an improving climate for private investment. Specific
adjustment operations would support a mix of administrative and legislative measures to strengthen
fiscal policy, public sector management, governance, and the financial sector. Higher growth,
improved policy environment and more effective government interventions in the social sectors
would be expected to bring down the incidence of poverty relative to its estimated level in 2000.
Satisfactory compliance with actions agreed under ongoing Country Portfolio Performance Reviews
would also be expected.

-38 -

Table 3-2 Lending Program Triggers

Low case
* Policy slippage, for example, loss
of fiscal discipline and financial
market volatility triggered by
policy weaknesses

* Nonprovision of the reform
foundations needed for adjustment
assistance and slippage of efforts to
improve govemance

High Case 
* Tax/GNP ratio to increase by 0.7 
percent per year in 2002-05; 
national govemment deficit/GNP 
ratio to decline to target 3.1 percent 
in 2002 and by 0.8 percent per year 
through 2005 

* Agreement on and implementation 
of an aggressive program of 
govemance and public sector 
reforms including: civil service 
reforms to improve public service 
delivery; public enterprise reforms 
that enhance fiscal sustainability 
and strengthen competition; and 
further specific actions to raise 
govemance standards 

* Agreement on and implementation 
of aggressive financial sector 
reforms including legislative 
reforms to enable rapid intervention 
and resolution of distressed banks 
and adequate legal protection for 
bank regulators 

Base Case 
* Macroeconomic policy framework 
acceptable to the Bank 
* Tax/GNP ratio to increase by 0.4 
percent per year in 2002-05; national 
govemment deficit/GNP ratio to
decline by 0.5 percent per year
through 2005
* Agreement on and implementation of 
a sound govemance improvement and 
public sector reform agenda 
including: improved financial 
management and procurement in
public sector agencies, and initiate
civil service reforms to improve
public service delivery; reform of the
Bureau of Intemal Revenue as part of
efforts to increase public revenues
and as an example of improved
govemance; and continued
improvements in private sector
governance
* Agreement on anld implementation of
financial sector r eforms to reduce
banking stress, strengthen
consolidated supervision and
regulatory enforcement capacity in
banking, and enhance the viability of
the contractual savings system

* Satisfactory compliance with agreed 
Country Portfolio Performance 
Review actions 

* Failure to address portfolio
problems and deteriorating
disbursement performance

* Improving portfolio 
performance/disbursement rate on 
Bank portfolio to increase by 2 
percent per year in FY03-FY05

(for higher investment lending)

Notes: Macroeconomic policy and outcome indicators for the base- and high-cases assume gradually rising GDP growth rates
relative to the growth rate attained in 2001. To the extent that such higher growth is not attained (e.g., due to serious extemal

shocks), quantitative and possibly qualitative targets may need to be re-assessed. Not all the above policy actions would need to
be implemented prior to any adjustment lending; but each individual adjustment operation would require upfront implementation
of an agreed subset of measures.

3.73 
In moving to the high case with additional adjustment lending, the Bank would expect a
faster reduction in the government deficit, aided by a more rapid increase in tax revenues vis-a-vis
the base case. In addition, the Bank would need to be assured that reforms of identified priorities in
the context of individual adjustment operations were proceeding at an accelerated pace and
implementation performance on the Bank's project portfolio also was satisfactory. Improved
portfolio performance, particularly regarding disbursements and evidence of a higher absorptive
capacity would be needed to increase investment lending beyond the base case. Faster reforms and
better portfolio performance are likely to occur sirnultaneously, but if only the preconditions for
either more adjustment lending or higher investment lending are met, the Bank would proceed with
only one or the other.

- 39 -

3.74 
In a low-case scenario, commitment to reforms would have waned and the Bank's assistance
program would contract to core poverty, human resource, and asset reform-related activities, plus a
still active set of nonlending assistance. These triggers would naturally need to be interpreted in the
context of evolving events as external shocks could also trigger the need for an adjustment to the
assistance program. In particular, in the event of a large external shock, followed by appropriate
policy adjustments supported by IMF lending, the Bank might also respond with a larger volume of
adjustment lending than envisaged in the base case. The precise adjustment and financing needs
under such a "crisis" scenario would have to be formulated in response to the nature of the shock.

G. 

RISK MANAGEMENT AND COUNTRY PROGRAM MONITORING

3.75 Country Risk and Risk Management. An open economy, large public debt, fiscal risks due
to the government's contingent liabilities, significant banking and corporate stress, and large external
financing needs render the Philippine economy vulnerable to both external shocks and policy
slippage. On the latter, there is a risk that the administration will face political opposition to some of
the policy reforms it wants to implement and that the outcome of the 2004 national elections could be
detrimental to the reform program. Risks regarding the conflict in Mindanao and opposition to the
administration's strategy regarding the international war against terrorism may also affect the
country's economic prospects and the administration's ability to implement difficult reform measures.
The strength of the administration's policy actions (e.g., to increase tax revenues, manage contingent
liabilities, and implement financial and public sector reforms, and its ability to gain political support
for those that require congressional approval) will determine the scope of the Bank's interventions.
The use of effective triggers would predicate increases in the Bank's exposure on necessary policy
actions. Continuous close dialogue with the government and other development partners will also
allow the Bank to closely monitor emerging problems.

3.76 
In addition to the country risks, the Bank's program will also be subject to project risks.
These include in particular: (i) the high security risk in Mindanao, which may limit on-the-ground
preparation and supervision of operations; (ii) compliance with safeguard policies (regarding
environment, resettlement, and indigenous peoples); (iii) compliance with procurement and financial
management procedures, particularly at the LGU level in view of capacity constraints; (iv) public
relations risk with renewed adjustment lending; and (v) reputational risks, in particular regarding
possible allegations of corruption in areas covered by Bank-financed operations. Mitigating these
risks requires intensive supervision, continued regular portfolio reviews, careful assessments before
project launch (including procurement and financial management assessment of the entity
responsible for project implementation), strong monitoring and evaluation systems, systematic post
reviews of projects, external procurement audit of the portfolio, the more strategic capacity building
already outlined, as well as the outreach efforts described above. The Bank will also follow up
closely on and assist in the implementation of agreed recommendations of the integrated PEPFMR
exercise, including through interactions on the procurement law and dialogue on restructuring of
specific agencies. Each project will also improve its risk identification, management strategies, and
monitoring of risk actualization.

3.77 Country Program Monitoring. The CAS relates sector-specific strategic objectives and
outcomes. Where possible,. these have been quantified and target values set. For others, the Bank will
work with government to determine the reliability of baselines and track these during the CAS
period. The CAS will utilize this evaluation feature to focus its sector operations on CAS objectives
and outcomes, monitor government's progress against a set of output-level country performance
indicators, and manage the Bank's own work through self evaluation indices and portfolio targets

- 40 -

(see also Annex B9). The Bank plans to undertake a mid term review of the CAS where the set of
outcomes, country performance and Bank performance indicators will be reviewed to determine
progress, any needed corrections, and the best way of refining the multitiered evaluation features.
The Bank will use the national statistics and specific surveys or data collection instruments for this
purpose. It plans to continue to monitor the effectiveness of the Bank Group's assistance through
consultations with stakeholders and another client survey in about two years, complemented by
follow-up qualitative interviews with stakeholders.

James. D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter L. Woicke

By:
Shengman Zhang 

Washington D.C.
April 30, 2002

Philippines 
Key Economic & Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS 

Annex Al
Page 1 of I

Economy (CY) 
Growth rates (%)
GDP 
Exports 1/ 
Imports 1/ 

Inflation (%o) 2/ 

National accounts (% GDP)
Current account balance 
Gross investment 3/ 

Public finance (% GDP) 4/
Fiscal balance 
Foreign financing 

International reserves 5/ 
(as months of imports)
Program (Bank's FY) 
Lending ($ million) 
Gross disbursements 
($ million)

Forecast in Last CAS 

Actual 

Current CAS Forecast

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005

-0.5 
-5.0 
-7.4 

10.4 

1.5 
20.1 

1.3 
0.3 

3.0 

2.5 
10.5 
10.6 

8.5 

0.6 
19.3 

1.1 
2.0 

2.6 

3.5 
5.0 
7.0 

6.0 

-0.6 
19.6 

1.6 
1.6 

2.9 

4.5 
6.0 
6.7 

5.0 

-0.5 
18.0 

2.0 
1.7 

3.1 

3.4 
3.6 
-2.8 

8.0 

10.0 
18.4 

-3.8 
2.8 

4.6 

4.0 
17.7 
4.0 

6.7 

12.5 
17.6 

-4.1 
2.0 

4.2 

3.4 
-3.2 
0.5 

6.7 

4.6 
18.0 

-4.0 
0.6 

4.7 

4.0 
1.8 
2.8 

6.0 

4.4 
18.0 

-3.3 
2.7 

4.9 

4.5 
4.4 
5.3 

5.5 

3.9 
18.2 

-2.7 
0.6 

4.9 

5.0 
7.2 
7.3 

5.0 

3.5 
18.7 

-2.1 
0.3 

4.8 

5.0
7.4
8.1

5.0

3.0
19.4

-1.6
-0.7

4.8

Oa 

FYO0 
560.0 
239.0 

~~b 

FYOO 
338.0 
300.0 

b 

FYO1 
469.0 
370.0 

b 

FY02 
500.0 
140.0 

FYOOc 
278.8 
202.6 

FYO1c 
66.1 
125.9 

b 

FY02 
135.0 
140.0 

b 

FY03 
403.0 
345.4 

b 

FY04 
320.0 
314.3 

b

FY05 
395.0 
175.0 

FY06
n.a.
n.a.

1/ GNFS
2/ to be consistent with the previous CAS, we use GDP deflator, instead of the CPI
3/ includes public, private investments, and changes in stocks
4/ for National Government only, excludes the rest of the public sector
5/ figures are months of imports of goods and services

a. Estimated year
b. Projected year
c. Actual outcome

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Philippines at a glance 

4/30/02

East 
Lower-
Asia & middle-
Pacific 
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Philippines 

Development dlamond*

2000
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

75.6 
1,040 
78.8 

1,853 
1,060 
1,964 

2,046 
1,140
2,327

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1994-00

Populabon (%) 
Labor force () 

2.1 
2.6 

1.1 
1.4 

1.0 
1.3 

GNI
GNI 
per 
capita 

Gross
prmary
enrollment

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1994-00) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% ofschool-age population) 
Male 
Female 

37
59 
69 
31 
30 
87 
5 
117 

35 
69 
35 
13 
75 
14 
119 
121 
121 

42
69
32
11 
80
15 
114 
116 
114

Access to improved water source

Phil

ippies

.. 
.. 

Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1980 

1990 

1999 

2000

Economic ratios'

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Grossdomesticsavings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

32.5 
29.1 
23.6 
24.2 

44.3 
24.2 
27.5 
18.4 
19.5 

76.2 
18.4 
51.0 
19.2 
28.0 

74.7
17.6
56.3 
24.0
30.3

Trade

.. 

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debtlGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debtGDP 
Present value of debtexports 

-5.9 
1.8 
53.6 
26.6 

-5.8 
3.5 
69.0 
27.0 

10.0 
2.7 
69.6 
14.0 
68.1
111.0

12.5 
3.3 
72.0 
12.0

Domestic 
savings 
s

nvsen
Investment

.. 
., 

.. 
.. 

Indebtedness

1980-90 

1990-00 

1999 

2000 

2000 04

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services** 

1.0 
-1.2 
3.5 

3.3 
1.0 
7.3 

3.4 
1.4 
3.6 

4.0 
2.1 
17.7 

4.2 
2.2 
5.6

-

Philippines
Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)

(%6 of GDP) 

2

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

25.1 
38.8 
25.7 
36.1 

21.9 
34.5 
24.8 
43.6 

17.1 
30.6 
21.6 
52.2 

15.9 
31.1 
22.6 
52.9 

20

10

0o

-10 1
-20

ss 

U 

go. 

o

Prvate consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

66.7 
9.1 
28.5 

71.5 
10.1 
33.3 

68.0 
13.1 
51.3 

63.2 
12.8 
50.2

GDI0 

GDP

1980-90 

1990-00 

1999 

2000 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

(avenage annual growth)

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumpton 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

1.0 
-0.9 
0.2 
2.8 
2.2 
0.6 
-2.1 
3.4 

1.6 
3.2 
3.0 
4.0 
3.9 
3.4 
3.1 
7.7 

6.5 
0.9 
1.6 
4.0 
0.3 
6.7 
-2.0 
-2.8 

3.3 
3.9 
5.6
4.4 
-2.1
-1.1 
2.3 
4.0

30
is

95 

e 

9700

-30

-

Exports 

-0lmports

Note: 2000 data are preliminary estimates.
'The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.
*Exports of goods and services is in local currency units.

6 

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Philippines

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Inflatbon (%)

Domestic pulces
(% change)
Consumer prces 
Implicit GDP deflator 
Govemment f1nance
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplusadeflct. 

14.2 
13.0 

6.7 
8.0 

4.3 
6.7

1_

14.3 

o 

,

16.8 

16.1 
0.3 
-3.8 

15.6 
-0.7 

99 

9s 

97 

9s 

99 

00

0.3 

GDP deflator 

OCPI

-3.5 

-4.1

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1980 

1990 
8,186 

1999 
34,210 

2000 
37,295 

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)

Total exporls (fob) 
n.a.
n.a. 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 
Export prce index (1995e100) 
Import prce index (1995-100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

40,000

30,000

5,706 
12,206 
656 
1,842 
3,122 

31.097 
36,276 
1,982 
3,395 
14,555 

33,394
36,102 
1,256 
4,524
15.011 

20,000

10 000 

is 10111111111

0 -1

94 

95 

as 

97 

s9 

99 

Do

..

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

Exports 

*Imports

..

_.._..

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ Millions) 

1980 
7,236 
9,147 
-1,911 
-439 
447 

1990 
11,430 
13,967 
-2,537 
-744 
714 

1999 
39,012 
35,267 
3704 
4,104 
481 

2000 
41,473 
37,864
3,646 
3,786 
430

Currant account balance to GDP(%I

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 
Net income 
Net current transfers 

15-

10

5-

Current account balance 

-1,903 

-2,567 

7,647 

9,349 

97 

se 

so 

|

Financing iems (net) 
Changes in net reserves 
Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS millons) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locaVUS$) 

2,794 
-891 

2,474 
93 

-2,889 
-3,941 

-9,645
420 

-10 --

.. 

2,048 
24.3 

14,987 
39.1 

14,910
44.2

7.5 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000

(USS mlillons) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 

Composition of 2000 debt (USS mill)

17,417 

30,580 

53,000 

50,100

IBRD 
IDA 

926 
34 

3,943 
101 

4,040 
206 

3,627 
207 

A: 3,627
B:207

G: 5,948 

Total debt service 

2,183 

3,590 

6,400 

6,700 

D. 3,281

IBRD 
IDA 
Composition of net resource flovws

106 
0 

597 
2 

641 
4 

572
5

Official grants 

59 

362 

170 

E: 12,362

Official credftors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 
Wold Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

367 
946 
-106 
0 

935 
109 
530 
0 

-130 
3,920 
1,427 
422 

-215 
2,138
1,584 
45

E 

;2_36

F: 24,415 

695 
230 
33 
197 
73 
124 

1,008 

208 
164 
387 
-223 
258 
-481 

255 
162 
352 
-190
225
-415

A -laRD 

E -Bilateral
D - Other mutilateral F - Private

507 
302 
206 
297 
-91 

B - IDA 

C - IMF 

G - Short-term

Development Economics 

4/30102

Annex B2
Page 1 of2

Philippines
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount 8 ' c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) 0 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ 000) 
Average Supervision (US$ 000/project) 

d 

FYI 1999 

FY 2000 

FY 2001 

FY 2002'

27 
3.8 
22.2 
25.2 
37.0 
38.2 
17.0 

Yes 
1,760 
61.0 

25 
3.4 
16.0 
33.5 
16.0 
33.5 
17.3 

Yes 
2,024 
67.0 

24 
3.7 
12.5 
9.1 
12.5 
9.1 
11.9 

Yes 
1,462 
61.0 

25
4.0
20.0
12.1
28.0
24.2
9.5

Yes
902
43.0

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
119 
19
7664 
1552
27.7 
26.3
28.5 
31.5

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
f. As of April 9, 2002.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

SUMMARY OF RATINGS

PHILI:PPINES
DEVELOPMENT EFFECTIVENESS REPORT
As of March 31,2002

Indicator 

FV99 
as or 6/30/99 

FY00 
as of 6/30/00 

Ratings

FAY01 
as of 6/30/01

1. Quality at Entry2
2. Quality of Supervision3
3. Quality ofESW 4
4. Development Outcome 

(QAG) 
(QAG) 
(QAG) 

(OED) 

5. Sustainability of Benefits 3,6 
6. Bank Supervision Performance' (OED) 
7. Quality of ICR 7
(OED) 

(OED) 

8. Development Objectives 

(PSR) 

Bank EA7J P 
86% 
100% 
82% 
85% 
73% 
82% 

PHL B 
100% 
89% 
75% 
92% 
100% 
86% 

72% 

55% 

73% 

-

-

86% 

59% 

81% 

-

-

100% 

100% 

100% 
100% 

91%9 

76% 

72% 

87% 
-

-

E 
88% 
96% 
91% 

81% 

73% 

88% 
-

100% 
NR 
100% 

75% 

63% 

92% 
100% 

92%9 

Bank 
94% 
NA 
67% 

| EAP 
82% 
NA 
NA 

|PL 
100% 
NA 
NR 

Bank 
90% 
90% 
90% 

NA 

NA 

NA 

-

NA 

NA 

NA 

-

100% 

100% 

100% 
100% 

960/o9 

NA- not available.
NR - not rated because no PHL project/task was included in the sample.

Annex B2
Page 2 of 2

FY02

Plan 

Actual

| 

P| 

PHL

90% 
90% 
90% 

100%
100%
100%

100%

100%

100%
100%

100% 

96%1o

1 In terms of % of projects rated satsfactory or better.
2 Sources: (i) QEA-3 and QEA-4 for Bank and EAP; (ii) QAG Assessment Reports for PHL.
3 Sources: (i) RSA-3 and RSA-4 for Bank and EAP; (ii) QAG Assessment Reports for PHL. Awaitng RSA-5 results for FY01 rabngs.
4 Sources: QESW-2, QESW-3, and QESW4 (1 assessment of CPARs and CFAAs).
Sources: (i) ARDE 2001 for Bank ratings (FY99 and FY00); (ii) OED website for EAP and PHL rabngs. FY01 results for Bank and EAP are expected by Sprng 2002.
Rating in terms of projects rated likely or better.
Source: OED Evaluabon Summaries.
Pertains to DO ratngs of ongoing projects. Source: MMRs.
aProjects with DO rated 'U- as at (i) end-FY99: WHSMP, TEEP, TGRP; (ii) end-FYO0: TEEP, TGRP; (iii) end-FY01: CBRMP
' Of 25 projects, one project (CBRMP) has the DO rated 'unsabsfactory.

Philippines
Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed IBRDIIDA Lending Program for Next Three Fiscal Years

Annex B3
Page I of 2

Fiscal 
year 

2002 

Proj ID 

2ND SOCIAL EXPENDITURE MGMT 
LAGUNA DE BAY LIL 
LGU URBAN WATER & SAN APL2 
TOTAL 

2003 

SECOND AGRARIAN REFORM COM."/ 
KALAHI CDD PROJECT 
ARMM SOCIAL FUND 
PROGRAM LOAN (PUBLIC FIN. STRENGTHENING) 
JUDICIAL REFORM 

TOTAL 

2004 

2005 

RURAL POWER I (APL) 
POPULATION MGMT/WOMEN'S HEALTH II 
HEALTH SECTOR REFORM 
RIVER BASIN DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAM LOAN (PUBLIC SECTOR REFORM 1) 
CITIES DEVELOPMENT 
TOTAL 

DIVERSIFIED FARM INCOME/AG MODERNIZATION"/ 
NATIONAL ROADS IMPROVEMENT MGT. II (APL) 
LAND AMIN. AND MGT. PROJECT 11 
MINDANAO RURAL DEV'T PROJECT n (APL) 
PROGRAM LOAN (PUBLIC SECTOR REFORM II) 
KALAHI CDD II 
TOTAL 21 

TOTAL FOR FY03-05 
o.w. program lending (%) 

USS 
(HAl) 

100.0 
5.0 
30.0 
135.0

. USS(A

High 
Case 

Base 
Case 

Low
Case

50.0 
100.0 
35.0 
250.0 
18.0 

50.0 
100.0 
35.0 
200.0 
18.0 

50.0 
75.0 
35.0 
-
18.0 

453.0 

403.0 

178.0

25.0 
30.0 
40.0 
75.0 
250.0 
100.0 
520.0 

100.0 
150.0 
30.0 
90.0 
250.0 
150.0 
770.0 

25.0 
30.0 
40.0 
75.0 
150.0 

320.0 

75.0 
100.0 
30.0 
90.0 

-

100.0 
395.0 

25.0 
30.0 
40.0 
75.0 
-
-
170.0

50.0 
-
30.0 
50.0 
-

130.0

1,743.0 1,118.0 
43.0 
31.0 

478.0
0.0

Strategic Rewards 
(H/AlL) 

Imple1entation Risks
HIIL
(L/MIL)

M 
M 
H 

H 
H 
H 
H 
H 

M 
H 
M 
M 
H 
H 

M 
M 
H 
H 
H 
H 

L
L
M

L
M
H
L
M

H
H
M
M
L
H

M
L
M
M
L
L

1/ Stand-by. Indicates project should be ready for possible board presentation in year prior 'to firm lending schedule if other operations slip.
2/ In addition, the Manila Sewerage 11 project (S30-50 million) in FY06 is a standby project for FY05.

Note:
1. In addition, LILs could be considered, and are cuffently under discussion, for future years for Coummunity Managed Agmrian Reform, Urban Shelter and Community Developmen
Microfinance Steengthening, Family Income Support Project, and Altenative Leaming Systems.
2. This table presents the jointly (Bank and Government) agreed program for the nest three fiscal years on which work is in progress. It will be updated in consultadon with Govenmnent
on a three-year rolling basis. Lending amounts are provisional subject to these consultations.

Annex B3 (IFC/MIGA)
Page 2 of 2

Philippines - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002

IFC approvals (US$m) 

52.00 

80.14 

126.00 

130.50

1999 

2000 

2001 2002 (Est)

Sector (%)

CONSTRUCTION & REAL ES 
FINANCE & INSURANCE 
HEALTH CARE 
INFORMATION 
NONMETALLIC MINERAL 
PULP & PAPER 
RETAIL TRADE 
TECHNICAL & PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 
TRANSPORTATION & WAREH 
UTILITIES 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other 

Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) * 

0 

58

42 

100 

69 
0 
31 

100 

83 

33 
17 
0 
19

30 

99 

66 
0 
25 
8 

99 

60 

17
5 
1
1 

76

100 

94 
1 

5 

100 

140 

38

8

10
21

23

100

72
2
3
23

100

131

*MIGA's outstanding gross exposure, as of FY end; FY02 - gross exposure as of February 28,
2002.

Philippines - Summary of' Nonlending Services

Annex B4
Page 1 of 2

Product 

CopipL FY 

Cost (US$000) Audience a 
(Direct Costs)

Objectiveb

Recent completions

Country Diagnostic Reports

SPR/CDF2000 
Poverty Assessment 

Country Advisory Reports

Rural Power Sector Policy Note 
Judicial Assessment 
Rural Development Trends & Strategy 
Combating Corruption 
Filipino Report Card 
Anticorruption Update 

Other Products

Environment Monitor 
Public Sector Reform Policy Note 

Technical Assistance

Pensions and contractual savings reform 
Debt mgmt, decentralization (thru GDLN) 

Underway

Country Diagnostic Reports

CPAR (integrated in PE, Proc. & Fin. Mgmt. Review) 
CFAA (integrated in PE, Proc. & Fin. Mgmt. Review) 
Development Policy Review 2002 
Financial Sector Assistance Program 
Public Expenditure, Procurement and Financial 
Management Review

Country Advisory Reports

Environment Monitor 
Out of School Youth Report 
Health Sector Policy Notes 

Technical Assistance

TA for Civic Engagement in Public Expenditure 
TA for LGU Portal Activity 
TA for City Development Strategies 
TA for Corporate Governance 
Mindanao Post Conflict Assistance 

FY00 
FY01 

FY00 
FY00 
FY00 
FY00 
FY01 
FY02 

FYO0 
FY01 

FYO0 
FYO0 

FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 

FY02 
FY02 
FY02 

FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 

205 
323 

116 
145 
69 
150 
408 
80 

36 
13 

50 
N/A 

80 
100 
80 
150 
150 

65 
20 
60 

80 
40 
85 
33 
N/A 

G, B, D, P 
G, B, P, D 

PS, PD
PS, PD

G, B 
G, B 
G, B, P, D 
G, B, P, D 
G, B, P, D 
G, B, P, D 

PS
PS
PS
PS, KG, PD
PD
PS, PD

G, B, P, D 
G, B 

PS, KG, PD
PS

G, B 
G 

KG, PS
PS

G, B 
G, B 
G, D, B, P 
G. B 
G, D, B 

G, B, P, D 
G, D, B 
G, B 

G 
G, P 
G 
G 
G, D, B 

PS
PS
PS, PD
PS
PS

PS, KG
PS
KG, PS

PS
KG
PS
PS
PS

Annex B4
Page 2 of 2

Product 

CompLFY 

Cost (USsOOO) Audience ' 
(Direct Costs)

Objective'

Planned (preliminary list) 1/

Country Diagnostic Reports
Economic Monitoring 
Development Policy Review 
PER/CFAA/CPAR 
Poverty Assessment 

FY03, 04, 05 
FY04, 05 
FY05 
FY04 

80/year 
200 
150 
150 

B 
G, D, B, P 
G, B 
G, B, P, D 

PS
PS, PD
PS
PS, PD

Country Advisory Work and Technical Assistance
(a) Ensuring Effective Delivery of Public Services

Decentralization Study 

Civil Service Reform 
Civic Engagement in Expenditure Tracking 
Capacity Building for Bureau of Internal Revenue 
TA for Improving Public Sector Governance 

FY03 

FY03 
F03 
FY03, 04 
FY03, 04, 05 

230 

G, B, D, P 

TF Funded 
72 
TF Funded 
50/year 

G, B 
G 
G 
G 

(b) Strengthening Environmentfor Private Sector Development
Selected Public Enterprise Reform 
FY04 
Capital Markets & Savings Study 
FY05 
Urban Infrastructure 
FY04 
Transport Cost Review Strengthening 
FY03 
TA for Financial Sector (FSAP follow up) 
FY03, 04 
TA for Corporate Governance 
FY03, 04, 05 

(c) Building Human Resources
Human Development Study (ARMM) 
Health Sector Issues 
Support regarding Violence against Women 
Gender Coordination 

FY03 
FY04 
FY04 
FY 03, 04, 05 

75 
120 
120 
75 
75/year 
50/year 

75 
75 
50 
30/year 

(d) Addressing Natural Resource, Rural Development, and Regional Concerns
Environment Monitor 
FY03, 05 
Country Environmental Analysis 
FY04 
Natural Resource Management Study 
FY03 
Regional Disparities/Inequality Study 
FY05 
Mindanao Post Conflict Assistance 
FY03, 04, 05 

50/year 
50 
75 
120 
200/year 

G, B 
G, B, D, P 
G, B, D, P 
G, B 
G 
G 

G, B, D, P 
G, B 
G, B 
G, B 

G, B, D, P 
G, B, D, P 
G, B.D, P 
G, B, D, P 
G, B, D 

PS

PS
PS
PS
PS

PS
PS
PS
KG, PS
PS
PS

PS, KG
KG, PS
PS
PS

PS, KG
PS, KG
PS, KG
PS
PS

Otlhers
Demand Driven Policy Notes 
East Asia Regional Studies 

FY03, 04, 05 
FY04, 05 

75/year 
75/year 

G 
G, B, D, P 

PS
PS, PD, KG

a. G=Government, D=Donor, B=Bank, P=Public Dissemination.
b. KG=Knowledge Generation, PD-Public Debate, PS=Problem-Solving.

1/ Composition will vary by low, base and high case scenario, be modified in response to evolving circumstances, and be subject to review with
government in annual programming discussions.

Philippines Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionrincome group

Annex B5

Page I of I

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index 1/ 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNI) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to an Improved water source 2/
(% of Population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12-months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 3/ 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 4/ 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

1970.75 

1980-5 

199399 

43.1 
2.8 
35.6 
5.2 

.. 
.. 
.. 

370 
10 
, 

.. 

5.0 
56.0 

.. 

2.0 

.. 

97 
94 
99 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

50 

59 
58 
61 

58 
90 

376 
314 

.. 

46 

54.7 
2.5 
43.0 
4.5 

52.0 
42.0 
58.0 

520 
43 
45 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

1.4 

..

96 
97 
96 

65 

.. 
.. 

49 
59 
33 

63 
61 
65 

46 
72 

323 
259 

.. 

57 

74.3 
2.2 
57.7 
3.5 

36.8
21.5
50.7

1,050 
135 
130

46.2

5.4
52.3

1.7 

3.4 

101 

.. 
.. 

87 
92 

80 

87 
87 
30 

69 
67 
71 

31 
41 

193 
146 
170
56

East 
Asia & 
Pacific 

1,836.6 
1.2 
34.5 
2.1 

Lower-
middle-
Income

2,093.0
1.1
42.9
2.1

1,010 
136 

1,200
137

1.7 
2.9 

100 
100 
100 

75 
93 
66 

83 
82 
12 

69 
67 
71 

35 
44 

184 
141 

2.3
4.8

99
100
99

80
94
69

87
87
9

69
67
72

32
40

191
133

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to Improved water
source data is 2000.
1/ Based on official poverty line.
2/ Data available in the Philippines is lower 77% of population.
3/ Official govemment data in the Philippines is higher 49 per 1,000 livebirths.
4/ Official govemment data in the Philippines is lower: 60 per 100,000 livebirths.
2001 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 3

Philippines - Key Economic Indicators

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2003 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

1998 

1999 

2001 

2002 

2004 

2005

100 
17 
31 
52 

100 
17 
31 
52 

100 
16 
31 
53 

100 
15 
32 
53 

100 
15 
31 
54 

100 
15 
32 
54 

100 
14 
32 
54 

100
14
32
55

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

86 
21 
3 
18 

81 
19 
4 
15 

76 
18 
3 
14 

81 
18 
3 
14 

82 
18 
3 
15 

82 
18 
3 
15 

81 
18 
3 
15 

81
19
3
16

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

52 
59 

51 
51 

56 
50 

49 
47 

48 
48 

47 
47 

48 
48 

49
49

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsC 

14 
23 

19 
28 

24 
30 

19 
23 

18 
22 

18 
22 

19 
22 

19
22

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ billion at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 
1090 
1050 
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1985 prices)
Gross domestic product at market I 
-0.6 
3.4 
Gross Domestic Income 
6.0 
6.3 

65 

76 

75 

71 

77 

84 

91 

98

1040 

1050 

..

4.0 
4.6 

3.4 
0.8 

4.0 
2.9 

4.5 
4.5 

5.0 
5.1 

5.0
5.2

Real annual per capita growth rates (0%, calculated from 1985 prices)
Gross domestic product at market r 
-2.6 
1.4 
2.1 
Total consumption 
4.1 
-1.0 
-3.8 
Private consumption 
5.0 
-1.6 
-3.9 
Balance of Payments (US$ billions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 

1.5 
3.1 
3.7 

2.0 
1.4 
1.3 

2.5 
2.2 
2.2 

2.9 
2.4 
2.2 

2.9
2.5
2.3

34.5 
29.5 
35.0 
29.5 

39.0 
34.2 
3-5.3 
29.3 

41.5 
37.3 
37.9 
30.4 

35.5 
32.2 
34.9 
29.5 

37.1 
33.5 
36.8 
31.0 

39.7 
35.9 
39.7 
33.5 

43.7 
39.5 
43.7 
37.0 

48.1
43.4
48.4
41.1

Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

-0.5 
0.4 
1.5 

3.7 
0.5 
7.6 

3.6 
0.4 
9.3 

0.7 
0.4 
3.3 

0.3 
0.2 
3.4 

0.0 
0.2 
3.3 

0.0 
0.2 
3.2 

-0.3
0.2
3.0

Net private foreign direct investmer 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 

1.8 
2.7 
0.0 
2.7 
-4.7 
-1.4 

1.4 
4.7 
-0.1 
4.8 
-10.0 
-3.8 

1.6 
5.5 
-0.2 
5.7 
-16.9 
0.4 

1.7 
-1.7 
1.5 
-3.2 
-3.4 
0.1 

1.5 
-1.6 
1.4 
-3.0 
-2.3 
-0.9 

1.6 
0.0 
0.7 
-0.7 
-3.2 
-1.6 

1.6 
0.3 
0.0 
0.2 
-3.2 
-1.9 

1.7
1.4
-0.5
1.9
-4.1
-2.0

Other capital (net, incl. errors & onmnissi 

Change in reservesd 

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 

-0.8 

4.8 

4.8 

0.9 

0.4 
0.03 
(Continued)

-0.02 

-0.4

Annex B6
Page 2 of 3

Philippines - Key Economiic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

2002 

Projected
2003 

2004 

2005

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues 
17.4 
Current expenditures 
15.9 
Current account surplus (+) or defic 
1.4 
Capital expenditure 
3.3 
Foreign financing 
0.5 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

42.9 
7.4 
9.7 
10.5 

16.1 
15.8 
0.3 
4.0 
2.8 

45.9 
19.3 
6.7 
8.0 

15.6 
16.3 
-0.7 
3.4 
2.0 

43.2 
4.5 
4.3 
6.7 

15.5 
16.3 
-0.8 
3.2 
0.6 

41.5 
6.0 
6.1 
6.7 

15.6 
15.8 
-0.2 
3.1 
2.7 

41.7 
10.6 
6.4 
6.0 

15.9 
15.5 
0.4 
3.1 
0.6 

41.7 
10.2 
5.9 
5.5 

16.3 
15.3 
1.0 
3.1 
0.3 

41.7 
10.3 
5.0 
5.0 

16.6
15.5
1.0
2.6
-0.7

41.7
10.3
5.1
5.0

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capilal grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Central government only
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Base-case (most likely) projection

Philippines - Selected Indicators Table

1998 

1999 

Estimate 

2000 

Projection

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005

Annex B6
Page 3 of 3

Part A: Main Macro Aggregates

Annual growth rates, calculatedfrom constant 1985 price data
GDP (mp) per capita 
Total consumption per capita 
GDP at market prices 
Total consumption 
Private consumption 
Gross domestic investment (GDI) 
Gross dom. fixed investment (GDFI) 
Exports (GNFS) 
Imports (GNFS) 
Savings-investment balances, as percentage of GDP
Gross Domestic investment 
Foreign savings 
Gross national savings 
Govemment savings 
Non government savings 
Gross domestic savings 
Other
GDP inflation 
Annual average exchange rate (LCU/US$) 
Money growth 

Part B: Government Finance Indicators

Percentage of GDP
Total revenues, of which 
Tax revenues 
Total expenditures, of which 
Consumption 
Deficit(-)/Surplus(+) 
Financing: 
Foreign 
Other
Total Debt/GDPmp 
Total interest payments/Tax revenues 

Part C: Debt & Liquidity Indicators

Total DOD and TDS
DOD (US$ billions) 
DOD/ GDPmp ratio 
TDS (US$ billions) 
TDS/exports(XGS)ratio 
Total gross reserves (months' imports G&S) 

Part D: External Financing Plan

(USS, millions)
Private investment (net) 
Net Long termn borrowing excl IMF 
Financing Requirements (incl IMF) 
of which current account deficit 

-2.6 
4.1 
-0.6 
6.3 
7.1 
-16.3 
-11.2 
-21.0 
-14.7 

20.3 
-2.4 
22.7 
1.4 
21.3 
13.7 

10.5 
40.9 
7.4 

17.4 
15.5 
19.2 
10.9 
-1.9 

1.9 

0.5 

53.3 
24.2 

48.3 
74.1 
4.7 
11.6 
3.4 

2.1 
2.7 
-0.2 
-1.5 

1.4 
-1.0 
3.4 
0.9 
0.3 
-2.0 
-2.3 
3.6 
-2.8 

18.4 
-10.0 
28.5 
0.3 
28.2 
18.9 

8.0 
39.1 
19.3 

16.1 
14.3 
19.9 
10.4 
-3.8 
3.8 
2.8 

56.9 
24.9 

53.0 
69.6 
6.4 
14.0 
4.6 

7.7 
4.7 
-3.8 
-7.6 

2.1 
-3.8 
4.0 
-2.0 
-2.1 
2.3 
0.0 
17.7 
4.0 

17.6 
-12.5 
30.1 
-0.7 
30.8 
24.0 

6.7 
44.2 
4.5 

15.6 
13.8 
19.7 
10.1 
4.1 
4.1 
2.0 

62.8 
30.9 

50.1 
72.0 
6.7 
12.0 
4.2 

1.6 
5.5 
-9.8 
-9.3 

1.5 
3.1 
3.4 
5.1 
5.7 
4.3 
-0.6 
-3.2 
0.5 

18.0 
-4.6 
22.6 
-0.8 
23.4 
19.4 

6.7 
51.0 
6.0 

15.5 
13.4 
19.5 
9.5 
-4.0 
4.0 
0.6 

60.4 
35.7 

51.0 
71.4 
7.6 
17.0 
4.7 

2.1 
-1.7 
-3.4 
-3.3 

2.0 
1.4 
4.0 
3.4 
3.3 
8.2 
8.4 
1.8 
2.8 

18.0 
-4.4 
22.4 
-0.2 
22.6 
18.4 

6.0 
51.9 
10.6 

15.6 
13.9 
18.8 
9.5 
-3.3 
3.3 
2.7 

65.0 
27.3 

48.9 
63.2 
7.4 
16.8 
4.9 

1.7 
-1.6 
-2.5 
-3.4 

2.5 
2.2 
4.5 
4.3 
4.2 
7.4 
7.4 
4.4 
5.3 

18.2 
-3.9 
22.1 
0.4 
21.7 
18.2 

5.5 
52.5 
10.2 

15.9 
14.3 
18.6 
9.6 
-2.7 
2.7 
0.6 

62.2 
26.0 

47.5 
56.3 
7.0 
15.1 
4.9 

2.4 
0.0 
-1.7 
-3.3 

2.9 
2.4 
5.0 
4.5 
4.3 
8.0 
8.0 
7.2 
7.3 

18.7 
-3.5 
22.2 
1.0 
21.2 
18.7 

5.0 
53.7 
10.3 

16.3 
14.7 
18.4 
9.7 
-2.1 
2.1 
0.3 

59.2 
24.2 

46.4 
51.0 
7.5 
14.9 
4.8 

2.5 
0.3 
-1.3 
-3.2 

2.9
2.5
5.0
4.5
4.4
9.1
9.2
7.4
8.1

19.4
-3.0
22.4
1.0
21.4
19.0

5.0
54.9
10.3

16.6
15.1
18.1
9.8
-1.6
1.6
-0.7

56.1
22.9

45.8
46.7
6.6
11.9
4.8

3.4
1.4
-1.0
-3.0

Philippines - Key Exposure Indicators

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Indicator 

1998 

1999 

E]stimate 
2000 

2001 

2002 

Projected
2003 

2004 

2005

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$b)a

Net disbursements (US$b)a 

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$b)a

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)C
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$b)d 
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$b)d 

IFC (US$b)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$mJ 

48.3 

53.0 

50.1 

51.0 

48.9 

47.5 

46.4 

45.8

-3.1 

4.7 

3.1 

6.4 

0.4 

6.7 

1.0 

7.6 

-2.2 

7.4 

-1.4 

7.0 

-1.1 

7.5 

117.9 
74.1 
11.6 
23.7 

17.6 
30.7 

1.6 
4.3 
3.6 
0.2 

115.8 
69.6 
14.0 
25.3 

105.5 
72.0 
12.0 
24.8 

13.1 
23.6 

1.4 
4.0 
3.3 
0.2 

13.1 
24.6 

1.2 
3.6 
3.0 
0.2 

125.7 
71.4 
17.0 
27.5 

11.6 
22.2 

1.5 
3.3 
2.7 
0.2 

110.9 
63.2 
16.8 
30.9 

11.1 
29.3 

1.4 
3.4 
2.7 
0.2 

101.9 
56.3 
15.1 
32.6 

10.0 
31.9 

1.3 
3.3 
2.7 
0.2 

91.6 
51.0 
14.9 
32.9 

9.8 
28.8 

1.2 
3.4 
2.7 
0.2 

161 
36 

186 
72 

256 
56 

204 
68 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 

n.a. 
n.a. 

-0.6

6.6

83.1
46.7
11.9
32.1

10.8
30.6

1.1
3.2
2.7
0.2

n.a.
n.a.

38 

83 

60 

140 

131 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a.

a. inciuaes pUDIIC ana puonicy guaranmeea aeor, pnvare nonguarameea, use or ir creairs ana net snorE-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defned as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.
f. MIGA's outstanding gross exposure, as of FY end; FY02 gross exposure as of February 28, 2002.

Philippines
Operations Portfolio (IBRDIIDA and Grants)
As Of Date 04t04t2002

Annex B8
Page I of2

Closed Projects 

140

IBRDI1DA
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

536.00
20.68
8,055.50
5,899.60
8,591.54
5,920.31
821.58
0.00
821.58

Active Prolects 

Project ID 

P037079 
P059933 
P004595 
P004403 
P066069 
P058842 
P066509 
P057731 
P004408 
P004565 
P039019 
P059491 
P040981 
P065113 
P004602 
P004567 
P048588 
P039022 
P004611 
P004576 
P004614 
P057598 
P051386 
P004571 
P004613 
Overall result 

Project Name 

AGRARIAN REFORM COMM 
COASTAL MARINE 
COMMUNITY BASED RESO 
CONS. OF PRIORITY PR 
LAND ADMIN & MANAGEMENT 
MINDANAO RURAL DEV 
MMURTRIP-BICYCLE NWK 
METRO MANILA URBAN TRANSPORT 
ODS INVESTMENT PROJE 
PH-EARLY CHILD DEV. 
PH-FIRST NATIONAL ROADS IMPROVEMENT 
PH-LGU URBAN WATER & SAN APL2 
PH-SECOND SUBIC BAY 
PH-SOCIAL EXPENDITURE MGMT 
PH-THIRD ELEMENTARY EDUCATION 
PH-WOMENS HEALTH & SAFE MOTHERHOOD 
PHIL-LGU FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
PHIL-LGU URBAN WATER & SANITATION PROJECT 
PHIL-MANILASEWERAGEII 
PHIL-WATER DISTRICTS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
RURAL FINANCEII 
RURAL FINANCE III 
SZOPAD SOCIAL FUND 
TRANS GRID REINFORCEMENT 
WATER RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT 

at Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

Development 
Oblectives 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

impementatin 
Progress 
S 
U 
U 
U 
S 
U 
# 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

Original Amount In USS Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements '

FY 

IBRD 

IDA GRANT 

Cancel. Undisb. 

Orig. 

Rm
Rev'd

1997 
2000 
1998 
1994 
2001 
2000 
2001 
2001 
1995 
1998 
2000 
2002 
1997 
2000 
1997 
1995 
1999 
1999 
1996 
1998 
1996 
1999 
1998 
1996 
1997 
Result 

50 

50 

4.8 
27.5 

60 

19 
150 
30 
60 
100 
113.4 
18 
100 
23.3 
57 
38.6 
150 
150 
10 
250 
58 
1520 

1.2 

20 

1.3 

15 

37.6 

7 
1.1 
33 
3 
4.1 
23.7 
1.2 
57.6 
3.9 
15.2 
127.9 
27.9
21 
58.6 
72.7 
3.1 
56.1 
18 
42 
32.9 
2.6 
108.9 
0.3 
80.6 
28.3 
630.8 

10 
2 

23.8 

20.1 
4.3 
40 

9 

45.5 
7.3 
162 

-3.2
1.2
27.3
6.9
0.8
10.2
0.1
-1.3
3.9
10.2
37.4

44.9 
58.5
78 
7.4 
21.1
16.3
51 
48.4 
2.6
81.4
0.3
110.8 
32.6 
646.9 

21

29.3
3.1

21.1
17.2

61.7
1.9
155.4

Annex B8

Page 2 of 2

P:hilippines
Stateiment of IFC's
Held and I)isbursed Portfolio
As of 3/31/2002
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval 
Company 
1980/82/85/89/90/94/95 AACT 
1996 
All Asia Growth 
1996 
All Asia Manager 
1996 
AllAsiaVen Mgmt 
2001 
APW Trade 
2000 
Asian Hospital 
1997 
Bataan P/E 
1998 
Drysdale Food 
2001 
Filinvest 
1979/90 
General Milling 
1998 
H&Q PV III 
1989 
H&QPV-I 
1993 
H&QPV-II 
1970/72/00 
Mariwasa 
2000 
MFl MEP 
1993/94 
Mindanao Power 
2001 
MNTC 
1993 
Pagbilao 
2001 
PIATCO 
1992 
Pilipinas Shell 
2000 
PlantersBank 
1998 
Pryce Gases 
2000 
SME.COM 
2000 
STRADCOM 
1995 
Sual Power 
1992 
Union Cement 
1999 
UPPC 
1994 
Walden Mgmt 
1994 
Walden Ventures 

Loan 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
7.00 
29.82 
13.46 
22.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
9.50 
0.00 
0.00 
46.00 
30.00 
50.00 
0.00 
15.00 
13.00 
0.00 
12.00 
27.19 
0.00 
20.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Equity 
2.74 
4.00 
0.04 
0.01 
1.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.73 
5.76 
0.61 
1.16 
0.00 
0.12 
4.26 
0.00 
10.00 
0.00 
1.56 
0.00 
0.00 
0.21 
0.00 
17.50 
5.63 
0.00 
0.05 
1.59 

Quasi 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
3.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
8.71 
0.00 
0.00 
8.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Partic 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
116.55 
10.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
3.00 
50.00 
0.00 
0.00 
5.00 
0.00 
0.00 
140.05 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Loan 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
5.00 
29.82 
11.66 
16.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
9.50 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
30.00 
0.00 
0.00 
15.00 
13.00 
0.00 
0.10 
27.19 
0.00 
20.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Equity 
2.74 
4.00 
0.04 
0.01 
1.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.73 
5.76 
0.61 
1.16 
0.00 
0.12 
4.26 
0.00 
10.00 
0.00 
1.56 
0.00 
0.00 
0.12 
0.00 
17.50 
5.63 
0.00 
0.05 
1.59 

Quasi 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
3.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
8.71 
0.00 
0.00 
8.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Partic
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
116.55
8.80
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
5.00
0.00
0.00
140.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Total.Portfolio: 

294.96 

57.96 

39.71 

324.60 

177.26 

57.87 

39.71 

273.40

Ajpprovals Pending Commitment

*EI 
Zsian Hospital 
Eastwood 
LTO Project 

Loan 
1.00 
0.00 
25.00 
0.00 

Equity 
0.00 
0.00 
3.00 
0.00 

Quasi 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Partic
0.00
5.00
0.00
20.00

2001 
2000 
2002 
2000 

Total Pending Commitment: 

26.00 

3.00 

0.00 

25.00

CAS Program (2003-05) Matrix Based on Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan (MTPDP) 2001-04

1. Macroeconomic Stability and Equitable Growth
Achieve macroeconomic stability and accelerate and sustain growth across sectors, regions and socio-economic groups.

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators U 

Strategies 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

Annex B9

Page 1 of 25

Recent growth
inadequate to generate
rapid poverty
reduction.

Sound and sustainable 
Soundfiscal management * Policy and administrative actions to * Sustained expenditures on * Public Finance 
fiscal management is 
and sustained poverty 
increase revenue mobilization; 
strategic social investments in Strengthening Loan (PFSL) 
critical for confidence in focused public 
* Better management of contingent 
education and basic health 
and future adjustment 
operations. 
macto management and expenditures. 
liabilities and fiscal risks; 
programs. 
the sustainability of 
* Declines in the net 
* Improvements in public, expenditure * Tax/GNP ratio increasing. 
* SEMP 2 loan, 
poverty reducing 
addition to government management through procurement, 
* NG deficit/GNP ratio 
* Public Expenditure, 
expenditures. 
liabilities. 
financial management and budget 
declining. 
Procurement and Financial 
reforms; and 
Management Review 
* Improving the efficiency, 
(PEPFMR). 
effectiveness and equity of public 
* PEPFMR 11.
* Periodic Development
expenditures. 
Policy Reviews (DPR).
* ASEM TF grant supported
technical assistance supporting
public expenditure budgeting
and govemance reforms.
* GDLN programs on fiscal
and debt management.

Satisfactory 
ADB: Analyses of LGU
implementation of PFSL, Finances.
SEMP 2 and future 
IMF: Post-pogram
adjustment loans and of monitoring and TA.
grant assistance. 
Japan: TA for risk
management.
U.S.A.: TA on public
expenditure and resource
mobilization.

Govemance deficiencies Improved governance in See section 4 for details.
create inefficiency, hurt both the public and
the poor and undermine private sectors.
confidence.

1/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Strategies 

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Performance 
Country Outcome 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Indicators 1" 
Areas
Financial sector (banking Financial sector is 
* Improve bank regulation, supervision * Containment of public 
and non-banking) 
strengthened and 
and exit procedures for dealing and 
funding need for bank 
weaknesses create 
deepened 
resolving financially troubled 
resolutions. 
uncertainty and militate * Falling NPL ratio. 
institutions. 
I Increased ability to solve 
against efficient resource * Increased financial 
* Reduce the ratio of non-performing 
failing institutions. 
use. 
sustainability with reduced loans and implement the anti-money 
* Addressed deficiencies 
pending liability on 
laundering initiative. 
identified in the Bangko 
government. 
* Increase the availability of financial Sentral ng Pilipinas 
* Increase in portfolio 
services to a greater portion of the 
assessment. 
investment. 
population. 
' Examinations including Anti 
* Increase in volume of 
Money Laundering compliance 
trading in secondary bond 
conducted.
markets and increased 
I Need for additional financial
issuance (number and 
services identified and draft
value) of corporate bonds. 
plan prepared.

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

Annex B9
Page 2 of 25

* PFSL. 
* Satisfactory 
* Technical assistance through implementation and 
trust funds, and notes on best dissemination of FSAP. 
practice. 
* Satisfactory 
* Financial Sector Assessmen implementation of PFSL 
Program and follow-up. 
and TA. 

ADB: Non-Bank Financial
Sector Loan and
Institutional Capacity
Building for PDIC.
IMF: Consultations and
involvement in FSAP.
U.S.A.: TA for improving
transparency and
accountability of banking
institutions, and addressin
money laundering issues.

Deepen the money and securities 
Deepening of money market as IFC: Deepen and strengthen
markets to increase sources of long term indicated by increased volum financial system through
investment and financring 
inttion building s
introduction ofnew financial
mechanisms (e.g.
securitization and trade
enhancement facilities).

..

Implement a comprehensive reform of Increased financial 
the major retirement income programs sustainability with reduced 
(SSS, GSIS, AFP-RSBS) and 
pending liability on 
contractual savings institutions to assure government 
a more adequate, equitable and
financially viable system.

* PFSL.
* Technical assistance through
trust funds.
* FSAP.

Increase in portfolio 
' Strengthen capital market 
Passage of the Corporate 
* Technical assistance through 
investment, 
development and the availability of long Recovery Act. 
trust funds. 
Increase in volume of 
term equity capital. 
' Reduction in stamp duties. 
* FSAP. 
trading in secondary bona * Support drafting and implementation * Development of a clearing * Notes on best practices. 
markets and increased 
of the Corporate Recovery Act. 
and settlement system. 
issuance (number and 
* Establishment of a bond exchange; 
' Establishment of a bond 
value) of corporate bonds. development of rules and regulations for exchange.
asset securitization and trading. 
* Development of rules and
regulations for asset
securitizabion and trading.

ADB: Non-Bank Financial
Sector Loan.
U.S.A.: TA to the SEC and
for financial sector
regulation and bankrupcy
issues.

I/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Diagnostic 

Strategies 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Performance 
Country Outcome 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Indicators " 
Areas
Infrastructure deficiencies Government and private * Support govemrnment efforts to develop * Full implementation of IRR* Technical assistance through Satisfactory 
limit growth and 
sector partnership in 
and implement frameworks for public- to the Electric Power Industry trust finds. 
implementation of Bank- 
infrastructure 
infrastructure improve 
private partnership in water, transport Reform Act (EPIRA). 
* FSAP. 
financed interventions. 
arrangements expose 
and are more efficient 
and power sector development. This * Announcement of guideline * Notes on best practices. 
government to large fiscal 
includes a framework for managing 
relating to issuance of 
* PEPFMR. 
risks. 
contingent liabilities and issuance of 
guarantees in PPI projects. 
* PFSL. 
guarantees, and clarifying the NG and 
LGU responsibilities. 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

WBG Instruments 

Transport Sector: Output based 
* Introduction of fuel levy to Supervision of ongoing 
Project performance 
funding of investment and long-term 
ensure sustainable 
National Roads Improvement indicators. 
performance based maintenance 
maintenance. 
Project (NRlMP) I 
contracting; procurement and financial * Implementation of 
Development of NRIMP-II 
management reforms in DPWH to 
procurement and financial 
strengthen delivery of infrastructure. management systems.
Support policy reforms for Philippine
Nationanl Railway, and water transport

In power sector: 
Power Sector: Restructuring, NPC 
* New entrants of private privatization, and strengthening 
players. 
distribution. 
* Higher rural 
electrification ratios. 

* Implementation progress * Continued policy analysis Project performance 
and results of NPC 
and dialogue, monitoring of 
indicators and ratings; 
privatization. 
the finances of NPC and its 
adequacy on donors' 
* Adequacy of tariff and 
successor; APL for Rural 
coordination. 
subsidy policy. 
Power Project, proposed co- 
* Improvements in operationa financing with GEF for 
and financial performance of renewable energy component 
electric cooperatives. 
* IFC: Support selected 
newly privatized National 
Power Corporation assets, as 
well as renewable energy and 
energy efficiency projects; and
support to selected rural
electric cooperatives.

1/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Annex B9
Page 3 of 25

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

ADB: Support through
lending and policy analyses
in broad infrastructure
sector.
U.S.A.: TA for regulatory
framework and competitive
procurement (in roads,
ports, shipping, aviation,
railways, power, telecom,
and M.

ADB: Sixth road project
and TA for rural roads.
Austria: Bridge program
Japan: Various road
projects.

ADB: Power Sector
Restructuring Program
Loan and possible loan for
rural electrification.
Japan: Loan for power
transmission, geothermal
rehabilitation, and TA for
hydropower and natural gas
areas.
U.S.A.: TA for power
sector restructuring.

Annex B9
Page 4 of 25

Diagnostic 

Strategies 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

WBG Instruments 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators " 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas
In water sector: 2 
Water Sector: 
* More private sector 
Manila Second Sewerage 
Project performance 
ADB: Water supply sector
* Improved water and 
* Assist water utilities to improve 
participation in water and 
Project. 
indicators. 
loan.
sanitation services in all operational efficiency and 
sanitation sector. 
Water District Development Meeting APL triggers. 
Japan: Various projects
urban areas. 
accountability to consumers. 
* Increasing private financial Project. 
Successful implementatio and TA on water supply.
* Deepen private sector participation in resources into water and 
LGUUWSP APL I and APL2. of TA. 
Spain: Water project.
the sector. 
sanitation. 
LGUUWSP APL3.
* Consolidate the gains in private 
TA for drafting the legislation
sector participation in operations of 
to establish a Water
LGU water services. 
Regulatory Commission
* Further private sector participation b 
(WRC).
attracting private financing. 
TA for establishing a Contrac
* Assist Local Water Utilities 
Administration Unit.
Administration reform. 
PHRD Grant on Local Water
Utilities Administration
reform.

Improved urban 
Other Urban services: Improve urban Rate of solid waste sanitary Urban Development Sector 
environment (water, air environment by investing in drainage, disposal. 
Study. 
quality measures). 
wastewater treatment, solid waste and 
City Development Strategies. 
air pollution reduction. 
Urban Environment Service 
Delivery and Management 
Study. 
LOGOFIND. 

ADB: Metro Manila Air
Quality Improvement
Program.
Sweden: Air Quality Mgt.
Japan: Solid waste mgt.
projects.
U.S.A.: Solid waste mgt.

1/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

2/Relevant MDG targets to which these objectives will contribute: "Halve, by 2015, proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water" and "by 2020, to have
achieved a significant improvement in the lives of slum dwellers."

Diagnostic 

Strategies 

WBG Instruments 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Performance 
Country Outcome 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Indicators It 
Areas
Investment and trade 
Investor confidence and * Policy and regulatory reforms, in 
* Lowering of spreads in 
* Policy advice under Trust 
environment needs reform willingness to participate particular trade liberalization and 
international borrowing. 
Fund arrangements. 
to strengthen competition in private sector improves deregulation for agriculture and 
* Simplified business permit * Alliance with institute of 
and competitiveness. 
(leading to improved 
service sector activities. 
approval process at LGU 
Corporate Directors to deliver 
competitiveness in 
* Inprove corporate govemance. 
level. 
corporate govemance training 
agriculture, industry, and * Improve arrangement for resolving * Securities and Exchange 
* Possible future policy-base 
services) 
cases of insolvency quickly. 
Commission and Philippine 
lending. 
* Investor Rating/EIU 
* Privatization of public enterprises and Stocl Exchange guidelines 
* Report on Standards and 
business environment 
facilitation of private investment 
regarding appointment of 
Codes assessment on corporate 
ratings; 
infrastructure, 
corporate directors. 
govemance insolvency and 
* Improved private secto * Land market reform (rural and 
auditing and accounting. 
perception of business 
urban). 
environment; 
* Professionalization in 
appointing directors in 
GOCCs. 

Greater competition in 
Review the cause of high transport costs 
inter-island shtpping and esp. in shipping. Philippines National 
transportation. 
Railways (PNR) - implementation of 
concessioning. 

Policy advice under Trade and 
Transport Facilitation project 
for East Asia region. 

SME Development. 
* Support diversification of collateral 
and secured lending regime. 
* Create a level playing field with 
regard to trade, competition, tax and 
FDI policies. 

* Changes in secured lending Policy advice under Trust 
laws to permit floating 
Fund arrangements. 
charges. 
IFC: Microfinance institution 
* Removal of size based fisca in Davao, other investments 
and tax incentives. 
in the Visayas/Mindanao 
* Enactment of uniform 
region. 
regulations and standards for
all types of microfinance
institutions.
* Training BSP examiners in
supervision and monitoring o
microfinance institutions.

1/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Annex B9

Page 5 of 25

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

ADB: Export
Competitiveness Projects.
Australia: Support for
training of trainers in
corporate governance.
Canada: Business
Advisory (BAP) Project
and Private Enterprise
Accelerated Resource
Linkages (PEARL) Project.
Japan: Various projects
supporting industries and
TA for investment
promotion.
U.S.A.: TA for
privatization and
open/equal access to
markets and inputs.

ADB: Support through
ongoing TA.
U.S.A.: TA in ports and
shippping.

Canada: BAP and PEARL
Projects.
Spain: support to SMEs.
U.S.A.: TA on
microtinance and credit
policy improvement.

Diagnostic 

Strategies 

Support ICT deployment and 

technology modernization. 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 1 
ITservices: -' 

* Renewed investment. 

* Increase in number of 

Filipino IT service firms 
that qualify for 
intemational certification 
such as CMM and ISO. 

Sustained investments in See section 3for details

human resources.

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

Annex B9
Page 6 of 25

Japan: Project and TA in

telecommunications.

U.S.A.: TA in e-commerce

and ICT.

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas
Development of self- 

Possible IFC investment 

regulating mechanisms in E- operations. Assisting 

commerce. 

development of the country's 

software and technology- 
related sector; ongoing
investment support to
cyberpark and technology-
related projects.

I/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

3/ Relevant MDG target: "Incorporation with private sector, make available benefits of new technologies, especially information and communication."

Annex B9
Page 7 of 25

2. Accelerating Environmentally Sustainable Rural Development with Social Equity
Undertake comprehensive poverty-focused rural development based on productivity improvements, agrarian reform and socially and environmentally sustainable development4'

Strategies 

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 
Pervasive poverty and Increased incomes (farm Refer below 
low incomes in rural 
and non farm) and social 
areas, particularly in wel being in rural areas, 
poor regions and 
and improved natural 

among IPs; and a 

declining natural 
resource base, 

resource management. 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas

' % increase in income in 
selected areas.
* % increase in social well
being indicators among fanne

(CIDSS survey).

a Participation and benefits to
poverty groups.
* Environmental Indicators
improving.

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

Refer below 

Refer below 

Refer below

tLow 

Interisland shipping reforms. 

Contributors to Low Market distortionsfor 
Promote priority policy and market National Food Administration Demand-driven policy 
Incomes and Low 
agriculturalproducts are reforms affecting rural sector incomes restructuring. 
notes/advice. 
Agricultural Growth: 
reduced, transaction costs and market led growth. 
loweredL and market-led 
levels of investor improvements beginning, 
confidence due to high * Reduced levels of 
transaction costs and 
protection for rice, com 
policy and market 
and sugar, stability in 
distortions; poor access 
supplies. 
to markets by producers, Lower transaction costs. 
inefficient markets; 
' Increase in investor
poor linkage between 
confidence in specific
production and market 
areas.
signals. 
* Increase in pnvate sector
investments.

Timely completion of 
demand-driven policy 
note(s); effective 
Policy dialogue associated 
coordination with 
with preparation of the 
concerned donors such as
Reduced protection coefficients Diversified Farm Income an ADB and USAID; impact
for rice, corn and sugar. Shift Agricultural Modemization visible in contributing to
policy debate and policy
from general rice subsidy to 
Project (DFIAM). 
more accurately-targeted 
changes.
subsidy programs for the poor.

ADB: Grains Sector
Development Program.
U.S.A.: TA for grains sector
reforms.

4/ Relevant MDG targets to which these objectives contribute: 'Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people with income below Si/day."

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 

Strategies 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

Annex B9
Page 8 of 25

* Create market-based incentives to 
Successful provision of 
mobilize private sector investments and appropriate market-based 
participation in rural enterprise 
incentives (e.g.., streamlined 
development and diversification of 
institutional and regulatory 
incomes and employment 
procedures, etc.). 
opportunities. 
Incentives for private sector to 
invest in grains trading. 

Policy dialogue and DFIAM. Development of effective U.S.A.: TA for investment
Rural Finance 11 & 111. 
monitoring and 
facilitation
benchmarking system, and
qualitative assessment of
impacts (IDF Spn
reports).
Assessed impact of PER
and DFIAM on budget
programming and overall

RD/NRM investmnents

(spn reports, stakeholder
workshops, GOP
feedback).

* Support provision of rural credit and Successful devlopment of rural Rural Finance H and m. 
rural finance, including microfinance, credit program (monitored 
and targeting mechanisms for access t through RF H and m 
finance by the poor. 
supervision). 

Monitoring of RF HI and ADB: Strengthening Rural
I. 
Microenterprise Finance.
JSDF Grant on Improving 
Expansion of credit 
Canada: Promoting
Microfinance Access for 
provisions in volume and Participation in Sustainable
Barangay and Town-Based measured degree to -whicl Enterprise (PPSE) Project.
Enterprises. 
thist is getting to the poor U.S.A.: TA for

(surveys). 

microfinance facilitation

including Microenterprise
Access to Banking Services
Project.

* Contribute to budget programming Performance-based, multiyear Ongoing IDF Grant on 
Development of effective
reforms. 
budget linked to priorities 
RD/NRM Monitoring and monitoring and
- Increase level of public expenditure spelled out in the MTPDP. 
Indicator System Project 
benchmarking system, and
on rural sector investments to a level 
"Harmonized" DA-DAR-DENR managed by NEDA. 
qualitative assessment of
that will support stable and sustained budgets. 
impacts (IDF Spn
growth. 
Increased budget for planning, PER on RD/NRM. 
reports).
- Appropriately prioritize RD/NRM monitoring and evaluation. 
Assessed impact of PER
public expenditures to maximize 
and DFLAM on budget
impact. 
programming and overall
RD/NRM investments.

DFIAM objectives will 
integrate with budget 
programming. 

Annex B9
Page 9 of 25

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 

Strategies 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

CDD approaches are 
* Aim to develop more pilots. 
used as a common 
* Broadbase and scale up successfuil 
approach in the RD/NRM programs. 
sector. Pilot approaches, 
and broadbase successful 

pibts. 

Development using 
Community and 
Demand Driven 
Participatory 
Approaches is 
achieving results in 
many instances, as an 
equitable way of 
achieving augmented 
welfare, incomes and 
natural resources 
management, but needs 
broadbasing for wider 
impact. 

* Successful RD/NRM using * For broadbasing: Agrarian * Project spns, M&E and ADB, Belgium, Japan,
these approaches. 
Reform Communities 
independent evaluations EC: Support to agrarian
* Development of more pilots. Development Project 
of progress, impact and 
reform communities, which
* Successffil broadbasing. 
(ARCDP), Land 
outcomes. 
is a multi-donor program.
(as measured by achievements, Administration & 
* Stakeholder surveys an Australia: Grant
surveys and outcomes). 
Management Project (LAMP) workshops. 
confmancing of LAMP.
(after LIL pilot) and Rural
Fmance.
* Implement MRDP regional
approach with LGUs as the
imnplementor, CBRMP, and
proposed ARMM Social
fimd, for potential later
broadbasing.
I Continue introducing
further pilots.

Decentralization has 
LGU capabilities to 
been enacted, and 
implement rural 
LGUs are effectively 
developmentprograms 
the implementers of 
are strengthened 
rural development, yet * enhanced capacity as 
their capacity 
evidenced by stronger 
(manageriaL financial development activities anc 
and technical) to 
increased rural sector 
implement is often 
investments, including 
weak, constraining 
from self-generated funds. 
rural development. 

Help strengthen LGU capabilities in Degree to which LGU 
* National programs such as * Interlinkage with and ADB: LGU Infrastructure
managerial, financial and technical 
capacities develop as measured ARCDP, LAMP to include 
preferably a direct role by Devevelopment Project.
areas, using national and regional 
in effectiveness of LGUs, 
TA to participating LGUs in LGUs to be aimed for 
U.S.A.: TA to LGUs for
programs as mechanisms to help 
expenditures on rural 
their areas of activity. 
during project design. 
imnproved govemance, env.
achieve this. 
development by LGUs and 
* Regional projects such as 
I Increase in LGU 
mgt., and delivery of basic
NEDA and other benchmarking. MRDP, to focus on LGU 
capacities for resource 
services.
Increased collaboration between implementation and capacity allocation and
DA, DAR, DENR and agencies building; ARMM Social 
mobilization as they
such as NIA with LGUs. 
Fund will have a capacity 
respond to priority
building objective. 
community needs.
* Progressive
institutionalization of a
performance-based
indicator system for
RDINRM, and
improvement in such
indicators.

Annex B9
Page 1O of25

Strategies 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

Community-based approaches to 
* LGU and beneficiary 
Most Bank-financed 
* Successful 
infrastructure creation, rehabilitation 
contributions increase; 
RD/NRM projects include 
implementation of 
and maintenance, done and maintained * Poverty targeted and poverty participatory processes and projects (Spn reports, 
by local communities, working closely impact, finding of ways to 
target poorer households and independent studies 
with LGUs. 
ensure sustainabiility of 
communities: 
including of poverty 
investments (O&M). (measured ARCDP I and 11; 
impact). 
by budget figures, poverty 
MRDP APL I & 2; SZOPAD * Projects serve as base 
impact surveys, consultant 
Social Fund; CBRMP; 
for future scaling up (e.g.,
studies). 
WRDP; ARMM Social Fund ARCDP, SZOPAD).
* Infrastructure created is
sustainable (O&M by
communities
demonstrated by M&E
and surveys).

AAA on Rural Infra O&M. 

ADB: Infrastructure
Support for Agricultural
Productivity Project.
Multidonor: ARCDP
program.
Saudi Fund: SZOPAD
cofinancing.

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 

Serious past 
Investment in rural 
Underinvestment in 
infrastructure is 
Rural Infrastructure: 
enhanced: 
Farm to Market roads, * higher overall govt. 
irrigation, village water investment in rural 
supply and sanitation, 
infrastructure. 
other community 
* LGUs and beneficiaries 
infrastructure. 
contributing to investment 
Contributes to low 
* investment getting to 
asset base of rural 
poor villages and 
sector, reduces growth benefiting poor groups 
and contributes to 
(women, IPs, isolated 
rural impoverishment, communities, poorer 
regions). 
* investment is
sustainable including
community operations an
maintenerice (0OV`).

Insecurity of land 
Provide security of tenure Land Tiding and Land Acquisition Success in the LAMP pilot 
LAMP LIL is piloting land Success of LAMP, and Australia: Grant
tenure, particularly for through eventual national Reform: Fast track the 
(benefits to participants, finding titling approaches. Possible Govt. commitment, 
cofinancing of LAMP.
the poor, inhibits 
program. 
implementation of land reform and 
a grass-roots institutional 
follow-up LAMP project 
enabling progressive
investment, does not 
improve land administration and 
model, including establishment would seek to broadbase. 
scaling up to a national
enable land as 
management systems. 
of enabling land reform 
program (Govt. feedback,
collateral, and reduces 
* Secure title to land benefiting the 
legislation and establishing a Proposed Community 
project spn reports,
Government tax base. 
poor, and stimulating rural investment dedicated 
institution) would Managed Agrarian Reform beneficiary surveys,
and access to credit. 
enable a broadbased national 
Project (LIL) to pilot a land 
inbuilt consultant
* Broader tax base and land based 
program. 
acquisition program. 
evaluation studies under
revenues. 
LAMP).
* Provision of instruments for
legitimizing communities, IPs and
occupants of public lands to security
and livelihood and resource base
protection.

Annex B9
Page II of 25

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 

Strategies 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

ARCDP needs scaling Scale up 
up. 

Broadbase Agrarian Reform 
* Faster implementation of 
Communities Program (ARCDP). 
agrarian reform law. 
* continue the scale-up of the ARCDF .* Budget for land acquisition 
increased. 
* Increase in the number of 
agrarian reform beneficiaries. 

ARCDP I and ARCDP 11. Outcome and performance ADB, Belgium, Japan,
The projects are financing the targets under the project, EC: Support to agrarian
scale-up, and helping 
and significant M&E and reform communities, which
improve the program. 
independent evaluations 
is a multi-donor program.
of income and poverty
impacts.

Uneven rural 
Resources to and impact Target expenditures and development * realized greater targeting of * Discussions with GOP on Regional poverty impact Consensus on regional
development 
in poorer regions are 
activities. 
expenditures and achieved 
priorities, regional focus and note. 
poverty focus with other
regionally. Need to pay increased: 
development to poorer regions. expenditures. 
donors.
special attention to 
* realized greater targeting 
* niral incomes in these areas * Portfolio has some regional
poorer regions. 
of expenditures and 
increasing. 
poverty focus under the
achieved development to 
national programs (e.g.
poorer regions. 
ARCDP, CBRMP), and in
* rural incomes in these 
location of specific projects,
areas increasing. 
such as Mindanao (refer
below).

Special Need for 
development of 
Mindanao and its 
ARMM provinces. 

Raise rural incomes and Dedicated Mindanao Development 
welfare, including of the Strategy under preparation. 
poor, in post-conflict 
Mindanao (refer also to 
Section 3 of matrix), 
especially in ARMM 
provinces. 

* Mindanao Development 
* Contribution to GOP's 
Successful partnership Donor community expecte
Strategy successfully prepared Mindanao Development 
with GOP, ARMM, 
to contribute significantly,
and attracts donor support 
Strategy. 
NGOs and donor 
especially if Mindanao
(projects, funds). 
* Coordination, at GOP's 
community, and 
Development Strategy is
* Rural incomes increasing. 
request, of donor community implementation of 
sound and enables
* Peace and Development 
efforts. 
Mindanao Development 
inclusivity, and ARMM
successfully occurs. 
* SZOPAD Social Fund. 
Strategy. 
Social Fund project starts
* MRDP APL. 
* Stakeholder workshops successfully.
* Proposed ARMM Social 
to continuously assess Many ODA partners have
Fund project. 
progress, shortcomings, 
related activities through
* Continue targeting of 
impact and outcomes. 
bilateral or mulit-donor
project activities in 
* Intensive M&E and 
programs.
Mindanao. 
outcome assessments
inbuilt into projects.
* Mindanao Social
Assessment.

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 

Strategies 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

Partnership 
Develop such 
Necessary actors include the 
Harmonization of approaches 
Partnerships with 
* Self-evaluation for all 
Successful partnerships
Approaches are Needed Partnerships in both 
stakeholders themselves (farmers, 
and successful partnerships 
communities, LGUs, NGOs, projects, strategy dialogue include ARCDP (multi-
for successful 
development of country 
fisherfolk, communities), LGUs, 
developing and contributing to civil society, private sector, and advisory work. 
donor), LAMP (with
RD/NRM. 
and regional strategies National Agencies (DA, DAR, DENR, RD and NRM. 
govemment agencies and 
* Degree of 
Australia), and a major
and in development 
LBP, DOF, DBM, NEDA, NIA, etc.), 
ODAs. 
decentralization and 
need will be for the
programs. 
NGOs and academia, and donor 
participation in 
Mindanao program (multi-
agencies. 
development projects. 
donor). Opportumities exist
also in non-lending work
(e.g., water, irrigation,
NRM) with ADB and other
ODA partners.

Annex B9
Page 12 of25

Depleted and declining Promote changes in 
natural resource base. Natural Resources 
Population pressure, poor Management (NRM) 
"olzc.es ands.tratc1.'. 
ecosystem management 
and inconsistent policies; 
integrated ecosystems 
approach is not utilized 
to effectively manage 
communal resources and 
improve rural poor's 
access to, and 
management of such 
resources; lack of 
updated assessment on
critical issues and
constraints in natural
resource management.

-. 

It -u 

programs. 

* Examine main constraints and issues * GOP/Bank partnership in 
National Resource 
* Completion of NRM 
ADB: Mindanao
for the NRM sector and formulate a se undertaking the NRM study. Management (NRM) Sector sector review. 
Community-Based Forestry
of recommended policies and strategic * Ownership and timely action Study. 
* Impact on GOP policies, Mgt. Project; Irrigation
assistance for the sector. 
on 
* Support sustainable community- 
recommendations of the NRM 
based resource management programs sector review. 
using an integrated ecosystems 
* Consistency with Agenda 21 
approach, targeted to LGUs and poor goals. 
rural communities. 
* Pilot through Bank-supported 
projects with objective of future 
broadbasing. 

Australia: Phil-Australia
Community Asst. (PACAP)
Program.
UNDP: Various TA on
environment and natural
resources management.
U.S.A.: TA for env. and
natural resources mgt.,
including at LGU level.

NIzMu sta'egy aU NWY1 Sector Review.

5/ Relevant MDG target to which these objectives contribute: "Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse loss of environmental resources."

Annex B9
Page 13 of 25

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 

Strategies 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

Implementation of 
NRM requires 
community-based 
approaches 

Community-based 
Community-based NRM 
* Adoption of key 
Ongoing Projects: 
In areas targeted by the 
Japan: Community-Based
approachesforNRM. s management: Improve natural 
recommendations of the NRM Community-Based Resource Bank projects: improved Upland Development.
resources management and 
sector review. 
Management Project 
NRM practices by 
U.S.A.: TA for
environmental protection through an * Adoption of integrated 
(CBRMP), Water Resources communities, LGUs, and enviromment and natural
integrated ecosystems approach and 
ecosystems approach and 
Development Project 
concerned NGOs; increase resources mgt.
using community-based initiatives 
community-based resource 
(WRDP), MRDP Coastal 
in coastal and forestry
and LGU empowerment in managing management as core policy for Marine Bio-diversity 
areas covered by
protected areas, coastal, upland areas, NRM 
Conservation Component; 
community-based mgt;
watersheds, etc. 
* Land-carrying capacity 
Wetdands Biodiversity 
improved capacities of
maintained. 
Project. 
LGUs on NRM.
* Maximum sustainable yields
maintained.
* Increase in forest cover from
improved forest protection,
natural regeneration,
agroforestry and tree farms.

.

Water requires 
Initiate Comprehensive Commence management of water on a 
management on a river river basin management 
river basin basis (pilot through 
basin basis 
of water. 
proposed River Basin Management 
project). 

Proposed Projects: 
Laguna de Bay LIL. 

* Successful project 
Canada: Ecosystem-based
implementation. 
Watershed Management.
* Improved river basin Component under Phil-
River Basin Management 
management and positive Canada Environmental and
Project. 
trends in environmental Economic Management.
Possible NRM sector projec and income indicators. 
. (PCEEM) Project.
following the NRM sector 
Japan: Masterplan Study
review. 
for Watershed Management.
in Upper Magat and
Cagayan River.

5/ Relevant MDG target to which these objectives contribute: "Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse loss of environmental resources."

Promote human development services in education, health, shelter, water and sanitation; Improve socialprotection of the poorest and most vulnerable; Promote sustainedpeace and development in Mindanao

3. Comprehensive Human Development through Access to Basic Social Services

Annex B9
14 of 25

Diagnostic 

Strategies 

WBG Instruments 

World Bank Performance Major Related Activities
Indicators 
of Other Donors

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Performance 
Country Outcome 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Indicators 
Areas
Education: 
Improvement in the 
* Simplify curriculum with focus on 
* Simplified curriculum in 
Ongoing: Third Elementary * Improved performance of ADB: Non-Formal
* Deficiencies in quality quality of student 
math, languages and science; Increase 
place in 80% of schools. 
Education Project (TEEP); 
TEEP. 
Education Project
of education across the 
outcomes and retention in textbooks and instructional materials per * 80% of elementary and 
Early Childhood 
* Improved performance o (completed); proposed
system. 
the educational system 61 student. 
secondary teachers trained in Development Project (ECD); pre-school and Grade I 
Secondary Education
* Skill shortage and 
* Student achievement tes * Improve teacher performance through new curriculum. 
First and Second Social 
components of ECD 
Improvement Project.
training needs. 
scores at elementary and 
pre/in-service training especially on 
* At least a 1:2 
Expenditure Management 
Project. 
Australia: Project on Basic
* High drop-out rate. 
secondary levels increased teaching-learning transactions. 
textbook:student ratio 
Projects (SEMPI; SEMP2); * SEMPI completed on 
Education.
* Low budget for 
from 51.7% in SY`00 to '01 * Prepare children for entry into Grade I nationwide. 
small grants to support 
time. 
Japan: Third Elementary
elementary education 
to 70% by SY'04-'05 and by (a) expanding attendance at day care * New approach(es) to 
Program on Out-of-School * SEMP2 effective by FY03 Education Project,
relative to need. 
from 53.4% in SY'00 to '01 centers; and (b) enhancing the quality of providing altemative leaming Children and Youth (OSY). Ql; timely disbursements. Education Facilities
to 70% by SY'04-'05 
the 8-week curriculum for entering 
opportunities for children 
Planned: Possible 
* Alternative Leaming 
Improvement Project,
respectively (National 
Grade I students. 
under 15 developed and 
Altenative Leaming Systems Systems Project LIL in 
Science and Mathematics
Education Statistics). 
* Develop Altemative Learnig Systems tested; participation in non- 
LEL; analytical paper on out- FY03 or 04. 
Education Manpower
* 2.3% decrease in 
(non-formal education) for children 15 
formal education 
of-school youth; education * Education Sector Policy Development Project.
elementary drop out rate. 
years and below. 
(accreditation equivalency) 
sector policy notes. 
Notes prepared.
* Incease in saisfacttion 
* Improve teacher depn!o,_ent and 
among out-of-schoo! youm
with education services management. 
increased.
among poor (Filipino 
* Protect budget for basic education in * In event of revenue shortfall,
Report Card). 
event of budget shortfall. 
reduction in budget
allocations for basic education
less than overall reduction.

e Weak implementation 
of education programs 
and projects by 
government agencies. 

Improvement in 
Provide TA and training to Department * Teacher redeployment
performance of DepEd of Education in procurement, financial 
program implemented.
Programs and Projects: management and resource allocation (with
* Prices ofpublicly 
focus on teacher deployment and
procured textbooks 
management).
reduced 
* Involve principals and Parent Teacher
* 20% of new 
Community Associations in oversight of
construction of 
School Building Program.
elementary school
buildings completed
within 90-days.
* Procurementjinancial
management and
resource allocation
rocedures in DepEd
more transparent
* Correspondence
between needs and
assignments in teacher
deployment.

6/Relevant MDG target to which these objectives will contribute: "Ensure that, by 2015, boys and girls will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling."

Diagnostic 

7/ 

Strategies 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Performance 
Country Outcome 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Indicators 
Areas
Health: 
Increase in utilization of * Provide integrated early childhood 
* HSRA implementation 
* Health outcomes behind and satisfaction with the development services. 
ongoing in 16 convergence 
quality of health care 
comparators', uneven 
* Implement five components of Health sites (PhilHealth enrollment 
across regions. 
services, especially among Sector Refomm Agenda (HSRA) in 
rates increased; number of 
* Differentials in access, 
low income households. 
selected convergence sites: health 
PhilHealth accredited and 
standards, quality of 
insurance, public health, hospital 
Sentrong Sigla facilities 
services. 
* Increase in the utilization development, local health systems and 
increased; Public hospitals 
* High cost of drugs. 
rate of health services 
health regulation (esp. drug pricing/ 
financially viable; drugs 
* Low health insurance 
among low income 
procurement/retailing/distribution). 
available in public facilities, 
coverage among poor. 
households. 
* Protect budgets for priority public 
etc.). 
* Public health spending ' 50% decrease in price of health programs. 
' Drug retailing network with 
low and uneven across 
drugs most commonly used 
socially-oriented prices in 
LGUs. 
by poor. 
place in 16 HSRA 
* Increase in satisfaction 
convergence sites. 
with health services among 
' PhilHealth policy package 
poor (Filipino Report 
more pro-poor (reduced out-of 
Card). 
pocket payments among 
* At least 30% of target 
lower income groups; 
Indigents and 10% of 
increased support level of 
target Individually Paying 
services commonly used by 
Participants enrolled in 
poor, etc.). 
PhilHealth program. 
' In event of revenue shortfalL 
reduction in budget
allocations for health less than
overall reduction.

Annex B9
15 of 25

WBG Instruments 

World Bank Performance Major Related Activities
Indicators 
of Other Donors

SEMP2; ECD; HSRP; 
analytical work on health 
financing (drug regulation 
and pricing, social health 
insurance policies, etc.). 
WBI: Flagship course on 
health sector reforms. 

* Accelerated 
ADB: Co-financier of ECD
implementation of ECD 
Project; support to
health component. 
development of local health
* HSRA implementation 
systems.
ongoing in 4 Bank-funded U.S.A.: Support to family
convergence sites. 
planning, PhilHealth,
* TA, HR development 
development of convergence
and capital improvements 
zones.
for BFAD, procurement and UNFPA: Active in family
FM teams delivered. 
planning and reproductive
* Drug pricing and 
health.
PhiHHealth Policy Notes 
UNICEF: Support to
contribute to development women and child health an
of pro-poor drug and health nutrition.
insurance policies. 
UNAIDS and EC: Support
to HIV/AIDS, development
of community partnerships.
Japan: Funding for family
planning and MCH, HIV
and STDs, and TB.
Germany: Support to
HSRA.

'Weak implementation 
Improvement in 
of health programs and performance of DOH 
projects by government Programs and Projects: 
* Prics ofpublicly 
agencies 
procured drugs reduced
* Procurement and
financial management
procedures in DOH more
eilident

' Provide TA, training and institutional 
inputs to Bureau of Food and Drugs and 
to procurement and financial 
management teams in DOH. 

* Shorter timelines for drug
licensing, procurement
processing and contracting in
DOH.

7/ Relevant MDG targets to which these objectives will contribute: "Reduce by 3/4, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio," "Reduce by 2/3, between 1990 and 2015, the under-5 mortality rate."

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 

Strategies 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas

WBG Instruments 

World Bank Performance Major Related Activities
Indicators 
of Other Donors

Annex B9
16 of 25

High population growth Reduce population 
* Support implementation of DOH's 
rate a binding constraint. growth rate, reduce 
National Family Planning Policy 
fertility rate; increase 
I Revitalize National Family Planning 
contraceptive prevalence: Program based on principles of couples' 
Decreased crude birth rate choice and full information.
per 1000 popn from 29.5
(1998) to 24.6 (2004).
Maternal mortality rates
reducedfrom 0.6 per
1000 live births(1998) to
0.4 per 1000 live births
(2004): DOH Health
Statistics.

Planned: Population 
Population
Management/Women's 
Management/Women's
Health & Safe Motherhood Health & Safe Motherhood
Project 11. 
Project n approved.

Social Protection: 
Increased number of poor * Protect budgets for priority social 
* In event of revenue shortfall, Ongoing: SEMPI, SEMP2, * ECD Project completed on ADB: Co-financier of ECD
* Need for improvements amilies accessing social welfare programs. 
reduction in budget 
ECD, Kalahi Project. 
time; improved quality of Project.
in targeting, scale of 
welfare services: 
* Support expansion of integrated early allocations for ECDP, CIDSS, Planned: Family Income 
Integrated ECD services in Australia: Phil-Australia
social services. 
No. of families 
childhood development services. 
Kalahi programs less than 
Support Project (LIL). 
Region 6. 
Vulnerable Groups Facility
* Opportunity cost (lost participating in CIDSS 
* Reduce opportunity (economic) cost 
overall reduction. 
* Family Income Support 
and PACAP Program.
income) to family of 
increased. v 
of school attendance for poor families 
* Higher share of LGUs 
Project LIL in FY03 or 04. UNICEF: Local
children's attendance in Psychosocial development through family income support 
offering integrated early 
Devevelopment Plans
school and participation of children 0-6 years 
payments conditioned on school 
childhood development 
for Children and other
in other social services. 
fmproved. I 
attendance and participation in other 
programs. 
programs.
Child development index critical social services for children. 
* Pilot project to test family
scores increased, Grade I 
income support payment
drop-out rates decreased in 
systems ongoing.
ECD Project regions.
Increase in school
attendance among
children in poorfanilies
in pilot areas of Family
Income Support Project

(FISP). v

7/Relevant MDG targets to which these objectives will contribute: "Reduce by 3/4, between 1990 and 2015, the matemal mortality ratio," "Reduce by 2/3, between 1990 and 2015, the under-5 mortality rate."
8/Relevant MDG target to which these objectives will contribute: "Halve, between 1990 and 1025, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger."

Strategies 

Diagnostic 

Strategic Object5ves & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 
Gender: 
Reduce levels of violence * Support Govemment and NGO 
I Unacceptably high 
against women and 
programs to end violence against 
incidence of violence 
children. 9 
women and children. 
against women and 
2 Promote reproductive 
e See Population section above. 
children. 
health (see population 
e Strengthen capacity of National 
* Poor reproductive health section above). 
Commission on the Role of Filipino 
* Mainstream gender Women and its partners in assisting 
of women. 
* Lack of responsiveness issues in work of 
agencies and LGUs in designing and 
of govemment programs government agencies 
implementing Gender and Development 
to gender issues. 
across aal sectors: each 
programs, projects, and activities. 
Govermment agency has a 
well-developed strategy to 
address gender issues. 

Annex B9
17 of 25

WBG Instruments 

World Bank Performance MNlajor Related Activities
Indicators 
of Other Donors

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas
* Mechanism for providing 
 Small grants to support 
c Grants to support 
Australia: Activities on
grants to Government and 
Govemment and NGO 
programs on violence 
participatory monitoring of
NGO programs on violence 
programs to end violence 
against women and children. gender projects.
against women and children in against women and 
* See Population section 
Canada: Gender Equality
place. 
children. 
above. 
Fund for various gender
* See Population section 
* See Population section 
* Grant and TA to National projects for NGOs, LGUs,
above. 
above. 
Commission on the Role of and POs, institutional
* National Commission on 
* Possible grant and TA to 
Filipino Women 
strengthening for the
the Role of Filipino Women National Commission on the implemented on time. 
National Commission on the
and its partners assisting 
Role of Filipino Women. 
Role of Filipino Women.
agencies and LGUs in 
UNFPA: RH interventions
designing and implementing 
for selected provinces.
Gender and Development 
UNIFEM: Evaluation of
programs, projects, and 
utilization of 5% Gender
activities. 
and Development budget.
* Increased number of 
UNDP: Gender govemance
agencies and LGUs 
facility for NGOs and
implementing a gender 
LGUs; support for gender
strategy. 
initiatives under Phil.
Govemance Forum.
UNICEF: Violence against
women prevention
strategies.

9/ Relevant MDG target to which these objectives will contribute: "Elimninate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 and to call levels of education no later than 2015."

4. Good and Effective Governance
Promote simple, fair, transparent and predictable rules to improve public sector performance, reduce cost of investing in the country andforge new partnerships between government, private sector and civil
society.

Annex B9
Page 18 of 25

Diagnostic 

Weak governance
reduces effectiveness
and equity of public
expenditures and
impedes delivery of
public services

* Policy, Planning and 
Budgeting 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 10/ 

Strategies 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

Strengthen linkages 
Improve the design and implementation * Presentation of medium term ASEM TF. 
Satisfactory 
ADB: Non-Bank Financial
between policy, planning, of the Medium-Term Expenditure 
expenditure framework 
PEPFMR. 
implementation of PFSL Govemance Program and
and budgeting processes Framework (MTEF) by: 
chapter as part of MTPDP. 
PEPFMR 11. 
and Second Adjustment 
various TA for capacity
* National, sectoral, 
* Linking the MTEF more closely with * Establishment of formal 
PFSL. 
Loan. 
building to LGUs,
regional, and LGU 
the MTPDP. 
planning coordination 
Second Adjustment Loan. Satisfactory 
procurement, PDIC, results
planning processes are 
* Reforming the structure and timetable mechanisms between 
implementation of IDF monitoring.
formally integrated an 
O of the planning process. 
NEDA/DBM -nd the sectors 
C-.ant. 
Canada; Lc
5 Medium-Term 
* Reforming the Medium-Term Public according to a timetable. 
Govermment Support
Philippine Development 
Investment Program (MTPIP) process to * Reform of the role of the 
Program.
Plan (MTPDP) priorities 
improve integration with the MTPDP 
Regional Development
are reflected in both 
and recuffent budget. 
Councils and their relationship
recurrent and capital 
* Improving the accuracy of medium 
with LGUs.
budget allocations over the term revenue estimates. 
* Refom of MTPIP to
medium term. 
* Mainstreaming and enhancing the 
strengthen gatekeeper role of
Sector Effectiveness and Efficiency 
ICC and links to budget.
Reviews. 
* Institutionalization of task
* Increasing civil society involvement in force on revenue forecasting.
budget formulation, execution and 
* Published guidehnes for and
oversight. 
tailored capacity building
program on SEERs and sector
program costings at
departmental level.
* Increased participation of
the Development Budget
Coordination Committee in
management of MTE.
* Regularized coordination
and information sharing with
NGOs.

10/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Annex B9
Page 19 of25

Diagnostic 

* Civil service 

Strategies 

WBG Instruments 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Performance 
Country Outcome 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Indicators 10/ 
Areas
* Make the civil service Develop and implement a civil service * Enactment and 
PEPFMR. 
Satisfactory 
Canada: Policy, Training
more efficient, 
reform package. 
implementation of modem 
ASEM TF (Civil Service 
implementation of PFSL. and TA Facility.
transparent, results 
Target corruption-prone institutions with Civil Service Law. 
Pay and Employment 
Satisfactory 
Japan: Training for Local
oriented and accountable. special anti-corruption action plans. 
* Implementation of 
Modeling). 
implementation of IDF 
Planning and Dev't
* Reduce corruption, 
competitive and sustainable 
Second Adjustment Loan. Grant. 
Officers.
particularly in vulnerable 
compensation policy and 
PHRD Grant for Second 
UNDP: Phil. Govemance
institutiorn. 
greater control over wage bill Adjustment Loan. 
Forum.
expenditures. 
IDF Grant for Civil Service 
U.S.A.: TA for BIR, SEC,
* Movement towards a 
Reform. 
and Dept. of Justice.
sustainable and affordable 
Govemance and Service
level of budgetary 
Delivery Assessment.
employment.
* Development of
organizational and individual
performance standards/
benchmarks.
* Institutionalization of
corruption assessments and
perfofmance on anti-
cornuption action plans.

10/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Annex B9
Page 20 of 25

Diagnostic 

Strategies 

____________________ 

' Public Procurement 
and Financial 
Management (FM). 

WBG Instruments 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Performance 
Country Outcome 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Indicators 101 
Areas
A. Centralprocurement Procurement Streamline public 
' Law adopting intemational PEPFMR and follow-up. 
Ratio of disbursement for ADB: Capacity-building
performance is improved procurement at the NG, LGU and GOCC procurement standards 
Support to Procurement 
WB portfolio reaching 
for procurement and system
* Reduction in average 
levels through adoption and 
presented and discussed by 
Policy Board and 
WB average. Reduction 
for national accounts.
time taken for 
implementation of a framework law on Congress. 
Procurement Service 
of partial cancellation of UNDP: TA to enhance
procurement for different public procurement. 
* Oversight arrangements 
strengthening. 
loans. 
accountability of COA.
categories of goods and 
Establish effective oversight 
established and active. 
Regular portfolio reviews. Satisfactory 
U.S.A.: TA for
services. 
arrangements for public procurement. 
* LGU procurement 
ASEM grant supporting 
implementation of PFSL. procurement reform and for
* Reduction in the number Improve transparency of Priority 
streamlined and consistent. 
govemance reforms. 
sudit practices.
of appeals and disputes 
Development Fund. 
* New Government 
IDFs for Procurement
over procurement process Increase civil society involvement 
Accounting System (NGAS) Policy Board and
and decisions. 
through Procurement Watch and similar implemented in all 
Procurement Service set up,
* Reduction in average 
initiatives. 
departments. 
status, and strengthening.
time taken to setde 
Financial Management Streamline flow * Integrated FM capacity
procurement-related 
of funds to agencies, LGUs and projects. program imnplemented.
appeals and disputes, etc.). Implement NGAS and develop an 
* Creation of the Office of the
B An efficient and 
mtegrated FM capacity building program Controller General.
rifendly FMsystem is 
for National and Local levels. 
' Management Information
working in aU central 
Management/Monitoring & Evaluation System (MIS) in place.
agencaes 
Develop an effective Monitoring
* Increase in number of 
Information System at all levels and
central agencies with clean increase speed of implementation.
audit reports from
Commission on Audit

(COA).

10/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Diagnostic 

* Civic engagement 

Weak governance
undermines public
revenues
* Revenue 
Administration 

Annex B9
Page 21 of 25

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

Canada: Local
Govemment Support
Program.
U.S.A.: Transparent and
Accountable Govemance
Project.

Strategies 

WBG Instruments 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas
Civil society feedback and involvement * Drafting and implementation Continued support to NGOs 
in budget formulation, budget execution of Laws and implementing 
involved in budget, 
oversight of service delivery, budget 
rules and regulations (IRRs). procurement and financial 
oversight, and public procurement 
* NGOs represented on 
management transparency. 
processes. 
procurement oversight entity. 
* Reactivation of public- 
private Budget Dialogue
Group.
* Institutionalization and use
of client satisfaction and
Report Card surveys.
* Strengthened relationship
between public expenditure
oriented NGOs and
DBM/NEDA.

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 101 
Improve the 
transparency and 
accountability with 
which public sector 
resources -financial, 

human, physical - are 
allocated and managed 

* Clients of public sector 
serves rate the 
transparency of the civil 
servants (feedback from 
surveys of households and 
enterprises), 
* Increased involvement o 
civil society in budget 
formulation, execution and
oversight at national and
local levels.

Satisfactory 
IMF: TA to BIR.
implementation of PFSL; U.S.A.: TA to strengthen
Satisfactory grant 
BIR management.
implementation.

BIR's ability to collect 

Develop a comprehensive reform 
* Increased audit presence by PFSL 
taxes, reduce evasion and program for BIR, covering institutional 
tax type (e.g. VAT) and 
Possible grant funding for 
arrangements, administrative procedures, taxpayer group (large 
BIR Reform. 
serve taxpayers with 
improved services is 
computerization, and human resource 
taxpayers). 
improved (at national 
development. 
* Full implementation of the
level) 
large taxpayers program and
* Increase in the tax to 
establishment of the large
GDP ratio; 
taxpayers office, with gradual
* Reduced level of 
growth in the number of large
evasion; 
taxpayers.
* Reduced taxpayer 
* Full computerization of BlR,
compliance costs; and 
including district offices.
* Reduced variability of 
* Development and adoption
annual collections by tax 
of a comprehensive
type. 
administrative reform
program, including
components on human
resource rationalization and
autonomization.

10/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Diagnostic 

* Tax Policy 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 50/ 
Improve the efficiency 
and equity of the tax 
system 

Strategies 

Revise excise tax rates. 
Review and rationalize tax incentives. 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas
* Specific excise tax rates 
restored to their real value as 
of 1997.
* Elimination of narrowly
focused tax incentives.

Weak local governance
undermines
decentralization.

Annex B9

Page 22 of 25

WBG Instruments 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

PFSL 

Satisfactory 
implementation of PFSL

IMF: TA and monitoring.

Completion and 
Australia: Phil-Australia
dissemination of 
Govemance Facility.
PEPFMR and PEPFMR Canada: Local
II. 
Govemment Support
Satisfactory 
Program.
implementation of PFSL. Japan: Training for local
planning and development
officers.
19NDP: Fnhancing nublic
accountability of COA.

Strengthen 
Improve LGU 
Establish a high level commission with Greater LGU access to 
ASEM TF for 
intergovermnental 
transparency and 
representatives from both public (NG 
different financing windows, Decentralization. 
finance system and fiscal accountability in the 
and LGU levels) and private sectors to 
including private fnancing 
PEPFMR H. 
framework for 
allocation and 
review IRA law and Local Govemment * Development and 
Second Adjustment Loan. 
decentralization 
managemnent of own and Code. 
implementation of 
transferred resources. 
Review and if necessary revise IRA 
modifications to the system of 
* Increase in number of 
formula and non-IRA fiscal transfers to intergovemmental funances. 
* Revisions to the 1996 LGU 
LGUs with clean audit 
achieve better accountability and 
epots from COA. 
horizon- 
equal:adizon. 
Financing Frarewo-k. 
* Reduction in number of Revise and implement LGU financing 
cases and amount of 
framework.
unliquidatedlunrecoveredl
unadjusted advances to
LGU officials (the term
they use is 'malversation').
Improve the LGU
mancingframework so
as to enable LGUs to
attracd increased private
fnancing.
* Reduction in proportion
of LGU investments
funded from grants.
* Increase in proportion of
LGU investments financed
from private and public
loans.
* Increase in number of
LGUs borrowing from

public and private sources.

10/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Strategies 

WBG Instruments 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas
Develop a program at the national level * Review of process for 
PEPFMR II. 
Completion and 
to support interested LGUs in bolstering updating schedule of assessed LOGOFIND. 
dissemination of 
their revenue mobilization capacity with value of real properties. 
Second Adjustment Loan. PEPFMR n;
components on training, IT systems, and * Improved LGU tax mapping 
Satisfactory
administrative procedures. 
capabilities. 
implementation of
* Revised DOF circulars on 
LOGOFIND and follow-
tax exemptions. 
up of LGU financing
framework in other
projects involving LGUs.

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Annex B9
Page 23 of 25

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

ADB: Capacity-building in
LGU Financing.

Diagnostic 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 101 
Strengthen LGU revenue LGU's capacity to 
mobilization capacity 
administer and collect 
revenues from own 
sources is strengthened. 
* Increase in proportion 
of LGU revenue 
collections from own 
sources (e.g. property and 
business taxes, and from 
fees and licenses)
* improve taxpayer
services
* Reduction in amounts o
delinquent tax payments
due.

Improve financing of, 
Strengthen LGU 
* Strengthen linkages between policy, * Reduction in LGU personal PEPFMR 11. 
Completion and 
ADB: Capacity-building in
access to, and delivery 
planning, budgeting and planning and budgeting at the LGU 
service expenditures as 
Governance and Service 
dissemination of 
LGU Financing, LGU
and quality of public 
implementation capacity, level. 
percent of total expenditures Delivery Study. 
PEPFMR 11. 
Private Infra Devt Facility.
services for which LGUs including greater control * Improve NG-LGU coordination and 
(baseline 2000). 
ASEM TF on 
Completion of 
Australia: Phil-Australia
are responsible 
over wagebill and 
inter-LGU collaboration. 
* Institutionalize framework Decentralization. 
Govemance and Service Govemance Facility.
employment levels 
* Improve LGU incentives to control 
for periodic assessments of 
Second Adjustment Loan. Delivery Study. 
Canada: Local
* Budget allocations more wage bill size and employment levels, LGU service delivery and 
Satisfactory 
Govermment Support
consistent with LGU 
and enhance LGU capacity to deal with publication of results. 
implementation of 
Program.
plans. 
wagebill and employment issues. 
LOGOFIND and follow- Japan: Training for local
* Greater consistency 
* Strengthen monitoring and evaluation 
up of LGU financing 
planning and development
between LGU plans at 
arrangements in LGUs and at the NG 
framework in other 
officers.
different levels. 
level. 
projects involving LGUs. U.S.A.: Transparent and
Accountable Governance

Project.

I0/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Annex B9
Page 24 of 25

Diagnostic 

Strategies 

WBG Instruments 

procurement including 

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Performance 
Country Outcome 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Indicators 101 
Areas
Strengthen LGU 
LGU civil service 
* Selectively support LGUs committed * Develop and initiate 
PEPFMR 11. 
PEPFMR II. 
Australia: Phil-Australia
accountability and 
capacity in the area of 
to better govemance through capacity 
implementation of a plan for Govemance and Service 
Implementation of 
Govemance Facility.
institutional capacity 
transparent and efficient building and capital finance. 
decompression of LGU 
Delivery Study. 
LOGOFIND and 
Canada: Local
(especially LGU civil 
* Develop and implement a training and salaries. 
CPPR. 
following up of LGU 
Govemment Support
for Comprehensive 
service and core 
capacity building plan for procurement * More information on 
Second Adjustment Loan. 
financing framework in 
Program.
functions such as 
Development Framework and fnancial management. 
revenue, expenditure, 
IDF Grant for Civil Service other projects involving 
Japan: Training for local
budgeting, procurement related activities and 
* Implement NGAS and develop an 
procurement, contracting and Reform. 
LGUs. 
planning and development
and financial 
financial management 
integrated FM capacity building program service delivery available to 
EDF Grant for Improving Decrease in the rate of 
officers.
management) 
practices is improved 
for national and local levels. 
public. 
Financial Management in 
rebidding. 
U.S.A.: Environmental
* Greater number of LGUs * MIS in place at LGU level. 
* Implementation of training LGUs. 
Satisfactory results of ex- Govemance Project,
with 'clean' COA audit 
* Promote LGU information publication plan in LGUs with World 
Selective support through 
post reviews at the LGU Transparent and
reports (baseline 2000 
and benchmarking. 
Bank fmancing. 
ongoing operations and 
level. 
Accountable Governance
COA report). 
LOGOFIND. 
CDS and other TAs for 
Project.
* Fewer LGUs with 
LGUs.
outstanding recoverable
advances from elected and
appointed officials
(baseline- COA 2000 audit
report).

* Strengthen Civic 
Engagement and Civil 
Society Oversight 

Improve transparency 
and accountability 

Greater civil society involvement in 
Development and application PEPFMR nI. 
Involvement of civil 
Canada: Local
working of LGUs, especially in budget of indicators to indicate 
Govemance and Service 
society in budget 
Govemment Support
planning and implementation, LGU stafl intensity/number of NGOs and Delivery Study. 
formulation, execution 
Program.
recruitment, procurement oversight and local associations involved in CPPR. 
and oversight, in project U.S.A.: Transparent and
contract implementation, design and 
budget process, oversight of Second Adjustment Loan. preparation and 
Accountable Govemance
evaluation of physical investments, and budget execution, merit-based 
implementation, and in 
Project.
oversight of service delivery. 
transparent recruitment of 
oversight of procurement
LGU staff, and in project 
and contract
implementation and 
implementation.
evaluation.

Weak governance
undermines confidence,
increases cost of doing
business and reduces
investment.

10/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Diagnostic 

* Judicial reform 

Strategic Objectives & 
Country Outcome 
Indicators 10/ 
Ensure the effective, 
transparent and timely 
provision of justice. 

Strategies 

WBG Instruments 

Country Performance 
Indicators Against Strategy 
Areas
Support implementation of the Supreme Reduction in case congestion Judicial Reform Support 
Satisfactory 
Court's comprehensive Action Program and delays. 
project; PHRD TF support. implementation of the 
for Judicial Reform. 
Judicial Reform Support 
Project 

World Bank 
Performance Indicators 

Annex B9
Page 25 of 25

Major Related Activities
of Other Donors

ADB: TA on Strengthening
the Independence of the
Judiciary.
Australia: Phil-Australia
Govemance Facility.
Canada: PPTAF support to
the Supreme Court.
UNDP: Activities under the
Phil. Governance Program.
UNICEF: Support to
comprehensive system on
Justice for Children.
U.S.A.: Reform of the
Administration of Justice
through Coalition Advocac
project, Barangay Justice

Service System Project

10/ Where measurable indicators have not been specified, most will be through ongoing/planned AAA such as PEPFMR, FSAP, etc.

Philippines 
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex B10
Page I of I

Network area 

Country 
performance' 

Major issueb 

Country 
priorityc 

Bank 
priorityc 

Reconciliation of country and
Bank prionitiesd

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Manaaement
Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 

Public sector 

Gender 

Human Development
Education 

Health, nutrition & population 

Social protction 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development 

Environment 

Fair 

Good 

Fair 

Good 

Incidence remains high and progress 
stagnates

Public debt, low tax revenues 

Govemance, decentraliation, civil service 
reform
Violence against women, reproductive 
health

High 

High 

High 

High

High

High

Moderate Moderate

Good 

High drop-out rate, education quality poor 

High 

High

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Poor 

Financial access for poor, quality of health 
care, high population growth

High 

High

Coverage of social welfare services, 
pension system, safety net for informal
workers.

Moderate Moderate

High poverty, low productivity 

High 

High

Weak enforcemnent of laws and weak LGU 
capacity

Moderate Moderate

Social development 

Good 

Capacity of local institutions 

Moderate 

Moderate

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 

Private sector 

Energy & mining 

Infrastructure 

Fair 

Good 

Fair 

Fair 

NPLs; rural credit and weak capital market 
development

High 

High

Corporate governance; lack of 
transparency; high ownership
concentration

Implementation of power sector 
restructuring; privatization of NPC; weak
policy and regulatory mining environment

Rural Infrastructure; regulatory capacity, 
transport bottlenecks and costs

Moderate 

Moderate

Moderate' Moderate'

Moderate 

Moderate

a. Use 'excellent," *good," 'fair,' or ^poor.'
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty;" for educaton, "female secondary completion;' for environment, 'urban air pollution').
c. To Indicate priority, use low,' "moderate,' or 'high.'
d. Give explanaton, if prioribes do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.
e. Both Country and Bank priorides are high for energy, but are both low for mining; hence the overall rating of 'moderate'.

Annex C
Page 1 of 1

WORLD BANK PHILIPPINES-NGO COLLABORATION, BY PROJECT CYCLE

FISCAL YEARS 1999 - 2001

Total number of 
ongoing projects 
(n) 

Percentage of
ongoinig Projects
that involved
NGOs/POs at 
Preparation 

Project implementation 

Project Monitoring and Evaliation 

I

-.

(%)

Projects with Intention 
of Involving NGOs/POs 

Projects with 
Acttial 
Involvement of 
NGOs/POs 

Projects with 
Intention of 
involvilig 
NGOs/POs 

Projectsvwith
Actualt

(%) 

Mt

e

(%) 

() 

(%)

All 

28 

24 

25 

21 

33 

36 

54 

62 

64 

68 

75 

76 

35 

38 

40 

43 

41 

Z4

Projects 

I

Infrastruct 

8 

8 

8 

25 

37 

40 

12 

25 

25 

38 

62 

62 

12 

12 

12 

12 

25 

38

ure and

Urban 

___

Human 

5 

5 

5 

20 

20 

20 

100 

100 

100 

100 

80 

80 100 100 100 

100 

80 

80

Develop-

ment 

I__ 

_ 

__

Rural 

13 

9 

10 

23 

44 

50 

62 

88 

90 

85 

100 

100 

30 

33 

40 

46 

44 

50

Dev./

Natural

Resource

Mgmt.

Other 

2 12 2 0 0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

Projects__- 

_ 

-

-

_ 

---

Annex D
Page I of I

Interventions** 

PHILIPINES: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FYOO-02
CAPACITY BUILDING INITIATIVES* IMPLEMENTED AND/OR MOBILIZED
DURING CAS PERIOD (as of March 31,2002)
No. of 
Actual No. of 
Interventions 
Interventions 
Identified in 
the CAS 

Amounts
(USD million)

Implemented/Mobilized

Imp. 
started 
Prior to 
FYOO

From Total Prior From Total
FY00 
to 
FY00
FY00

SO1: Addressing 
Crisis Effects &
Promoting
Economic
Recovery
S02: Enhancing 
Human
Development &
Social Services for
the Poor
S03: Accelerating 
Environmentally
Sustainable Rural
Development
S04: Promoting 
Sustainable Urban
Development and
Combat Urban
Povertyv
S05: Developing 
Infrastructure,
Particularly in the
Provinces
S06: Enabling 
Expansion of the
Private Sector
S07: Improving 
Governance and
Combating
Corruption** 
TOTAL 
Of which: Loans 
Trust Funds 
WBI/GDLN/Other 
KS Activities 

7 

10 

11 

10 

0 

4 

7 

49 
6 
19 
24 

3 

4 

3 

3 

0 

1 

4 

18 
9 
7 
2 

.

11 

14 

1.7 

1.3 

3.0

12 

16 

29.0 

3.5 

32.5

1 1 

14 

8.6 

5.5 

14.1

16 

19 

3.3 

18.6 

21.9

0 

5 

0 

6 

0 

0 

0

11.2 

0.4 

11.6

15 

19 

0.7 

1.4 

2.1

70 
4 
25 
41 

88 
13 
32 
43

54.5 
51.6 
2.9 

30.8 
15.5 
15.3 

85.3
67.1
18.2

* Refers to interventions irivolving training, workshops, semiinars, knowledge sharing and knowledge networking.
** Includes interventions provided through loans, rrust finds. WVBi.GDLN WOAher k.noA lIdte Sharing Activities.
* Includes portfolio wide intcrventions targeted sr Impro% mig project managemeni capuisia n, 
compliance with Bank policies and
guidelines.

Annex E
Page 1 of 3

Achievements and Sector Objectives during the Previous Country Assistance Strategy Period

CAS objectives 

Key achievements 

Major shortfalls

Address Crisis Effects and Promote
Economic Recovery
* Stabilize banking 

* Make public finance sustainable 

* Strengthened prudential regulations 

* Fiscal deficit targets essentially met in 
2001 

* 

Increase long-term savings 

* Achieve a strong recovery 

* Significant past dialogue and analytical 
work
* Reasonable recovery after 1997 crisis 

* Increase in nonperforming loan ratio;
persistence of banking vulnerabilities
* Fiscal targets missed by wide margin
in 1999 and 2000; continued increase
in public debt as share of GDP; lack
of effective national government
framework to manage contingent
liabilities
* Lack of concrete action

* Less growth than expected; no

progress with poverty reduction

Enhance human Development and
Social Servicesfor Poor
* Maintain social services 

* 

Increase education quality 

* 

* 

Improve management and financing 
of education system 
Improve outcomes and performance 
of health service system 

* 
Improve portfolio performance 
Accelerate Environmentally
Sustainable Rural Development
* 
Increase broad-based growth 

* 

* 

Increase public and private 
expenditure in rural areas 
Improve natural resource 
management 

* Strengthen institutional capacity 

* Key social budget expenditures
protected
* Text-book-to-student ratio rising 

* Some improvements in procurement and * 
financial management 
* Better access to health care, lower 
incidence of tuberculosis; cheaper drugs 

* Upgraded human development projects 

* Positive agricultural growth (3.3 percent 
in 2000 and 3.9 percent in 2001) 

* 

Increase in public funding 

* 

* 

Initiated reforms on water resources 
management at national level and in 
irrigation management 
Indigenous people and local 
stakeholders engaged in protecting and
managing centers of biodiversity
* Active devolution of responsibilities, 
performance indicator system by 
National Economic Development 
Authority being institutionalized 

* Little improvement in school
completion rate
Intra-sectoral public expenditure
allocation still to be addressed
. Quality still low, weak financial
management system, wide
geographic differentials
Improvements still fragile

* 

* Growth erratic and below target, not
enough to alleviate rural poverty;
Comprehensive Agrarian Reform
Program behind target
* Mixed utilization; no pick up in
private investments
* Fragmented sectoral, approach to
resources planning and development,
lack of subsector coordination on
natural resource management

* Capacity and project management
still weak, and monitoring and
evaluation deficient
* Local government units (LGUs)
constrained with only partial
devolution of natural resource
management (NRM) functions to
them
* LGU capacity still limited making
Bank project implementation difficult

Achievements and Sector Objectives during th,e Previous Country Assistance Strategy Period
(continued)

CAS objectives 

Key achievements 

Major shortfalls

Annex E
Page 2 of 3

* Some LGU water systems coming on 
line, some private sector participation in 
water utilities; pilot city development 
strategies completed 

* 

Institutional arrangements between
national and local levels remain
unclear; slow use of LGU funding;
limited LGU capacity and private
finance for private participation in
infrastructure projects
* No tangible progress; worsening
environmental quality

* Power sector restructuring bill approved,
laying foundation for more private
sector participation

* Work just starting 

* No tangible progress yet

Promote Sustainable Urban
Development and Combat Urban
Poverty
* Increase urban services for poor 

* 

* Improve urban environmental 
management 
Develop infrastructure, particularly in
the provinces
* Strengthen National Power 
Corporation finances; introduce 
competition in energy sector, 
promote private-public partnership
Increase rural electrification, more 
efficient rural electric cooperatives
* Better integrated multi-modal 
transport system
* Strengthen transport system in Metro 
Manila 
Enable Private Sector Expansion
* Promote competition and 
transparency 

* Alleviate constraints on small and 
medium enterprises 

* Enhance private-public partnerships 
and promote foreign direct 
investment 

* New Metro Rail Transit running 

* Supported Institute of Corporate 
Directors of Philippines, including
training programs on corporate
govemance; competed reviews of
standards and codes relating to
Corporate Governance and Accounting
and Auditing
Intemational Finance Corporation (IFC) 
trade finance facility; support for a 
micro-enterprise bank 
* Successful transactions by IFC 

* 

* No tangible achievements yet

* Weak institutional capacity, highly
congested traffic

* No change in competition laws

* Bank loan targeted at private
enterprise sector cancelled in 1999
before implementation started
* Progress hampered by low investor
confidence; inflows of foreign direct
investment reversed; timely
enforcement of creditors' rights
delayed by defects in legal and
administrative framework for secured
lending; lack of clear rules and time-
bound procedures for distressed
companies
* Slow-down of credit applications
during 2001

* Develop rural finance 

* Rural Finance 11 and III projects under 
implementation 

Annex E
Page 3 of 3

Achievements and Sector Objectives during the Previous Country Assistance Strategy Period
(continued)

CAS objectives 

Key achievements 

Major shortfalls

Improve Governance and Combat
Corruption
 No graft and corruption in Bank- 
financed projects
* Structural reforms for transparency 

* Eliminate graft and corruption in 
specific institutions 

* Collaborate with partners in official 
development assistance and with civil 
society 

* Allegations rigorously pursued

* Passed anti-money laundering bill; 
laumched Judicial Reform Action 
Program 
* Procurement and financial management 
reforms initiated in education, health, 
and public works departments
* Judicial reforms designed and
implementation initiated
* Collaboration strengthened; joint donor 
recommendation addressed to new 
administration; civil society engagement 

increased

* Budgetary reforms made; anti-money
laundering bill may need
strengthening
* Executive Order issued but
procurement law not yet passed

* Implementation of anticorruption
programs in most corruption-prone
agencies; weak LGU govemance

Annex F
Page 1 of3

Alignment with Corporate Priorities

The Bank's corporate priorities are outlined in the Strategic Directions Paperl under two
groups: the Corporate Advocacy Priorities (CAPs) and the Global Public Good Priorities (GPGPs).
CAPs are defined as "the critical enablers of poverty reduction that the Bank is particularly well-
qualified to champion by sharing knowledge (both research and experience) and building awareness
with clients, development partners, and other stakeholders. " They build on two key pillars of the
Strategic Framework Paper; (i) building the clirnate for investment, jobs and sustainable growth and
(ii) empowering poor people to participate in development and investing in them. Regarding the first
pillar, the CAPs advocate that the Bank should play a catalytic role in improving investor confidence
and boosting private sector investment. With reference to the second pillar, the CAPs advocate
treating clients as participants rather than recipients of development aid.

The Philippines CAS proposes to support policy and institutional reforms as outlined in the
government's MTPDP to create an environment conducive to investments, led by the private sector.
Secondly, by increasing the recipient ownership of the development program through participatory
processes, it involves them as participants rather than recipients of development. Table 1 lists the
CAPs and their alignment with the CAS.

Table 1: Corporate Advocacy Priorities and their Alignment with the CAS

* 

Corporate Advocacy Priorities 
I 
CAS strategy
CAP 1: Building the Climate for Investment, Jobs and Sustainable Growth
Investment Climate 
Poverty Reducing Growth: The CAS supports
.
Support for urban and rural 
macroeconomic stability, sound fiscal management, a
development 
robust financial sector, a favorable investment
Infrastructure services to support 
environment and infrastructure improvements in the
private sector development 
roads, water and sanitation and rural power sections.
* Regulatory reform and competition 
Environmentally Sustainable Rural Development with
policy 
Social Equitv: The CAS aims to accelerate rural
.
Financial sector reform 
development by, among other things, supporting
Public Sector Governance 
policy and institutional reforms to remove market
.
Rule of Law (incl. Anti-corruption) 
distortions.
.
Public administration and civil service Good and Effective Governance: The CAS promotes
reform (incl. Public expenditure 
better public sector governance support anti-
accountability) 
corruption measures, judicial reform and civil service
* Access to and administration ofjustice 
reform, procurement and financial management
(judicial reform) 
reform, and policy and regulatory reforms towards
greater competition.

World Bankc Strategic Directions for FY02-04: Impiementing the World Bank's Strategic Framework, March 28,

2001.

Annex F
Page 2 of 3

.

Corporate Advocacy Priorities 
CAS strategy
CAP 2: Empowering Poor People to Participate in Development and Investing in Theme
Empowerment, Security and Social Inclusion 
Comprehensive Human Development: The CAS
. Gender mainstreaming; civic 
supports attention to remaining gender concerns
engagement and participation; 
including mainstreaming of gender in governance,
Social risk management (incl. Risk 
civil society participation in strengthening government
mitigation) 
accountability, addressing deficiencies in education
Education 
sector, providing support for women's and child
.
Education for All - with emphasis on 
healthcare, and building the capacity of the poor to act
girls' education 
for themselves.
Building human capacity for the 
Poverty Reducing Growth: The CAS promotes urban
knowledge economy 
sector development by supporting investments in
water and sanitation.

.

Health 
* Access to clean water, air and
sanitation by poor people
. Maternal and child healthcare

The second group of corporate priorities focuses on the global public goods priorities
(GPGPs). These require relatively higher level of international coordination since they involve
externalities and the success of achieving them will depend on the extent to which global programs
are implemented at the country level. Table 2 lists the GPGPs and their alignment with the CAS.

Table 2: Global Public Goods Priorities and their Alignment with the CAS

Global Public Goods Priorities 
Communicable Diseases
.
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and 
childhood diseases, incl. the relevant link 
to education 
* Vaccines and drug development for major 
communicable diseases in developing 
countries 

Environmental Concerns
* Climate change; water; forests 
.
Biodiversity, ozone depletion and land 
degradation 
* Promotion of agricultural research 

Trade and Integration
* Market access 
 
Intellectual property rights and standards 

CAS

* Comprehensive Human Development: The CAS
addresses preventable diseases through reforms
in the health sector and support for critical items
in the health budget. (EU and JICA are
supporting EHV/AIDS; ADB is co-financing
early childhood development project with WB;
UNICEF is supporting women and child health;
Japan is financing TB and STD.)

* Poverty Reducing Growth: The CAS supports
investing in drainage, wastewater treatment, solid
waste and air pollution reduction.
* Environmentally Sustainable Rural Development
with Social Equity: The CAS addresses NRM
issues (Japan is financing agriculture research).

* Comprehensive Human Development: The CAS
focuses on policy and institutional reforms
needed for agricultural competitiveness in view
of WTO agreements.

Annex F
Page 3 of 3

Table 2 (contd.): Global Public Goods Priorities and their Alignment with the CAS

Global Public Goods Priorities 
Information and Knowledge
.
Redressing the Digital Divide and 
equipping countries with the capacity to 
access knowledge 
* Understanding development and poverty 
reduction 
I
International Financial Architecture
* Development of intemational standards 
* Financial stability (incl. sound public debt 
management) 
International accounting and legal 
framework 

* 

CAS

.

Poverty Reducing Growth: The CAS
includes PPIAF support to improve access
of rural communities to
telecommunications services.

o Poverty Reducing Growth: The CAS
supports strengthening and deepening of
the financial sector with follow up on
FSAP recommendations.
o Good and Effective Governance: The
CAS promotes reforms in procurement,
financial management and in the judicial
_ _ __ _ sector.

Annex G
Page 1 of 13

CAS Consultations and Stakeholder Recommendations

The 1999 CAS started the World Bank's (WB) engagement in an extensive consultation
process at the overall strategic level (October-November 1998)-in addition to consultations for
individual activities. This was never seen as a one-time step, but rather as the start of a continuous
feedback mechanism. Since the last CAS consultations, the World Bank has sought feedback from
civil society around the country on the final approved CAS (July-August 1999), as well as on its
implementation progress at midterm (September-November 2000). It held regular end-of-year
feedback sessions with civil society, as well as regular consultations with ODA partners.

The process followed for the preparation of this CAS has built on the above experience and
taken it one step further: between October and November 2001, the Bank held multistakeholder
consultations for specific aspects of the strategy. These day-long meetings on sectoral and cross-
sectoral issues, as well as thematic objectives of the CAS included for the first time both government
(national oversight and implementing agencies, as well as local government units, and a few
technocrats from Congress), and non-government participants (private sector, civil society, and
labor). The meetings were facilitated by professional facilitators with NGO and academic
backgrounds. The springboard for consultation was the experience in the implementation of the 1999
CAS, as well as the issues and priorities identified in the Government's new MTPDP. Separate
meetings were also conducted with ODA partners.

Through these consultations, the World Bank was able to listen to the views of its various
stakeholders-views on the development issues and needs faced by the country in the next three
years. The meetings also asked for ideas on how the Bank can assist the Government and other
developmental partners in addressing these needs.

Specifically, the meetings tried to (1) review the 1999 CAS and see how it relates to the new
Medium Term Philippine Development Plan, determine what worked well and what did not; (2) draw
lessons from the past three years of implementation; (3) identify emerging issues as well as cross
cutting issues that may be relevant beyond a sector; and (4) identify strategic changes, if necessary.

A team of facilitators and documentors was contracted by the Bank'. At the very start it was
clarified that, although reaching a consensus or agreements on analysis and suggestions was an ideal,
total consensus on all points was not aimed for in the consultations. Consensus or converging points
were to be identified and formulated but it was equally important to surface and document the
diverging ideas or issues. A template design was the starting point, with the different sector teams
revising this to best address both the overall objective of the consultations and specific sector needs.

The concrete output from these consultations is a documentation report that presents both the
synthesis and discussion results of each of the consultations. The summaries of these
recommendations were presented to the staff and the government officials, led by the National
Economic and Development Authority and the Department of Finance, who participated in a joint
World Bank-Government retreat immediately following the consultations.

I The members of the team of facilitators and documentors were hired on individual basis with a principal facilitator
serving as the overall coordinator of the team. All are social development practitioners coming from the civil
society sector, with a good number of them also based in the academe.

Annex G
Page 2 of 13

Since the participants in the consultations for the formulation of the CAS came from various
groups, the comments, issues, suggestions, and recommendations gathered during these meetings do
not necessarily reflect a consensus. A documentation report on all these are posted on the website
(www.worldbank.or.ph) and was sent to all the participants. The table below indicates the
recommendations gathered from each meeting and how these are reflected in this CAS or, why they
are not reflected.

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS' RECOMMENDATIONS TO CAS FY03-05

RECOMMENDATIONS 

WORLD BANK GROUP'S (WBG)
RESPONSES

A. Rural Development
) Integrate the provision of services for the 
rural poor under a sustainable development 
framework. 

The ongoing Mindanao Rural Development Project
(MRDP) aims to integrate the provision of services
for the rural poor within the framework of
devolution and empowerment of communities to
ensure sustainability of poverty alleviation
interventions. The planned KALAHI project will
also pursue this.
All Bank-financed RD projects are geared towards
supporting GOP's goals of poverty reduction,
equity and sustained growth since the majority of
the poor are in the rural areas.

0 Make social assessment and capacity 
building integral parts of every WB 
instrument on RD. 

) Shape WB programs and projects on rural 
development (RD) to support the 
Government of the Philippines' (GOP) 
goals of poverty reduction, equity and 
sustained growth.
) Besides pursuing RD instruments 
Lending in the rural sector includes Adaptable
prioritized earlier, infuse innovation in new Program Loans and Learning and Innovation Loans
instruments to be carried out. 
(LILs), which are instruments that allow innovative
features. LILs, in particular, provide an opportunity
to try out new and untested ideas which can later on
be broadened and deepened.
Social assessment and capacity building are integral
and necessary elements of the Bank's program. For
example, the design and preparation of MRDP and
the proposed ARMM Social Fund Project are a
result of wide ranging social assessments. In the
Community-Based Resource Management Project
(CBRMP), MRDP, and other RD projects, capacity
building through learning-by-doing and formal
training courses are integral project interventions.
The majority of Bank-financed RD and NRM
projects are being implemented with, and through,
Local Government Units (LGUs) and communities,
as well as local NGOs. Hence, implementation
strategies and modalities are geared towards
enhancing devolution and engaging communities
and other stakeholders putting them in the drivers'
seat for addressing development issues.

t) Adopt measures related to improving WB 
program implementation that are directed 
towards decentralization and increased 
partnership/multi- stakeholdership and 
local community ownership. 

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS' RECOMMENDATIONS TO CAS FY03-05

Annex G
Page 3 of 13

RECOMMENDATIONS 

WORLD BANK GROUP'S (WBG)

RESPONSES
f) To improve implementation of WB 
All Bank-financed RD and NRM projects place
programs and projects, exact accountability 
emphasis on disseminating information to promote
from, and greater coordination among 
transparency and accountability of all project
stakeholders, undertake public education 
stakeholders (e.g., local community bill-boards,
and information campaign, and set basis for Anti-Corruption Hotline). Systems for monitoring
assessment from the very start. 
and evaluation of performance are agreed with GOP
during project preparation and followed through

) Include collaborative and impact studies, 
analytical work, credit programs, and 
capacity building instruments such as 
scholarships and cultural exchange. 

) Concentrate on the rural poors' access to 
natural resources and focus on Mindanao 
and IPs' concerns. 

during implementation.

The WB's program in RD and NRM includes grant
resources for economic and sector analysis, strategy
formulation and evaluation of critical development
issues. On credit programs, the Bank-financed
projects under implementation include Rural
Finance II and III, as well as grant projects on
improving micro-finance access in selected
Mindanao municipalities and on livelihood
assistance for women and Indigenous Peoples (IPs)

in the SZOPAD areas.

Eighteen of the on-going projects have components
for Mindanao, including two projects (SZOPAD
Social Fund and MRDP) that are exclusively for
Mindanao. Pipeline projects also contain emphasis
on Mindanao. A number of on-going interventions
target indigenous peoples as beneficiaries (i.e., 30%
of micro-finance portfolio for the Japan Social
Development Fund [JSDF] Grant Project on Micro-
finance should be provided to IPs, women and
Muslims, in the MRDP block grant component, 1/3
of community subprojects prioritized for IP and
women groups.)
A public expenditure review and planned non-
lending work would address these issues.

* Address the perennial issue of budgetary 
constraints and revisit classification of 
LGUs to facilitate their access to resources.
B. Urban Development
g) Prioritize capacity building and training of LGU capacity building is being addressed in the
LGUs all the way to the barangays. 
ongoing LOGOFfND project, and the suggested
Included in areas for improvement are, 
areas will be tackled as the implementation of the
among others, policy reform, land use 
LGU Capacity Building Component of LOGOFIND
planning and enforcement, solid waste 
accelerates.

management. 

I__

Annex G
Page 4 of 13

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS' REiCOMMENDATIONS TO CAS 03-05

RECOMMENDATIONS 

g) Improve accountability of Local Chief 
Executives by improving data collection, 
strengthening monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E), including Civil Society 
Organizations (CSOs) in M&E, 
institutionalizing performance monitoring 
across LGUs, benchmarking, and 
providing both positive and negative 
reinforcements.
) Require participation of communities 
through pre-project consultations, creation 
of consultative bodies and mechanisms; 
conduct voters' education for community 
awareness and empowerment; make local 
development councils functional. 
) The National Land Use Code should be 
enacted and operationalized. The 
guidelines and standards for creating cities 
and managing them have to be clearly set. 

Og Disseminate success stories or best 
practices for replication. 

g) Improve tax collections in both National 
and Local levels; review the IRA formula, 
impose idle land tax, creation of secondary 
mortgage institution to plow back funds for 
housing, creation of a Social Housing 
Finance Corporation to focus on the 
housing needs of the poor. 

WORLD BANK GROUP'S (WBG)
RESPONSES

Performance monitoring and benchmarking have
become standard requirements under projects in
urban water supply and will be followed through
other future urban sector operations. The Bank will
coordinate with other donors on LGU M&E
development, and will recommend national policies
to improve LGU accountability in the context of
planned analytical work.

Bank-financed urban projects are already involving
communities extensively, particularly in the LGU
Water and Sanitation projects. The approach will be
expanded further to other urban projects, such as the
planned Cities Development Project, to make them
more community-driven.
This will be addressed in a proposed Urban Sector
Study, though it may not cover the details of the
national land use code. This is also an area where
City Development Strategies (CDS) will assist
selected cities on a demand-driven base.
The Bank has been working closely with the
League of Cities of the Philippines on CDS and
other activities, which facilitate dissemination. The
other important channels are LGU Portal, and
CDSEA, websites for communication and
dissemination of CDS information.
LGU taxation issues are partially being addressed
by LOGOFIND, which has a significant LGU
resource mobilization component. Other LGU
financing issues, such as IRA formula, will be
reviewed under a planned study. Housing finance,
including primary and secondary mortgage markets,
will be examined as part of capital market
development. Housing for the poor could be
addressed in the proposed Urban Shelter and
Community Infrastructure LIL.

Annex G
Page 5 of 13

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS' RECOMMENDATIONS TO CAS 03-05

RECOMMENDATIONS 

WBG'S RESPONSES

g) Study and create programs using 
Most of these would be addressed in the planned
alternative tenure system; expropriate land Urban Shelter and Community Infrastructure LIL.
for socialized housing; use foreclosed land
for housing; review and scale up the
Community Mortgage Program; review
subsidy system for housing; provide
resources for organizing and social
preparation work; improve transportation
and communication systems.

C. Human Development

<D Review government's responses focusing 
These factors are being taken into consideration in
on how to strengthen LGUs and 
design of the proposed Health Sector Reform
synchronize the various instruments, 
Project (HSRP). Shortcomings of LGUs in
improve accessing and networking, adopt 
implementing the School Building Component of
flexible strategies and emphasize 
the Third Elementary Education Project (TEEP) are
sustainability. 
now receiving close GOP attention.
) Treat capacity-building of LGUs, National HSRP, TEEP and Early Childhood Development
Government Agencies and beneficiaries as 
(ECD) project provide support for LGUs in
top priority. 
implementation of social services. Departments of
education, social welfare and health are receiving
support in procurement and financial management
under the Social Expenditure Management Project
(SEMP) and SEMP2. A planned Human
Development (HD) sector study for ARMM will
review ways to strengthen the capacity of the
ARMM government in HD.
A study on special needs of IPs in early childhood
development has been carried out under the ECD
Project, and GOP is formulating a strategy to
address their special needs. A planned HD sector
study for ARMM will address special needs of IPs
in that area.
SEMPI, SEMP2 and HSRP (will) involve CSOs in
project evaluation. PTCAs are involved in TEEP
implementation and local POs are involved in
ECDP implementation.
Information and Education on reproductive health
and family planning would be the central focus of
the proposed Population Management/Women's
Health2 project. Purchase of contraceptives was
excluded under SEMP2. Grant funding is expected
to be available from USAID for purchase of
contraceptives.

) Assist the National Commission for IPs in 
their formulation of a National IP Plan and 
come up with more programs that will be 
culturally sensitive. Assist in the creation 
of learning centers of the IPs. 

) Assure and sustain civil society 
participation particularly in their efforts to 
evaluate programs and projects. 

) Support projects in population education 
and management, e.g., reproductive health 
concerns. 

Annex G

Page 6 of 13

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS' RECOMMENDATIONS TO CAS 03-05

RECOMMENDATIONS 

O Have clear provisions on enforcement and 
sanctions in all instruments aside from 
clear monitoring and evaluations systems. 
Ensure substantial disclosure of 
information regarding all instruments. 

) Support the Health Sector Reform Agenda 
particularly reforms in the convergence 
sites of public health, hospital system and 
the local health system. 

< Encourage programs and enhance public- 
private sector partnerships. 

) Provide technical assistance to strengthen 
systems for resource allocation, 
procurement, tracking and resource 
utilization. 

D. Governance 

Local Governance 

<) Prioritize LGUs in the provision of 
technical assistance in the areas of: IT 
(hardware, software and training), 
enhancement in management knowledge 
and skills, financial management and 
procurement, monitoring and evaluation. 
Conduct training needs assessment prior to 
any capacity building intervention. Come 
out with user-friendly easily 
understandable manuals for local 
executives. 

WBG'S RESPONSES

E'CDP, TEEP and HSRP (will) have monitoring and
evaluation components. In addition, the HSRP will
have an information component covering both the
national Health Sector Reform Agenda (HSRA) as
well as the project itself. All instruments comply
vwith the Bank's disclosure policy.
The HSRP will support HSRA implementation in
four convergence sites and will help GOP develop
procedures and guidelines to be able to provide
technical assistance (TA) and matching grant
support to other convergence sites.
The WB does not have significant activities to
promote public-private partnerships in HD, but
intends to continue dialogue with GOP. Priorities
would be public-private partnerships in secondary
schooling and accreditation of private health care
providers and private drug retailers in the national
health insurance scheme. Partnership with IFC
could be explored.
SEMP1 and SEMP2 are providing assistance for
procurement, financial management and tracking of
resource allocation in departments of education,
social welfare and health. A study on teacher
deployment is being undertaken under SEMP2.
_

_-

An IDF grant on strengthening accountability in
poor LGUs, especially their financial management
capacity, is under implementation. A public
expenditure review focusing on LGUs is planned
during the CAS period. Projects such as SEMPI/
SEMP2 are providing assistance in procurement
and financial management in selected government
departments. Recently launched "LGU Assistance
Portal" aims at improving information flow to
LGUs on Bank-supported products and services.
Finally, comprehensive LGU development strategy
programs and possible follow-up operations are
being proposed to assist LGUs committed to better
governance.

Annex G
Page 7 of 13

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS' RECOMMENDATIONS TO CAS 03-05

RECOMMENDATIONS 

0 Set-up citizen's group for monitoring and 
evaluation. Put mechanisms in place to 
ensure genuine and meaningful 
participation of citizens in locaf 
governance, from planning of projects to 
implementation. 
g) Clarify roles to facilitate inter- 
governmental coordination; reengineer the 
Department of the Interior and Local 
Government. 

t) Give more emphasis to internal controls 
and set up performance indicators and 
accountability measures. 

Public Sector

WBG'S RESPONSES

TA is ongoing and proposed to build capacity
within CSOs to monitor and evaluate government
activities (e.g., support to Procurement Watch).
The WB will also continue to support the
institutionalization of Report Card Survey among
beneficiaries of government services.
A proposed study will revisit the Local Government
Code, including the IRA formula, and provide
guidance on strengthening inter-LGU collaboration.
A follow-up program loan is likely to address issues
of civil service reform.
Program loans will address the issues related to
LGU finance. The WB will also support
benchmarking to improve LGU accountability.

This is not being addressed directly by the WB.

O9 Focus reforms on the most corrupt agencies Technical assistance is being mobilized (IDF grant)
including the Bureau of Internal Revenues 
to support reforms in the BIR. A proposed program
(BIR). Clean these agencies to set an 
loan will also focus on BIR reforms.
example.
) Come up with a competence index for 
public officials, instead of using trust and
integrity alone. Involve CSOs in
monitoring of officials. Intensify electorate
education to include use of competence
index, criteria for selection of a
government officials and report card for the
incumbents.
<) Conduct capability-building interventions 
for barangay officials, particularly on 
financial management and administration. 

WB is proposing TA and training activities to staff
of implementing agencies to build their
procurement and financial management capacities.
These are being included in project design as
required.
The Country Procurement Assessment Review
(CPAR) working group (WB and GOP) is
discussing creating a procurement oversight
committee which would monitor quality of GOP
procurement functions. The WB is already
supporting Procurement Watch, a civil-society
based organization, to monitor public procurement.
The public expenditure reviews, undertaken both at
national and local government level, will provide
guidance on how best to achieve this.

1) Make available to the public government 
records and publish in web site full 
disclosure of assets and liabilities of public 
officials. Also include data on government 
performance, procurement processes and 
contracts. Create a database to be shared 
by several groups. 
Q Emphasize national and sectoral priorities 
rather than the project level, i.e., the public 
and the implementors should be made to 
see the bigger picture.

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS' RECOMMENDATIONS TO CAS 03-05

Annex G
Page 8 of 13

RECOMMENDATIONS 
WBG'S RESPONSES
) Institutionalize coordinating mechanisms to The institutionalization of the Report Card Survey
facilitate cooperation among government 
being supported by the WB will facilitate closer
agencies and other sectors. Engage CSO 
collaboration between government agencies. Civil
in government planning, monitoring and 
society involvement in design, delivery and
evaluation. 
monitoring of development projects will be
strengthened by supporting them with capacity
building and technical assistance.
<) Introduce Civil Service Reforms including The proposed program loans would address civil
the conduct of regular lifestyle checks of 
service reform issues. A capacity building grant
public officials, developing clear 
will also be mobilized to improve the capacity of
performance indicators, improving the 
government in designing and implementing civil
incentive system (reward system, public 
service reforms and streamlining bureaucracy.
recognition), reviewing RA 6676 (last in,
first out policy on reorganization), develop
customer-service orientation, and
aggressively pursue streamlining or right-
sizing of the bureaucracy.
<) Limit appointing powers of the President to This is not part of the WB's assistance program.
cabinet secretary and undersecretary levels
only.
Judiciary 
I) Provide continuous legal training of court 
personnel and judges in order to improve 
the quality of performance and increase the 
drive for reforms; streamline judicial 
systems and procedures; and establish pro- 
poor and user-friendly systems. 
g) Establish a clear and transparent judicial 
appointment process, especially for women 
magistrates. 
G) Involve justice institutions in national 
processes; install effective judicial 
performance management system; and
enhance operating budgets.
 Reform formative education to inculcate 
genuine sense of democracy; design a legal 
literacy program for the general public. 

The implementation of the action program for
judicial reforms which has been embraced by the
supreme court will be supported by the judicial
reform project that is under preparation and
concurrent assistance from a number of bilateral
donors as well as ADB and UNDP.
An NGO (Bantay Katarungan) is already
contributing information to the judicial appointment
process.
The judicial reform project under preparation will
address the performance management system.

Information dissemination and mobilizing public
understanding and support is one of the pillars of
the supreme court's action program for judicial
reform which will be supported by the Bank
financed judicial reform project under preparation.

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS' RECOMMENDATIONS TO CAS 03-05

Annex G
Page 9 of 13

WBG'S RESPONSES

O Enforce consistently laws, rules and 
regulations. Improve accountability 
systems and mechanisms. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 
Project and Financial Management
1 On leadership and transparency: 
The ongoing Public Expenditure, Procurement and
government leaders should improve their 
Financial Management Review (PEPFMR) will
decision-making processes; establish 
provide guidance regarding reforms in financial
comprehensive disclosure requirements as management, including auditing and accounting.
part of the operations and financial
reporting system; improve public access to
government records and transactions.
Review role of oversight committees, 
In the context of civil service reform, the PEPFMR
strengthen and where necessary, rationalize will provide advice on the strengthening of the role
roles and responsibilities. 
of oversight agencies; based on this, the proposed
second program loan might support this initiative.
Several projects will include improving
accountability and transparency in financial
management as an important component (e.g.,
SEMP 2, NRIMP 2). An IDF capacity building
grant is supporting improving accountability in poor
LGUs.
) Streamline and simplify audit and reporting The Commission on Audit (COA) is taking the lead
processes. 
in improving the internal and external audit
mechanisms. The PEPFMR will also provide
guidance on how the streamlining and
simplification of such processes is achievable.
Enhance capacity through IT hardware and 
SEMP 2 will finance IT improvements in the
software. Include training to optimize these departments of education and health. This project is
tools. 
currently under preparation.
Procurement
) In terms of procedural reforms: integrate 
requirements of different funding agencies 
for consistency and standardization; 
simplify processes and procedures;
suppliers/ contractors and the public should
be provided with the procedural guidelines
that are simple and easily understood; there
should be clear benchmarks and
specifications; reduce the number or
required signatures; increase transparency
by making information available to the
public; improve communication between
recipients and procuring entities; maximize
technology in the procurement of goods
and services; simplify the payment process.

The PEPFMR will provide advice on procurement-
related reforms. This would also be addressed in the
two proposed program loans.

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS' RECOMMENDATIONS TO CAS 03-05

Annex G
Page 10 of 13

RECOMMENDATIONS 
) Capacity-building is an important 
intervention. Training should be done on 
the procurement cycle and project design; 
GOP should recognize procurement as an 
important function that requires the 
appropriate skills and professional staff;
regular refresher course should be provided
given that procurement policies and
procedures as well as people managing the
process, change regularly; come up with an
accreditation process for procurement
officers, Bidding and Accreditation
Committee members and the secretariat

and technical staff. 

g) Reinforce/reward good performance; 
penalize those involved in graft and 
corruption; use performance evaluation
schemes with effect on promotions,
improvement in pay scale for those
involved in this function. 
E. Macroeconomy *_
) Rural infrastructure and human capital 
investment are important for growth. 
<i Look more into the micro (supply side) 
responses and not just demand to generate 
growth, including privatization, agriculture 
trade reforms, reforms in the social sectors 
and improved productivity. 
Review/change/repeal laws and policies
that hamper productivity. Expand rural-
based and not just traditional agriculture-
based income sources. Consider regional,
industry and sectoral distribution and the
quality of growth. 

WBG'S RESPONSES
Procurement reforms will be supported through
projects (for instance SEMP 2) and staff of
implementing agencies will be provided with
training and technical assistance to build their
procurement capacity.

_

Should be addressed by GOP directly, in context of
civil service reform.

_-

See the responses above for (A) rural development
and (C) human development.
Analysis is currently underway regarding transport
costs in the Philippines which may constrain supply
side response. Trade reforms, in particular for
agricultural commodities are part of the WB's
macroeconomic dialogue with government.

_-

Annex G
Page I Iof 13

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS' RECOMMENDATIONS TO CAS 03-05

RECOMMENDATIONS 

WBG'S RESPONSES

0! Look at policy and procedural reforms for Detailed follow-up on implementation is a key
both lending and non-lending programs. It 
element of our CAS, with regard to both
is effective to support not just policy but 
implementation of projects and of policies. The
also implementation and their consistency. WB is ready to provide technical assistance in this
Improve service delivery of agencies 
regards where needed. Also, communication about
including coordination among them. 
the WB's programs and policies is a key element of
Improve communication about the Bank's 
the Bank's outreach strategy, including both in-
policies and programs. Review Bank's own country events, publications, media relations and
policies, processes and requirements, 
availability of information on the Bank's external
particularly criteria for project selection. 
web site.
Exact accountability and impose the rule of
law.
Improve fiscal management in two areas: 
revenue policy and fiscal risk matters. 
GOP plans and programs should have clear 
budgetary sources and fiscal management 
plans, with reconciliation of seemingly 
conflicting policies. GOP should move 
away from foreign loans to reduce debt 
burden. Review tax system and IRA. 

1 

Lending support to improve fiscal discipline will be
provided through the proposed program loan and
advisory and technical assistance through the
PEPFMR, a follow-up study and grants. Future
analytical and advisory work will pay particular
attention to fiscal management at the local
government level and will review the feasibility of
the current IRA. The capacity building efforts will
initially focus on BIR through mobilization of an
Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant. The
IMF has also been providing advice and technical
assistance on tax policy.
The WB will continue to work with the IMF and
use a combination of program lending, advisory
work and technical assistance to address
weaknesses in the financial sector. IFC will also
assist in strengthening the banking system and
promoting capital market development.

g) Undertake policy reforms in the financial 
sectors and capital markets; SEC reforms 
to ensure fair competition; corporate 
governance reforms. Explain proposed 
instruments and solutions such as the 
AMCs and securitization to the public. 
Strengthening the regulatory system
(Banking Act and the Central Bank Act).
) The WB should continue to blend project 
The WIB's assistance will include all these elements
lending and non-lending program (i.e., best during the CAS period, depending on the needs of
practices, knowledge-sharing, distance 
the government. It will use a blend of program
learning, studies and researches. etc.). 
lending (for policy reforms), project lending, and
Information and communication 
advisory services. Advisory services will include
technology is an element to improve 
analytical and diagnostic studies, including best
efficiency of service delivery. LGUs and 
practices and knowledge sharing. Some of these
social preparation are key elements in 
will also have LGU focus.
project design to ensure project success.
WB's intellectual capital must be
harnessed, not just its financial capital.

Annex G
Page 12 of 13

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS' RECOMMENDATIONS TO CAS FY03-05

WBG'S RESPONSES

RECOMMENDATIONS 
F. Private Sector*
^) The Bank Group should concentrate on: 
IFC is talking to several players interested in setting
support to asset management companies 
up a Special Purpose Asset Vehicle (SPAV) and
(AMCs), expansion of micro-finance, 
would be pleased to work with a Company that has
sharing of its knowledge-wealth, undertake 
a viable proposal. It would like to leverage on the
information dissemination on best 
experience of its micro finance investment in
practices, assistance in urban development Mindanao, once the results of the first investment
concerns (titling system, security of tenure 
are clear. IFC is also looking to finance the Land
of informal settlers), and the establishment Registration Authority project that would help
of a local infrastructure fund. 
improve the land titling system. It is also working
on providing local currency financing to clients in
the Philippines.
) Address the following constraints faced by The WB is ready to assist the GOP in helping
improve LGU capacity, both within the context of
the private sector in supporting LGUs: 
LGUs limited capacity, lack of LGU 
projects, and through grant assistance. Upcoming
accountability and transparency, the short 
analytical work will focus particularly on issues of
term of the Local Chief Executive (LCE), 
financial management at the local level. However,
the incompatible accounting system being 
the short term of the LCE cannot be addressed by
used by government, and the lack of a 
the WB.
clearing and settlement system.

0) Recommendations to address the above 

<) Population management was raised as a 
One of the proposed WB-financed projects would
key concern. It was suggested that LGUs 
address population management issues (Population
should address this issue with help from the Management/ Women's Health 2).
Department of Health, private sector and
civil society organizations.

constraints were: the LGUs to make use of
available funds window before accessing
private sector funds, classifying LGUs
according to capacity and identifying the
type of assistance needed by each cluster,
reviewing the official policy against LGU
deposits in private banks including the
bond pooling system and strengthening the

local government guarantee system. 

See above.

.

MULTI-STAKEHOLDERS RECOMMENDATIONS TO CAS 03-05

Annex G
Page 13 of 13

WBG'S RESPONSES
Approving IRRs soon after legislation is passed is
key to assuring actual implementation of policy
reforms. The WB is ready to provide assistance to
government as requested. Tax reform would be
addressed in the context of the planned program
loans.

RECOMMENDATIONS 
O The meeting suggested the following 
regulatory priorities to improve investor 
confidence: the formulation of the 
Implementing Rules and Regulation (IRR) 
to already passed legislations and ensuring 
strict compliance and implementation of 
these; specific tax reforms (documentary
stamp tax, capital gains tax, excise tax,
VAT, taxes for self-employed) and a
rationalization of the complicated tax rules
and regulations, with greater transparency
to improve compliance.

Consultations on Private Sector and Macroeconomy had different methodologies, hence, the formats were quite
different from the rest. Recommendations often refer to government rather than the Bank Group's program.

Annex H
Page 1 of 28

Philippines: Private Sectcr Development Strategy

I. Introduction

Philippines absorbed the negative impact of the Asian financial crisis better than most other
countries in the region. But it has not returned to pre-crisis GDP growth levels and over the
past 30 years growth has lagged behind most Asian neighbors. The incidence of poverty in
Philippines remains relatively high at about 34 'o. To reduce poverty Philippines has to grow
faster. The private sector would have to play a major role since it dominates the economy.

However, despite a relatively open and liberal investment environment the private sector
engine has never been consistently strong. Growth has been a start-stop process. Periods of
boom have been followed by episodes of bust. Periodic political and economic turbulence
has shortened investment horizons causing under investment. Increasing private investment is
the key to building a strong competitive private sector. This would require, first and
foremost, reducing concerns about law and order problems and perceptions about political
instability breaking the chain of reforms. Then policy must focus on (a) improving the
business environment; (b) expanding supply of long-term risk and loan capital; (c)
strengthening infrastructure by attracting private investment and management expertise to
complement government resources and increase their effectiveness. Finally, speedy
implementation of reforms would enhance credibility with investors.

This report identifies issues in private sector development. The focus is on development of
the non-financial private sector. Part II presents an overview of the private sector and reviews
developments since the last CAS. Part III identifies key issues. Part IV proposes a Private
Sector Development (PSD) strategy and role of the Bank Group.

II. Overview of the PhiLippines Private Sector

Structure

* The Philippine economy is a predominantly private economy. Private sector consumption
and investment drive the economy accounting for about 63% and 10-12% of GDP
respectively. In the agriculture sector the chief products are rice, corn, coconut,
pineapple and sugar. In the minerals sector, the country is rich in copper, cobalt, nickel,
silver, and iron and gold. Food processing, textiles, clothing, wood, forest products, and
home appliances dominate the industry sector, with fast-growing aquaculture,
microcircuit, garments and furniture sectors. Retail trade, financial services and
telecommunications are important service sub-sectors. Private sector involvement in
infrastructure sectors increased during the 90s.

* 

Industry and Services sectors dominate the economy. In 2000, services, industry and
agriculture accounted for 53%, 31% and 16% of GDP respectively. Between 1990 and
2000 the services sector has been the fastest growing sector (average annual growth rate
of 4%). Manufacturing dominates industrial sector output. In terrns of employment,
agriculture accounts for about 40% of employment, services for about 36% and industry
24%.

Annex H
Page 2 of 28

* Unemployment and underemployment is high. Of the estimated 32.6 million persons in
the labor force (public as well as private) as of July 2001, about 29.2mn people were
employed giving an unemployment rate of about 10.1% (unemployment is estimated to
have gone up since then). In addition 17.7% of the labor force is estimated to be
underemployed. There are about lmn overseas Filipino workers. With annual
remittances in excess of US$6bn (2000), these overseas workers make a major
contribution in supporting balance of payments and domestic consumption.

m Micro and small enterprises account for 99% of registered private firms. According to
the annual survey of establishments, the total number of registered establishments in
operation at end- 2000 was estimated to be about 820,960. Micro enterprises accounted
for 91 % of registered establishments; and small establishments accounted for about 8%
of registered establishments. Medium-sized firms accounted for 0.4% of registered
establishments. The remaining 2,984 were large establishments employing more than 200
workers. In the agriculture sector there are an estimated 4.6mn farm holdings with an
average size of about 2.1 hectares. Disparity in agricultural land ownership is substantial.
Most manufacturing establishments are located in one of the 54 (mostly privately
managed) special economic zones and industrial estates.

* Ownership in listed companies is highly concentrated. The Philippines has 231 publicly
listed companies. The degree of ownership concentration is second only to Indonesia in
the region. The top 15 families account for 55% of ownership in listed companies.
According to a 1997 survey, 757 of the 1,000 largest corporations (ranked by sales) were
Philippine-owned and 216 of these belonged to only 39 corporate groups. The total sales
of these 216 group-owned companies accounted for 51 percent of the total sales of the
largest Philippine-owned corporations. The study also found that in 1997, among publicly
listed non-financial companies, one dominant shareholder controlled on average 41
percent of the equity, while the top 5 shareholders had majority control in three out of
every four listed company. Some product markets such as tobacco, beverages and cement
have high concentration ratios. Geographically, the National Capital Region around
Manila -accounts for a large part of the corporate private sector and industrial sector.

* Export production and export markets are concentrated Exports grew rapidly in the 90s
and manufactured exports account for 80% of total exports. But relative to other East
Asian economies the export base is narrow with a high dependency on electronics exports
that account for nearly 60% of total exports. In terms of destination, U.S.A. and Japan are
the largest markets accounting for more than 50% of total exports. Philippines share in
regional exports is lower in comparison to Thailand and Malaysia. Domestic value added
in electronics exports increased from about 10% in the early 90s to about 30% by 1998
but now appears to have reached a plateau. In recent years, IT services have grown
rapidly. Exports increased from US$125million in 1995 to around US$700million by
2000.
a While it is difficult to assess the truefinancial situation of the corporate sector it appears
not to be highly leveraged. Filipino companies are not as leveraged in comparison to
other East Asian countries. However, because accounting standards and disclosure
requirements are not up to international practices the relatively lower leverage may need
to be interpreted with caution. In terms of external sources of financing, the corporate
sector relies mainly on commercial banks. Loans are typically on short-term basis with

maturities not exceeding 90 days. The corporate bond market is almost non-existent

Annex H
Page 3 of 28

because of high costs of trading. Private sector's external debt accounts for about 34% of
total external debt.

Foreignfirms are an important part o,the private sector. As at end 1995 about 14,800

foreign affiliates were located in the economy, a number considerably higher than that in
Indonesia and Thailand.

Financial Sector

* Relative to Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia, the Philippines financial system is

smaller. At the apex is BSP, the central bank responsible for monetary policy and bank
supervision. The banking system consists of Commercial Banks (Expanded Commercial
Banks and Non-Expanded Commercial Banks); Thrift Banks (Savings Banks, Private
Development Banks, Stock Savings and Loan Associations); Specialized Government
Banks; and Rural Banks. As of June 2001, there were 45 universal and commercial banks,
1 5 thrift banks and 785 rural and cooperative banks. The Philippine Deposit Insurance
Corporation administers a deposit insurance program. Deposit insurance covers up to
Pesos 100,000 per depositor. In addition, there are a number of other financial institutions
regulated mainly by the Securities and Exchange Commission. These include registered
investment companies (26), and registered investment houses (48). The micro finance
sector is growing rapidly. There are over 300 credit-granting non-government
organizations. Two of the largest non-government financial institutions have experienced
a rapid growth in number of clients. Cooperatives and rural banks are also expanding
their micro-finance operations. Ownership of financial institutions is mainly in private
domestic hands. Majority or controlling interests in the commercial banks typically
resides with business families. The government owns three specialized development
banks.

* Commercial banks dominate the financial system. As of June-2001 expanded commercial

banks, ordinary commercial banks, thrift banks and rural and cooperative banks
accounted for 71%, 20%, 7% and 2% of assets of the banking system respectively.
Foreign banks account for about 15% of the assets of the banking system. In recent years
foreign banks have been involved in mergers in the banking system.

* Despite rapid growth in the mid-90s the equities market is small. As-of 30 August 2001,

the Philippine Stock Exchange had 231 listed companies. The top 15 stocks account for
67% of trading volumes and 71% of total market capitalization. The Market's average
daily trading volumes have shrunk to less than US$10mn in comparison to US$20-
30million in Indonesia and US$120-130million in Thailand.

Annex H
Page 4 of 28

Infrastructure Sector

Philippines infrastructure development is behind its middle-income neighbors. (Table 1)

Table 1: Philippine Infrastructure Performance

Philippines 

Indonesia Malaysia 

Thailand 

Korea 

Per capita power consumption 

451 

(kwh) 

_ _ _ _ _ __ 

16 
65 

Trans & Distrbn losses (lo) 
Access to power 
(%households)
Urban water access ( YOpop) 
92 
Rural water access (% pop) 
80 
Paved Roads (% 95-99) 
20 
Telephone mainlines per I 000 
39 
Cellular Subscribers per IO00 
36 
Source: World Development Indicators, 2000

_____ 

320 

12 
39 

91 
65 
46 
27 
1 1 

__________ ____ 

_____ ____ 

_____ ____ 

2554 

_ _ _ _

1345 

4497 

7 
92 

95 
94 
76 
203 
137 

9 
87 

89 
77 
97 
86 
39 

7 
97

97 
71 
75 
438 
500 

Middle

In co m e

1367

11

93
68
48
121
55

Government agencies are responsible for sector development with independent (and often
multiple) regulatory bodies responsible for entry, price and service regulations. Operators are
a mix of public and private entities and local governments (Table 2).

Sector 
Transport 

Telecommunication 

Water 

Power 

Table 2: Institutional Structure in Infrastructure

Institutional Structure
Sector Development: Department of Transport and Communication, Infrastructure Committee
of NEDA.
Regulation: Separate agencies for each mode. Toll Roads are under the Toll Regulatory Board;
local govemments.
Delivery: Rail is state-owned except for light rail. Several private toll roads. Other roads
managed by Department of Public Works and Highway and local governments. Passenger and
cargo traffic and inter-island shipping is largely private. Ports are a mixture of public and
private under the overall jurisdiction of the Philippines Port Authority. Aviation is in private
hands.
Sector Development: Department of Transport & Communications
Regulation: National Telecommunications Commission.
Delivery: Private operators. Competitive market structures in most segments and low barriers
to entry.
Sector Development: National Water Resources Board
Regulation: National Water Resources Board, Local Water Utilities Administration, MWSS
regulatory office for Manila;
Delivery: Autonomous Public Sector Water Districts, Private systems under design, build and
lease schemes. Water delivery in Metro Manila through private concessions supported by IFC.
Sector Development: Department of Energy
Regulation: Energy Regulatory Commission Delivery: (a) generation: State owned National
Power Corporation (NPC)+ Independent power produccrs; (b) transmission: NPC; (c)
distribution: local government utilities; investor owned utilities and electric cooperatives. More
than 40 generation projects with private sector participation. The Electric Power Industry
Reform Act provides the framework for privatization of NPC and creation of a competitive
power market.

The track record in attracting private sector investments.in infrastructure has been

impressive. Among developing countries Philippines was a pioneer and innovator in the
use of Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT). A BOT law was passed in 1990 and amended in
1994. Over the past decade, the government in partnership with the private sector has

Annex H
Page 5 of 28

implemented about 111 infrastructure projects, with an estimated total capital cost of
US$26 billion. IFC has been an advisor and financier in some of these projects. Private
sector participation is the highest in the power and telecom sectors followed by roads and
water.

Trade & Investment Regime

Trade and tariff reform programs launched in the early 90s have lowered and simplified
tariffs but agriculture sector is relatively more protected Tariffs have come down. The

average most favored nation rate in Philippines in 1999 was 9.98% compared to 13.5% in
Indonesia, 9.45% in Malaysia, and 16.97% in Thailand. The weighted average effective
protection rate (EPR) declined from 24.8% in 1995 to 14.4% in 2000. The decline in the
EPR is most pronounced in the manufacturing sector. The latest Tariff Commission
estimates of EPRs are as follows: 14.1% in 2001, 12.62% in 2002, 11.77% in 2003, and
10.76% in 2004. In 2004, a uniform tariff of 5% will apply. But exceptions in agriculture
and food processing make the EPR in these sectors 20.08% and 21.50% respectively. Most
price controls have been eliminated.

* The foreign investment regime isfairly liberal. In most sectors 100% foreign ownership is

permissible. However Philippines maintains two negative lists that restrict or limit foreign
investments in certain sectors/activities such as services, ownership of land, retail trade.
While foreign ownership of land is restricted firms can lease land for up to 75 years. The
investment regime guarantees freedom fiom expropriation without nationalization, and the
right to remit profits, dividends, capital gains and sale proceeds from investments.

Recent DeveloDments

The private sector has been unable to sustain a growth momentum and business and
consumer confidence has been volatile. With the exception of the services sector growth has
been volatile (Figure 1). Turbulent domestic political and economic events and adverse
weather conditions contributed to volatility. High oil prices and slowdown in global IT
demand further exacerbated domestic problems. Private business and consumer confidence
has also been volatile as measured by the monthly confidence surveys conducted by the
Business World and Audit and Surveys Worldwide.

Annex H
Page 6 of 28

Figure 1: Uneven Growth: Quarterly Sectoral GDP Growth (y-o-y, %)

15

10 

--,-Construction

U- Agnculture
-- Manufacturing|

_

\ 

~-0-Services 

-1 

-15 

15 

-20 

Source: BSP

A slow-down in export growth has muted private sector growth. The fortunes and

performance of the private manufacturing sector depend significantly on export performance.
Because Philippines is highly dependent on electronics exports, it has been severely affected
by the global slow-down in the information technology sector. In the first half of 2001, on a
year-on-year basis export growth turned negative because of a significant decline in
electronics exports. (Figure 2).

Figure 2: Steep decline in export growth (%, y-o-y)

25-
20-

S 

10

5- 

-5 -1997-- 

-10

-15

1998-199 

1999- 

20000t(Jan

Growth in private fixed investment has been muted. Fixed capital formation has not picked
up (Figure 3). Fixed investment in the manufacturing sector has been subdued because of
unutilized capacity; average capacity utilization in the manufacturing has fluctuated between
70-75%. Growth in private construction -
an important component of fixed capital -
has
been hampered because of soft commercial property markets. Rental rates have been
declining and vacancy rates have been increasing.

Annex H
Page 7 of 28

Figure 3: Fixed Capital Formation, Annual Change, %,1985 prices

Is 

_ 

_ 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ___ 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

I. 

-S

J 

I' 

N 

U 
X 

OI(OI 

J

Source: NEDA

Net realizedforeign investmentflows have been volatile. Once again, turbulent domestic
political and economic conditions resulted in Philippines not being able to maintain a steady
growth in new investment flows (Figure 4). A stock market scandal in early 2000 severely
undermined investor confidence.

Figure 4: Fluctuating Foreign Investment (Net Flows, US$mn)

1~~ 7- 

| | 

1 

I w ,,$ A a z I 

| _ 
I 
9 X 

.D, 

*~~~~~0Portfolio 

OFDI

l

Source: BSP

Andforeign as well as domestic direct investments approved by promotion agencies has
been declining. Approved private investment projects have remained below pre-crisis levels
(Table 3). Both domestic as well as foreign investment approval requests registered with the
main investment promotion agencies have been declining. Initially uncertain political and
economic conditions made the private sector hesitate in committing new investments. Global
economic downturn resulted in maintaining the decline in the approved value of investment
in 2001. Translating approved investments into actual investments also continues to be a
challenge.

Annex H
Page 8 of 28

Table 3: Private investment approvals have declined

Total approved investments 
Of which foreign
(bn Pesos) 
(bn Pesos)
1998 
375.1 
172.5
1999 
283.3 
106.7
2000 
207.0 
80.4
2001 (QI+Q2) 
57.9 
17.0
Source: National Statistical Coordination Board. (Covers investments approved by Board of
Investments, Philippine Economic Zone Authority, Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority and Clark
Development Corporation.)

Corporate financial performance has improved. Net profits in the corporate sector show an

upward trend and the number of loss making companies did not materially increase (Table 4).
Systemic risk appears to have been reduced -at 
the end of 2000, only 13.5% of total
corporate sector liabilities were on the books of the 100 largest loss-makers versus 20% at the
end of 1999. However, sustaining profit performance and strengthening balance sheets will
be a challenge because of the slowing economy and weak exports.

Table 4: Corporate Performance, 1997-2000

# of companies 
% loss making 
Net Profit (Peso bn) 
Return on equity 
Debt-Equity ratio 
Memo Item
Total external debt of private 
sector (USSbn)
Source: World Bank and BSP

1997 
4,535 
24.3 
68.9 
5.7 
1.7 

12.5 

1998 
4,705 
24.1 
122.9 
7.7 
1.3 

12.0 

1999 
4,578 
21.6 
99.1 
6.7 
1.5 

13.2 

2000
2,910
22.0
127.9
7.1
1.4

14.1

There is evidence of corporate restructuring. Despite important bottlenecks and limitations

in the corporate restructuring regime, firmns appear to be restructuring their operations. A
funds flow analysis of 3,344 corporates for the balance sheet year 1999 also indicates
restructuring that went beyond mere rescheduling of loans. Corporates financed losses and
reduced borrowings by liquidating long-term investments and other assets (Table 5). Data on
worker retrenchment also suggest an active process of restructuring. However, restructuring
in the corporate sector has been at the expense of banks. Companies surrendered assets to
banks in return for reduction in loan obligations. The market value of surrendered assets
(classified in bank balance sheets as ROPOA --- Real and Other Properties Owned or
Acquired) is considerably below the face value of loans.

Table 5: 1999 Flow of Funds for 3,344 Corporates

Annex H
Page 9 of 28

SOURCES OF FUNDS

From operations 

From investment activities
Decrease in current assets 
Decrease in long term investments 
Decrease in other assets 

Totalfrom investment activities 
Fromfinancing activities 

Total Sources of Funds 
APPLICATION OF FUNDS

Increase in Cash 
Decrease in current liabilities 
Decrease in long term liabilities 
Decrease in shareholder funds 
Others 

Total uses of funds 

L__ 

_ _ _ _ Peso Billions

156.9

94.5
285.7
333.8

714.0
0.0

870.9

44.6
66.7
427.6
323.0
9.0

870.9

While the Philippines banking system did not suffer as severely from the East Asian
financial crisis it did not materially improve its performance and NPLs have risen. Table 6
summarizes the performance of the financial system. Banks have been focusing on
consolidation by reducing lending, increasing loss provisioning and improving liquidity.
There has been an increase in mergers between banks, often involving foreign banks,
reflecting the need for better economies of scale. Between 1998 and 2000 there were I I
merger transactions in the banking system. While BSP reported capital adequacy ratios for
the banking system remain substantially above the minimum Basle standard of 8%, the true
capital adequacy picture may be far poorer if the value of acquired assets are properly
accounted for. The system may be becoming more vulnerable. Asset quality has worsened
because NPLs and restructured loans have gone up. At the same time profitability, measured
as return-on-average-asset ratio has declined to less than 1%.

Table 6: Philippine Banking System -Key Performance Indicators

Growth Rates (% year-on-year) 
Total Assets 
Loans (net) 
Operating Income 
Ratios
Loans/Dcposit 
NPL Ratio 
NPL Coverage Ratio 
Capital Adequacy 
Return on Assets 
Retum on Equity 
Source: BSP

_

1999 

6.7 
0.3 
-8.9 

36.1 
12.7 
45.4 
17.5 
0.4 
2.9 

2000 

9.5 
2.1 
-8.7 

80.9 
14.9 
43.7 
16.2 
0.4 
2.7 

2001 (June)

9.8
3.8
3.7

74.7
16.6
44.8
16.7
0.4
3.2

The Philippine capital market is yet tofully regain lost ground but in recent months
investor interest has picked up. Recently, S&P upgraded outlook to "stable"from negative.
The PSE composite index has declined from a high of 2621 reached in July 1999. The
Market's average daily trading volumes has shrunk and market depth has not increased. The
top 10% and 25% of publicly listed companies accounted for 88.6% and 95.9% of market
capitalization, and 81% and 96% of trading volume, respectively, at year end 2000. Activity

Annex H
Page 10 of 28

in the IPO market has also been low. The net new number of publicly listed companies grew
by an average of only five companies per year over the last five years. A corporate debt
market has also not emerged because of high documentary tax costs of transactions. These
weaknesses led to three international financial firms closing their securities and brokerage
operations in Philippines. However, investors have viewed positively the government's
reform and its determination to tackle law and order problems, including terrorism. The PSE
composite index has regained some of the lost ground.

Re2ulatorv and Policy Develovments

Significant policy and regulatory developments in the power, banking and corporate sectors
include:

Power sector reform. The most significant development was the passage of the long delayed
power reform bill in June 2001 sends a strong signal to the market. The Electric Power
Industry Reform Act (EPIRA) which shall provide a framework for the restructuring of the
electric power industry, including the privatization of the assets of the National Power
Corporation (NPC), the transition to a desired competitive structure, and the definition of the
responsibilities of the various government agencies and private entities. Key features of the
reform include: (i) separation of generation & transmission functions of NPC; (ii)
competition in generation & supply sectors; (iii) regulated transmission and distribution
sectors; (iv) unbundled power rates for transparency and basis for consumer choice; (v) open
access in transmission & distribution wires; and (vi) retail competition.

Anti-money laundering legislation. Philippines was identified by the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) as one of the 15 countries that was non-cooperative in the fight against money
laundering. In response, Philippines passed an Anti-Money Laundering Law just ahead of
the September 30, 2001 deadline imposed by FATF. Documentary requirements for foreign
exchange transactions have been tightened. These actions resulted in the FATF deciding for
the time being not to apply counter-measures to the Philippines. However, as of February 1,
2002 Philippines remains on the list of non-cooperative countries pending action by the
Government of Philippines to address the deficiencies in the Act identified by the FATF.

A new General Banking Law. This law was enacted in May 2000. It is a major improvement
over the 1949 law and an important step in addressing structural weaknesses in the financial
system. The new law lays the basis for a major overhaul of the regulatory and supervisory
framework. The law also eases restrictions on foreign ownership of local banks (foreign
ownership has been raised to 40% of voting stock and after seven years up to 100%). The
supervisory powers of the central bank have been enhanced and made more explicit and
prudential regulations are more closely aligned with BIS standards.

A frameworkfor encouraging micro-finance institutions. The Monetary Board, the policy-

making body of BSP, has partially lifted the general moratorium on the licensing of new
thrift and rural banks to allow the entry of micro-finance-oriented banks on a selective basis.
Consequently, Micro Enterprise Bank (MEB), an IFC investee bank for micro-finance was
able to receive its lending license in 2001. Micro finance loans extended by rural banks and
cooperative rural banks will be eligible for rediscounting with BSP. This is to encourage rural
banks and cooperative rural banks to support micro finance activities by providing them
additional liquidity to fund their lending operations.

Annex H
Page 11 of 28

A new Securities Regulation Code. The nevw code is intended to increase corporate

transparency, afford better protection of investors interests, and strengthen regulation. Under
the law, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is to be reorganized to function as
an effective market regulator. Implementing regulations have also been issued. Both the code
and the implementing regulations adopt many of the practices recommended by International
Organization of Securities and Credit Organizations. As mandated by the SEC the
Philippines Stock Exchange was transforned into a stock corporation owned by 184
stockholder members. The new structure provides for easier entry by new securities firms and
facilitates greater transparency.

A number of laws liberalizing the economy and opening it to greater competition were

enacted. The Retail Trade Liberalization Act opens the retail sector to foreign equity
investment. The E-commerce law provides a legal basis for electronic transactions. The law
also requires the government to move within two years towards implementing an electronic
system for issuance of permits and granting of business approvals. The Regional
Headquarters law grants additional incentives to multinational corporations to establish
regional headquarters in the Philippines.

The government implemented measures to reduce the cost of transacting business with

Government agencies. Examples include the modernization of customs procedures including
a comprehensive electronic interface for submission, examination and clearance. This has
materially reduced customs processing time. The government used the BOT law to support a
public-private partnership that has shortened processing time for driver's licenses and car
registration to 1-2 hours. This project has been financed by IFC. A computerization project
within the judicial system is being implemented to ensure efficient and speedy resolution of
court cases. The Supreme Court along with the Bar is also working on measures to reduce the
backlog of pending cases. Government statistics indicate that the backlog is declining.

III. Key Issues

Short-term growth prospectsfor the private sector are subdued. Growth prospects in the
private sector during the next twelve to eighteen months will remain subdued. While private
domestic consumption is expected to remain steady, domestic investment is not expected to
pick up. The simultaneous and a broad-based slow down in the industrial economies and
concerns about emerging market risks will affect exports, foreign direct and portfolio
investment flows. High dependency of IT sector exports may mean that the export sector is
unlikely to emerge as a growth engine at least till beginning of 2003. The ability of the
government to stimulate growth through increased public spending is also limited given the
need to contain deficits. And because of creeping NPL problems, the financial system will be
cautious in increasing credit to the private sector. As a result in the short-term a rapid
ramping up of growth appears unlikely.

But prospectsfor implementinggrowth-inducing reforms aregood. Underlying the
subdued short-term prospects is a strong positive -the 
restoration of political stability, a
reform minded government and social consensus for reforms. The policy framework has,
over the years, become more conducive. T here is good understanding about the main
development bottlenecks. S&Ps recent upgrade of country outlook to "stable" from negative
is contributing in reviving portfolio investments. The Government is aiming for an average
growth of over 5% per annum over 2001--2005. Consistent implementation of policy and

Annex H
Page 12 of 28

regulatory reforms and sustained action to make the business environment more conducive
could contribute in realizing this goal.

Philippines must improve its competitive position. Boxes I and 2 provide external
perceptions regarding Philippine country risk and competitive standing. Philippines is
somewhere in the middle. But this may not be enough because Philippines is caught in a
competitive pincer. Countries such as Vietnam and Cambodia pose a threat in low-cost goods
and services markets. Thailand and Malaysia have a better infrastructure and head start in
FDI in a wide range of export assembly industries. China poses a competitive threat in all
sectors especially after WTO entry. And India offers stiff competition in IT services sectors
and, increasingly, with deepening reforms will pose a threat in manufactures also. Further,
the large domestic markets of China and India exert a strong gravitational pull and enable
them to attract foreign direct investments despite policy and regulatory deficiencies. China
and India also offer an abundant supply of technically qualified manpower. Investors are
increasingly reluctant to spread themselves thin across many markets. At the same time many
more developing economies are reforming and aggressively chasing investments,
technologies and markets. Private sector growth will depend on Philippines developing a
positioning that is attractive to investors -
a very open and stable investment environment
and high quality infrastructure. The recent upgrading in Philippines country risk outlook is a
positive development.

Annex H
Page 13 of 28

Box 1: Foreign Investor Perception of Philippine

Economist Intelligence Unit Business Environment Rankings. The Economist Intelligence Unit has developed a
global business rankings model, which seeks to measure and forecast the quality or attractiveness of the business
environment and its key components. The model uses quantitative data, business surveys and expert assessments. It
reflects the main criteria used by companies in formulating their global business strategies and investment-location
decisions. The overall scores (on a I to 10 scale) and rankings are based on the scores for 70 indicators, grouped into
ten different categories of the business environment. The higher the score better the environment.

Country 

Singapore 
Thailand 
Malaysia 
Philippines 
China 
India 

2002-2006 IBusiness Environment 
8.52 
6.96 
6.79 
6.38 
6.16 
6.34 

-_ 

Qualitative Assessment

-Very Good

_ 

_ 

__Good

Good
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate

Institutional Investor Country Credit Ratings

Institutional Investor Country Credit Ratings

gao 0

900

70 0

500 

40 0

n 

300 * 

200

100

Q 

_ 

________

_ 

_

00 

, 

i 

, 

,

90O 

9> 

c> 

9c7 

99 

g 

,,, 

oO 

4S 

lz9 

-0-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~PHIL



Annex H
Page 14 of 28

Box 2: Philippine competitive position is weak

The most cited measure of competitiveness is the annual Competitiveness Ranking issued by the World Economic
Forum. Philippines is viewed as less competitive than most of its important Asian competitors.

WEF Rankings. (Represents a best estimate of an economy's effective utilization of its current stock of resources.)

Current Competitiveness 
Growth Competitiveness
2001 
2000 
2001 
2000
Malaysia 
37 
30 
30 
24
Thailand 
38 
40 
33 
30
Indonesia 
55 
47 
64 
43
Philippines 
54 
46 
48 
36
China 
47 
44 
39 
40
India 
36 
37 
57 
48
(Current Competitiveness Rank: Measure's an economy's effective utilization of current stock of resources)
(Growth Competitiveness Rank: Measures an economy's underlying prospects for growth over the coming five years)

Source: WEF

Philippines must increase fixed investment. Growth of fixed investment has been much

lower than other economies in East Asia. Between 1986 and 1997, the average investment to
GDP ratio in Philippines was around 21% substantially lower than those in Thailand (36%),
Indonesia (34%/6), and Malaysia (35%). Foreign direct investment also played a lesser role in
fixed capital formation (Figure 5). Four factors would appear to be central for increasing
fixed investments: quality of business environment, quality of infrastructure, availability of
long-term loan and risk capital, and skilled labor.

Figure 5: Role of FDI in Fixed Capital Formation

MYS

201 

THA

_ _____ 

In 
1272

1 0

PHIL

0 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25

Annual Average, as % of gross fixed capital formation

Source: United Nations Center for Transnational Corporation

Low fixed investment rate has not been sufficiently offset by high productivity growth;
productivity growth has been negative. While the exact estimates of productivity

performance vary among studies, all point towards poor productivity perfornance and its
lack of contribution to economic growth. One study estimated that Total Factor Productivity

Annex H
Page 15 of 28

(TFP) in Philippines was -2.2% in 1981-:1989 and -0.6% in 1990-981. Another study
suggests that Philippines has been lagging behind in its productivity performance with
respect to other East Asian countries (Table 7). Improving productivity is fundamental
because Philippines will not be able to mimic the process of high capital accumulation that
enabled other East Asian economies to grow rapidly during the 80s and early 90s.

Table 7: Annual Growth Rate of Total Factor Productivity (%)

Period 
1960-94 
-0.4 
1984-94 
-0.9 
Source: Collins and Bosworth, 1997

Philippines 

Malaysia 

0.9 
1.4 

Indonesia 

0.8 
0.9 

Thailand

1.8
3.3

To improve private investment and prod uctivity the volume and quality of domestic
resource mobilization needs to be increased. This means increasing access to domestic
long-term debt financing, equity capital and "patient" risk capital. Domestic savings in
Philippines are much lower than other East Asian countries and this constraints a rapid
increase in investment. The problem of low-level of domestic resources is further
compounded by the very short-term nature of savings. This inhibits long-term lending by
financial institutions. Long-term contractual savings play a limited role in a commercial
bank dominated financial system. The corporate debt markets are underdeveloped
accounting for less than 10% of capital market debt instruments. Risk capital by way of
equity issuance is also limited and the total amounts raised have been small relative to the
size of the private sector. Institutions providing "patient" risk capital -
"angel" capital and
venture capital -
have not emerged.

But increasing investment volumes and long-term resources will require strengthening
accounting and auditing systems and corporate governance. The Bank Group and IMF
have jointly prepared two Reports on Standards and Codes (ROSC) - ROSC Report on

Accounting and Auditing and ROSC Report on Corporate Governance. The ROSC
assessments have revealed weaknesses in financial reporting due to poor audit, ineffective
oversight over the auditing industry, conflicts of interest, related party transactions, weak
institutions and poor corporate government practices. These weaknesses have diminished the
effectiveness of market mechanisms for corporate control and undermined investor
confidence. They are a leading cause for the underdeveloped state of the capital market.

Growth needs to be more broad-based and diversified. This issue needs to be tackled at a

number of levels. The Philippines private sector is very bi-modal. A large number of small
and micro enterprises coexist with relatively few modern corporations. A sophisticated sub-
contracting manufacturing sector is yet to emerge. SME access to finance, technology and
markets needs to be improved. This will require addressing issues relating to enforcement of
loans, expanding forms of acceptable collateral and supporting micro finance institutions.

Removing biases with regard to incentives and foreign direct investment regulations would
facilitate technology and market development.

Exports need to be diversified and the relative dependency on IT sector needs to be
reduced. Agriculture and mining sectors offer good export potential. With the exception of

' Paderanga, Cayetano W. (2000). Productivity Growth and Industrial Structure in the Pacific region: The
Philippines. Japan: Pacific Economic Cooperation Council.

Annex H
Page 16 of 28

a few crops such as fresh mango and banana and rubber, export growth of crops was lower
between 1990-98 than during the 80s. The agriculture sector has shifted from being a net
earner of foreign exchange to a net importer. Mineral exports; which have potential to
generate more than $1 billion in export earnings and $ 400 million in tax revenues, have
languished. Resolving obstacles to 100% foreign ownership of mines and putting in place
clear environmental standards, safeguard and monitoring procedures could mobilize the
investments required to fully tap the economic potential of the mining sector.

PFivate entrepreneurship and investment also needs to be more widely dispersed. While
National Capitol Region will continue to be the growth pole, increasing private sector activity
in backward regions is essential. This will require improving infrastructure, strengthening
supply chain, increasing rural access to credit and improving the local business environment.
Modifying the current system of zone-based incentives that tend to distort location decisions
would facilitate dispersion of industries. Improving service delivery at the LGU level would
also be necessary.

Engineering rapid growth will require improving productivity in agriculture and growth of

non-farm activities. Despite accounting for only 20% of GDP the agriculture sector accounts
for 40% of employment. And, a significant percentage of agriculture employment is seasonal.
The agriculture sector has been growing at only about 2% for the past 20 years and output per
worker in agriculture is about one-sixth of output per worker in industry and about half of
services sector. Growth in yield of many crops fell in the 90s. A number of factors are
responsible for these outcomes.

* Distortions in land markets and uncertainty of the land reform with process lower
incentives for long-term investments in land improvements and tree crops, erode
collateral value of land and limit free transfer of land.

* Access to credit is limited. Share of agriculture loans in total loans from the formal
private financial system is less than 10%. Most households rely on short-term high
cost informal sources of finance.

* The share of productivity supporting public investments in total public expenditure in
the agriculture sector has not risen beyond 30-40%.

* Non-farm activities have not grown rapidly in rural areas because of poor rural
infrastructure and farm to market supply chains. Philippines is an archipelago.
Lowering logistics costs is critical to integrating the rural economy. The need for a
better rural road network linking farms to collection and marketing points is essential.

* 

Investment in and management of extension technologies, R&D has not kept pace
with farmer needs or cropping patterns.

Private firms require a better-trained technicalforce. Student achievement in math and

science in Philippines is lower that its neighbors and lower than the international average.
This affects the capability of the average worker to absorb new technologies and processes.
Government and the private sector need to work together to improve technical skills of the
existing work force.

Annex H
Page 17 of 28

Corporate restructuring framework is weak. The present restructuring framework does not
facilitate maximization of the value of a firm's assets; is unable to strike the right balance
between liquidation and reorganization and between creditors and debtors, and provide for
timely, efficient and impartial resolution of insolvencies. A new restructuring framework is
being introduced under the proposed Corporate Recovery Act. However, as analyzed later on
in this report the new framework while improving on the existing framework still has some
important deficiencies. While the proposed law seems much closer to best practices than the
interim rules, there remain a number of important outstanding issues that should be addressed
prior to enactment (Box 3).

Box 3: Outstanding Issues Under the Proposed Corporate Recovery Act

- Many concepts incorporated in the proposed law are not commercial in nature but tend to be litigious and could
reduce the likelihood of speedy outcome.
- Unlike the old insolvency law, there is no formal hearing on the petition. There is also no requirement that the
debtor be given the right to examine the creditor on the affidavit supporting the petition.
- Under the law creditors may submit to the court their comments on the merits of a proposed rehabilitation plan but it
is the trial court judge who decides whether to try to rehabilitate or to liquidate a distressed company. Under the
Commonwealth model, creditors take this decision based on meetings and discussions amongst themselves. It would be
important to give creditors greater say in the final decision to liquidate or rehabilitate.
-Though the proposed law imposes a number of requirements on a debtor, there are no defined consequences if the
debtor does not or will not fulfill these requirements.
- Although the law requires that a conservator be appointed, there is no obligation for the conservator to report to the
creditors or the Court.
- The law does not provide, as is in the case of other jurisdictions, that levies be charged, based on varying
percentages of assets, to defray the court costs
-The 
proposed law provides that adjournments can be sought and provided, even for inadequate reasons. Delays
caused by such adjournments could cause the death of a distressed company.
- There is no provision for a "cram" down plan and the circumstances under which it could be used.
- A number of sections of the proposed law require that the conservator expend finds. However, there is no
requirement that the debtor advance funds for these purposes.
-There 
is ambiguity over the establishment of classes of creditors. There is no requirement concerning classification
of sub-classes of secured creditors based on varying security interests. It is inequitable to lump together the claims of
secured creditors into the same class if their security interests are totally different.
Source: World Bank, Preliminary ROSC Analysis of Insolvency Systems

IV. The PSD Strategy

The proposed PSD strategy addresses the key issues. It is built around three themes: (i)
supporting the government and the private sector to improve the business environment; (ii)
supporting efforts to increase domestic mobilization of long-term funds; and (iii)
supporting infrastructure deepening through enhanced private sector participation.

The proposed strategy responds to constraints identified in the private sector. In November
2001, the IFC and World Bank (WB) held consultation meetings with the Philippines private
sector focused on Enabling Expansion of the Private Sector. The discussions included (i)
reviewing the new MTPDP and the previous CAS, determining what worked well and what
did not; (ii) drawing lessons form the past three years of implementation; (iii) identifying
emerging and strategic issues and (iv) implementation actions under this CAS . Earlier on
during the summer of 2000, the World Bank Group had commissioned a study to survey the
domestic private sector's perception of the business environment. These consultations
affirmed the key issues discussed in section II and identified the following areas of concern
to the private sector: (i) business environment issues relating to policy and political

Annex H
Page 18 of 28

uncertainty, taxes and uncertain regulations; corruption; speed and consistency ofjudicial
decisions; (ii) lack of access to long-term investment capital and absence of local funds for
private infrastructure investments; (iii) poor quality of public infrastructure and need to
improve LGU service delivery; (iv) need for framework and regulations relating to
securitization and Asset Management Companies including reform of documentary stamp
tax; and (iv) need for speedier announcement of implementing rules and regulations.

The proposed strategy supports the government's policy and institutional reform agenda
and private sector development priorities. The Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan

(MTPDP) 2001-2004 envisages the private sector playing a leading role. The MTPDP
commits the government to a program of legislative, policy, regulatory and institutional
measures to improve the investment and operating environment. The main elements of the
government's support for private sector development are given in Box 4. The Bank Group is
already involved in the areas identified by the govemment as well as the private sector. The
proposed strategy will focuses on completing and deepening existing engagements.

Box 4: Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan, 2001-2004 -Private Sector Development
Priorities

* Maintainfiscal stability
* Rationalizefiscal incentives
* Privatize government corporations.
* 
Strengthen the financial system, address NPL problems and deepen capital markets

.

* 

* 

* Generate employment by improving the investment environment at the LGU level, supporting SMEs and micro
finance institutions and supporting construction of low cost housing
Enhance competitiveness by liberalizing, deregulating and facilitating trade and investments and
Investing in skills development in partnership with industry under a system of enterprise-based training
Improve infrastructure by relaxing restrictions on shipping, promoting connectivity and convergence in
telecommunications sector, attracting private investments under regulatory frameworks that promotes competition
and cost recovery, enacting the Water Resources Management Act and strengthening capacity at the LGU level
* Modernize agriculture by effective implementation of land reforms, fast tracking implementation of the
Agriculture and Fisheries Modemization Act, reducing tariffs on agricultural inputs, upgrading generation of
market information, modernizing farm to market supply chains and promoting private investment in agribusiness
Improve governance by improving service delivery using ICT in govemment, strengthening local government
capacity, implementing procurement reforms

* 

Suipport growth of the tourism and ICT sectors.

Source: MTPDP, 2001-2004

The Bank Group will implement the proposed strategy through lending and non-lending

instruments. The Bank will provide policy advice and technical assistance and will facilitate
knowledge sharing for strengthening regulatory and implementation capacity. With regard to
lending, the Bank will incorporate elements of the proposed PSD strategy in the adjustment,
APL, and investment operations proposed under the FY03-05 CAS. These lending
operations will support policy and institutional reforms that improve the environment for
private investments as well as finance public infrastructure and services required by the
private sector. The focus will be on the financial, water, transport, power and rural sectors.
An important goal will be to improve the business environment at the LGU level.

IFC's approach is to support pioneering or innovative projects. The current shortage of long

term financing available for private sector projects in the Philippines provides the basis for
IFC's comparative advantage in provision of debt and equity financing. IFC's priorities in the
Philippines include achieving a deepening and diversification of the financial system,

Annex H

Page 19 of 28

supporting viable projects in infrastructure and promotion of private investment in health,
education, software and technology relatedi sectors. IFC's investments in the Philippines have
been on an upward trend over the past few years. During FYOI, investment approvals
amounted to $126 million, up from $85 million in FY00. The Philippines is currently among
the Corporation's top ten exposures worldwmide, with a portfolio of over $750 million for 29
projects, $416 million of which is on IFC's own account. During FY02, IFC expects to
undertake investments worth $120-140 million on its own account. It is aiming to increase its
program approvals to around $160 million in FY03. MIGA will remain available to provide
guarantees to facilitate new private sector investment in FY03. In particular, the agency
expects to underwrite two additional transportation projects next fiscal year. Also, MIGA is
being approached for coverage of projects involved in the power privatization process.

The remaining paragraphs discuss the PSD agenda under each of the three themes and the
proposed strategy of the Bank Group to support the implementation of the agenda.

Strenethen the Business Environment

The private sector needs a stable business environment because it expands access to capital
at lower cost. Private investors want to see specific and concrete measures. The litmus test
for investors is implementation. Therefore, the strategy proposes the following actions.

Ensure that implementing regulations and setting up of monitoring, enforcement and
regulatory mechanisms quickly back new laws. A comment often voiced in Philippines is
that while policies and laws are passed, the implementing regulations take a long time to be
announced. Investors have viewed positively the relatively short lag between the enactment
of the Electric Power Industry Act and the announcement of implementing regulations. The
MTPDP has an ambitious legislative agencla. The government could consider preparing draft
implementing rules and regulations concurrent with the draft legislation. Markets also need
more convincing that the rules of business are indeed changing. The litmus test would be a
more effective enforcement of rules already on the books such as those dealing with integrity
of regulatory, accounting and auditing practices and compliance with disclosure
requirements.

Announce a time-bound implementation program to address the business environment
concerns of the domestic private sector. A business environment survey conducted by the
World Bank Group identified the specific concerns and priorities of the domestic private
sector. Corruption, poor infrastructure, inefficient judicial enforcement, poor infrastructure
were identified as some of the important concerns. The govemment could work with the
private sector to systematically tackle the constraints identified through the Business
Environment Survey.

Strengthen the business environment at the local level. Progress has been made in addressing

business environment issues at the national government level. However, day-to-day hurdles
to businesses operations are affected by local rules and regulations. The government could
consider working with the local private sector in systematically identifying and resolving
bottlenecks at the local government level. Benchmarking and broadcasting LGU service
performance could be an important part of exerting performance pressure.

Strengthen. and implement vigorously the accounting, auditing and corporate governance

standards and regulations. Philippines should first and foremost adopt accounting and

Annex H
Page 20 of 28

disclosure standards consistent with best international practices. Then it must focus on
improving enforcement of laws and regulations related to compliance, including imposing
sanctions on accountants, directors and managers who violate the law or their professional
duties. Then it must strengthen institutions responsible for ensuring accountability -
the
Securities and Exchange Commission, the Stock Exchange and the Institute of Accountants.
Finally, the government must support and promote institutions that protect shareholder rights
and support shareholder activism. These measures would significantly enhance investor
confidence and attract foreign partners. The ROSCs on Auditing and Accounting and
Corporate Governance provide a detailed road map and action agenda.

Complete the policy reform agenda. Philippines must differentiate itself with respect to its

neighbors. Sticking to or even accelerating the tariff reform agenda could send a very
powerful signal. To offset some of the advantages that competitors enjoy, a bold decision to
fully deregulate the services sector could be important. Fully opening the mining sector to
foreign investment and putting in adequate environmental and local community safeguards
also needs to be part of the policy agenda. Philippines has drafted a competition policy law.
A speedy announcement of a competition policy framework and competition law could be
important in signaling the government's intention to create a level playing field.

The Bank Group will support efforts to strengthen the business environment through
capacity building, knowledge sharing andfocused technical assistance.

Corporate Governance: The Bank Group is assisting the private sector in the development of
a national corporate governance action program, aimed at improving governance in the
corporate, banking and securities market sectors. The Bank and IFC have supported the
Institute of Corporate Directors, set up in Manila to train directors in good corporate
governance, and are also, supporting a diagnostic study in public and private sector
accounting and corporate governance to identify areas for improvement. The Bank Group
will assist BSP and the Department of Finance to improve corporate governance among
banks and government owned corporations. Finally, the Bank Group will collaborate with the
Institute of Directors in the development of a public information program advocating
improved corporate governance.

Accounting and Auditing. The Bank Group in collaboration with ADB will provide technical
assistance and policy advise for strengthening of enforcement capacity and adoption of

international best practices and standards. In particular, the Bank Group will assist the SEC,
BSP, PSE and the Board of Accountancy to enhance their surveillance and enforcement
capabilities. Support will also be provided for improving the system of licensing and
certification of accountants and auditors. The Philippine Institute of Chartered Professional
Accountants will be assisted in adopting and promoting international accounting and auditing
standards and improve the quality of professional education. Program loans will be used as
vehicles to assist the Government implement the key policy recommendations and regulatory
gaps identified in the ROSC on Accounting and Auditing.

Capacity upgrading in the judicial system. The Bank Group will support a comprehensive

program to build judicial capacity. Bank technical assistance will focus on training, judicial
inspection, and greater transparency and predictability in court and case management.
Support will also be provided to further strengthen drafting capabilities in government,
training of judges in insolvency law and related commercial issues. The Bank will also

Annex H
Page 21 of 28

provide assistance for strengthening, diversifying and expediting the system for perfecting
and enforcing security interests.

Eliminating investment impediments. The B3ank Group will assist the government to improve
the investment environment at the LGU level. Assistance will be provided for benchmarking
LGU performance and for identifying specific bottlenecks in the operation of business
regulations. The Bank Group will work with the government to reduce investment
impediments. For example, the Bank Group will provide advisory services to strengthen the
regulatory framework relating to mining sector development. The Bank Group will also assist
the Government to rationalize and streamliie investment promotion activities. MIGA has
provided capacity building assistance to the staff of the many investment promotion entities
in Philippines. MIGA will work to achieve greater strategic and operational coordination
between these agencies. Finally, the Bank will assist the Government to maintain progress in
reforming the trade regime and introducing an effective competition policy regime and
competition policy law.

Improve domestic mobilization of long-term resources.

From the standpoint of the non-financial private sector there are two important credit
access issues: (a) limited availability of domestic long-term resources; and (b) limited
access to private credit in rural areas.

Stepping up fixed asset investment requires long-term resources. And for prudential reasons
there has to be a balance between long-termi debt and equity capital. Developing an active
debt and equity market would require as necessary conditions effective bankruptcy regime,
transparent disclosure and clear accounting standards. Financial transparency breeds
confidence, and confidence enhances efficient credit and equity flows. The necessary
conditions for a long-term debt market would include (a) independence and authority of
regulators for corporate debt and equity markets that is at the same level as is accorded to
BSP for the banking industry; (b) an early approval of the proposed Securities Act by
Congress; (c) an effective debt resolution framework under the proposed Corporate Recovery
Act and (d) a credit rating system.
Give high priority to implementing proposals that have been preparedfor developing the
corporate bond market. Philippines is aware of the need to address these deficiencies. The
monitoring and surveillance capabilities of the monetary authorities have been strengthened.
In the long run this will enhance confidence of international lenders in extending medium-
term loans to the financial system. Since the mid 90s, the government, professional
associations, bilateral and multilateral agencies have been examining options for developing
a robust capital market especially the debt rnarket. Under the Market Reforms Project
initiated in 2000, BSP, the Bankers Association of Philippines, the Investment House
Association of the Philippines, and the Trust Officers Association of the Philippines have
developed proposals regarding a "Fixed Income Securities" exchange. The government on
its part is considering revising the Investment Company Act, enacting a law for securitization
and eliminating document stamp tax on primary issue of securities and its trading in
secondary markets. Completing these initiatives should be given high priority in order to
create an effective regulatory and supervisory framework for the bond market,
intermediaries, institutional investors and other market participants.

Increase the supply of debt securities by establishing the framework and regulations
governing asset securitization. The volume of ROPOA assets, proposed privatization

Annex H
Page 22 of 28

program, agricultural commodities, housing construction, receivables etc. are sufficient to
support an active asset securitization market. Distressed bank assets in particular would
benefit from securitization and transfer to Asset Management companies. This would
facilitate the process of establishing Asset Management companies that is gathering
momentum in Philippines. The basic task is to create a policy framework for (i) bank asset
securitization, (ii) use of Special Purpose Asset Vehicles, (iii) pricing and valuation
arrangements, (iv) taxation, (v) land ownership by foreign investors and (vi) a system for
perfecting the asset transfer arrangements.

Establish a coherent restructuring and insolvencyframework by ensuring that the
restructuringframework proposed under the Corporate Recovery Act removes most of the

uncertainties and delays. The proposed Corporate Recovery Act is a comprehensive
approach to addressing corporate financial distress. It allows the long-overdue reform of
insolvency laws and provides for the remedy of rehabilitation for distressed companies.
However, as discussed in the previous section there are some deficiencies in the proposed
Act. A quick enactment of an effective act that expedites corporate restructuring and
bankruptcy would enable banks and private sector firms to commence the process of
unfreezing assets and restructuring balance sheets.

Increase the ease of using inventories and accounts receivables as collateral. In Philippines

the three principal types of collateral forms are real estate mortgage, chattel mortgage and
pledge. In all cases the option for extra-judicial foreclosure is available. Inventories and
receivables are important and most common assets of a producer. But using these as
collateral under existing instruments is cumbersome and expensive. The concept of a floating
charge does not exist. Developing the legal basis for floating charges could expand secured
lending to a broader set of firms especially small and medium enterprises.

Maintain and deepen the program of introducing micro-finance concepts and institutions for
expanding delivery of credit to small and micro enterprises in rural and urban areas.

Government has taken a decision to consolidate and wind down its directed credit programs.
The National Credit Council has emphasized the importance of distinguishing between
targeting social and infrastructure services to the poorest of the poor and delivering credit to
small entrepreneurs. There is an ongoing debate in Philippines regarding the best approaches
to promoting and regulating micro-finance institutions. Currently, the share of micro-finance
institutions in total deposits and loans is small. They do not pose a systemic risk to the
financial system. Focus needs to be on capacity building in rural banks, dissemination of
micro-finance management concepts, strengthening of information systems and training of
bank regulators and supervisors in monitoring and evaluating micro-finance activities.

The Bank Group will support efforts to increase availability of long-term resources
through policy advice, capacity building, support to private financial institutions and direct
investment support to private enterprises.

Policy support and capacity building. On the policy front the Bank Group will assist the

government to strengthen the framework for financial market regulation. The Bank Group
will continue to provide support to BSP in the area of bank supervision and regulation.
Technical assistance will also be provided to support the establishment of the regulatory
framework for corporate bonds and asset securitization. Support will also be provided for
strengthening the payment and settlement infrastructure in capital markets. These efforts will
directly contribute in supporting the proposed "Fixed Income Exchange". To support

Annex H
Page 23 of 28

corporate restructuring the government, BS'P, SEC and other agencies will be assisted in
implementing the proposed Corporate Recovery Act and developing legislation relating to
private asset management companies. The B3ank Group will support staff training in
regulatory agencies.

Stupportfor micro finance institutions. The Bank Group will provide assistance to BSP in

training bank examiners in supervision of micro finance institutions. It will also support the
restructuring and transformation of rural finance institutions into micro finance institutions.
Specific micro finance institutions will be supported in building capacity and applying best
practices. Under its community and rural development projects the Bank Group will channel
part of its financial assistance through comrnunity based micro finance institutions. IFC has
established a micro finance institution in Davao to provide small entrepreneurs access to
appropriate financing, and is considering other investments in the area.

Direct Investment Support. Through community development, rural and agriculture
development projects the International Banlc for Reconstruction & Development will
contribute in increasing long-term investments in farm to market infrastructure, for
modernizing the tree crop sector, for improving access to irrigation systems and for
increasing the effectiveness of extension and technology support systems in the agriculture
sector.

IFC will take the lead in directly increasing the supply of long-term resources. IFC's strategy
for the financial sector focuses on promoting a deepening and diversification of the financial
system through:

* 

* 

* 

introduction of new financial instruments and mechanisms (e.g. securitization,
forfeiting, factoring, venture capital, and trade finance and risk-sharing facilities);
strengthening banking and non-banking financial institutions, by helping upgrade
their standards of governance and technologies (via electronic banking and
commerce);
* assisting in the consolidation of the banking system, i.e. through mergers and
restructuring;
* helping in the restructuring of NPL portfolios, by supporting the establishment of a
private asset management company;
* helping to set up specialized institutions, e.g. a secondary mortgage institution for
provision of housing finance, or an investment fund for developing micro finance
institutions.
* For the technology sector IFC strategy is to support development of technology parks
software companies and e-commerce institutions IFC has already made a number of
investments in these areas (Filinvest Alabang Inc., Eastwood, ).
In the health and education sectors, IFC had earlier invested in Asian Hospital and,
more recently, approved an investment in the Asian Eye Institute, a comprehensive
eye-care ambulatory center in Manila. IFC is also looking to support projects for
private provision of education services.

MIGA will catalyze long-term financing in projects by providing political risk insurance.
MIGA has sufficient guarantee capacity to support additional political risk insurance for
projects in the Philippines. On an annual basis, MIGA conducts promotional activity in
Philippines in order to publicize the use of its guarantee products as well as meet with
potential investors.

Annex H
Page 24 of 28

Supporting SME Development. The Bank Group will provide advise on creating a more level
playing field for the SME sector. Assistance for SME development will be provided by: (i)
supporting reforms in the secured lending regime so as to diversify sources of collateral and
expedite the process and procedures relating to creation and enforcement of security interests;
(ii) supporting policy changes in the trade, competition policy, FDI, fiscal and tax regimes so
as to create a more level playing field for SMEs; (iii) developing and supporting private-
public initiatives aimed at delivering enterprise level technical assistance to SMEs. In the
area of micro finance, the Bank will assist micro finance institutions to expand outreach
through support for development of a regulatory framework, skills deepening and
development of information systems.

IFC has also been actively engaged in support of SMEs, having earlier supported a thrift bank
(Planters) focused on the SME sector, and more recently having approved an investment in a
credit line for SMEs engaged in exports and an investment in an SME export services
company. In support of the Government's objective of promoting regional development, and
development of small and micro enterprises, IFC's priorities include the objective of
investing more outside of the Manila region, and in particular in the Visayas and Mindanao
area. Since 1998, IFC's Board has approved investments of more than $50 million for
projects in these two areas.

Improve the Infrastructure.

From the private sector standpoint there are two issues: (i) how can infrastructure services
be made more adequate, efficient, reliable and affordable and (b) how can private sector
involvement in the infrastructure be increased in the provision of both financing and

delivery of services? The strategy needs to be framed in the following context:

* Philippines infrastructure requirements are estimated ranging from US$36 billion to
US$45 billion for the next 10 years, about an average of 7 percent of its annual GDP.
From a fiscal standpoint the government does not have resources to finance the
infrastructure backlog even if measures currently proposed to increase revenue
collection efforts are fully realized.
* The government is already saddled with substantial contingent liabilities arising from
earlier commitments under private infrastructure projects. This reduces its capacity
and flexibility to offer credit enhancements to support private financing and
management of infrastructure.
Infrastructure problems are most acute in rural areas. Purely privately managed and
financed projects in this infrastructure may emerge only slowly because commercial
viability, at least initially will be tenuous.
* At the same time local governments willingness and ability to invest in essential
infrastructure at the local level is constrained by short-term political horizons, limited
financial independence and limited capacity. These problems have biased local
government investments away from essential infrastructure towards commercial
activities.

* 

Implement the recommendations made in the Country Framework Report on Private

Infrastructure. The infrastructure strategy for Philippines has been extensively analyzed in
the Country Framework Report on Private Infrastructure (CFR) prepared by the World Bank
under funding from the Public-Private Infrastructure Facility (PPIAF). The CFR has been

Annex H
Page 25 of 28

discussed with investors. The CFR put forvward a three point strategy: (a) reducing
dependence on National Government finance through a number of financial reforms; (b)
strengthening institutional and legal elements by rationalizing institutions and processes; and
(c) deepening reforms in the individual infrastructure subsectors. Table 8 summarizes the
main pending issues in each of the infrastructure sectors. Implementing this strategy would
require a careful unbundling of construction, management and financing functions between
the private and public sector. To encourage private sector involvement arms-length
regulatory agencies with institutional capacity to deal with issues of access, pricing and
quality need to be established. A clearer and more transparent competitive bidding process is
also required. Finally, a framework for fostering partnerships with the private sector and
local communities would minimize subsidies, target them better and make government
money go further.

Sector 

Power 

Water 

Transport 

Telecoms 

Table 8: Required Sector Reforms

Required Sector Reforms

Effective enforcement of the Implementation Rules and Regulations (IRR) of the EPIRA.
Privatization of NPC. Efficient management of IPP contracts. There is also a need to: (i) strengthen
the Energy Regulatory Commission; (ii) restructure the National Electrification Administration; (iii)
rationalize franchise areas and open up unserved areas to qualified new entrants; (iv) address the
poor financial and managerial performance of selected electric cooperatives, and to encourage
greater private sector participation in the operations and financing of this sector; (v) rationalize tariff
and subsidy policy for rural electrification (government study ongoing); and (vi) follow through on
privatization plan for NPC-SPUG operations.

Water sector faces substantial service deficits. Reform of the water sector should involve the
redirection of two PPI policies. First, there should be a shifting of emphasis from BOTs to the
privatization of existing assets. Although BOT projects being pursued outside of Metro Manila will
enhance supply capacity, they fail to address fundamental problems associated with those water
systems, namely: (i) inadequate investment; (ii) inefficient operations; and (iii) maintenance and
management of the distribution system, and billings and collection deficiencies. Privatization of
existing assets addresses these issues while removing the gap between bulk and retail tariffs.
Secondly, the government should move towards transparent and solicited bidding of water assets as
already too many unsolicited bids are tying up the sector and posing severe constraints in the further
development of water infrastructure. In addition there is a need for institutional reforms by
reassessing the role of LWUA and other agencies in the sector. In the long run, it is best to separate
regulatory, policy and operational functions of govemment agencies (e.g. LWUA, NWRB, MWSS
and SBMA) and to establish an independent national utility regulator.

(i) Greater attention to maintenance to cope with large maintenance backlog, as stipulated in the
MTPDP (efforts underway); (ii) develop policy framework for PPI in regional airports and ports;
(iii) enhance LGUs capacity to manage PPI, contracting and tendering process; (iv) improve
coordination between greenfield and privatization projects; and (v) separate regulatory, policy and
operational functions of PPA, ATO and DPWH.

(i) standardize 
interconnection agreements; (ii) implement framework for frequency spectrum
auctions and allow greater flexibility with regard to the allocation of frequency; (iii) establish
institutional framework to manage issues relating to exercise of monopoly powers by incumbents;
and (iv) strengthen provision of telephony services in rural areas.

A frameworkfor reducing dependence on national governmentfinancial resources needs to

be developed. The PPI movement in the Philippines was highly successful in addressing the
immediate problems of the infrastructure sectors - particularly power. However, the
government assumed heavy contingent liabilities estimated at around $18 billion. Moreover,
the Government's budget does not include any provisions for covering expected claims on

Annex H
Page 26 of 28

these contingent liabilities, giving rise to the possibility of significant adverse consequences
on the Government's finances if these liabilities are called in the near-to-medium term. The
EPIRA provides for government to assume up to P200billion (between US$2.5 to 3.75
billion) of NPC's obligations (stranded debts and IPP contract costs) as part of the move to a
market-oriented sector structure. Measure that the govemment could consider include: (i)
moving toward more privatization of service level function so as to minimize the need for
guarantees for demand risks; and (ii) improve the current framework for the issuance of
sovereign guarantees, by better defining the basis and rationale for credit enhancements and
once extended, pricing and managing the attendant risks appropriately.

Infrastructure management at the Local Government level needs to be made more effective.

The existing framework does little to foster development of infrastructure in the poorer and
more remote parts of the country. Very few local governments have either the financial or
management capacity to design, construct, operate or contract out infrastructure. Four areas
should be targeted for supporting infrastructure investment.

* Modify the LGUfinancingframework. Consider revising the formula on block

transfers by making a greater relative allocation these smaller and poorer towns. This
realignment in the block transfers would also force the larger cities to rely more on
their own internal sources of revenue from property and business taxes.

* Privatize or concession out local government owned commercial enterprises and

activities. LGUs tend to invest their scarce capital in business enterprises, where there
is strong investment interest from the private sector.

* Develop the financial marketfinancing option for the larger LGUs with more

diversified revenue base. The current LGU finance market is extremely limited.
Presently only DBP and Land Bank and to some extent the Municipal Development
Fund provide financing to local governments. These are all government entities. It is
estimated that about 150 LGUs could tap the private financing market. A start could
be made by working with credit rating agencies and financial markets to identify the
pre-conditions for LGU access to financial markets.

* 

Increase performance pressures on LGUs. Benchmarking performance indicators for

each LGU could tighten governance and accountability. Making the comparative
results available to the public, community groups and local businesses could
significantly increase performance pressures.

Focuts on making government infrastructure spending go further through better targeting and
through involvement of the private sector. Many basic services cannot be adequately funded

from user-fees alone. For some services, externalities mean that user fees alone cannot fund
an efficient level of service. For other services, full cost-covering user fees raise affordability
issues for the poorest members of society. These services will remain dependent on public
financing. But the responsibility of delivering these services could go beyond the public
sector and could be contracted out to the private sector on a competitive basis. This would
reduce the fixed cost of government, provide the private sector with business opportunities
while lowering delivery costs because of competitive bidding. Options that could be pursued
are:

Annex H
Page 27 of 28

* Use "output-based aid" (OBA). OBA involves delegating delivery for service

provision to the private sector and NGOs under contracts that tie public payments to
the services or outputs actually delivered. Contracts are structured such that payments
are made when services are delivered or when certain pre-determined
performance/quantitative targets are met. The public payments complement user fees,
and are sourced from budget revenues, loans from international lending agencies, or
other forms of donor assistance. OBA schemes can take a wide variety of forms and
can be used in a variety of settings. OBA can be used to subsidize connections. An
immediate example could of application of OBA is in making telephony services
more accessible in rural areas. In Philippines rural areas remain largely excluded
from access to basic communication services. Some form of government subsidy
would be required, especially for initial investments and operating expenses. But by
making private firms bid for delivery of these subsidized services costs could be
lowered as has been the experience in Peru.

* 

Involve the private sector in improving efficiency in maintenance and management of

infrastructure. In situations of budget constraint, routine maintenance is the first to
suffer. Operational efficiency also tends to be lower. In Philippines numerous studies
have identified poor road maintenance as the most serious problem. Philippines could
consider greater private sector involvement as many countries in Latin America have
done successfully

The Bank Group will support efforts to improve the infrastructure through policy advice
and capacity building in the area of infrastructure regulations, financing public
infrastructure, and through financial support to private infrastructure operators under
various contracting arrangements.

Supportfor completing the regulatory reform agenda. The Bank Group will first and

foremost focus on rationalizing the regulatory framework and improving the functioning of
regulatory agencies along lines recommended in the "Country Framework Report on Private
Infrastructure" prepared by the Bank Group. The Bank Group will: (i) support strengthening
of institutional capacity at the central and LGU level to identify, promote, negotiate and
regulate PPI projects in the water and power sectors; (ii) provide policy advice and technical
assistance with regard to clarifying the roles and responsibilities of national and local
government agencies; (iii) assist central and local governments to review the revenue sharing
and financing framework with a view to enhancing the capacity of LGUs to increase access
to private commercial financing; (iv) assist national government for establishing a framework
for the sound management of contingent liabilities and issuance of sovereign and other types
of guarantees for PPI projects; and (v) streamline project preparation.

Supportfor increasing private sector involvement. In view of the resource and capacity

constraints faced by the Government, the Bank Group will give special attention to involving
the private sector through arrangements going beyond BOT contracts. The Bank will work
with the government in using concepts such as Output Based Aid, auctioning of subsidies,
competitive bidding for long-term maintenance contracts etc. to increase private sector
involvement in managing and financing infrastructure in areas where purely commercial and
privately owned operations may not be feasible. In this regard the Bank Group will give
priority to assisting the government reduce the Digital Divide. The Bank Group, with support
from PPIAF, has recently submitted to the Government a report recommending options for
accelerating access to telecommunication services in rural areas. The Bank Group will work

Annex H
Page 28 of 28

with government in implementing the recommendations. Bank will also assist the
government in piloting OBA schemes for decentralized electrification in rural areas, in water
delivery, and delivery of telephone services in rural areas.

In order to increase access to capital markets for water, power, road and urban infrastructure
projects, the Bank will support design and implementation of pre-investment funds,
establishment and operation of local infrastructure funds and measures to develop municipal
infrastructure bond markets. In view of the reduced risk tolerance of private infrastructure
developers and reduced availability of private risk insurance worldwide the Bank will also
explore the use of Bank's guarantee instruments to enhance market access to commercial
debt.

IFC has been active in infrastructure investments sector over the past decade, commencing
with the financing of path breaking privately financed BOT power projects in the early 1990s
(the Hopewell Pagbilao, Navotas, and Sual power plants), and of the Light Rail Transit
project. More recently it provided advisory assistance to the Metropolitan Waterworks and
Sewerage System privatization and is considering financing the Manila Water Company's
capital investment program. It has also financed toll roads (North Luzon Expressway, for
which MIGA also issued $87 million in guarantees) and construction of a new passenger
terminal at Manila airport. IFC's medium term priority would be to support innovative power
projects, e.g. co-generation/alternative fuels without government support, and environmental
ventures, such as the Efficient Lighting Initiative and grid-connected photovoltaic solar
projects. IFC is also looking to support private investments in electricity distribution,
contingent on the introduction of satisfactory regulatory arrangements.

PHILIPPINES

Annex I

Page 1 of 6

PROGRAMS OF OTHER ODA PARTNERS
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE MEDIUM-TERM PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN

1. 
The following provides an overview of other ODA partners' major activities in the
Philippines, organized according to the four major parts of the Medium-Termn Philippine
Development Plan (MTPDP). Since the CAS is closely aligned with the MTPDP, the ODA
activities were mapped according to the MTPDP themes/parts. The information was based on
inputs from the various ODA partners under a mapping exercise undertaken by the World Bank
Office Manila from November 2001 to January 2002, to which most ODA partners in the Philippines
contributed data. The purpose of the exercise vas to obtain an overview of the broad distribution of
ODA activities to point to areas where several ODA partners work towards the same overall
objectives based on government's expressed priorities and where strong collaboration among them is
thus desirable. It also points to those areas where the role of the Bank Group needs to be delineated
against that of other ODA partners.

2. 
In terms of lending volume to the Philippines, the Bank ranks third after Japan and ADB
among all the ODA partners. Overall, Japan provides the largest portion of ODA to the
Philippines, accounting for more than half of total amount of ODA. Together, Japan, ADB and
World Bank provide about 95 percent of all ODA to the Philippines, which totaled over $13
billion in outstanding commitments as of December 2001. Other ODA partners provide assistance at
a smaller scale, mostly in the form of grants to the national government, local government, and/or to
NGOs. Moreover, the World Bank also administers grant funds on behalf of Japan (PHRD, JSDF)
and EU (ASEM).' It should be noted that some ODA partners may have activities in some of the
sectors below, but were unable to participate in the mapping exercise or are relatively less active
than many other ODA partners, and were thus, not necessarily mentioned in the write-up.

I. Macroeconomic Stability and Equitable Growth Based on Free Enterprise

3. 
Part I of the MTPDP outlines six major strategies to address the overall objective of broad-
based growth: macroeconomic stability; productive employment; competitiveness of industry and
services; information and technology; tourism; and infrastructure development. A review of the data
collected from the ODA partners indicate that ADB, Japan, USA and the World Bank are the major
ODA partners with activities that directly support macroeconomic stability through policy-based
projects and policy advice in various sectors. ADB's program loans are in the grains, power and
environment sectors, while USA provides technical assistance in areas such as public expenditure,
resource mobilization, financial sector regulation and bankruptcy issues.. In the case of Japan, it
provides policy advise through its Individual E,xpert Dispatch, where experts are sent to look at areas
such as risk management. World Bank provides policy advice regularly through annual country
economic analyses, and currently on specific areas such as public expenditure, procurement and
financial management. For the IMF, its engagement in this sub-theme is in terms of its ongoing

'PHRD: Policy and Human Resources Development Fund
JSDF: Japan Social Development Fund
ASEM: Asia-Europe Meeting Fund

Annex I
Page 2 of 6

policy dialogue in the framework of post-program monitoring and annual Article IV consultations.
Together with the World Bank, the IMF is also conducting a financial sector assessment for the
country.

4. 
In terms of other sub-themes covering employment, competitiveness, information technology
& communications (ITC) and tourism, there are relatively fewer ODA partners directly involved.
This is in part due to the large role of the private sector in areas such as ITC and tourism. On ITC,
Japan provides technical assistance and project funding in telecommunications, while the USA
provides technical assistance in e-commerce. Employment and competitiveness are addressed more
indirectly through ODA programs that support growth through investments, support to SMEs, credit
policy reforms and technical assistance to enhance competitiveness.

5. 
Under the broad theme of accelerating infrastructure, multiple ODA partners are involved,
some with relatively large projects, particularly Japan, ADB and World Bank. ODA activities in
this area include major infrastructure works such as flood control, airport development, highways,
and power projects, as well as smaller urban and rural infrastructure projects and water supply
projects. Complementary activities include policy advice and TA for supporting public-private
partnerships. The MTPDP notes the role of private sector participation as an important element,
particularly in public-private partnership in infrastructure development. USA is particularly active in
promoting private sector participation in infrastructure at the local government levels, and provides
technical assistance to enhance the regulatory framework and competitive procurements in various
infrastructure sub-sectors. Other ODA partners with activities in the infrastructure sector include
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Spain, and Sweden. The Bank's investment have been focused on the
roads sub-sector, rural electrification and water supply in smaller municipalities. In the water sub-
sector, the Bank has a continuing dialogue on water sector regulation and corporate restructuring of
the Local Water utilities Administration, and through the IFC, may finance the capital investment
program of the Manila Water Company, one of the two private water supply enterprises operating in
Metro Manila.

6. 
Under the infrastructure sector, the sub-sectors which the Bank is not nor plans to be
involved in include aviation, ports, waterways, shipping, telecommunications, and railways, which
other ODA partners (ADB, Japan) are already heavily supporting. In the energy sector, the Bank is
limiting its assistance to rural power transmission/distribution as agreed with the ADB (which will
cover power generation), and to renewable energy in coordination with other ODA partners.

II. Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization with Social Equity

7. 
The MTPDP recognizes that majority of poor Filipinos still reside in the rural areas and
depend on farming and fishing as their main source of livelihood. Hence, Part II of the MTPDP
outlines the country's plans for rural development through agriculture and fisheries modernization,
as well as by advancing social equity through land reform, and promoting sustainable management
of natural resources.

8. 
As most of the ODA partners programs are aimed at alleviating poverty, and many of the
poor reside in the rural areas, substantive investments are channeled to the rural areas. Most
programs and projects focus on community-based approaches for the management of upland, coastal
and forestry resources as well as support irrigation works and give comprehensive assistance to

Annex I
Page 3 of 6

agrarian reform including the development of farmer organizations, enhancement of rural
infrastructure, provision of credit and rural micro-enterprise finance. Environment and natural
resources management activities are also well-supported by many ODA partners, which include
support to strengthen the institutional framework at the Local Government Units' level to implement
and monitor natural resources and environmental management. Complementary activities to all these
activities are capacity-building initiatives, and studies, policy advice and technical assistance in areas
related to development of the sector.

9. 
Specifically, on agriculture and fisheries; ODA partners with major activities include the
ADB, Australia, EU, France, Germany, Japan, Spain, USA and World Bank. Central to the
strategy of advancing social equity is the agrarian reform program of the Government, which
numerous ODA partners are supporting through various programs. Among the ODA partners with

major activities supporting agrarian reform are the, ADB, Australia, Belgium, EU, , Japan, Spain,

and World Bank. On natural resources management, including environment programs in the green
and blue sub-sectors, active ODA partners include ADB, Belgium, Canada, Germany, Japan,
Sweden, UNDP, USA and World Bank. WB assistance in the agriculture sector is being targeted
primarily at the local government and community levels, consistent with the strategy of empowering
the LGUs and poor communities, as well as small-scale producers, to improve their access to
productive assets and services. Areas where the Bank will not be involved in, include agricultural
research and animal production.

III. Comprehensive Human Development and Protecting the Vulnerable

10. 
Part III of the MTPDP covers the sub-themes of: education and training; health care; access
to shelter; protecting vulnerable groups; balanced regional development; and peace and development
in Mindanao (as a special chapter). Of these areas, shelter has the least number of ODA programs,
while education, health, vulnerable groups, and Mindanao have a proliferation of ODA activities.
Major activities across the various sectors include support to: basic and secondary education,
including teacher training and provision of school buildings and support facilities; formal and non-
formal education; integrated community health services; nutrition; family planning and reproductive
health; protection of social sector expenditures in the budget; as well as policy reforms directed at
improving access to and quality of basic education, improving education sector financing and
enhancing the skills of the labor force. There are also special activities directed at marginalized
women, children, rural and urban poor, indigenous peoples, victims of disasters, and HIV/AIDS
programs. Parallel to these activities are measures designed to improve poverty targeting and action
plans to reduce poverty and income inequalities. Active ODA partners in this broad area include

ADB, , Australia, Canada,, EU, Germany, Japan, Finland, the UN agencies, USA, and World
Bank.

11. 
In the education sector, the Bank's assistance is targeted at primary education; IFC is
planning to support projects for private provision of education services. In the health sector, the Bank
will support components under the Department of Health's Health Sector Reform Agenda, and will
continue to support health and nutrition interventions in children ages 0-6 years. Population

management/women's health is an area where government demand for ODA has recently been

indicated, and to which the Bank is responding. For the health and education sectors, the Bank is
protecting expenditures in the budget through budget support-type projects. Social protection of
vulnerable groups is a growth area for Bank assistance, and initial activities will be targeted at

programs to end violence against women and children. In all these areas, the Bank works closely

Annex I
Page 4 of 6

with other ODA partners through working groups or discussion groups, as there are many involved in
the sector.

12. 
In the area of pursuing a balanced regional development within the country, ADB, Canada,,
Japan, UNDP, USA, and World Bank have activities which have been identified in support of that
theme. These include various types of programs (infrastructure, micro-enterprise, planning and
training activities, etc.) that are directed at specific regions/areas and are intended to strengthen those
regions to balance the development of the country nationwide. The Bank's support in this area is
through the Cities Development Program as well as LOGOFIND projects which address urban
development throughout the country through TA and infrastructure support.

13. 

As a special area of concern highlighted in the MTPDP and in response to Government's

call, almost all multilateral and bilateral donors are extensively and intensively involved in
supporting peace and development of Mindanao, not only through their own programs but

through multi-donor programs as well. Assistance is in the form of targeted programs for the whole
of Mindanao or specific areas in Mindanao, as well as other multi-province/region programs that
include Mindanao in their coverage. The range of programs include almost all types of
interventions-from large to small-scale infrastructure, from National Government- to LGU- or
community-based assistance, from livelihood to institution-building activities, and from post-conflict
to peace and development interventions. Given the numerous ODA programs for Mindanao,
President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo has specifically requested the Bank to coordinate donor
assistance to Mindanao. Therefore, aside from being an active player through our large program in
Mindanao (50 percent of Bank portfolio is targeted at, or include Mindanao in its coverage), the
Bank will take a leadership role in coordinating ODA for Mindanao in partnership with the
Government and other ODA partners.

IV. Good Governance and the Rule of Law

14. 
The overarching goal of the Arroyo Administration is to "Winning the War Against Poverty."
Accordingly, the MTPDP devotes the fourth part to the Government's plans to: good governance;
peace & order, law enforcement and administration ofjustice; and harnessing governance through
international collective action. In the broad area of governance, ODA activities include policy-
related activities to help the Government address regulatory and institutional issues confronting the
non-bank financial sector; capacity-building and strengthening accountability at the national and
local governments; support for dialogues and partnerships on governance with NGOs; supporting
corporate governance; and enhancing portfolio management and results monitoring. ODA partners
active in this theme include, ADB, Australia, Canada, Japan, UNDP, USA, and World Bank. On

anti-corruption work, in particular, the Bank is leading a small group of ODA partners (ADB,

Australia, Canada, UNDP, USA) who are actively supporting anti-corruption programs. This sub-
group of ODA partners has prepared a joint working paper on recommendations for the Government

to consider in addressing corruption, which has been presented to Government. The Bank will
continue to play this leadership role to pursue the actions from the joint working paper.

15. 
Since the last CAS, more ODA partners have become active in the area of improving the
administration ofjustice, possibly due to the pro-activity of the Supreme Court in implementing
judicial reforms under the leadership of the current Chief Justice. Under the umbrella of a
government action program for judicial reform, assistance is provided by several ODA partners to
strengthen the judiciary, advocacy support for judicial reforms, support to the barangay justice

Annex I
Page 5 of 6

system, and specific justice programs for children. ODA partners with activities in this area include

ADB, Australia, Canada, Japan, UNDP, UN][CEF, USA, and World Bank. In the field of law

enforcement, Japan is active through its experts dispatched in forensic sciences.

16. 
The following matrix indicates the ODA partners who provide support in each theme of the
MTPDP. Overall, it will be noted that there are certain sectors where there is a proliferation of ODA
activities while in other there may be less. This could be explained by the large financing
requirements in one sector relative to others, on one hand, and the availability of private sector and
government financing on the other hand.

Ensuring Sustained

Growth with Equity and
Macroeconomic Stability 
Promoting Full, Decent &
Productive Employment 

_

X 

X 

- 
X 

-

-

-

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Enhancing

X _ X _ X X _ _ X 

X 

X 

.

Co mpetitiveness of 

~~~~~~X ~~~~~~~~~~Industry & Services 

-

Building on the Country's 

O

X X 

X X 

X 

, 

Strengths in Information & 
Communications 
Technology
Putting the Philippines on 
the International Tourism
Map
Accelerating
Infrastructure Dev't

O

> -

X~ X~ X ~ X 
X X 
XX 

., 

Modernizing Agriculture
& Fisheries

X 

X 

X X X 

X X 

X 

X 

X X 

.

Advancing Social Equity 
through Land Reform 

r 

_ ~ X X _ X 
X _ _ X X _ X _ X _ _ X _ _ X X _ 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 

.

>
X

e 

Promoting Sustainable 

S 

x 
x x 
x x 
X X X _ X X _ X _ X _ _ X _ _ X X _ 

~Management and useor 

"c 

0

XX X~ X 

~ 

.

Natural Resources 

'TO

Investing in Education and 
Training

Z

Enhancing Health Care

Expanding Access to 

_

x x 

~~~~~~~Shelter

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _Protecting 
Vulnerable 
Groups 

0

X 

X 

X X X 

X 

X 

X 

O

Pursuing Balanced
Regional Development

X 

X 

X X 

X 

X 

.

Securing Peace & Dev't in 

N t

x 

X X 

X X 

X 

X X X X 

X 

Mindanao 

>

W__inning the Battle Against 
oethrough Good 
Governance

t

x~~~~~~x~~~~~~ 

~~~~~~ ~~Poverty 

thohGo

X X X X X >< _ _ X _ _ X _ 

i0^ 

Improving Peace & Order, 

' 

x X 

x 

~~ 

~~~x 

x 

Law Enforcement and 

(

Administration of Justice 

-

Harnessing Governance 
through International 
Collective Action 

,-

_ _ _ _ X 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ X _ _ 

_ 

_ _ ;f 

b

1

* *r.: Hi-F 

-I- 

I~ 

~ 

~ 

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~MEFCFD11--

-I~~A 

I-I4NIVILYA

PHILIPPINES

____ 

'II.~~~~~ 

I 

' 

* 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

1 -~pA

T I... ~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ ~ ~ * 

IV.

- I 
-~~~~~~~~~~~eIc 

~ 

P-1 A LI 1 4 

~ 

