d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No.25125-VE

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION

AND DEVELOPMENT

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON AN

INTERIM COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

THE BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA

November 18, 2002

Colombia-Mexico-Venezuela Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA-FISCAL YEAR
January I - December 31
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of November 18, 2002)
Currency Unit = Bolivar (Bs)
US$ = 1367 Bs
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AML 
CFT 
CAS 
CFAA 
CPAR 
CPPR 
FSAP 
GDP 
GEF 
IBRD 
IFC 
IFI 
IMF 
INPARQUES 
MIGA 
ODS 
PDVSA 
VAT 
WBG 
WBI 

Anti-Money Laundering
Combating Financing of Terrorism
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institution
International Monetary Fund
Instituto Nacional de Parques
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Montreal Protocol on Ozone Depleting Substances
Petr6leos de V'enezuela, S.A.
Value Added Tax
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute

Vice President 
Chief Economist 
Country Director 
Sector Leader 
Task Managers 
Research Analyst 

IBRD
David de Ferranti
Guillermo Perry
Olivier Lafourcade
Marcelo Giugale
Connie Luff and Vicente Fretes-Cibils
Mario Cuevas

INTERIM COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
TABLE OF CONTENTS

I

4
7
9
9
9
23
24
26

.

V. 

I. 

11. 

IV. 

VI. 

Introduction and Main Messages ................................................................ 
The Country Context ................................................................ 
3
Political Context ................................................................ 
3
Economic Context ................................................................ 
5
The External Environment ................................................................ 
7
Poverty, Inequality, and Development Goals ........................................................... 7
Ill. Main Development Challenges ................................................................ 
10
The Government's Development Plan and Policies-An Effort to Build Consensus ...... 13
WBG'S Development Partnership with Venezuela ................................................ 
15
The Lessons of the Previous CAS-What Worked and What Did Not Work.15
16
WBG's Portfolio Experiences ................................................................ 
Procurement and Financial Management in Venezuela's Portfolio ................................. 17
Interim WBG Assistance Strategy- Seizing Opportunities To Reduce Poverty In An
Uncertain Environment .............................................................. 
18
Restoring Macroeconomic Stability .............................................................. 
19
Attaining Economic Diversification and Competitiveness ........................................... 20
Building Efficient, Accountable and Transparent Governance ...................................... 21
Promoting Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development .............................. 22
Exposure, Financial Risk and Public Debt Sustainability Under the Proposed Strategy ........ 25
VII. 
Coordination with other Partners .............................................................. 
25
VIII. Risks of the Proposed Strategy .26
IX. 
Concluding Remarks .27
Figure 1. Venezuela. Macroeconomic Cycles 
..
Table 1. Venezuela. Key Macroeconomic Indicators .....................................
Table 2. Poverty in Venezuela.. 
Table 3. Inequality in Venezuela ................................ 
Table 4. Millenniumn Development Goals.. 
Table 5. Bank Lending Program for FY03-05 
..
Table 6. Venezuela-Bank Knowledge Based Program for FY03-05 
Table 7. Partnerships in Venezuela's Development Programs 
Box 1. Who Are the Poor in Venezuela? 
ANNEXES
A. Venezuela, RB at a Glance
B2. Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
B3. IBRD Program Summary 
B3. IFC & MIGA Program, FY 2000-2003
B4. Summary of Nonlending Services
B5. Social Indicators
B6. Key Economic Indicators
B7. Key Exposure Indicators
B8. Status of Bank Group Operations in Venezuela Operations Portfolio
B8. Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
B9. CAS Matrix FY03-05-Base Case

..

..

.

.

5

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON
AN INTERIM COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA

I. 

INTRODUCTION AND MAIN MESSAGES

1. 
The World Bank Group (WBG)'s last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Venezuela
was discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on May 19, 1997 (Report No. 16471-VE). It
was prepared to cover the second half of the Caldera government and to provide the basis for the
Bank's strategic intervention during the first year of the subsequent administration. That strategy
focused appropriately on enhancing sustainable growth, promoting social development and
modernizing the public sector-objectives that were not achieved. Weak governance, inefficient
public sector expenditures and general economic mismanagement (fed by high dependency on
volatile oil revenues) caused dismal economic performance and growing poverty, making it
impossible to implement an effective development agenda that could realize the country's
enormous potential. This vicious circle was not new to the Caldera administration and has been
faced by all governments for the last 30 years-a legacy that propelled Mr. Hugo Chavez's
election in December 1998 and his re-election under the new constitution two years later.

2. 
The election of President Chavez represented a national mandate to break with past
policies and, in effect, made the framework of the last CAS no longer relevant. Mr. Chavez
moved quickly to introduce profound institutional, political, social and economic reforms.
However, these reforms have created turbulence, exacerbated by: (a) difficult fiscal conditions
caused by extremely low oil prices during the last half of 1998 and the first half of 1999; (b) a
real overvaluation of the exchange rate (resulting from a policy initiated in 1997) that led to
unsustainable erosion of competitiveness, increased imports and capital flight; (c) excessive use
of a state-led growth model; (d) a large share of short-term debt (although a relatively low stock
of public debt) that heightened fiscal instability; and (e) a restricted access to capital markets due
to low credit ratings. All of this was worsened by a politically agitated environment that
deepened the country's political polarization and uncertainty, and finally triggered a coup d'etat
attempt on April 12, 2002.

3. 
Today, Venezuela is at a critical juncture. Poverty has continued to increase and social
development has further deteriorated, exacerbated by policy decisions that have negatively
impacted the investment climate for private sector participation, deepened the country's political
polarization and increased uncertainty. The list of outstanding reforms, many of which are
urgent, continues to expand. However, the events of April 2002 prompted the government to
change direction. 
It has responded by appointing a new economic cabinet which has moved
forcefully to implement several sound macroeconomic policies (such as implementing a flexible
foreign exchange system, together with some adjustments in the fiscal program); partially
revised decisions such as some aspects of the land reform initiative; and developed the Plan de
Consenso Nacional, which includes promoting private sector participation in the revival of the
It is still unclear whether all actors in the country will reach a common ground for
economy. 

reform over the next few years and Venezuela will finally start to realize its potential, or whether
the country will spiral down into further poverty and instability.

4. 
On the economic and social front, the Bank fully shares the general objectives of the
government to accelerate growth, reduce poverty and achieve greater equality. However, the
Bank and the government had difficulties agreeing on the means to achieve them during the first
years of the administration, which resulted in the Bank's scaling back its financial and analytical
involvement, severely depleting its country knowledge. This retrenchment has not served either
Venezuela or the Bank.

5. 
This Interim CAS seeks to guide the WBG during the upcoming period of heightened
uncertainty. It proposes a re-engagement with Venezuela through a broad policy and operational
dialogue meant to contribute to the country's own search for consensus around a common
development agenda. Mindful that country circumstances will call for maximum program
flexibility, the WBG will search for and seize opportunities 
to foster consensus-building
interventions in the four areas of reform that are the most critical for poverty reduction:
macroeconomic 
stability, 
sustainable 
economic 
diversification 
and 
competitiveness,
environmentally and socially sustainable development, and good governance.

6. 
The tools to deliver this program would be an enhanced package of analytical work, to
underpin the policy dialogue and rebuild the Bank's much depleted country knowledge. This
would be complemented by an investment lending program of about US$300 million for
FY03-05, composed of selected operations that: (a) have the most tangible impact on poverty
alleviation; (b) help Venezuela meet the Millennium Development Goals by 2015; (c) reinforce
conducive sector policy; and (d) incorporate the lessons learned from the recently completed
portfolio review. If the recently achieved improvement in portfolio quality were not maintained
or if the reform program were reversed, IBRD would make no further new lending until adequate
corrective actions are taken. In tandem with IBRD, IFC will focus on supporting core private
sector activities through the management of its existing investment portfolio and selective new
investments in key sectors of the economy (including hydrocarbons). The actual scope for new
IFC investment will depend on the pace and extent of future reform.

7. 
If the new economic team implements the necessary structural reforms, achieves growing
national consensus, and puts into place an adequate macroeconomic framework that evidences
the possibility of returning to the financial markets in relative competitive terms, the IBRD will
respond by presenting a CAS to the Board of Directors. Under these circumstances, 
it is
expected that the lending program could be expanded to include policy-based loans in support of
critical policy areas, such as fiscal sustainability, 
the financial sector, and public sector
effectiveness and efficiency. 
In such a case, the overall envelope could reach US$400-500
million per year depending on evolving circumstances (including country creditworthiness and
other factors), as well as the depth of the reform program adopted. In this context, the IMF will
play a pivotal role in assessing the appropriateness of the macroeconomic framework.

8. 
This Interim CAS faces serious risks of-deepening political turmoil and civil unrest,
policy stances that continue to swing along with oil prices, and declining investor confidence.
Moreover, in the integrated economic world of today, the possibility of negative external
developments in the oil market and contagion from another emerging market cannot be ruled out.

2

These risks are worth taking, however, given the rewards of increasing the Bank's engagement in
Venezuela, supporting the new economic team, and contributing to poverty reduction, enhancing
In implementing its strategy, WBG will
equality and promoting sustainable development. 
continue its close collaboration with other stakeholders, especially the IMF, IDB and CAF.
Finally, financially, IBPD faces no major exposure issue with Venezuela-a reflection of the de-
facto disengagement of recent years, during which time the country has continued to service its
IFI debt on schedule.

II. 

THE COUNTRY CONTEXT

Political Context

9. 

Venezuela's development challenges are not new. A resource-rich country, with some of

the largest petroleum and mineral deposits in the Western Hemisphere, Venezuela has great
potential for achieving sustained social and economic prosperity. Yet, the country has suffered a
long history of missed opportunities. A large percentage of the population has not benefited
from these resources and the country is characterized by uneven social development and
pervasive poverty. Economic policymaking has been unable to cope with the boom and bust
cycles generated by the oil sector, resulting in periodic bursts of inflation, recurring recessions,
and increasing poverty and inequality.

10. 
The attempt of the Perez administration (1989-93) to redefine the private and public
sector roles and to reorient the economy toward market-led growth stalled in 1992 due to the lack
of fiscal and financial reforms, and because of inconsistent macroeconomic policies that
contributed to economic contraction and social instability. The interim administration that
followed govemed without defined objectives and lacked coherent economic programs. In 1994,
President Caldera took office immediately after the collapse of the country's second-largest bank
that led to a deep systemic financial crisis. Partly in response to this crisis, unorthodox economic
policies were adopted, including a wide range of price and exchange controls. These measures,
together with the financial crisis, brought the economy to the brink of collapse by the end of
1995. Reversing the experiment with economic interventionism, President Caldera announced
more market-oriented policies, including abandoning price and exchange controls and opening
the oil sector to private investment. The government's program brought Venezuela's rampant
inflation and currency decline under control. However, the program became unsustainable when
the bloated public sector resisted further reforms and the government reversed previous wage
policies.

11. 
Against this background, Venezuelans expressed their dissatisfaction with the failure of
past governments by electing Hugo Chavez in December 1998 with the largest margin in 40
years. The sweeping electoral victory gave President Chavez a mandate to radically change from
past policies and to focus his administration on political, social, institutional and economic
reforms that had not been previously considered. This fundamental break with the policies of
past governments has led to a situation of great uncertainty and political polarization.

3

12. Mr. Chavez used the initial stages of his administration to make deep institutional
changes. These have included adopting a new Constitution and within this new framework,
changing more than one hundred laws. By mid-2000, a new Constitution had been put in place
and the long process to define the new legal framework had started, including the re-election of
all officials and Mr. Chavez for a six-year term. At that point, in response to social pressures and
high levels of unemployment, the President increased the focus of his administration on
socioeconomic reforms. The social and economic objectives of the Chavez government are
laudable as they largely focus on the reduction of poverty and inequality, as well as the provision
of education and health services for the poor. However, the government's initial choice of which
instruments would most efficiently achieve these objectives was questionable. During the first
years of the administration, the authorities promoted a state-led growth model with strong public
sector intervention in the provision of goods and services, 
including the development of
government-sponsored communities that called for the relocation of the poor from urban slums.
In addition, it expanded the role of the state at the expense of the private sector and strengthened
the discretionary powers of the central government. In early November 2001, the administration
issued 48 decrees under the Enabling Law, which included legislation on land tenure, finance,
and hydrocarbons. Some of the content and the process of approval of these decrees have been
behind the emergence of opposition movements that includes many of the government's former
supporters, business leaders, 
labor unions, and some members of the Catholic Church.
Opposition to different aspects of this model, aggravated by strikes in Petr6leos de Venezuela
S.A. (PDVSA), generated a conflict that escalated into an attempt to take over the government on
April 12, 2002.

13. 
The administration regained control and appointed a new economic team which has
implemented several sound macroeconomic policies (such as implementing a flexible foreign
exchange system, together with some adjustments in the fiscal accounts); partially revised
decisions such as some aspects of the land reform initiative; and developed the Plan de Consenso
Nacional, which includes promoting private sector participation in the revival of the economy.
Venezuela is now at a critical crossroads. The country has another chance to introduce the
structural changes needed to overcome poverty, inequality, and poor governance, or, as in the
past, to continue on a path that is unsustainable from a fiscal, institutional, and social point of
view.

Figure 1. Venezuela. Macroeconomic Cycles

10% 1
15% 
-0/I 

Od-(DP Gmwd,h 

Unemnipoymnrt Rate

1, 

I 

' 

i ' 

' 

/

I 

x 
0 

oo 
0 0 
000 0 00 
0' 0'0' 0 

0 a, 
0 0w a, 
0'0 

o 

a, 
'0'0 

z 

In 
0l a, 
a, 
'' 

r- 

'0 
0 0' Oy 
0 -
o o
V. 
a, 
a, 
a, 
0 
0D 0D,0 0 0
0'1 0~ 0' 0' 0 
000 
04 0

Note 2002-2005 are projections

4

Economic Context

14. 
The performance of the Venezuelan economy over the long-term, including the last
decade, has been dismal, 
largely due 
to unproductive public sector 
investments, poor
macroeconomic management and the inability of economic policymakers to cope with oil cycles.
First, much public sector investment in human and physical capital has been unproductive and, in
the process, has destroyed wealth. Real GDP per capita growth averaged -1.2 percent per year,
and real non-oil GDP per capita growth averaged about -2 percent per year over the last decade,
largely explained by declining productivity. 
Second, 
inadequate and inconsistent fiscal,
exchange rate and monetary policies have not been able to neutralize the impact of external oil
shocks on macroeconomic 
stability and the economy. While oil 
income fluctuations
significantly affect Venezuela's fiscal stance, they are not the only culprit. In 2001, despite a
relatively high oil price (above US$20 per barrel on average), the consolidated non-financial
public sector registered a deficit of about 6.4 percent of GDP-slightly above the one in 1998
when the average oil price was about US$10 per barrel. The 2001 fiscal deficit was mainly
caused by an expansionary fiscal policy (i.e., a large acceleration of public expenditures and as a
result the non-oil public sector deficit increased to about 14 percent of GDP).
15. 
Lack of a consistent exchange rate policy has also contributed to fiscal instability, given
that over half of fiscal resources depends on oil revenues which in turn depend on oil prices and
the exchange rate. Moreover, the de-facto fixed exchange rate for most of the last decade caused
the demand for money to play a crucial role behind foreign exchange losses and changes in
international reserves. Finally, by February 2002 the excess demand for foreign currency had
increased significantly (largely due 
to capital flight) and after unsustainable 
losses 
in
international reserves, the government replaced the exchange rate band system by a floating
exchange rate regime. Following a significant depreciation of the exchange rate (about 40
percent) and to avoid rising inflation and further depreciation of the exchange rate, the
authorities increased interest rates through a tighter monetary policy. The resulting large
reduction in the rate of change of the monetary base triggered a substantial increase in real
interest rates, negatively affecting economic growth (i.e., real GDP contracted by about 7 percent
in the first semester of 2002) which compounded the negative impact of weakening private
sector confidence and cuts in oil production.
16. 
As a result of high price of oil and the change in the exchange rate policy, net
international reserves have recovered to a level of about US$11.5 billion by end-September-
representing about 160 percent of short term external debt on the remaining maturity basis, and
excluding about US$3.5 billion remaining in the macroeconomic stabilization fund. The
demonetization of the economy and the severe economic recession of 2002 have negatively
impacted the banking portfolio (which had never fully recovered from the mid-1990s financial
crisis), making the entire financial sector fragile. On the fiscal side, the overall public sector
deficit would likely narrow to about 2 percent of GDP in 2002 (this deficit incorporates some
revenue measures already approved by Congress and pending reductions in expenditures).
Covering the public sector deficit has required transfers from the Central Bank, the use of
resources accumulated in the oil-based macroeconomic stabilization fund (on a discretionary
basis), and an accumulation of domestic arrears.

5

17. 
From its very beginning the Chavez administration gave priority to political reforms,
including the introduction of a new Constitution and legal framework. This, and the lack of a
fully implemented and comprehensive economic program, increased uncertainty, affecting the
investment climate and reinforcing domestic private sector disinvestment (that had been
impacting the country for several years). Real private investment declined by 15 percent
annually on average during 1999-2001 compared with 1998, which deepened the economic
recession in 1999 (the worst in the last decade) and hampered the economic recovery in 2000 and
2001. As the result of poor economic performance, unemployment increased from 11 percent in
1998 to about 13 percent by the end of 2001. The worsening political and economic conditions
caused a significant increase in country risk, reflected in sovereign bond index spreads of over
1,000 basis points and in persistent large outflows of private capital. 
In 2002, Venezuela's
economic vulnerability has increased considerably, with the government facing difficulties in
rolling over maturing domestic debt and accessing international credit markets.

18. 
In April 2002, the new economic team inherited an economy heavily dependent on the oil
sector with major macroeconomic and structural imbalances, including a growing fiscal deficit
and high unemployment (see Table 1). The scale of the crisis made it necessary to act quickly,
and the govemment announced a set of emergency economic policies, including the intention to:
(a) reduce public expenditures by limiting public sector wages and by cutting investment outlays
of the government and PDVSA; and (b) increase public sector revenues by introducing a tax on
bank debits for one year and by increasing the VAT rate from 14.5 percent to 16 percent and
reducing VAT exemptions. These measures were in the right direction, and the government has
worked on developing an economic plan. They have started to reverse the macroeconomic
imbalances and deep recession-GDP is now projected to decline by about 5-6 percent for the
whole year. Nevertheless, the economic recession poses a risk to the health of a number of
already weak financial 
institutions. Moreover, major structural reforms still need to be
implemented, including in the public sector, pension systems, taxation, decentralization, public
debt management, and social safety-net programs. 
In summary, economic and political
uncertainties continue 
to undermine private sector confidence, affecting the recovery of
investment and preventing the reversal of private capital outflows. The underlying fiscal
position remains on an unsustainable path, unless additional measures are taken. Furthermore,
its financing is further complicated because of the structure of the public sector debt which has
short-term debt that is maturing.

6

Table 1. Venezuela. Key Macroeconomic Indicators

1996 

-0 2 
-2 5 
1175 

166 

70 
73 
-6 7 
12 6 

117 
39 
100 

1997 

64 
4 2 
1135 

210 
94 
1 8 
-8 3 
3 9 

131 
24 
50 

1998 

1999 

02 
-0 9 
113 

219 
107 
-58 
-6 7 
-3 4 

161 
46 
36 

-6 1 
-5 4 
145 

181 
88 
I 1 
-5 7 
3 6 

181 
32 
24 

2000 

3 2 
3 0 
132 

172 
81 
3 2 
-to 0 
10 8 

192 
25 
16 

2001 

2002 

Project,ons
2003 

2004 

27 
3 8 
128 

187 
94 
-6 4 
-13 9 
3 5 

205 
25 
12 

-6 1 
-4 8 
143 

170 
109 
-2 0 
-11 8 
5 8 

144 
40 
27 

2 5 
05 
135 

170 
108 
-3 5 
-11 0 
5 0 

144 
38 
32 

20 
1 0 
131 

170 
108 
-3 0 
-9 5 
2 4 

144 
28 
22 

2005

2 0
1 0
128

170
107
-3 0
-9 5
2 3

144
22
16

3110 

3520 

3540 

3730 

4310. 

4760 

3351 

3488 

3574 

3633

GDP Growth (%) 
Nonoil GDP Growh (%) 
UnermployrmentRate 

Investrent/G)P 
Pnvatelnvestment/GDP 
Fiscal Balance/GDP 
Nonol Budget DeflcitGDP 
Current Account/GDP 

Real Eff E.ch RateIndex C87-I100) 
Lending Interest Rate 
Inflation 

GDPperCapita(USS) 

'An increase denotes a real appreciation

The External Environment

19. 
Venezuela's integration into international trade and capital markets has brought some
benefits, such as the potential to exploit wider export markets, greater exposure to technological
innovations, and increased access to foreign capital (but has also caused hardship to previously
protected industries that have had to adjust). However, exposure to external shocks-
particularly developments in the international oil market and foreign capital flows-continues to
be significant. Oil contributes about 25 percent of GDP (in real terms), about 80 percent of
exports, and about 50 percent of fiscal revenues. While oil prices are projected to stabilize with
a slight downward trend in the longer term, experience has demonstrated their high volatility. In
this context, market perceptions of country risk have risen steadily largely, due to increased
domestic political 
instability and uncertainty-the spreads on Venezuelan sovereign bonds
averaged just over 1,000 basis points in 1998, about 1,200 in 1999 and 2000, and 1,350 in 2001.
This trend has, however, reversed during the last few months due to the high price of oil and the
govemment's more prudent policies, including the implementation of a more flexible exchange
rate regime-spreads decreased to about 1,200 through November 2002. Nevertheless, at their
current levels, spreads on Venezuelan bonds remain high, and for all practical purposes, access
to international markets is closed to Venezuela.

Poverty, Inequality, and Development Goals

20. 
Over the last decade, poverty has increased, largely as a result of the decline in economic
growth, with a resulting negative impact on real per capita income and employment. This has
been magnified by Venezuela's dependence on the capital-intensive oil sector and lack of export
diversification-the share of non-oil exports to total exports has remained, on average, below 25
percent. At the same time, real wages have fallen significantly and unemployment has risen-
between 1990 and 2002, average real wages fell by about 25 percent and unemployment
increased by about 4 percentage points, and would have been higher had it not been for the
growth in the informal market. Low average real wages and unemployment affected all sectors
of the labor market. However, the impact has been more severe on those individuals that

7

participate in the non-oil labor market and that: (a) had relatively little human capital, (b) were
young and female, and (c) were urban residents and/or recent migrants. 
In addition, labor
productivity has decreased bY an average annual rate of about I percent.

Box 1. Who Are the Poor in Venezuela?

A poor person in Venezuela is most likely to live in urban areas, be female, old and living alone, or
young, uneducated, unemployed or employed in the infornal sector, with many children.

Location. The vast majority of the poor live in urban areas. However, the intensity of poverty is greater
in rural areas.
Gender. Households headed by women are more likely to be poor.
Age Households headed by individuals older than 50 years are poorer than those headed by individuals
in the 30-50 year-old range-this is expected because 30-50 years of age approximates the prime
income-generating years.
Children. Households in the lowest income deciles have, on average, twice as many children as
households in the middle income deciles.
Education. Schooling is positively and significantly associated with income-lower income groups
have lower education.
Employment status and sector. Households in which the head is not in the labor force or is unemployed
are likely to be poor. Those employed in the private informal sector are poorer than those employed in
the formal private sector or public sector.
Family size Households with family members of 5 and people living alone are highly represented in
households in the lowest incomes deciles.
Ethnicity. Venezuelans of Afiican or Amerindian descent (about I I percent of the total population) are
also more likely to be poorer than the rest of the population.

Source: Encuesta de Hogares por Muestreo, OCEI.

21. While there is no consensus on the absolute level of poverty, its level is unambiguously

higher now than in the early 1990s (See Table 2). Poverty is a multi-dimensional phenomenon,

as reflected in the characteristics of the households that are poor (See Box 1). 
In addition to
increased poverty, inequality has also increased-the Gini Coefficient increased from about 0.47
in the mid-1990s to about 0.50 in the late 1990s (see Table 3). 
Indeed, based on data from
household surveys, Venezuela income distribution is highly skewed-i.e., in 2000, the top 20
percent of all households received about 55 percent of total income while the bottom 20 percent
obtained 3 percent.

22. 
Although some of Venezuela's current Millennium Development Indicators are not too
distant from the goals for 2015 (see Table 4), Venezuela will need to successfully implement a
comprehensive economic and social development strategy if it is to achieve all of the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015. For more detail on the government's program, refer to Section IV.
Annex B5 provides additional information on Venezuela's social indicators.

8

Table 2. Poverty in Venezuela

Percent of Total Population
1991 
1996 

Pop Below US a day 
Poverty Gap at US$I a day 
Pop Below US$2 a day 

Poverty Gap at USS2 a day 

11 8 

3 1 
32.2 

12 2 

14 7 

5 6 
36.4 

15.7 

1997 

187 

6 5 
44 6 

19 0 

1998 

23.0 

10.8 
47 0 

23 0 

2000

23 5

11 5
48 5

23.8

Source World Developmenr 1ndicatorv, World Bank 2000 is an estimate

Table 3. Inequality in Venezuela

Gini Coefficient 
Share of Income of Highest 20% of Households 
Share of Income of Lowest 20% of Households 
Source World Development Indicators, World Bank 2000is an estimate.

1990 
0.54 
58.4 
3 6 

1995 
0 47 
51 8 
43 

1996 
0 49 
53.1 
3.7 

1997 
0.49 
53 7 
4 1 

1998 
0 50 
53 2 
3.0 

2000
0 50
55.0
30

Table 4. Millennium Development Goals

Position of the World 
20% of the world population live on 
less than US$1 a day (WBG 
estimate for 2000). 

Targets 
1. Between 1990 and 2015, 
reduce by half the proportion of 
people living in extreme poverty 
and suffering from hunger. 
2. Achieve universal completion 
90% of the world's elementary 
of primary education by 2015 for 
school-age children (6-14) are 
both boys and girls. 
enrolled (WBG estimate for 1997). 
3. Eliminate gender disparities 
Worldwide, there is a gender gap of 
7 6% in the primary education Gross 
in primary and secondary 
education by 2005, and for all 
Enrollment Ratio (WBG estimate
for 1996).
levels by 2015. 
4. Reduce infant mortality rates Worldwide, the under-5 mortality 
rate was 78 per 1,000 (WBG 
by two thirds between 1990 and 
2015. 
estimate for 200.
5. Reduce matemal mortality 
Worldwide, there are 400 matemal 
rate by three quarters between 
deaths per 100,000 live births. 
1990 and 2015.
6. By 2015, halt and reverse the 
spread of HIV/AIDS, malaria, 
and other diseases. 
7. Ensure environmental 
sustainability. One indicator is 
access to an improved water 
source. A second indicator is 
ratio of land protected to 
maintain biological diversity to
surface area.
8. Develop further an open, rule- Developing countries have 
based, predictable and non- 
embraced this goal and committed 
discriminatory trading and 
to reducing poverty and improving 
financial system. 
governance. 

In 1999, the worldwide prevalence 
rate of HIV/AIDS among adults 
aged 15-49 was 1.07% (WHO data). 
Worldwide, in 2000, approximately 
80% of the population had access to 
water. Likewise, in South America, 
percent of land area in protected 
areas averaged 7.4% in 1999.

Current Position of Venezuela
In 1998, 23% of Venezuela's population lived on
less than US$1 a day. The prevalence of
malnutrition among children under age 5 decreased
from 7.7% in 1990 to 4.4% in 2000.
Net overall primary enrollment ratio in Venezuela in
1996 was 83.80%, 84.8% for girls and 82.8% for
boys.
The ratio of female to male enrollment in primary
and secondary schools is 101%.

The under-5 mortality rate in Venezuela decreased
from 27 per 1,000 in 1990, to 24 per 1,000 in 2000.

In Venezuela, matemal mortality rate was 43 (per
100,000 live births) in 1995.

In 1999, the prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS among
population aged 15-49 was 0.49%. It was 0.15%
among women aged 15-24.
In 2000, 81% of Venezuela's population had access
to an improved water source; in rural areas, access to
safe water is 58%. Likewise, in Venezuela, percent
of land area in protected areas totaled 35.4% in 1999.

For poverty related goals please see Development
Goal I. Venezuela ranks 84 in Transparency
International's Corruption Perceptions Index (102
countries ranked in 2002). Venezuela scored 2.5
from a possible score of 10 (with I representing most
Icorrupt and 10 representing least corrupt countries).
Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank. Corruption Perceptions Index supplied by Transparency International.

9

III. MAIN DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

23. 
Although Venezuela is blessed with great natural wealth, poverty is pervasive and social
conditions are deteriorating. Poverty has increased largely as a result of the decline in economic
growth. Poor macroeconomic management, constraints to private sector participation, and
political uncertainties have increased business and country risks, negatively affecting investor
sentiment and contributing to high interest rates, in turn thwarting growth and diversification.
This outcome performance has been exacerbated by the weaknesses in the broader institutional
and legal framework, an inefficient public sector culture (including low administrative capacity),
and rent-seeking activities. Moreover, the large and inefficient public bureaucracy has been
unable to design and implement programs to reduce poverty, provide for steady economic
growth, improve the quality and coverage of education and health, and protect the vulnerable.
Social sector institutions have lacked the capacity to formulate, coordinate, and implement
policies with clear objectives and responsibilities. As a result, a large number of social funds
have emerged, but have only made the overall institutional infrastructure more complex. The
private sector has not been given the enabling environment to act as the engine for growth, while
deficient physical 
infrastructure has limited the competitiveness of the economy. These
problems have existed for decades and have been common to all recent administrations.

24. 
If the government is to break with this past and bring improved living standards, reduced
poverty and greater equality to Venezuela, the key challenges will rest in five strategic areas: (a)
restoring macroeconomic stability and growth; (b) diversifying the economic structure; (c)
improving governance and public sector institutions; (d) promoting social development; and, (e)
supporting sustainable development. These are the perennial challenges of Venezuela.

25. 

Restoring Macroeconomic Stability and Growth. 

If Venezuela does not achieve

macroeconomic stability and then find the way to successfully maintain it, the country will face a
severe economic deterioration that could send millions more of its citizens into acute poverty.
The challenge to prevent this crisis and restore growth will depend upon: (a) correcting fiscal
imbalances and moving toward a sustainable medium-term fiscal position; (b) addressing
weaknesses in the financial sector; and (c) removing regulatory and legal barriers to private
sector investment in the oil and non-oil sectors. To achieve this requires the implementation of
policies in several areas such as reforming the taxation system, strengthening tax administration,
establishing budget rules to stabilize revenues, reducing oil dependency, avoiding pro-cyclical
fiscal policies, and improving debt portfolio management (including a reduced dependency on
short-term debt).

26. 
The Venezuelan banking system is experiencing liquidity pressure due to the loss of
deposits, depreciation of the Bolivar and continuous capital flight. Reported bank solvency has
continued to deteriorate, however profitability has recently improved. The banking system has
been consolidating during the last four years, but the system is still very fragmented. Overall
indicators of financial penetration remain 
the lowest 
in the region, with high spreads,
underdeveloped risk management practices, and growing official intervention influencing the
banks' credit allocation process. The government must assess the condition and vulnerabilities
of banks and major segments of borrowers, strengthen the level of institutional preparedness to
mitigate and manage any risk of a systemic crisis, and strengthen the operational capacity of the
Superintendency to resolve failures. These actions should be complemented by legal reform in

10

the area of banking resolution, bankruptcy, and secured lending legislation, among others. If the
govemment were successful in implementing such an economic program and reforming the
financial sector, it would help investor confidence to improve, real interest rates to decline, and
hence private sector investment to recover. Moreover, a healthy development of the financial
system will require strengthening the legal and regulatory framework for the banking system,
including the anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT)
component, and related infrastructure (e.g., payment systems), complemented by enhancing the
business environment.

27. 
Attaining Economic Diversification and Competitiveness. 
In the past, Venezuelan
governments sought to foster growth by bolstering aggregate domestic demand through
accelerating public expenditure which resulted in short-lived growth that was halted when oil
prices declined. 
In today's global economy, Venezuela's long-term growth acceleration will
only be sustainable by enhancing competitiveness, diversifying the non-oil tradable sector,
improving the private sector investment climate and enlarging the growth base of the economy.
This would require that the government: (a) maintain a flexible exchange rate system; (b) deepen
international trade liberalization; (c) advance "behind the border" reform policies (e.g., reforms
in customs, transportations, and trade standards); (d) promote private sector participation in the
non-oil sector (including in the electricity and aluminum sectors) via privatizations, joint
ventures, concessions and small and medium enterprise development; (e) improve infrastructure
in areas such as transport and water systems; and (f) reduce high business transaction costs by
eliminating complex and uncertain legislation and combating crime and violence.
Strengthening Public Sector Institutions and Improving Governance. To bring the
28. 
country's economy to a sustainable, poverty-reducing growth path would overwhelm the already
weak administrative capacity of the government if it does not reform. Therefore, public sector
institutions and human capital development will need to be strengthened, which will require
focusing on those critical areas that will have the greatest impact on bettering governance and
which will enable them to provide efficient and transparent public services. These areas include
rationalizing the administrative structure; enhancing the efficiency of the civil service; deepening
the decentralization process; expanding access 
to 
justice; and combating corruption.
Rationalizing the state through downsizing and simplifying central functions will improve the
quality of government, as it will make the central government leaner and more effective, and
focuses only on providing essential basic national services. Additionally, enhancing government
efficiency will require a more professional and better trained civil service.
29. 
To restore public confidence, stability, and promote access to justice, a strong and highly
professional judiciary is required. This objective, that should be central in the strategy design,
should be accomplished with measures geared towards producing judicial decisions that can be
perceived as fair and functional for, and by, the public. For this, judicial training is needed as
well as the implementation of a judicial career, including systems for the assessment of judicial
performance. Disciplinary mechanisms must be combined with a strategy to fight corruption in
the judiciary while at the same time promoting independence and transparency. The training of
lawyers and the ethical standards of their practice have to be substantially improved because the
quality of justice relies on their performance. Since the Judicial Council was suppressed by
Constitutional reform, the technical capacity of the Supreme Court to handle the responsibilities
of the previous Council has to be improved. These responsibilities include: the judicial branch

governance, the design and management of an accurate and efficient administrative system, as
well as a case management system. Efforts to enhance and preserve judicial independence are
critical especially for the selection and promotion of judges as well as in all aspects of their
performance. Finally, serious efforts have to be made in order to improve access to justice by
the poor and by the vulnerable segments of the society, and to promote their participation in the
justice administration. Justices of the peace, oral procedures and legal information programs can
help in accomplishing this goal, but 
it is also necessary to develop a strong system of legal aid
clinics, public defense, disseminate the use of altemative dispute resolution mechanisms and
address gender and indigenous peoples issues linked within the content and use of the legal
system.

30. 
Deepening the decentralization process will also facilitate the effectiveness of the state
and improve the provision of public services by bringing policy makers and beneficiaries closer
together and by redefining the role of the central government so that it is no longer seen as being
the exclusive provider of services. For decades, Venezuela has been a federal country, but the
role and finances of the states have been reduced to a minimum. All this began to change with
the Law of Decentralization of 1988 which authorized transfer of responsibilities and effectively
transferred a few excise taxes to the states. Some of states, have made the most out of authorized
excises and tolls and have been able to partially finance infrastructure and social services with
their own revenues. However, most states are still completely dependent on the general revenue
sharing. Transfer of responsibilities have been incomplete and unclear; leading to little
accountability at the state level, and expenditures associated with the revenue sharing scheme
have created unnecessary fiscal rigidities. Beginning in 1994 the federal government created a
special fund-FIDES-to finance decentralization via project competition among states.
Although not as important as general revenue sharing, the FIDES has become a significant
supplementary transfer targeted to priorities that are negotiated between the state and the federal
government. Regarding municipalities, they raise their own taxes (primarily the property tax and
the patente de industria y comercio, an obsolete colonial tax that is being transformed into a
*rough form of gross sales tax). They also receive general revenue sharing equal to about 20
percent of current national revenues.

31. 
Promoting Social Development. To tackle poverty and inequality on a sustainable basis
requires investment in human capital development rather than discretionary transfers and
subsidies. This encompasses reforms in education, health and social protection systems. Given
fiscal limitations, the government needs to improve the quality and coverage of education by
focusing on increasing the efficient and equitable use of the resources allocated to the sector.
Second, the quality and coverage of health services needs to be strengthened by ensuring
sustainable and efficient institutions, financing and management. The reform should entail a
new market structure for the provision of health services to reduce costs and increase private
sector participation. Finally, the effectiveness and efficiency of the social safety net programs
should be improved by developing better targeting mechanisms, advancing administrative
efficiency, 
identifying and increasing support for high-impact programs, and eliminating
economic distortions caused by food-related programs.

32. 
Supporting Sustainable Development. Venezuela has the third highest ratio of urban to
rural populations in Latin America (behind only Uruguay and Argentina), with an estimated 87
percent of the population located in urban areas. Nevertheless, in rural areas, the impact of

12

agricultural colonization and rural-to-rural migration has led to annual forest loss rates which are
more than double the average in the region. In rural areas, the poor deplete natural resources to
survive, given the lack of access to land, markets, education, health, clean water, transport and
other public services. To overcome this vicious circle, rural poverty will need to be reduced
while mainstreaming environmental considerations with sectoral decision making, both in rural
areas as well as urban areas. This will require: (a) increasing the productivity of small-scale
agriculture by strengthening sustainable production systems as well as 
increasing 
the
competitiveness of the sector; (b) expanding institutional capacity developed in recent years to
ensure effective enforcement of environmental regulations as well as application of market-based
instruments for environmental management; and (c) ensuring transparent, participatory processes
in designing and implementing regional planning to address concerns of indigenous peoples and
other marginalized communities.

IV. 

THE GOVERNMENT'S DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND POLICIES-AN
EFFORT TO BUILD CONSENSUS

Decree of the Land and Agrarian Development Law (Ley de Tierras y Desarrollo Agrario) called

Venezuela's initial development plan for 2001-2007 provided a general framework for
33. 
social and economic change. While the Bank shared the general objectives of the government to
accelerate growth, reduce poverty and achieve greater equality, we could not agree on the set of
policies proposed to achieve these goals. There are concerns that the proposal calling for
expansion of the role of the state was in conflict with the empirically proven development model
of private-sector led economic growth, complemented by an efficient public sector that protects
the vulnerable and provides key public services. Furthermore, there was a contradiction between
expanding the role of the state in Venezuela and the continuous erosion in the state's policy
formulation and administrative capacity, including the prevalence of rent-seeking practices
which distort income distribution. Finally, there were concerns that the plan might not
adequately protect individual property rights, particularly because the issuance by Presidential
some of these rights into question and generated an intense discussion within the country.
The new economic team strengthened the original plan, departed from the initially
proposed policies to implement the plan and broadened consultation with different groups and
34. 
representatives of Venezuelan society. The authorities are making efforts to build national
consensus around this revised plan (Plan de Consenso Nacional) and have made it public
through its web-site (www.foronacional.gov.ve). The revised strategy includes: (a) restoring
stability and promoting economic growth by transforming the structure of production into one
that is more competitive and diversified, and capable of generating employment opportunities for
all Venezuelans; (b) good governance and building institutions by enhancing the efficiency of
the civil service, deepening the decentralization process, expanding access to justice, and
fighting corruption; (c) establishing an effective system of social protection; and, (d) ensuring
environmental protection. The short-term measures outlined in the plan may not be deep enough
to achieve macroeconomic stability and the long-term measures may not be sufficient to promote
sustainable development. However, the Bank's dialogue with Venezuela on these issues has
greatly improved under the new economic team, and the Interim strategy is intended to further
strengthen the dialogue.

13

35. 
The new team's revised plan includes measures that aim to restore economic stability and
growth by improving confidence in the Venezuelan economy, facilitating a decline in real
interest rates, and fostering a recovery of investment. Key components of the economic program
include correcting fiscal imbalances and achieving a sustainable medium-term fiscal position. In
order to achieve this, the government has increased: (a) the rate of VAT to 16 percent from 14.5
percent, as well as reduced tax exemptions; and (b) the rate of the bank debit tax to I percent (on
a temporary basis). 
In addition, the government intends to: (a) increase the rate of duties on
some consumption goods; (b) improve tax administration and customs procedures; (c) restrain
the growth of public sector outlays; (d) reform the Macroeconomic Stabilization Fund (through
introducing more transparent and automatic rules for the accumulation and use of funds); and (e)
improve the efficiency of Treasury operations and debt portfolio management (including a
reduced dependency on short-term debt).

36. 
To diversify economic growth, Venezuelan officials intend to focus on: (a) maintaining a
flexible exchange rate system; (b) promoting private sector participation in the non-oil sector
through an overhaul of public procurement, 
strengthening export promotion programs,
supporting the development of small enterprises, and transferring assets in selected industries to
the private sector (e.g., including in the tourism sector through the liquidation of Corpoturismo);
(c) increasing private sector investment in the hydrocarbons sector; (d) implementing a program
of legislative reforms aimed at improving the legal and regulatory framework for the banking
system and capital markets; and (e) enhancing the business environment by reducing high
transaction costs, protecting property rights, and clarifying uncertain business regulations.

37. 
The authorities seek to improve governance and the quality of public sector institutions.
Key components of the program include: (a) deepening the decentralization process through the
implementation of a program of legislative action that would include reforms to strengthen state
and municipal finances, citizen participation, and the allocation of responsibilities between
federal and subnational officials; and (b) enhancing the efficiency of the civil service through
institutional 
restructuring, 
strengthening 
training programs, and mainstreaming modern
technology in the public sector.

38. 
The authorities aim to improve social protection and the sustainability of the development
process in Venezuela through increasing efficiency and equity in the use of education resources.
The government plans to increase coverage of pre-school and early education, including tripling
the number of children served by day-care centers and increasing the number of classrooms for
early education nationwide. 
Improvements 
in the quality of education services will be
supplemented by an increase in coverage of basic food and nutrition programs. The quality and
coverage of health services will be improved by addressing the sustainability of health care
financing, bettering health care management, focusing on increasing access to public health
services, and creating mechanisms to increase citizen participation in the management and
delivery of health services. Special programs will be developed to serve the needs of indigenous
communities, women, children and to assist people suffering from diseases such as tuberculosis,
malaria, and HIV/AIDS. The social safety net will be overhauled by introducing better targeting
mechanisms, promoting administrative efficiency, identifying and increasing support for high-
impact programs, and eliminating economic distortions caused by food-related programs.

14

39. 
Since early 1999, rural development has been an important part of the government's
discourse. The main challenge for the agriculture and rural sector is to promote equitable growth
through market friendly policies which would result in a more equitable allocation of resources.
Government programs aimed at reducing rural poverty will be implemented, enhancing the
productivity of small-scale agriculture, expanding the institutional capacity to ensure effective
enforcement of environmental regulations; and ensuring transparent, participatory processes in
the design and implementation of regional planning to address the concerns of indigenous
peoples and other communities.

V. 

WBG'S DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP WITH VENEZUELA

The Lessons of the Previous CAS-What Worked and What Did Not Work

40. 
The previous CAS was prepared in 1997 to cover the second half of the Caldera
administration and provide the basis for the first years of the new administration. 
It focused on
the perennial problems of Venezuela, namely, enhancing sustainable growth while promoting
social development and modernizing the public sector. Improvement in the performance of the
IBRD portfolio was a prerequisite for all future lending to the country. The authorities
developed, with assistance from the Bank, a Portfolio Improvement Plan that contained a
strategy for improving portfolio management, targets and an action plan for monitoring portfolio
performance. The Bank's primary support was through a low-case lending program of about two

operations per year for an annual average of $55 million that could have been expanded if there

had been significant improvement in portfolio performance and strong government commitment
to policy reform. This program was to be complemented by key non-lending services such as:
(a) case studies of international experience on managing oil booms and busts; (b) assistance in
establishing the regulatory framework for concessions and privatization public enterprises in key
sectors; (c) a poverty assessment; and (d) a labor market analysis.

41. WBG-financed programs have had both successes and failures. For example, 
the
emphasis in the CAS on improving the quality of the portfolio worked well, and by the end of
fiscal 1999 there were no problem projects in the portfolio. However, this improvement was not
sustained and by fiscal 2001 portfolio performance had once again deteriorated, with about 30
percent of the projects rated as unsatisfactory. WBG's contribution to Venezuela as a knowledge
institution, although limited, also worked well. For instance, recommendations regarding how to
make the labor market more flexible and a study of international experience in managing oil
revenues were well received by high levels of the administration, including President Caldera.
Initially there was not an agreement on the focus that the Bank's knowledge-based services
should take; however, the new economic team has expressed keen interest in this work. Finally,

even though there was no agreement on an overall economic reform program, appropriately
designed and targeted operations in sectors where there was good dialogue have worked well,

such as Judicial Reform, Agricultural Services, and Caracas Slum Upgrading.

42. 
However, the objective of reducing poverty by implementing a program of structural
reforms to move the economy onto a higher sustainable growth path was not achieved. This was
due to the inability of the Caldera administration to maintain support for the reform program

15

prior to the elections, and to the decision of the Chavez government to focus primarily on
political and institutional reforms and on an economic model that was not conducive to rapid
growth.

43. 
There are several lessons of the implementation of the previous CAS. First, the Bank's
relationship with Venezuela has been uneven, with the government's interest in WBG assistance
positively correlated to low oil revenues. Under these conditions, it is imperative that the Bank
be responsive to client priorities (i.e., clients especially appreciated the Bank's knowledge-based
services such as the work on managing oil revenues and the labor market analysis), take
advantage of windows of opportunity to promote policy dialogue and reforms in key sectors, and
support projects with strong government ownership. Second, although the efforts proposed in
the CAS to improve portfolio performance were initially successful, by FY01 performance had
once again deteriorated. 
It is therefore necessary that the government and the Bank agree to
Finally, where there 
is not a strong
maintain a strong focus on portfolio performance. 
government commitment to implement reforms, IBRD can still have a positive impact by
focusing on highly selective operations in key areas such as social sector development and
targeted poverty-reduction operations.

WBG's Portfolio Experiences

44. 
IBRD Experiences. The IBRD's portfolio in Venezuela currently contains 9 projects
with commitments of about US$396 million and US$169.1 million undisbursed. Two projects
are currently rated unsatisfactory. The IBRD's portfolio in Venezuela has historically been of
poor overall quality and has had generally unsatisfactory outcomes. In the last five years, OED
has evaluated seven projects and found that almost half were found to have had unsatisfactory
results.

45. 
In 2001, a significant overhaul of the portfolio was carried out and as a result the number
of operations was reduced, performance indicators improved and the closing dates were extended
for projects likely to achieve their development outcomes. The portfolio improvement program
has recorded significant results in terms of implementation performance and disbursements.
Problems with a new procurement law that was in conflict with the IBRD's guidelines were
resolved. Chronic flow-of-funds problems were addressed and disbursements have picked up
significantly in the past several months. Project-specific issues have been dealt with and several
project ratings have been upgraded. Maintenance of this improvement in the performance of the
portfolio is a prerequisite for all future lending to Venezuela.

46. 
Based on the recommendations of the Venezuela portfolio review conducted by the
Regional Quality Enhancement Team, the IBRD will increase its focus on portfolio management
to ensure effective project implementation and to prevent recurring problems by:
i. Being more responsive to client priorities, including avoiding projects without strong
government ownership;
ii. Simplifying ongoing and new operations;
iii. Maintaining intensive supervision of projects;

16

iv. Extending project closing dates only if the project is rated satisfactory and monitorable
targets have been met;
v. Making more effective use of portfolio management tools (for example, CPPRs, project-
specific action plans, and project implementation benchmarks);
vi. Increasing training aimed at improving procurement, audit, and project management
skills of staff in executing agencies, both at the national and subnational levels.

47. 
IFC Experiences. Given Venezuela's reliance on oil and low level of private
investment, IFC in the last CAS focused on facilitating private sector activity in the non-oil
sector and diversifying the economy away from the oil sector. 
In the early part of the CAS
period, IFC was able to implement this strategy. From FY98 to FY02, IFC approved a total of
$408 million (including syndications) 
in 13 projects (10 of which were in sectors such as
telecommunications, power, forestry, aquaculture, ports, and general manufacturing). However,
most of these were approved during FY98 to FY00. As country conditions began to deteriorate,
investor confidence declined and there were fewer new investment activities in the private sector.
The perceived unsustainable fiscal position, the past real appreciation of the exchange rate, and
the prolonged absence of political consensus over a coherent economic plan, has led investors to
curtail, or postpone, essential investments in key sectors of the economy and in turn to focus on
the maintenance of their existing investments at risk, particularly the ones oriented towards
domestic markets and thus generate primarily domestic currency-denominated revenues. Under
these circumstances, IFC has seen fewer opportunities to support economic diversification, while
it has been faced with limited but important demand to help sustain core private sector activities
in Venezuela (including the hydrocarbons sector).

Procurement and Financial Management in Venezuela's Portfolio

48. 
Based on preliminary assessments and the experience of IBRD projects, current
government systems do not provide useful and timely information for financial management, nor
adequate checks and balances between different government levels and between entities at each
level. These deficiencies should be corrected within an overall program of anticorruption and
governance strengthening. IBRD will help the government resolve*these problems by preparing
a Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) scheduled to begin in early FY04. 
It

would include the following aspects of financial accountability: (a) budgetary processes; (b)
accounting, financial reporting, and internal control systems; (c) auditing; (d) legislative and

public oversight; (e) review of internal control practices within government; (f) accountability

framework to support transparency under future governments; and (g) financial accountability of

public sector enterprises and agencies, 
including customs. Based on the findings and
recommendations of the CFAA, an action plan for strengthening financial accountability 
in
Venezuela would be agreed with the government, including a possible new accounting model
meeting the requirements of an Integrated Financial Management System.

49. 
Furthermore, 
the IBRD portfolio 
in Venezuela has been adversely affected by
weaknesses related to project financial management and auditing. To improve this situation,
IBRD will: (a) more strictly enforce the timeliness policy of audit compliance; (b) encourage
borrowers to contract private auditing firmns to conduct audits with financing from loan proceeds;

17

(c) assist the government in setting up a system to monitor the timeliness and quality of the audit
reports and provide feedback; (d) initiate a thorough review of project financial management
systems, and their adequacy in producing reliable and transparent information, and provide the
necessary support for their upgrading; and (e) encourage timely counterpart contribution to
project financing.

50. 
The government and the IBRD will complete a Country Procurement Assessment Report
(CPAR) in FY04. The CPAR would assess the capacity of government to carry out procurement
according to international standards and with regard to Bank guidelines. An action plan would
be developed in agreement with the government to assist project implementation units by
developing bidding documents and training programs for procurement staff. 
In addition, the
CPAR could assist the government by making recommendations to update present laws and
reduce conflicts imposed by existing legislation. Finally, its recommendations could lead to the
introduction of an electronic procurement system.

VI. 

INTERIM WBG ASSISTANCE STRATEGY-SEIZING OPPORTUNITIES
TO REDUCE POVERTY IN AN UNCERTAIN ENVIRONMENT

51. 
Given the political and economic uncertainties facing Venezuela, WBG will support the
authorities efforts in broadening dialogue for consensus building and seize opportunities for
analytical work and investment that are the most critical for poverty reduction. In this context,
sustainable economic
WBG will support 
the key areas of macroeconomic 
stability, 
diversification and competitiveness, environmentally and socially sustainable development, and
governance. Given the level of political instability and polarization in Venezuela, as well as the
nature of an Interim CAS, IBRD has not carried out extensive consultation with civil society and
the private sector. However, the strategy has been fully discussed with the government.

52. 
If the administration is willing to engage in a sustained and constructive policy dialogue,
the IBRD would support Venezuela by implementing a large program of analytical and advisory
services to help construct a common ground for reform and rebuild the Bank's depleted country
knowledge. This program would be implemented with the active participation of government
and other interested national stakeholders in order to strengthen dialogue and build much needed
consensus. 
Increased emphasis would also be placed on responding quickly to demand-driven
informal economic work and advice to specific immediate needs of policymakers. The impact of
this work would be enhanced 
through close 
interaction with policymakers and wider
dissemination, including the use of seminars and workshops.

53. 
The Interim CAS plans a three-year lending program for IBRD that could reach US$300
million for FY03-05, depending on portfolio performance and policy. The program would
consist of investment operations focused on opportunities to contribute to the reduction of
poverty and to the support of greater equality. The selected investment operations would: (a)
have the most tangible impact on poverty alleviation; (b) help Venezuela meet the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015; (c) reinforce conducive sector policy; and (d) incorporate the
lessons learned from the recently completed portfolio review.

18

54. 
The level of lending would be dictated by progress in portfolio performance and related
policy improvements. Specifically, lending in the first two years of the CAS would only take
place if there are no reversals of policies in the macroeconomic framework and respective sector.
Lending in the third year of the CAS would only take place if there were meaningful
improvement in macroeconomic and the respective sectoral policies. In addition, if the recently
achieved improvement in overall portfolio quality were not maintained or if the reform program
were reversed, IBRD would make no further new lending until adequate corrective actions are
taken. Specifically, (a) an annual disbursement ratio of at least 15 percent will be maintained;
(b) the percentage of problem projects and projects at risk by amount (excluding country risk)
will be maintained below 35 and 50 percent, respectively; (c) there will be satisfactory ratings
(Development Objectives and Implementation Progress) for projects in the sector; and, (d) there
would be no reversals in the protection of property rights.

55. 
If the new economic team implements the necessary structural reforms, achieves growing
national consensus, and puts into place an adequate macroeconomic framework that evidences
the possibility of returning to the financial markets in relative competitive terms, the IBRD will
respond by presenting a CAS to the Board of Directors. Under these circumstances, 
it is
expected that the lending program could be expanded to include policy-based loans in support of
critical policy areas,, such as fiscal sustainability, the financial sector, and public sector
effectiveness and efficiency. 
In such a case, the overall envelope could reach US$400-500
million per year depending on evolving circumstances (including country creditworthiness and
other factors), as well as the depth of the reform program adopted. In this context, the IMF will
play a pivotal role in assessing the appropriateness of the macroeconomic framework.

56. 
A summary of the main instruments for WBG intervention is provided below, aligned
with the strategic objectives they will support and proposed Bank instruments. 
(see Tables 5
and 6).

Restoring Macroeconomic Stability

57. 
The main objective of the IBRD's strategy in terms of macroeconomic stability is to
identify, in close collaboration with the IMF, policies for correcting macroeconomic imbalances
and to help reduce the likelihood of an economic crisis. To achieve this, the IBRD is
undertaking an in-depth Country Economic Study (CEM-I). This study comprises the following
key topics: (a) macroeconomic 
imbalances and volatility-which 
includes how to manage
volatility coming from oil price/production cycles; (b) external sector; and (c) real economic
growth-which includes both the oil and non-oil sectors, and particularly the constraints to
diversify 
the economy and what to do about 
them. 
Based on this analysis, policy
recommendations would emphasize the requirements for ensuring stability and building an
environment 
conducive 
to 
sustained economic growth, greater competitiveness 
and
diversification. To complement this study, the Bank will undertake a public expenditure review
(PER), which will focus on analyzing the sources of fiscal instability, the level and quality of the
public sector expenditure programs, and the allocation of public sector expenditures, including
special program protecting the poor. The PER will include policy recommendations to improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of the public sector expenditure program, reduce its volatility
and ensure fiscal sustainability. Both the CEM-I and the PER will be carried out in consultation

19

with the government, interested stakeholders and civil society. Upon completion, these studies
will be broadly disseminated through seminars and workshops. At the government's request, the
Bank could continue and expand its advisory services regarding pension reform and public sector
debt management to improve the profile of debt structure.

Attaining Economic Diversification and Competitiveness

58. 
The IBRD would undertake a program of analytical and advisory work in a number of
economic and sectoral areas, including the preparation of a comprehensive country economic
study in FY04 (CEM-II), which will include the analysis of private sector investment, input
technology) and 
its 
impact on economic growth and
factor productivity 
(including 
diversification. The IBRD is finalizing a set of policy notes to support important reforms in
areas such as the public sector, taxation, decentralization, public debt management, pension
systems and social safety net programs, and in this context would work with the government on a
detailed set of policy recommendations. 
In addition, FIAS recently completed a study of the
in Venezuela, 
in partnership with the country's
investment climate and competitiveness 
investment promotion agency. The Venezuelan authorities have expressed to the Bank and the
IMF their interest in participating in an FSAP. The evaluation would benefit the authorities in
benchmarking the state of development of Venezuela's financial system. Given its broader scope
and focus, the FSAP would need to be complemented with post-FSAP support providing the
hands-on advice needed to develop and implement an action plan directed at averting a deeper
crisis. Hence, the Bank also intends to step up monitoring of developments in the country's
financial system, with a view to enabling the IBRD to provide at relatively short notice
comprehensive and detailed policy advice to the authorities.

59. 
Furthermore, IBRD could support Venezuela's initiatives towards improving the legal
and regulatory framework of the financial sector, including strengthening of the AML/CFT
regime. The Venezuelan authorities are planning to upgrade their payments and securities
settlement systems. This process has been initiated with the launching of a project for an
automated clearing house that will automate check clearing and eventually other payment
instruments. However, a much more comprehensive approach is required to provide security to
the settlement of large value payments in order to mitigate credit, liquidity and systemic risks. A
first step will be to assess the legal, operational and regulatory arrangements for the payments
and securities settlement systems. The Venezuelan authorities have requested a mission for
technical advice on the payment, security and settlement systems. This initiative is led by the
Bank, in partnership with the Center for Monetary Studies in Latin America (CEMLA), and has
already undertaken this type of studies in 12 countries.

60. 
IFC and MIGA. As noted earlier, low investor confidence and constrained private
sector activities present IFC with fewer opportunities. Given the importance of maintaining the
quality of its overall portfolio, IFC would focus on managing its existing portfolio in Venezuela
(US$291 million for its own account and US$213 million for syndications, as of June 30, 2002).
IFC will also respond to important demands to help sustain core private sector activities under
the current difficult investment climate and diminishing private sector role. When opportunities
arise, IFC will provide financial support to projects that have positive fiscal and/or foreign
exchange earning impacts and remain robust under difficult country circumstances. This could

20

include projects in the hydrocarbon sector, or with domestic top credit rated, non-oil sector
enterprises. 
In the medium-term, IFC would resume its focus on helping diversifying the
economy, as and when the investment climate improves and Bank-supported reform presents
increased opportunities for the private sector. MIGA continues to receive inquiries from
potential investors, but they have not yet materialized into active applications.

Building Efficient, Accountable and Transparent Governance

61. 
Decentralization. 
Venezuelan policy makers do not have a unified vision of
decentralization policies nor a common strategy for implementation of the decentralization
process. The Bank would be ready to assist the authorities in the design of the legal, regulatory
and institutional framework for intergovernmental relationships. In this context, the Bank would
support: 
(a) basic 
institutional fiscal and financial 
tools, including standard accounting,
budgeting, planning and reporting routines-probably along the lines of integrated financial
management made compatible at all levels of government; and (b) documentation and support of
best practices at state and municipal levels. The Bank will need to keep an active policy
dialogue with public and private stakeholders if it is to help the government develop a medium to
long term strategy for decentralization. The Bank would join efforts with other multilateral
(IDB, UNDP) or bilateral organizations (German foundations) that are already supporting the
Venezuelan decentralization debate and process. The Bank would assist the government to
further the decentralization process by: (a) introducing performance and result indicators and
inter-government coordination mechanisms; (b) supporting fiscal sustainability strategies for the
more advanced state and local governments, consisting of components such as rationalization of
expenditures at subnational levels, better management of floating debt, strengthening 
tax

administration and improved capacity for project preparation and implementation; (c) ensuring
cohesiveness between the ongoing legislative agenda and management strengthening actions at
subnational levels; and (d) strengthening the capacity of the national level to monitor, evaluate

and disseminate decentralization goals and results.

62. 

Judicial System. The judicial system is the second governance front where the Bank

would support the government. Venezuela's judiciary needs to continue to modernize and

improve its effectiveness by: (a) promoting transparency and resource utilization through the

automation of case management systems nationwide; (b); strengthening judicial professionalism

and independence by accelerating the implementation of judicial career and tenure programs,
along with judicial training and disciplinary mechanisms; and (c) improving citizen access to
justice and confidence in the judicial system through the promotion of justices of the peace, oral
procedures and legal information programs, especially for the poor and disadvantaged. Future

Bank assistance would include the mainstreaming of the successfully completed pilot court

project, along with activities that improve judicial professionalism, resource utilization, access to
justice, transparency, and citizen outreach programs that build confidence 
in the system,

especially among the poor.

63. 
Anticorruption. Building an effective and high-quality public service would involve the
strengthening of anticorruption measures. The Bank would assist by providing technical
assistance for the design of anticorruption strategies to federal ministries and agencies and
carrying out Financial Accountability and Procurement Assessments. Specifically, IBRD would

21

assist in making government more transparent in areas such as designing systems to provide
useful and timely information for financial management and adequate checks and balances, as
well as developing standardized bidding documents and an electronic procurement system.

64. WBI Program. The World Bank Institute (WBI) held discussions with the Ministry of
Planning to explore the possibility of providing support to the government in the areas of
institutional capacity building, particularly in policy formulation and administrative capacity in
the public sector, including governance and corruption areas where Venezuela is admittedly
weak. In the context of the proposed strategy outlined in this Interim CAS, WBI would assist the
government 
in the areas mentioned above. Venezuelan civil servants and private sector
individuals have been invited to participate in WBI learning and training programs in a number
of sectors. WBI would continue to invite the authorities to send participants to all its learning
activities directed to Latin America.

Promoting Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development

65. 
Supporting the Social Sectors. The main objective of the program for the social sectors
is to focus on the protection of the most vulnerable, while contributing to the design of
appropriate policies to reduce poverty in the longer term. The IBRD will conduct a Social Sector
Assessment and Review to enhance social sector performance. The study will include the
analysis of how to: (a) improve the efficiency in the allocation and use of existing resources
through a clear definition of social policy objectives; (b) strengthen the social ministries by
prioritizing administrative capacity building; and (c) simplify, streamline, and increase the
administrative efficiency of the social programs to improve their cost-effectiveness, including
merging and simplifying social sector institutions and funds. The IBRD's strategy would: (a)
strengthen institutions to formulate better policies, in particular regarding social safety nets,
through analytical work, and the provision of technical expertise; and (b) offer lending
operations to help improve the coverage and quality of basic education and health services.
Specifically in education, any new lending would build on the objectives of past operations such
as raising student achievement, reducing repetition and dropout rates, as well as enhancing
efficiency, quality and equity in primary and secondary education. The Bank's experience in
education from the most recent operation was that an overly ambitious design in terms of
objectives and coverage greatly strained the implementation capacity of the public sector. This
capacity was further undermined by constant changes in key counterpart positions. A follow up
operation would respond to these weakness with greater simplicity 
in design and with
institutional capacity analysis.

66. 
Combating Poverty and Protecting the Environment. To improve basic services to
the urban poor, the IBRD would support a national urban upgrading and housing project,
building on the lessons and experience gained from the successful implementation of the
ongoing Caracas Urban Upgrading project. This operation would address the urgent need for
upgrading in basic infrastructure services for the urban poor, including water and sanitation,
electricity, access roads, and telecommunications within the context of urban land management
and low-income housing. The project would build on lessons learned from the current project,
including 
the need for strong community participation 
in planning processes, 
focus on
integrating physical and social 
infrastructure and devolving as much responsibility for

22

implementation as possible to the state and local levels. Whereas the current project focuses on
integrated upgrading of urban settlements in Caracas, the national project would include a menu
of options available to municipalities, depending upon on the needs and reform commitments of
In addition, the project would aim to work with municipalities in
the particular municipality. 
developing policies that increase opportunities for access to land and housing by the urban poor,
such as relaxing excessively onerous building standards that price the poor out of the local
housing market. 
IBRD would also support a regional and urban transport project oriented
towards improving transport access to the poorer and less well served population segments via
strengthening of regional highways and secondary networks and medium size urban centers. In
the context of a sustainable fiscal framework, the IBRD would conduct a study (CEM-IIl) to
improve the efficiency of public sector investments. The study will review the status of access to
public services (including 
infrastructure, water and sanitation), especially 
in the poorest
communities and ways to address deficiencies, including policy and institutional improvements
and more effective public-private partnerships.

67. 
The IBRD would help mainstream sustainable development by combating rural poverty
while protecting 
the environment. 
The ongoing rural and environment projects have
strengthened institutions and updated the regulatory framework. They have also developed basic
capacities to identify and promote synergies between economic and social regional development,
sustainable 
livelihoods, and conservation. 
Follow-up operations would build on 
these
achievements. 
They would be designed 
to support the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals specifically by helping to reduce rural poverty and to support the
environment goals. In FY04, an IBRD/GEF blended operation would address needed reforms to
ensure sustainable development, as well as invest in important parks in the south and eastern
parts of the country to preserve their unique biodiversity. To help reduce poverty in rural areas,
the project would intend to improve the productivity of sustainable production systems in small
scale agriculture and rural enterprises. 
In addition, the Bank has engaged in a dialogue with
government to assist the country in complying with the Montreal Protocol on Ozone Depleting
Substances (ODS) to protect the ozone layer.

Table 5. Bank Lending Program for FY03-05

AM.~~~~~ 

~ 
~ 

I ~ ~ 
2003 

~ ~ 

-~ 

2004 

2005 

7 

-Mlji

j_y,:yf 

Education Improvement 
Judicial Reform 

Subtotal 
Health Project 

Slum Upgrading 
Rural Poverty, Sustainable Development and 
GEF-Canaima National Park
Subtotal 
Education Improvement 11 
Regional and Urban Transport 
Montreal Protocol-Ozone Depleting Substances 
Project

Subtotal 
TOTAL 

23

50
40

90
45

45
30

120
40
35
15

90
300

rable 6. Venez 

la-Be 

Knowledge 

'g 

FY

IiD 

ml 

is.i, 

2003 

2004 

2005 

iI

Country Economic Study I
Economic and Social Policy Notes
Financial Sector Assessment Program & Monitoring
Country Economic Study II
Public Expenditure Review
Social Sector Assessment and Review
Country Procurement Assessment
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Economic Study III
Poverty Assessment

68. 
Progress Benchmarks. Progress will be reflected in the implementation of more
prudent fiscal policies, strengthened financial supervision, an improved investment climate and
reduction in the "cost of doing business" in Venezuela. Maintenance of a stable and flexible
exchange rate system, as well as sustained recovery of aggregate private investment, would
signal that the policy environment remains on track. Key indicators of openness to international
trade as well as increased FDI flows (in both the oil and non-oil sectors) would also be positively
associated with the degree of success of the government's reform program. The achievements of
WBG assistance would be measured by the extent to which analytical and advisory services, as
well as lending operations, help the government sustain coherent economic policies, and build
consensus in the reform process.

69. 
Another signal of the success of the government's program would result from the
improvement of the institutional capacity of sub-national government and greater coordination
across different levels of government. Moreover, streamlined judicial processes and increased
access to justice by the poor would also be associated with successful implementation of the
government's reform agenda. The success of the government's anticorruption efforts would
eventually translate into an improvement of Venezuela's international ranking of transparency.
The achievements of WBG will be measured by the extent to which analytical and advisory
services, as well as lending operations, help the government implement its agenda for public and
judicial sector reform, including fighting corruption.

70. 
Progress with the implementation of the government's program would be reflected in
improved national 
indicators of efficiency 
in the educational system and access to basic
healthcare. Moreover, there would be an increase in access to basic social services, decreased
leakage and phasing out of regressive targeting systems. The achievements of WBG will be
measured by the extent to which analytical and advisory services, as well as lending operations,
help the government implement its agenda to reform the education, health, and social safety net
systems.

71. 
Finally, implementation of the government's program would result in accelerating rural
development, combating rural poverty and ensuring sustainable development. The success of the

24

WBG would depend on the effectiveness of its contribution to the design and implementation of
rural and sustainable development policies, and to capacity strengthening measures at the
national and state levels.

Exposure, Financial Risk and Public Debt Sustainability Under the Proposed Strategy

72. 
IBRD exposure and financial risk in Venezuela are low. 
IBRD debt outstanding and
disbursed is US$ 799 million and constituted less than 1 percent of the total IBRD portfolio, less
than 5 percent of the country's total foreign debt, and less than 20 percent of total preferred-
creditor debt. IBRD exposure is also low with respect to Venezuela's debt service capacity as
well as other country specific conditions, WBG debt service to exports, less than 1 percent;
WBG debt service to public debt service, less than 6 percent; and preferred creditor debt service
to public debt service, less than 30 percent. Moreover, President Chavez has repeatedly
confirmed the country's commitment to honor its obligations and IBRD has not experienced any
delays in payments under this administration.

73. With implementation of a policy scenario without additional fiscal adjustment, the
underlying primary balance (after discounting long-term price trends in oil prices) is estimated to
be -0.4 percent of GDP. If the current (cyclically adjusted) fiscal position is maintained, it is
projected 
that Venezuela's total public debt ratio would continue 
rising, reaching an
unsustainable 55 percent of GDP by 2012, and continue increasing thereafter. Under the policy
reform, and adjustment currently proposed by the authorities, a primary surplus equivalent to less
than I percent of GDP will likely be achieved. Additional measures will be necessary to attain
an underlying primary surplus of about 1.5 percent of GDP and thereby make the fiscal path
sustainable. If the authorities are able to achieve and permanently maintain this primary surplus,
a nonexplosive debt path will be reached (consistent with long-term price trends in oil prices).
Thus with an underlying primary surplus of 1.5 percent of GDP, total public debt would stabilize
at around 35 percent of GDP by the end of this decade. This suggests that the magnitude of the
required adjustment is about 2 percentage points of GDP (to bring the underlying primary
balance from -0.4 to a sustainable 1.5 percent of GDP).

VII. COORDINATION WITH OTHER PARTNERS

74. 
IMF Program. Venezuela does not have a program with the IMF. The last Article IV
consultation was completed by the Executive Board of the IMF on September 11, 2002. IBRD-
IMF collaboration would remain strong, including exchanging 
information for monitoring
macroeconomic and financial sector developments, as well as structural reform.

75. 
IDB Program. The IDB assistance program in Venezuela focuses on four strategic
areas: (a) economic development through increasing productivity in the non-oil sector; (b) social
development and poverty reduction through investment 
in human capital; (c) institutional
development through strengthening the public sector; and (d) technology development through
increasing access to science and technology. The lending program consists of 17 ongoing,
mature projects representing about US$1.3 billion as of July 31, 2002. Of this total amount,
about US$700 million has been disbursed, and 7 operations are expected to close during the
remainder of 2002. 
In addition, the IDB is planning 4 operations in 2002 for a total of about

25

US$240 million. The Bank and the IDB are closely coordinating the strategic areas of
interventions through both lending and nonlending services.

76. 
CAF Program. The CAF assistance program in Venezuela focuses on four strategic
areas: (a) infrastructure for development and integration; (b) strengthening the productive sector,
SMEs and improving competitiveness; (c) development of financial and capital markets; and (d)
public sector reform and institutional strengthening. The lending portfolio represents about
US$1.4 billion as of March 2002. Of this amount, about US$720 million was disbursed in 2001.
About 95 percent of the existing portfolio is related to infrastructure projects and investments in
the manufacturing sector. 
In addition, the CAF has approved or is planning to undertake 7
lending operations in 2002 for a total of about US$225 million, mostly for investment in
infrastructure. Moreover, 11 technical assistance operations have been approved or are planned
for 2002, amounting to about US$1 million. The Bank and the CAF are closely coordinating the
strategic areas of interventions through both lending and nonlending services.

77. 
Table 7 below summarizes the focus of WBG interventions and of our partners in
Venezuela's development program.

Table 7. Partnerships in Venezuela's Development Programs

Development 
Devellpenge 
Macroeronomic Stability 
s and Growth 

~~Restonng 

Attaining Economic 
Diversification and 
FIsotutious 
Competitiveness 

tmprovmng Govemance 
and Public Sector 

Promoting Socially and
Envtronrnentally
Sustaonable Developmen

Government

IDB .

183RD 

fJg,,,l"4!1Wi

EFC 

CAF

4 

^

VIII. 

TH RIK 

FTEPOPSDSRTG

Pnvate Sector

Civil Society 

.

, 

,' i'i. ,N

High Focus 

Significant Focus 

Some Focus 

Littic Focus

VIII. 

THE RISKS OF THE PROPOSED STRATEGY

78. 
The assistance strategy put forward in this document confronts a set of significant risks.
First, the climate of political polarization (as evidenced by the attempt to remove President

26

Chavez and frequent demonstrations) and civil unrest is still very strong, which has limited the
capacity of the authorities to implement credible economic policies and needed structural
reforms to remove distortions and enhance the participation of the private sector. While it may
not be possible for the government to overcome this polarization, the authorities are attempting
to broaden the dialogue with different civil society groups, including labor unions and private
sector, to narrow the gap around the economic and social agenda. Furthermore, they have
invited the international community, including former US President Carter and General Secretary
of the Organization of American States, Cesar Gaviria, to facilitate mediation among the various
interested parties.

79. 
Second, in the integrated economic world of today, the possibility of negative external
developments in the oil market and contagion from another emerging market cannot be ruled out.
Furthermore, developments in the domestic financial sector and the foreign exchange market
must be closely monitored. In addition, Venezuela's macroeconomic management record and
policy mix (especially regarding the consistency of fiscal, monetary and exchange rate policies)
do not yet provide a solid basis for consolidating stability and increasing confidence in private
investors. The new economic team is fully aware of this situation and is attempting to
implement better macroeconomic policies.

80. 
Finally, if the political and economic situation deteriorates, long-standing structural
problems will become more acute, and the likelihood of a crisis will increase. For example, a
social crisis could emerge if a large state or municipality (or even the central government) is
fiscally unable to deliver basic social services. This could, in turn, instigate marginalized urban
groups to civil unrest and overwhelm the capacity of the government to respond. This threat is
present countrywide, but greater in poor, overcrowded urban areas, i.e., the barrios.

IX. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS

81. 
The objective of this assistance strategy is to support Venezuela's efforts to create
consensus around reforms that restore macroeconomic stability, build the basis for economic
diversification and competitiveness, construct an efficient, accountable and 
transparent
government and promote environmentally and socially sustainable development. This strategy is
the result of analytical work and lessons of operational experience.

By:
Shengman Zhang

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Washington, D.C.
November 18, 2002

27

Venezuela, RB at a glance 

990

POVERTY 
and SOCAL 
P91"W-1y"end 

, 

Venezuela, Amrc 
RB& 
Cari.mn 

lddle4 

SOC 

~~ 

Deveilopment diamond*

GNI per capita 
.?d0ulaiion: mid-year (miifons) 
GNI (Alas etod 'USbllos 

~~~~~ ~~~~~~~~4760 

3,680 

' 6207
- 4 

-

46 
117 2 

-- 1 

Lfe expcac

-

-1,895

Avenage ann'ual growth,.19964f1
Populatzon(96) 
Laborforce(%) 

~~~ 

~~~ 
~ 

~~~~~~2 

0 
30 

183 
2 3 

1.3 ' 
2. 

, 

~L 
~ 
~ 

GNI' 

Gross

Labor 

fon;*, 

m 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

-.

Tperprimary

Motrcnatimaew patest year.avallable, 1995-Of 

"cpta- 

erollmet

~Poverty, (% of population below nfafional poverty line), 
(% oftotalps~laboA) 

- ,52

Urban popul~~tlon 
Life expectancy at blth (yoees) 
Infant t ortai6lty, (per 1, 00 
ChIld mailnutrbon% of chikdrsn under' 5)`.` 
A~ccssi to-n Improved water, source (% of population) 

87 
M 7 
19' 
'4 
84 
7 
91 

75 
70 
30 
9 
85 
12 
113 

776'

.69

lve b1rMlS) --

28

' 

Access to improved water source

87,
10,
10 
0 

llhteacy % ofpopultiona~e 54) 

Grs riayenrollmeni I(%-'lcro-geppto) 
Male 

Vnzuela RB
Upper-nmVddle4ricome grop

~~~~~~~~~~- ~~~90 

KEY ECONOMC~4 RATi6S and LON'G 

DsNu

(u~~~~$bllli&tsY 

,A~~~~~~~~~~
53 5 
121.3 
18-7 
171 .2:T"d 
313 
23 8 
21 3- 

1

E~~conomic. 
ratios', 

GDP (US$biffa' o~ 

.78. 

1249 

~ 

~ 

-

Gross doi8lcnsif 
'vestrmen`t/6QD' 
Excports bf goods and iom646s/GP. 
Gr~a&m~stI~ia~ngsdGDPt' 
Grosainbonal 
evnga/GP, 

i 

24'4 
288 
29 4,. 
29 6 

28.4- ~2.2.7i 

-

' 

-

29 3 
_28 2 

28 
-r- 

-

Current aooount balanclGDp 
-lrterestpayrlnslD 
Totale GP41.2 

5 
10.8 
2 0, 137 
20 
638- T31 3 

32i 

Dmetcnese

-

- ; 

InVestment 

27 

.

727

debttGD 

1,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Inetdns 

1981 91199141 

~~2017 

200 

201451 
-

-

GD 

Ae1 

.32 

2 0 

~ 

/nzeaR 

OEABortvsdofgoddsbterv'rts 

42.*~ 

6 

55 

'210 -

27'5 

1

lilfl- 

-1916 

A201 

2001

STUTR anna twhe ECOOM
G0 

'I"1981i 
19913 
-
4.9~~~~~-07 
55 
444 
45.m 
1~~~~~2,' 
4.9 
196 
50.7csT 49.3 

2000 
50. 
507 
19 
443 

2001 
501A
504e25 
1.'27
4462 

r 

G 

Vtet nezuea,~ RB GP %

Agnculture 
Industry 
- Manufacturing 
SExpvices 

-

-

-

n 

ImpRtCs1k of 

thedaEd sriNs21 

62 

13Y7

-

~~~~~~~~~~19811 

199141 

2000 

2001 

Growth of envsptman and GDPors(%)

Agrnculture 
Manufactuding 
Servic,es ' 
Prvtcons,rn57n 
General government consumPtion 
Imports of goods and services 

4 28 

5 21 

2. 

1.9

1469 
.2 
1 
129 
-0.6 

0.46 
02. 
01. 
-09 1 
45 2 

3.7 

2419 
3424.0 
47 2 
5 9 

20

-

-

4434 

0

6374 
750 
1543 

0 o
2

17 6 

'

Note: 2001 data 
era prel1imi1nary estimatesowh 

o exort an Imort

avrbe Inncomletewth

Venezuela, RB

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

t 1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

infation I%)

Domesdte pntces

(% change) 
Consumer pnces 
Implicit GDP deflator 

150

16.3 
12 9 

34 2 
21 4 

16 2 
27 6 

12 3 
6 8 

100.

_ 

_o_ 

t_

Govemment finance

(% of GDP, includes current grants) 

0 

, 

I 

I

Currentrevenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

27.7 
11.2 
. 1 4 

233 
51 
-1 3 

187 
1.1 
-2 6 

. 184 
-16 
-6 3 

-so 

97 

9 

99 

00 

01

GDOP deflator 

e CP

.

. ,, 

, 

_

TRADE

1981 

1991 
'US 
15,155 
12,201 
507 
1,445 
11,147 

2000 

2001

(USS millions) 
Total exports (fob) 
Petroleum 
Aluminum 
Manufactures 
Totalimports(crf) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

,Export 

and Import levels 

mll.)

20,181 
,19,094 
293 
255 
13,106 

33,035 
27,781 
895 
3,006 
14,606 

27,056 
21,561 
800 
2,462 
16,508 

3s0o
30,0w

25,000 

.

20 ooo

15005
10 

.L 

r_ 

t* 

,500

2,791 

3,303 

5,450 

6,365

95 

9i 

97 

9s 

r9 

oo 

01

Exportpnceindex01995=100) 
Importpnceindex(1995=1O0) 
Terms7t bade (1995=100) 

191 
140 
137 

101 
100 
101' 

141 
105 
134 

113
107 
105

, 

Exports 

aImpons

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 
, 
28,335 
21,814 
6,521 

Current account balance to GDP (%)
: 
.
t 

(USS millions) 
Exp6rts of goods and services 
Imports,of goods and services 
Resource balance 

-20,938 
17,103 
3,835 

16,388 
13,690 
2,698 

34,564 
20,038 
14,526 

,14-
12
e 

.

Net income 

574 
-409 

-598 
-364 

-1,204 
-211 

-1,546 

9' m 

' 

,

Net current transfers 

-610 

42 -

2-

Currentaccountbalance 
Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

4,000 
-4,021 
21 

1,736 
909 
-2,645 

13,111 
-7,293 
-5;818 

4,365 
-6,435 
2,070 

o

-29 

99s 
s 
s

97 

3 

9 

oo o

-2 

' 

4

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, localAUS$) 

17,070 
4 3 

15,161 
56 8 

15,882 
680 0 

12,295
723.7

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

'2000 

2001

(USS millions) 

,I 

Componit ion of 2001 debbt (USS mill.)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

32,132 
106 
0 

34,122 
1,340 
0 

38,001 
972 
0 

34,660
838 
0

A 938

G 3,729 

_ 

2,363
E E 1,713

Total debtservice 

5,700 

3,322 
62 
0 

6,590 

7,901 

IBRD 

37 

299 

287 

|,' 

IDA 

0 

0 

0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Ofricial creditdrs 
Private credritors 
Foreign directinvestment 
Portfolio equt 

0 
-5 
1,469 
184 
0 

7 
830 
152 ,, 
1,916 
100 

34
169 
888 
4,464 
71 

-910
-622,
3,085 

.,t#

.

F 2017

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursenients 
Principal repayments 

0 
0 
27 

100 
330 
0 

20 
50 
208 

5 
78 
212 

A - IBRD 
8 - IDA 
C-IMF 

E -Bilateral
F - Pnvate
G -Short-term

D -Other muftllateral 

Netflows 

-27 

330 

-158 

-133 

1 

* 

I

Interest payments 
Net transfers 

9 
-37 

62 
268 

91 
-249 

. 75
-208

Development Economics 

9/9/02

Annex B2

CAS Annex B2 - Venezuela

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As of November 18,2002

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount 4 d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$000) 
Average Supervision (US$000/project) 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

13 
4.0 
23.1 
23.9 
23.1 
23.9 
16.7 

12 
4.7 
33.3 
20.2 
58.3 
63.0 
18.9 

10 
5.2 
10.0 
2.2 
30.0 
15.3 
24.8 

9
5.1
22.2
3.8
33.3
9.7
3.9

Yes 
1,152.0 
88.6 

Yes 
1,137.0 
94.7 

Yes 
1,008.0 
100.8 

Yes
1,100.0
110.0

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 

15 
1,853.1 
57.1 
71.0 

Last Five FYs
7
321.7
42.9
51.3

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3 -

IBRD Program Summary - Venezuela

As Of November 15, 2002

Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program

Fiscal year Proj ID 

USS(M) 

Strategic Rewards' 
(H/M/L) 

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

Annex B3

2003 

2004 

2005 

EDUCATION IMPROVEMENT 
JUDICIAL REFORM 

Result 
HEALTH PROJECT 
SLUM UPGRADING 

RURAL POVERTY, SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
AND GEF-CANAIMA NATIONAL PARK 

Result 

EDUCATION IMPROVEMENT II 
REGIONAL AND URBAN TRANSPORT 
MONTREAL PROTOCOL-OZONE DEPLETING
SUBSTANCES PROJECT 

Result 
Overall result 

50.0 
40.0 

90.0
45.0 
45.0 

30.0 

120.0

40.0 
35.0 

15.0 

90.0
300.0 

H 
H 

H 
H 

H 

H 
H 

H 

H 

H
M

H
M

M

H
H

M

M

a. This table presents the Bank's lending program for the next three fiscal years.
b. H=High, M=Moderate, L=Low

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L)

Template created on 11/18/2002.

Annex B3 (IFC MIGA)

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) - Venezuela
IFC & MIGA Program, FY 2000-2003

IFC approvals (US$m)* 

Sector (%)

Agriculture & Forestry 

Chemicals 

Finance & Insurance 

Industrial & Cons Prod 

Nonmetallic Mineral 

Oil, Gas and Mining 

Transportation & Warehouse 

Utilities 

Total 

Investment instrument (%)

Loans 

Equity 

Quasi-Equity 

Other 

Total 

MIGA Guarantees (US$m) 

2000 

2001 2002 2003

71 

8 

10

11 

11 

0 

32 

0 

0 

0 

45 

100 

84 

13 

0 

3 

100 

109 

0 

0 

0 

0 

100 

0 

0 

0 

0

0

0

0

0

0

100

0

100 

100

100 

0 

0 

0 

90

10

0

0

100 

100

0 

0

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Venezuela
As of November 15,2002

Product 

Completion FY Cost(USS000s) 

Audience' 

Objective b

Annex B4

Recent completions
The Remaining Agenda for Trade Reform 
Characteristics of Labor Supply 
Human Capital for Growth, Prosperity
and Poverty Reduction 
Public Sector Policies in Agriculture 

Underway
Country Economic Study (CEM) I 
Economic and Social Policy Notes 
Analysis of Tertiary Education 

Planned
Financial Sector Assessment & Monitoring 
Country Economic Study (CEM) II 
Public Expenditure Review 
Social Sector Assessment and Review 
Country Procurement Assessment 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
Country Economic Study (CEM) III 
Poverty Assessment 

FY97 
FY97 

FY00 
FY03 

FY03 
FY03 
FY03 

FY03 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY05 
FY05 

US$85 
US$65 

US$150 
US$75 

G, D, B 
G, D, B 

G, D, B 
G, D, B 

US$100 
US$125 
US$50 

G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 

US$150 
US$200 
US$100 
US$90 
US$90 
US$90 
US$150 
US$125 

G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 

KG
KG

KG
KG, PS

KG
KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG
KG, PS

a. G=Government, D=donor, B=Bank, PD=public dissemination.
b. KG=Knowledge generation, PD=public debate, PS=problem-solving.

Annex B5

CAS Annex B5- Venezuela - Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionrineome group

POPULATION
Total population, bud-year (millions) 
Grwth rate'(% annual averageforpenoda) 
Urban populanon (Vo of population) 
Total fertiity ate (birtihsperwoman) 
POVERTY
(%o afpopulatioi)
National headcount index 
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer pnce index (1995-100) 
INCOMEtCONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gii index 

Lowest quintile (96 ofincome or consumptionJ) 
Highest qwntile (96 of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditrire
Heltbh(fGDP), 
Education (%,of GPI) 
Socal securnty and welfre (% ofGDP) 
Net l*linary school enrollment rate
(Yoofagegroup),
Total' 
Male 
Female 
Access to an improved water source
(96 o population) .
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immuniiation rate
(YO under 12 months)
Measles 
DPr 
Child malnutrition (*Aunder5years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Feinale 
Mortality
Infant (perithousand live births) 
Under S (per ihousand live biths) 
Adult (15-59) 
Male (per 1,000population) 
Female (pier, 00population) 
Buths attended by skilled health staff 6) 

-

!70.75 

1980-85 

1995-01 

li.7 
3.4 
75 8, 
47 

17 1 
25 
81 9 
38 

24 6 
20 
87.4 
29 

31.0, 

52 0

3,800 
3 

0.3 
4.7 
47 8 

4,840 
656 .

, 0.5

30
53 2;

2.4 
51 
-2.2 

84 

.. 

.
.

56 
49 
10 

70 
67 
74 

30 
42 

219 
123 
82

.

2.6 
4:9 
46 

84 

85
83

84 
88 
54 

79 
79 
4 

73' 
70 
76 

19 
23 

155 
88 

2,590 
1 

04 
3,0 
54.0 

.

45 

80' 

.

.

, 

, 

.

67 
64 
70 

43 
61 

23i 
157 
79 

Latin 
America 
& Carib. 

515 6 
1 6 6 
75.3 
26 

Upper-
middle-
income

647 0
1.3
75 7
24

3,680 
152 

4,620
141

34 
36 
-7 4 

91 

85 
93 
62. 

90 
87 
9

70 
67 
73 

30 
38 

207 
122 

34
. 51
79

94

87

92
70

90
88

69
66
73

28
35

226
143

05t29/02

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B6 - Venezuela - Key Economic Indicators

Actal 
1998 

Estimate 
2000 
2001 

Projected
2003 
2004 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP
Gross domestic product 
Agnculture 
Industry 
Services 

1997 

1999 

2002 

2005

10o 
4 
43 
52 

100 
5 
35 
60 

100 
5 
36 
59 

100 
5 
51 
44 

1oo 
5 
50 
45 

100 
5 
48 
47 

1oo 
5 
49 
46 

0oo 
5 
49 
46 

100
5
50
46

Total consumption 
Grossdomesticfixedinvestment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

72 
19 
9 
9 

79 
19 
8 
11 

77 
16 
7 
9 

71 
14 
6 
8 

76 
16 
7 
9 

73 
17 
6 
11 

74 
17 
6 
11 

76 
17 
6 
11 

76
17
6
11

Exports (GNFS' 
Imports (GNFSY 

28 
22 

20 
21 

22 
16 

28 
16 

23 
18 

34 
26 

33 
26 

30 
26 

30
26

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings 

28 
25 

21 
19 

23 
22 

29 
28 

24 
22 

27 
25 

26 
25 

24 
22 

24
22

Memorandum stems
Gross domestic product 
(USS million at current pnces)
GNP percapita(US$, Atlas method) 

88704 

95849 

103311 

121258 

124948 

84084 

89104 

92954 

96220

3520 

3540 

3730 

4310 

4760 

3351 

3488 

3574 

3633

Real annual growth rates (%)
Gross domestic product at market pnces 
Gross domestic income 

6 4 
3 6 

0 2 
-7 3 

-6 1 
3 6 

3 2 
17 2 

2 7 
-5 7 

-6 1 
-7 6 

2 5 
1 4 

2 0 
-1 6 

2.0
0 7

Real annual per capita growth rates (%)
Gross domestic product at market pnces 
Total consumption 
Pnvate consumption 

4 3 
2 9 
3 0 

-1 9 
-1 9 
-2 1 

-8 1 
-5 2 
-6 2 

1 3 
2 0 
1 8 

0 8 
3 0 
2 8 

-7 9 
-8 4 
-6 5 

0 7 
0 3 
0 4 

0 2 
-0 9 
-0 9 

0 2
- II
-1 1

Balance of Payments (USS millions
Exports (GNFSt 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFSJ' 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Netcurrenitransfers 
Current account balance 

25192 
23703 
19173 
13678 
6019 
-144 
3467 

19037 
17576 
20251 
15105 
-1214 
-108 
-3253 

22122 
20819 
16985 
13213 
5137 
70 
3689 

34564 
33035 
20038 
15491 
14526 
-211 
13111 

28335 
27056 
21814 
17282 
6521 
-610 
4365 

28400 
26500 
21900 
17400 
6500 
0 
4900 

29300 
27300 
23300 
18600 
6000 
0 
4400 

28000 
25900 
24300 
19400 
3700 
0 
2200 

29000
26800
25400
20300
3600
0
1900

Net pnvate foreign direct investment 
Long-termloans(net) 

5036 
-301 
-5633 
-3075 

4262 
1398 
-6627 
2931 

2669 
316 
-7092 
-1041 

4357 
66 
-9298 
-5818 

3085 
-1891 
-7228 
2070 

2520 
-1150 
-7060 
410 

2590 
-100 
-6760 
-490 

2640 
650 
-5510 
-370 

2680
960
-5480
-490

Other capital (,,et, mci enors & ommssuens) 

Change in reserved 

Memorandum items
Resourcebalance(%ofGDP) 

67 

-12 

53 

121 

51 

77 

67 

40 

38

Annex B6
Page 20f2

CAS Annex B6 - Venezuela, RB - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

1997 

Actual 
1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 
2001 

2002 

Projected
2003 
2004 

2005

Public finance (as % of GDP at market priees
Currentrevenues 
Currentexpenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-) 
Capitalexpenditure 
Foreignfinancing 

Monetary indlcatorw

M2tGDP 

GrowthiofM2(%) 
Privatesectorcreditgrowth/ 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices (1987-100)
Merchandiseexportpnceindex 
Merchandise import pnce index 
Merchandisetermsoftradeindex 
Real exchange rate(US5/LCU)r 

Real short-term deposit interest rates 
Consumerpnceindex (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

280 
183 
9 7 
116 
06 

193 
611 
829 

110.6 
744 
1487 
1312 

-22 3 
500 
384 

214 
175 
3 9 
99 
07 

184 
154 
757 

78 5 
73.7 
1066 
160.9 

-7.1 
358 
209 

248 
165 
8 3 
75 
-01 

187 
207 
76.1 

103 6 
767 
1350 
1809 

-14.8 
236 
270 

306 
188 
11 8 
81 
00 

174 
231 
858 

152 3 
766 
198.8 
1919 

-19.2 
162 
276 

24.6 
210 
3 6 
98 
-1.2 

183 
153 
779 

121.6 
78.0 
1559 
2055 

-3 9 
123 
68 

280 
210 
7 0 
100 
-10 

124 
-149 
59.6 

1217 
788 
1544 
144.1 

-25 0 
27.0 
320 

280 
200 
8 0 
100 
00 

130 
340 
610 

1210 
81 0 
1490 
1441 

-23 0 
320 
240 

260 
200 
6 0 
100 
10 

130 
190 
620 

1110 
830 
1340 
1441 

-15 0 
220 
160 

260
200
6 0
100
10

130
17.0
620

111 0
850
1310
1441

-13 0
160
140

a. GDP at factor cost

b "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services'

c Includes net unrequited tansfers excluding official capital grants
d 
Includes use of IMF resources
e Consolidated public sector
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units n An increase in USS/LCU denotes appreciation

Annex 67

CAS Annex B7 - Venezuela - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator 

1997 

1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

2002 

Projected
2003 
2004 

2005

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)'

Net disbursements (US$m)' 

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)^

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/publicDS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRDTDO(US$m)d 
ShareoflBRDportfobo(%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

IFC (US$m)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity' 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

35765 

38161 

38085 

38001 

34660 

33500 

33400 

34000 

35000

1539 

8361 

1420 
40 3 
33 2 
02 

7 8 
20 4 

1.1 

12127 
1.3 
0 

104 
77 

4506 

5565 

2005 
39 8 
29 2 
0.2 

3 4 
9 3 

I 0 
12190 
1 1 
0 

115 
82 

IN 

841 

1037 

-1533 

-1150 

-100 

650 

960

5158 

5083 

7703 

7500 

6300 

6300 

6100

1099 
31.3 
14.7 
0.2 

7.2 
21.4 

1 3 
971 9 
1.0 
0 

221 
94 

122.3 
27.7 
27.2 
0 1 

1200 
40.0 
26 0 
00 

1100 
37.0 
22.0 
0 0 

1200 
37.0 
23.0 
0 0 

1200
36 0
21 0
0 0

7.3 
22 9 

4.6 
28.9 

4.0 
25 7 

4 9 
24.3 

6 1
22 8

0 9 
838.5 
08 
0 

1.0 
6790 
0 7 
0 

0 9 
601 0 
0 7 
0 

0 9 
518.0 
0 6 
0 

1 0
5250
06
0

229 
87 

221
70

1722 
36 9 
23 3 
0 1 

5 6 
15.0 

1.3 
1129.5 
1 1 
0 

148 
93 

109

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements
d Includes present value of guarantees
e 
Includes equity and quasi-equity types of boih loan and equity instruments.

m4)

C

0R

WX~~~~ 

E

~~~~ 
~ 

8~ 

_ 

C~~~~~~C

j 

o 

a0 

-- 

.0 

e~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0

000 

N 

vo 

I~ ~ ~ ~ -

C.==0 ~ 

~ 

CN 

 

-

00 

0So 0 

0 

0 

n 
0 

.

N 

a 

(N x 

> 9 9 9 9 9 9 = 

N o 

N 

' 

x 

-

( I 

NC

c 

E g

N 

00 Y 

E

o~~~~~~ 

o 

bo 

Annex B8 (IFC)

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) - Venezuela

Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

As of September 30, 2002

(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 
Equity Quasi 

Disbursed
Equity Quasi 

FY Approval 

Company 

Loan 

Partic 

Loan 

Partic

2001 

Andino 

762 

000 

000 

2438 

476 

000 

000 

1524

1996/1997 

CANTV 

000 

000 

2500 

000 

000 

000 

2500 

000

1995/1998 

COMSIGUA 

23 34 

10 00 

000 

6516 

23 34 

10 00 

000 

65 16

1999/2000 

EDC 

57 29 

0 00 

0 00 

23 33 

55 09 

0 00 

0.00 

23 33

2000 

ForestalTrillurn 

16 80 

3 00 

3 00 

10 00 

501 

120 

120 

2 99

2002 

GMSVIACBL 

865 

000 

000 

000 

321 

000 

000 

0 00

2000 

Intersea 

5 00 

3 00 

0 00 

0 00 

0 00 

300 

000 

000

1992 

Jose Methano 

8 78 

6 80 

0 00 

0 00 

8 78 

6 80 

0 00 

0 00

1997/2000 

MineraLoma 

5874 

443 

411 

4231 

5874 

443 

411 

4231

1997/1998 

Movilnet 

2188 

000 

000 

3000 

2188 

000 

000 

3000

1990 

Pralca 

8 22 

0 00 

0 00 

0 00 

8 22 

0 00 

000 

0 00

1999 

Profalca 

21 75 

0 00 

0 00 

15 33 

21 75 

0 00 

000 

15 33

1991/1994 
Total Portfolio 

Zuliano 

000 
23807 

000 
2723 

1407 
4617 

000 
21051 

000 
21079 

000 
2543 

1407 
4437 

000
19436

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan 

Equity Quasi 

Partic

2002 VRT 

0 

1000 

0 

0

1999 Ccraven 

15000 

0 

0 

25000

Total Pending Commitment: 

isooo 

1000 

0 

25000

a)~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4

.0

F.

UO~~

00

0 

-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-

t te' e8 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1 8 

Ra 

04~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

r 

09

U 

us a 

IN~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

op3 

u 

Z 

t ~ 

~~~ 2 S 

CL

00 

0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

a0.= n { 
2 1, 

, ^ E E 1 2 

2 3 

" E 

* E E * t b 8 E

x~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

a L 

9 

a 

t 

> E

A.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~F

K 

e 

v 

~ 

l}<C 

Cl| 

S9

"~~ 

~~ 

0E 

e 

saMc 

YiS 

,! 

87 

3EZ 

| 

aE 

tz-9 a

aa~~~~~~~~~~~~~a

a

a 

I ~ 2 

I 

> 

i

6<~~~~~~~ 

I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I

'mo ' U0 

S- 

o

kn 

U 

8 3 

 

_ 

Pt 

ctcG$z 

| 

z 

i g 

i 

C11111

cXgm 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4:

o ] 

.

0$ 

| E

-

*0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i

ar~~ 

K 

-a _ 

I 

2 :E " 

4 

c

aa z8

E~~

e

7la~a

E r o 

5 8 

| 

t 

-= 

60.. 

g 

s 4 

o 

-

t~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

ia 

Z 

e*.j 

ax 
axi

as

u) 

A

LI

E~~~~~~E

C~~~~~~~~~~~ 
.
i 

MAP SECTION

W" 

z

ME

IBRD 31 255

-W. z

-th a 
Z-0 < 
5;

k.

-p-, 

-24

(10 

J"- 

LU LU

W ui
z

>

0

<

Pd.

z
0

q

<

ct3

V) 

Nl-

co

0 

Lu

Vt 

Uj 

R 

co 

LU

z

D

a Z
Z 0
0

< 

z
9 O

z 

:R 

O >

4L.:
(cid:1) i

JANUARY

Report No.: 
Type: 

CAS

25125 VE

