d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank Group

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 24073-GUA

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

THE COOPERATIVE REPUBLIC OF GUYANA

May 17, 2002

Caribbean Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Guyanese Dollar (G$), US$1.00 = G$180.50, April 30, 2002.

FISCAL YEAR

January 1 - December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
Analytical and Advisory Activities
Adaptable Program Loan
Caribbean Community
Country Assistance Strategy
Caribbean Development Bank
Commonwealth Development Corporation
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Canadian International Development Agency
Caribbean Loan Facility
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Portfolio Performance Review
UK Department for International Development
European Union
Gross Domestic Product
Guyana Economic Management Project
Guyana National Commercial Bank
Gross National Product
Government of Guyana
German Technical Cooperation
Guyana Sugar Corporation
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
International Development Association
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Monetary Fund
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Monitoring and Evaluation
Millennium Development Goal
Medium Term Economic Framework
National Protected Areas System Project
Pan American Health Organization
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Public Sector Technical Assistance Credit
Special Drawing Rights
United Nations Development Programme
United States Agency for International Development

AAA 
APL 
CARICOM 
CAS 
CDB 
CDC 
CFAA 
CIDA 
CLF 
CPAR 
CPPR 
DFID 
EU 
GDP 
GEMP 
GNCB 
GNP 
GOG 
GTZ 
GUYSUCO 
HIPC 
IDA 
IDB 
IDF 
IMF 
I-PRSP 
M&E 
MDG 
MTEF 
NPAS 
PAHO 
PRGF 
PRSC 
PRSP 
PSTAC 
SDR 
UNDP 
USAID 

Vice President 
Director 
Lead Economist 
Task Managers 

David de Ferranti
Orsalia Kalantzopoulos
Ali Khadr
James Droop, Camille Nuamah

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUYANA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................

I. 

II. 

POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONTEXT 
A. Country background ........................................

B. Economic performance and recent developments 

C. The challenge of poverty reduction 

GUYANA'S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY 
A. Stimulating growth 

.8

:.1

.5

.

.3

.

.

.

B. Strengthening governance and increasing public sector capacity and accountability .12

C. Improving the delivery and quality of basic services and safety nets .14
III. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 
.
.16

A. Objectives of the Bank Assistance Strategy and the CAS Development Process .16
B. Progress since the last Bank Assistance Strategy .16
C. Coordination with other development partners .19
D. Bank Assistance to Guyana in FY03-05 .20
IV. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING AND RISKS .23
A. Program Implementation .23
B. Performance Indicators .24

C. Program Risks.24

V. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 

..

BOXES
Box 1. Human Development in Guyana.
Box 2. PRSP Policy Reform Agenda to be supported by the CAS.

TABLES
Table 1. PRSP Targets and the Millennium Development Goals.
Table 2. IDA Portfolio Performance FY93-02.
Table 3. Guyana's Development Partners and the PRSP.

FIGURES
Figure 1. Guyana: Structure of the Economy, 1989, 2001.
Figure 2. Guyana: Real GDP Growth, 1966-2001.
Figure 3. Guyana: Inflation, 1990-2001.
Figure 4. Guyana: External Trade, 1993-2000.
Figure 5. Distribution of Official Assistance Flows to Guyana (disbursements), 2000.

ANNEXES

i

I

6

26

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

GUYANA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Country Context

1. The last CAS for Guyana was discussed at the Board in November 1993. An overview of the last
decade shows significant gains in economic performance. Up until 1997, the economy continued on the
path of strong growth that followed stabilization and structural adjustment measures undertaken in the late
1980s and early 1990s. The gross domestic product (GDP) grew by over 7 percent per year between
1991-97. Gross national income per capita rose from US$340 in 1989 to US$870 by 2000. Poverty rates
declined from 42 percent of the population in 1992 to 35 percent in 1999, although rural poverty remained
high. 
Inflation fell to low single digits and the fiscal situation improved significantly since the early
l990s when the overall deficit had reached 23 percent of GDP. Supported by the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) initiative, Guyana's debt ratios have been falling towards sustainability.

2. However, by the late 1990s, the initial gains from economic stabilization and the first generation of
structural reforms had been exhausted. At the same time, a series of domestic and external shocks,
including political uncertainty, social unrest, adverse weather conditions and declining commodity prices,
impacted Guyana. The economy adjusted poorly to these shocks and, since 1998, GDP growth has
averaged less than half a percent per year. At present, there is a risk that this slow growth and the policy
drift of recent years will begin to reverse progress on poverty reduction. Further deterioration could, in
turn, put Guyana's fragile democracy and social stability under renewed threat.

3. Emerging opportunities. With its natural resource endowments, English-speaking population,
proximity to North America, benign climate and areas of natural beauty, the potential for Guyana to enjoy
growth and investment in a range of sectors is widely recognized. However, the country has yet to realize
this potential. At present, with the uncertainties of recent elections over, debt relief resources starting to
flow, and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) completed, political, economic and social factors
have come together to present Guyana with a unique opportunity to achieve the growth rates of the early
1990s and to lay the foundations for measurable and sustainable progress on poverty reduction.

4. Challenges ahead. Notwithstanding these opportunities, the challenges facing Guyana remain
considerable. The weakness of democratic institutions, combined with the ethnic-based patterns of voting
that characterize Guyanese politics, leave the country vulnerable to an escalation in political and social
instability. A range of recent reforms and initiatives, including the PRSP, promises to contribute to the
complex process of building national consensus around governance and development issues. Sustained
progress in this area demands strong and enlightened leadership from politicians and civil society.
Decades of poor economic performance have led trained Guyanese to emigrate in search of opportunities
abroad. This outflow of skills continues. As a result, the human resources available to the country, and
particularly to the public sector, where wages are low, are severely limited. Moreover, weaknesses in
systems, procedures and principles also undermine efficiency, transparency and accountability in the
functioning of the public sector.

5. In addition, Guyana is a small state vulnerable to terms of trade shocks. The structure of its economy
remains similar to that inherited at independence - dominated by the production and export of primary
products like sugar, rice, bauxite, gold and timber. The PRSP has public investment making the major
contribution to raising the growth rate in the short-to-medium term. However, decades of poor economic
performance under the socialist model have shown the limitations of this approach on its own. Of equal
importance is the accompanying, and pressing, agenda of structural measures required to lift the rate of

i

return on public spending and to improve the institutional, legislative and regulatory environment for the
private sector, so that it can lead growth and transform the economy over the medium term.

6. The PRSP. The Government has recently completed a full PRSP which sets out a coherent agenda
for poverty reduction. The PRSP builds on the National Development Strategy, a comprehensive multi-
and cross-sectoral process led by civil society, that has been in place since 1993. The PRSP sets out a
wide-ranging, seven-pillar approach 
that can be grouped into three broad thematic objectives: (i)
stimulating economic growth; 
(ii) strengthening govemance and public 
sector capacity and
accountability; and (iii) enhancing the delivery of basic services and safety nets. Reflecting the
dependence of the economy on natural resources, as well as the country's unique biodiversity and natural
habitats endowment, the PRSP also recognizes the need to ensure sustainable development. The Strategy
Paper reflects inputs received through the extensive consultative process which involved discussions at
the local, regional and national levels. As a result, it emphasizes such fundamental concerns as
employment, governance, the need for stronger local govetnment and improved provision of basic
services. These priorities emerged with surprising consistency across the different ethnic and regional
groups who participated in the consultations, including Amerindians in the rural interior.

7. This CAS draws on the PRSP consultations and preparation process, and is guided by the Bank's core
mandate of poverty reduction, the principles of the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) and
IDA's comparative advantage in policy dialogue. 
It incorporates the lessons learned through previous
interventions in Guyana. These considerations have combined to yield a strategy whose main approach is
to focus Bank support on the implementation of the policy reform agenda set out in the PRSP and on
helping the authorities bring increased coherence to the overall donor effort. This will involve a
fundamental shift from investment lending to a program of Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs)
as the principal lending vehicle.

Bank Program

8. Base case assistance program. The CAS covers a three-year period and has a series of PRSCs at its
core, supported by a technical assistance project to help implement the PRSC reforms, and core Economic
and Sector Work to help refine the policy agenda and monitor and evaluate the impact of the PRSP. The
base case envisages new commitments of up to US$25 million (SDR 20 million) over three years, of
which about US$4 million would be allocated for a Public Sector Technical Assistance Credit (PSTAC),
with the remaining amount provided through single tranche, programmatic PRSCs. The pace of policy
reforms and the extent of Guyana's financing needs will determine the size of the individual PRSCs. This
overall program will be supplemented by three focused interventions: an HIV/AIDS project under the
Caribbean Region HIV/AIDS Adaptable Program Loan framework discussed at the Board in June 2001; a
recently approved Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant for building capacity in the Ministry of
Amerindian Affairs; and a proposed National Protected Areas System (NPAS) project under the Global
Environmental Facility (GEF).

9. Low case assistance program. A core set of policy reforms, in the areas of financial management,
procurement, sugar, water, mining and forestry, comprise a sine qua non for going ahead with each
PRSC. 
In the event that the reform agenda falters, i.e. the core policy reforms are not implemented,
individual PRSC loans would be deferred, and the IDA lending program would be limited to the PSTAC
and the regional HIV/AIDS project.

10. Partnerships. In terms of resource transfers, the Bank has a limited role in Guyana, accounting for
only 7 percent of annual disbursements of official assistance. However, the Bank has maximized its
impact by coordinating its policy work with financing and implementation support from other donors to
effect important reforms in Guyana. Expanding and intensifying this effort will be a critical feature of the
new assistance strategy.

11. Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Guyana's PRSP sets out 27 quantitative targets in such
areas as income poverty, access to, and quality of education, health, and basic services. These targets
include all the seven Millennium Development Goals, except for gender equality. Four of these MDGs
could be met in Guyana, if the progress envisaged in the PRSP is achieved and maintained through 2015.
The CAS includes support, through the PSTAC and the PRSCs, to help strengthen Guyana's capacity to
monitor and evaluate its progress on PRSP implementation and, by extension, 
the Millennium
Development Goals.

Managing Risks
12. Given the scale of the challenges outlined above, the risks to the PRSP and to the Bank program are
high. The key risks and mitigation strategies are highlighted below.

*: Political instability and policy commitment. Guyana continues to be in a transition
from 
the current politically divisive atmosphere towards one of greater national
consensus on development issues. The possibility of escalating political instability
therefore remains high, and with it, a loss of momentum and focus on the reform agenda.
In the event of a serious reversal in policy ownership and commitment, the Bank would
defer new lending, as outlined in the low case scenario, while continuing its dialogue
with the Government aimed at strengthening the reform program.

*: Fiduciary risks. Both the Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR) and the
Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) identify substantial weaknesses in
the fiduciary and accountability framework within the public sector. These weaknesses
not only reduce the impact of public spending but also grant a high level of discretion to
top officials and policy-makers that becomes a key source of political friction. Failure to
address these issues raises not only social and economnic risks, but also political ones.
The Bank is currently working with the authorities to identify appropriate reforms, and
will make these a major focus of the PRSCs and the PSTAC. The base case lending
program is predicated, inter alia, on satisfactory implementation of the agreed CFAA and
CPAR action plans. The Bank is also coordinating extensively with other donors who are
providing key institutional development support on governance and accountability issues.

*: Implementation capacity. Decades of outward migration, limited budgetary resources
and outdated government processes and systems have left the public sector ill-equipped
to deliver against its key objectives. The approach of this CAS is to focus the Bank's
limited capacity-building support on a set of key government-wide reforms that can
influence the performance of the public sector as a whole, in synergy with the assistance
being provided by other development partners.

*: Partnership risks. As such, the CAS relies heavily on an enhanced division of labor
among Guyana's development partners. There is a significant risk that the success of this
strategy could be adversely affected by implementation delays on the part of other
donors. To manage this risk, the Bank will have to channel adequate resources into
donor coordination and establish a system for frequent communication with other
development partners at the project level.

*: Fiscal discipline. The fiscal accounts have deteriorated steadily over the past few years,
with public sector wage increases, weaknesses in tax collection and ongoing subsidies to
public enterprises being the main contributors. The PRSP calls for macroeconomic and
budgetary stability, but also envisages a shift from unproductive public expenditure

iii

towards the social and growth-oriented sectors. The Bank will work to mitigate the risks
of fiscal deterioration by supporting measures to raise the productivity of public
expenditure and 
to reduce subsidies 
to state enterprises. 
The macroeconomic
management trigger for the low case scenario will also ensure that IDA resources are not
directed to increasing government current consumption.

13. In its discussions, the Board may wish to consider the following:

Issues for Board Discussion

* Given the Bank's limited role in Guyana, does the proposed lending program represent the most
appropriate role the Bank can perform to support the Poverty Reduction Strategy?

* Does the assistance strategy adequately 
identify the risks to the Bank program and to
implementation of the PRSP? Are the proposed measures to address these risks appropriate? Do
the triggers for the low case adequately capture the CAS emphasis on the governance and
fiduciary agenda?

* Given the capacity constraints in Guyana and the Bank's limited role, is the focus of the non-
lending services on core economic and sector work and safeguard issues appropriate?

iv

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE COOPERATIVE REPUBLIC OF GUYANA

1. The last Bank Group Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Guyana was discussed by the Board in November
1993 as part of the documentation for the Water Supply Technical Assistance and Rehabilitation Project.
Since then, the Board has discussed Guyana's overall policy and development framework in the context
of the decision point and the completion point for the original Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC)
initiative in December 1997 and May 1999, respectively. Most recently, Guyana's Interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) was discussed at the Board when further debt relief was approved
under the Enhanced HIPC (E-HIPC) in November 2000.

2. The authorities have now completed a full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) based on
consultations held at community, regional and national levels in mid 2001. At present, with the
uncertainties of the recent elections over, debt relief resources starting to flow and the PRSP providing a
nationally-owned framework for development, political, economic and social factors have come together
to present Guyana with a unique opportunity to achieve the growth rates of the early and mid 1990s and
to lay the foundations for measurable and sustainable progress on poverty reduction.

3. Nevertheless, the agenda for poverty reduction is challenging. Successful outcomes will require
further progress on prioritization, policy design, institutional arrangements for implementation and
stronger links between policy, targets and expenditures. This CAS incorporates the lessons learned
through previous interventions in Guyana, while drawing on the PRSP, Comprehensive Development
Framework (CDF) principles, and the Bank's comparative advantage in policy dialogue. These factors
have been combined to deliver a strategy that takes into account the limited International Development
Association (IDA) resources available for Guyana, and proposes the Poverty Reduction Support Credit
(PRSC) as the principal instrument with which the Bank will help the authorities achieve the fundamental
policy and institutional changes necessary to implement the PRSP and bring increased coherence to the
overall donor effort. At the same time, the CAS provides a framework for managing risks associated with
Bank interventions in Guyana through the triggers for a low case lending program, and through a
capacity-building operation that will address some of the key systemic weaknesses that could undermine
the impact of IDA lending and the implementation of the PRSP.

I. POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONTEXT

A. Country background

4. Situated on the northern coast of South America, Guyana is the only English-speaking country on the
continent. It covers an area nearly the size of the United Kingdom, but has a small population of less than
one million. Around 90 percent of the population live along the coastal belt. The interior of the country,
which contains pristine tropical forests and extensive mineral deposits, is very sparsely populated. The
country has a multi-racial population of which the Indo-Guyanese are the largest ethnic group with
around 48 percent of the population. Afro-Guyanese account for about 28 percent of the population, and
indigenous peoples or "Amerindians", who live mostly in the interior, make up another 8 percent. The
incidence of poverty, at 35 percent of the population (with much higher rates in rural and Amerindian
areas), is among the highest in the Western hemisphere.

1

Box 1: Human Development in Guyana

Guyana remains among the Caribbean countries with the lowest indicators of health
status. Maternal mortality is 190 per 100,000 live births; infant mortality is 54 per 1000.
Malaria is highly endemic and HIV/AIDS is in the stage of a generalized epidemic, with a
prevalence in adults of three to five percent, the highest in the Caribbean region after Haiti. The
1999 Living Conditions Survey found that 60 percent of the population had piped water into
their yards or building and that 64 percent had electricity. Reported literacy rates are high at 98
percent in 1997. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that this is misleading and that
functional illiteracy is widespread. Net enrollment levels are high at the primary school level
(97 percent), but lower for secondary education (60 percent)*. Of most concern, in terms of
educational quality, is the alarmingly high percentage of untrained teachers in the system.
During 1998/1999, untrained teachers represented 43 percent of all primary teachers and 40
percent of all general secondary teachers.

* Edstats, World Bank.

5. With its natural resource endowments, English-speaking population, proximity to North America,
benign climate and areas of natural beauty, the potential for Guyana to enjoy growth and investment in a
range of sectors is widely recognized. However, the country has so far not been able to realize this
potential. Following independence from the United Kingdom in 1966, Guyana pursued a policy of
"cooperative socialism" with increasing state intervention in the economy. The results were dire. Real
GDP growth averaged less than half a percent per year from 1966 to 1988 - less than the population
growth rate at that time. By the late 1980s, income per head had fallen to US$350 and the Government
controlled over 80 percent of recorded trade and investment. Against this backdrop, a steady flow of
skilled Guyanese emigrated to North America, the United Kingdom and the rest of the Caribbean
weakening the human resource capacity of both public and private sectors. Following the initiation of an
Economic Recovery Program in 1989, focusing on stabilization and structural adjustment, the economy
recovered during much of the 1990s. 
In the last few years, however, growth has come to a standstill.
Despite encouraging progress on macroeconomic management during the reform period, the structure of
the economy remains similar to that at the end of the 1980s - dominated by the production and export of
primary products like sugar, rice, gold, timber and bauxite (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Guyana: Structure of the Economy, 1989, 2001

SSugarS 
13% 
Rice 

Other 

u 

Rice 
6% 

Other
r Crops

89 

32% 

Construc 
!on 
5% 

Manufact. 
13% 
g 

1 3% 

L./ 

Uvsock 
l F 3% _i 

F 
1%2
Frsr
ining & 
2% 
qurynConsMtruuat 
1%15%

1 1rryi%g 

11% 

evie 

Services 
40%
111 

| 

Uvestock
2

Rshing

7%

FDrestry

on 

~~~ 

Manufact. 
8%

~~~5% 

Mining &
quarrying
a5

6. Political context. At the same time as the economy was being liberalized in the late 1980s, the
political system also began to open up. After over 25 years of authoritarian rule by the People's National
Congress (PNC), the People's Progressive Party (PPP) was elected in 1992 in the first free and fair vote
for two decades. Since then, there have been two more free and fair general elections, but Guyana

2

remains a fragile democracy where political parties remain divided largely along ethnic lines. This has
periodically resulted in civil unrest and violence. The PPP is closely identified with the Indo-Guyanese
community, which make up most of the agricultural workers in the key sugar and rice sectors, while the
PNC historically draws its core support from the largely urban Afro-Guyanese population, mainly
employed in the civil service and the bauxite sector.

7. Following the death of the PPP founder, Cheddi Jagan, in March 1997, his widow, Janet Jagan, was
elected as President in December 1997. The electoral process was endorsed by international observers
but was challenged by the opposition PNC, alleging widespread fraud. Civil unrest and violence broke
out and persisted until the CARICOM-brokered January 1998 Herdmanston Accord, in which the parties
agreed to Constitutional Reform and to elections in early 2001. Nevertheless, tensions remained high and
a three-month public sector strike from April-June 1999 strained social relations and severely complicated
economic management.

8. The PPP was returned to power for a third successive term in March 2001, under the leadership of the
former Finance Minister, Bharrat Jagdeo, who had assumed the Presidency earlier following Mrs. Jagan's
resignation due to ill health. The elections, which were deemed free and fair by international observers,
largely repeated the pattern of ethnic-based voting, and were again marred by civil unrest. The tensions
subsided somewhat following a post-election agreement between the two parties to a process of dialogue.
In addition, the parties agreed to implement Constitutional Reforms, passed in May 2001, to make the
Executive more accountable through the establishment of parliamentary committees in key sectors to
oversee policy and financial management, and independent Commissions to safeguard fundamental
human rights and oversee public procurement.

9. The Constitutional Reforms and dialogue have created an opening for the political parties to take up
the challenge of deepening and strengthening the roots of Guyana's fledgling democracy. Up to now,
progress on implementing the agenda of the party leaders' dialogue has been sporadic and the key
provisions of the Constitutional Reforms have yet to be operationalized. 
Implementation of the
legislative agenda has been handicapped by, among other things, disputes over parliamentary
management, which restricted the National Assembly to sitting on only 20 occasions in the year after the
March 2001 elections. Most recently, the opposition have been refusing to participate in parliamentary
debate.

B. Economic performance and recent developments

10. The challenge for the Government is to return the economy to the impressive rates of growth which
followed the 1989 Economic Recovery Program (ERP). Backed by substantial external technical and
financial support, the ERP eliminated virtually all price controls, abolished import prohibitions, unified
and floated the exchange rate, simplified the tariff structure, and established market-based interest rates.
The outcomes were remarkable - GDP grew by over 7 percent annually from 1991 to 1997 (see Figure 2).
Gross National Income per capita rose to US$870 by 2000 from US$340 in 1989. Inflation was brought
under control, reaching low single digits by 2001 as compared to 80 percent at the end of 1991. Fiscal
imbalances have improved significantly since the early 1990s when the overall deficit was 23 percent of
GDP. Poverty rates - as measured by the 1992 and 1999 household income and expenditure surveys -
declined substantially, although rural poverty remained high. Moreover, key sectors of the real economy
recovered. The sugar sector now produces around 300,000 tonnes a year up from a low of 130,000 tonnes
in 1990. Rice production recovered from 150,000 tonnes in 1991 to nearly 300,000 tonnes in 2000.
Furthermore, despite persistent rural poverty, economic growth did help to reduce inequality - the share
of income going to the poorest quintile increased from 3.9 percent in 1992 to 4.6 percent in 1999.

3

Figure 2: Guyana: Real GDP Growth, 1966-2001

10%

5% .

v.w 

0w 

0) 

c) 

0) 

0F7 0 

0) 

0) 

0) 

,n 

07Z 
) 

0)} 

0) 

0) 

0

-10%

11. However, by the late 1990s, the initial output gains from economic stabilization and first generation
structural reforms had been exhausted. Since 1998, Guyana's economic performance has been dampened
by a combination of domestic and exogenous factors. The domestic factors include political and social
unrest and policy drift. At the same time, the external environment worsened as the El Ninio weather
phenomenon hit and key commodities (sugar, rice, gold, bauxite) experienced a cyclical decline in prices.
Despite significant and continued flows of external assistance, economic growth averaged a mere 0.4
Inflation remained low, averaging 5.2 percent 1998-2001 (see Figure 3),
percent during 1998-2001. 
partly because a large share of the financing for public sector deficits came from external resource flows,
thus limiting the amount of monetary expansion, and partly because the lackluster private sector had a
low demand for credit. Similarly, the trade deficit averaged about 8 percent of GDP during 1998-2000,
lower than the level for 1991-97(see Figure 4). However, this was achieved at the cost of a contraction in
trade in real terms.

Figure 3: Guyana: Inflation, 1990-2001 
70% -
60% 

-/----------- 

t- 

Figure 4: Guyana: External Trade, 1993-2000
700 -
650

50% -- - -

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

600 --- 

-

-

-

-

-

-- 

-

-

-- 

-

-

-

40%-- 

-- 

30% 1/ -- -- 

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- ------ 
20%- ---- t- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --- 

300/~~~~~~~

10% 

0% 

-400 

.. 

.350

__550 -- ____----_

500 

450 ----

~ -~~-~---------

_-|-+ 0importscif 

- - Exports fob -

* 

1990-92 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 

1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000

12. The authorities have expressed a strong commitment to ensuring that the enormous fiscal imbalances
of the early 1990s are a thing of the past. At first, substantial progress was made in improving fiscal
performance, but this has been eroded over the past few years. Public sector wages doubled between
1998 and 2001 as the result of a two-month strike in mid 1999, which ended with a damaging arbitration
award - 31 percent salary increase to most civil servants in 1999 and an additional 27 percent in 2000.
This award, nevertheless, achieved the goal of bringing the public sector wages in line with private sector
levels. The public sector wage bill rose from 8.5 percent of GDP in 1998 to 11.3 percent in 2001. The
Government has subsequently maintained a 5 percent increase in public sector wages for the 2001, as had
been agreed under a Fund-supported program. Nevertheless, slow growth, weak tax collection and low

4

production outtums in several state-owned companies have contributed to the public sector deficit rising
to 6.8 percent of GDP in 2001. The key concerns are, on the revenue side, the rise in discretionary tax
concessions on imports and, on the expenditure side, the maintenance of large subsidies to state-owned
enterprises. Despite these deficits, inflation remains modest, only 2.7 percent in 2001 for the same
reasons outlined above.

13. External Financing. Future flows of concessional funds will also continue to play an important role
in Guyana. For example, in 2001, foreign grants to the budget came to 8 percent of GDP and net
concessional lending stood at 7 percent of GDP. Nearly half of the 2001 public sector investment
program was financed by foreign grants and concessional loans and the ratio is projected to rise further
during 2002-05.

14. HEPC. Guyana became eligible for debt relief under the original HlPC initiative, paving the way for
a cumulative US$440 million debt relief in nominal terms (of which US$59.9 million would come from
IDA). Although not all program targets were met, donors agreed to provide debt relief because the
factors that prevented achievement of program targets were largely beyond government control. As a
result, the debt service to export ratio fell from 19 percent in 1998 to 11 percent in 1999. 
In October
2000, Guyana became eligible for debt relief under the E-HIPC initiative, paving the way for an
additional US$590 million of debt relief in nominal terms (of which US$70.6 million would come from
IDA). Pending the completion point of the E-HIPC, the Bank and other creditors are providing interim
debt relief to Guyana, amounting to about US$15 million per year. When Guyana does achieve E-HIPC
completion, the two HIPC initiatives together will have eliminated more than half of the country's future
debt service, and its outstanding debt in net present value terms will have been reduced by 54 percent.

C. The challenge of poverty reduction

15. The 1992 and 1999 living conditions surveys have shown that the overall incidence of poverty in
Guyana fell from 43 percent in 1992 to 35 percent in 1999. Over the same period, the share of the
population in absolute poverty fell from 29 percent to 21 percent.' However, against the backdrop of
faltering growth in recent years, it is unclear whether these impressive gains were sustained throughout
the period, or if poverty rates have begun to rise again in later years. The ultimate medium-term goal for
Guyana's poverty reduction strategy is to reduce the poverty headcount ratio to 31 percent by 2005.

16. Poverty is unevenly distributed in Guyana. Around 60 percent of the population live in the rural
coastal areas where the incidence of poverty is just above the national average, at 37 percent. However,
in the rural interior, which includes around 9 percent of the population and is mostly populated by
Amerindians, the incidence of poverty is nearly universal at 93 percent, with 88 percent of the population
living in extreme poverty. These rates are higher than they were in 1993 when the poverty headcount
ratio was 79 percent. Therefore, the impressive growth of the 1990s had no real impact on poverty in the
rural interior. By contrast, poverty rates in urban areas, where around 30 percent of the population
resides, are not only much lower at 16 percent in 1999, but also fell considerably from around 28 percent
in 1992. Most of the rural poor are self-employed in agriculture or work as manual laborers. Levels of
education are lower for the poor population than for the population as a whole. Less than 15 percent of
the heads of poor households have completed a secondary or higher level of education.

17. Given the broad distribution of poverty in Guyana, the main challenge of poverty reduction will be
to raise economic growth rates and to improve the delivery of services to the rural areas. It is important to
note that, given Guyana's negligible population growth due mainly to continued strong emigration, even
modest economic growth rates could have a significant impact on household incomes. However, higher

' In 1999, the national poverty line stood at G$251 per day (equivalent to US$1.40 at market exchange rates). The
national line for extreme poverty was G$180 per day (equivalent to about US$1.00 at market exchange rates).

5

growth rates and improved social service delivery need to be accompanied by targeted interventions to
address the pockets of particularly high and persistent poverty in the rural interior and to ensure that the
benefits of renewed growth reach these more isolated populations.

18. With the uncertainties of the election period over and the PRSP complete, the conditions are in place
for the authorities to focus their attention on steering the economy back to pre-1998 growth rates. The
PRSP focuses on a program of public investment to stimulate demand in the short run. However, the
inefficiencies of public expenditure mean that this alone will be insufficient. Public sector capital
spending over the past few years, on average 12 percent of GDP, has had limited impact on economic
growth. Furthermore, weaknesses in the financial sector and in the institutional and legislative framework
for private investment mean that the prospects of the private sector leading growth in the short term are
limited. Therefore, the accompanying, and pressing, agenda of structural measures required to raise the
return on public spending, and to improve the institutional, legislative and regulatory environment for
private sector-led growth will be equally important.

II. GUYANA'S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY

19. The Government has recently completed a full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper which sets out a
coherent agenda for poverty reduction. The PRSP builds on the National Development Strategy (NDS), a
comprehensive multi- and cross-sectoral process led by civil society that has been in place since 1993,
and an Interim PRSP which was discussed by the Bank's Board in November 2000.

20. Participatory processes. The NDS preparation included an initial round of consultations, and
formed the basis for the I-PRSP. The I-PRSP was then followed by an extensive participatory process
with discussions at the local, regional and national levels. These discussions were open to all groups in
society, and included youth and indigenous people. 
In all, over 200 consultations were held involving
over 8,000 people. However, there was limited participation by the main opposition party, the largest
organization of private companies, and labor unions. The findings from the consultations were
incorporated into a draft PRSP, which was further discussed at a national level consultation in October
2001. As a result of the inputs received through the consultation process, the PRSP gives greater
emphasis to such fundamental concerns as employment, governance, 
the need for stronger local
government and better provision of basic services. These priorities emerged with surprising consistency
across the different ethnic and regional groups who participated 
in the consultations, 
including
Amerindians in the rural interior.

21. PRSP targets. The PRSP sets out 27 quantitative targets in areas such as income poverty, access to,
and quality of, education, health and basic services. The PRSP targets correspond to all of the seven
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) apart from gender equality (see Table 1). 
In Guyana, as in a
number of other Caribbean countries, gender does not appear to be a critical factor in the incidence of
poverty. The 1999 Living Conditions Survey indicates that the proportion of poor households headed by
women is similar to that of non poor households. This pattern was also observed in the earlier 1992
survey results. As such, the PRSP did not establish specific targets related to gender equality. 
In terms
of broader public policy, the Government has undertaken to establish a special parliamentary committee
to examine the status of women in Guyanese society.

22. The PRSP envisages reducing poverty from the estimated 35 percent of the population to 31 percent
in 2005. The PRSP does not provide projections through 2015, making it difficult to judge performance
against the MDGs. However, an extrapolation of the targeted gains through 2005 to 2015 reveals that, of
the seven MDG indicators contained in the PRSP, four would be met if progress envisaged in the PRSP
was achieved and sustained up until 2015. The Government has argued that this extrapolation may be
pessimistic since the rate of progress on MDG indicators will accelerate after 2005 as the growth rate
rises and the long-term benefits of structural adjustment are reaped. Nevertheless, it should be noted that,

6

in light of the weak economic performance of the last few years and given the past relationship between
poverty and growth in Guyana, even the targets up to 2005 are quite ambitious. Since the links between
the PRSP targets and expenditure and policy plans are not established, it is not clear that the targets could
be met even if the underlying assumptions on growth, the quality of public spending and the availability
of concessional finance are realized. Finally, information gaps suggest that some revision of baselines
may be required.

Table 1: PRSP targets and the Millennium Development Goals 2

Millennium 
Development Goal 
(MDG) 
1. Halve poverty and 

malnutrition 
2. Achieve universal 
primary education 
3. Promote gender

equality

Indicators shared 
between 
MDG and PRSP 
Poverty 

headcount rate* 
Primary school net 
enrollment ratio

1990 
1999 
Actual Actual 

(1992) 

43.2
92.8 

35.1 

96.6 

2005 
2015 
Likely to
PRSP 
Staff 
achieve
projections estimates* MDG?
31.4 
26.1 
No

100 

100 

Yes

Infant mortality rate 
4. Reduce child mortality (per 1,000 live births)
by two-thirds 
Measles: % of one-year 
olds immunized
Maternal mortality
(per 100,000 live births) 

5. Reduce maternal 
mortality by three- 

quarters

6. Combat HIV/AIDS, 
malaria and other 

Reported cases of
HIV/AIDS among 

major diseases 

7. Environmental 
sustainability 

women aged 15-45 t

% of population with 
access to safe water ยง 

63.8 

77 

58 

83 

42 

92 

190 

130 

74 

88 

25 

100 

69 

64 

81 
8 

92 
9 

98 
9 

100 
1

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

* Based on simple straight-line extrapolations of the PRSP expected trends for 1999-2005.
* MDG goal relates to population living with less than US$1 per day, whereas Guyana's 1999 national poverty line was
equivalent to US$1.40 at market exchange rates.
4 MDG goal relates to 15-24 year old pregnant women.
ยง MDG goal relates to % of urban population with access to an improved water source.

23. PRSP monitoring and evaluation. The authorities recognize the need to strengthen Guyana's
ability to monitor and evaluate implementation of the PRSP. A new Policy Coordination and Program

Management Unit (PCPMU) is being established in the Office of the President, with IDA support, to

track key PRSP reforms, build capacity for monitoring and evaluating (M&E) implementation in key
ministries and agencies, and coordinate M&E activities across the Government. The Government will
also pilot an innovative community-based M&E program focusing on local level PRSP activities and
impacts of policy reform. The M&E approach to the PRSP will build on systems already developed to
track HIPC spending. 
In addition, also with support from IDA and other donors, the Government is
working to strengthen the capacity of the Bureau of Statistics to improve data collection, analysis,
management and dissemination, with particular emphasis on the social sectors.

24. Overview of the strategy. The PRSP contains a comprehensive seven-prong agenda designed to
achieve these poverty reduction targets. They are:
(i) 
Broad-based, job-generating economic growth;
(ii) 
Stronger institutions and better governance;
(iii) 
Investment in human capital, with emphasis on basic education and health;

2 The Millennium Development Goals are a set of international development goals unanimously adopted by the

member states of the United Nations in Millennium Declaration in September 2000.

7

(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 

(vii) 

Investment in infrastructure to support better services in water, sanitation and housing;
Improved safety nets;
Investment in infrastructure to support growth, including sea defenses, road and river
Itransport, drainage and irrigation and rural electrification; and
Special intervention programs to address regional pockets of poverty.

25. These seven pillars can be grouped into three broad thematic objectives. Driven by evidence of
strong links between growth and poverty reduction, the PRSP states that policies to stimulate economic
growth are the most important elements of the strategy. Pillars (i) and (v), together with reforms aimed at
improving the business environment, contained in pillar (ii), contribute directly to the economic growth
objective. Reflecting the dependence of the economy on natural resources, as well as the country's
unique biodiversity and natural habitats endowment, 
the PRSP also recognizes 
that 
improved
environmental management are essential for sustainable growth and development.

26. Secondly, the need for stronger governance and public sector capacity and accountability, at all levels
of government in promoting economic and social development, is recognized through commitments under
pillar (ii) to reform public procurement, revise land administration policies, decentralize public services,
reform local government, improve the administration of justice and enhance public accountability.

27. Further, the strategy calls for strengthening the delivery of basic services, including primary health
care, primary and secondary education (pillar (iii)), water and sanitation and housing (pillar (iv)) and
safety nets (pillar (vi)). The PRSP also contains strategies (pillar (vii)) to address areas where poverty
and unemployment are well above average.

28. As described in the Joint Staff Assessment (JSA), Guyana's PRSP provides a basis for supporting the
implementation of effective poverty reduction policies. Nevertheless, successful outcomes will require
ongoing improvements in priority setting, policy design, institutional arrangements for implementation
and links between policy, expenditure and targets. The Bank will work with the authorities on all these
elements.

A. Stimulating growth

29. Economic policies to stimulate growth. The Government aims to maintain a growth rate of about
2.7 percent per year over the 2002-05 period, on the basis of: (i) public 
investment averaging
approximately 17 percent per year; (ii) export expansion averaging 1.2 percent per year; and (iii)
increasing private investment from its current 8 percent of GDP to 11 percent of GDP. After 2006,
growth is anticipated to rise to around 5 percent a year.

30. Fiscal policy. Growth in the short term will be led principally by an ambitious public sector
investment program averaging nearly 17 percent of GDP per year during 2002-05, of which about 70
percent is allocated to priority programs for poverty alleviation. A notable principle of the PRSP
medium-term economic framework is the authorities' commitment to limit budget deficits to what can be
externally financed by concessional funds. This is crucial to ensuring that the authorities' public
expenditure-led strategy is consistent with sustainable debt dynamics and does not crowd out private
sector investment, which is already low at 8 percent of GDP. A key source of the additional financing to
meet these commitments is expected to come from HIPC resources. The series of PRSCs in this CAS
represent IDA's contribution to the financing required for PRSP implementation. The Fund is planning to
support the PRSP through a new 3-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement to
be discussed at the Fund's Board in June 2002.

31. The overall public sector deficit (after grants) will continue its steady rise of recent years reaching
9.4 percent of GDP in 2003 and 12 percent of GDP in 2004, when planned investments in the sugar sector

8

(described in more detail below) are expected to peak. However, current savings of the public sector are
expected to be positive from 2003 supported by tax reforms, improvements in tax administration, and a
new wage policy. The Government will undertake a comprehensive tax review aimed at simplifying the
revenue system and broadening the tax base, and institutional strengthening of the Guyana Revenue
Authority. On the expenditure side, the Government is committed to the introduction of a multi-year
public sector wage policy, based on expected inflation and productivity, in order to avoid the pattern of
uncertainty and conflict associated with previous wage settlements and which have contributed to
deterioration in the fiscal accounts.

32. External sector. Up to 2005, growth in exports of goods and services is expected to be on average
flat. Steady increases in sugar, rice and non-traditional exports are likely to be offset by steep declines in
export earnings from gold. Led by the capital goods required for sugar sector investment, imports will
show moderate growth over the CAS period. As a result, the current account deficit will rise to around 20
percent of GDP. External financing is expected to be sufficient to keep reserve levels at around
3.8 months of imports.

33. Monetary policy and the financial sector. The PRSP proposes a gradual easing of monetary policy
during 2002-05 in support of growth objectives, which should allow inflation to remain below 5 percent
throughout the period. Further strengthening of prudential regulations and supervision of the financial
sector will be required to address the high rates of non-performing loans that currently burden the banking
system. IDA is providing ongoing support for capacity building and for the divestiture of the remaining
state-owned bank, Guyana National Cooperative Bank (GNCB). Other donors, including the IDB, the
IMF and DFID are also providing support in this sector, for example, for institutional strengthening of the
central bank and a review of key financial legislation.

34. Restructuring and modernization of the traditional sector. Primary products like sugar, rice,
bauxite, gold and timber continue to dominate production and exports in Guyana. However, against a
backdrop of weak commodity prices and eroding access to preferential markets, these sectors will require
extensive restructuring in order to maintain and maximize their positive contribution to the economy.

35. Sugar. Contributing 16 percent of GDP and 23 percent of export earnings, sugar, is the most
important of these sectors. This sector, which remains in state hands, directly or indirectly supports the
livelihoods of over 75,000 people in Guyana. The Guyana Sugar Corporation (GUYSUCO), which is
managed by a private contractor, produces about 300,000 tonnes of sugar annually of which 90 percent is
exported. The recent production record has been impressive. Since the early 1990s, decades of decline
have been halted and output has been restored to levels last seen in the 1960s. This recovery has ensured
that Guyana is able to fill its preferential import quotas in European and US markets.

36. Improvements 
in field and factory performance have been consistent with average world
productivity gains giving Guyana a comparative advantage in sugar production within the Caribbean
region. A recent Bank-sponsored study on the sugar sector argued that this advantage, combined with the
preferential, albeit declining, price and quotas, makes it economically and financially viable to invest in
the sector. Lack of investment would lead either to the demise of the sector in the medium term, or else
the need for ever-increasing subsidies. Furthermore, the report confirmed that, given current excess
capacity in the global sugar industry, and the depreciated state of GUYSUCO assets, privatization would
not be feasible at this time. At present, there is considerable cross-subsidization between efficient and
inefficient GUYSUCO estates, which absorbs over two percent of GDP. Because the company is state-
owned, these transfers significantly reduce public resources available for physical and social investments
elsewhere in the economy. As such, the GOG is pursuing a modernization strategy aimed at eliminating
these subsidies, and positioning the sector for growth and future private investment.

9

37. The key elements of the GOG strategy are: (a) investment in a new modem processing factory to be
financed by the GOG, GUYSUCO retained earnings and land sales; (b) a shift in production away from
higher cost estates, and eventually closing estates which cannot be brought to profitability; (c)
reorientation of management incentives away from current production targets to profitability and cost
benchmarks, and providing management with the appropriate level of authority to meet these targets; (d)
stronger control of the wage bill, while reorienting employee remuneration toward production and
profitability targets; (e) development of new export markets; and (f) improvements in drainage and
irrigation systems. The Bank will continue to provide policy advice and technical assistance to the sugar
sector reform process through 
the proposed PRSCs, 
together with the IMF, UK Department for
Intemational Development (DFID) and the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB).

38. Mining. Guyana has excellent potential for the discovery of significant additional mineral deposits,
especially in gold. Despite this, the outlook for production in the two main mining industries currently
under extraction, gold and bauxite, is weak. The privately-owned Omai mine, which accounts for 75
percent of the gold now produced in Guyana, will run out of reserves in 2005. The bauxite sector is state-
owned and, despite large mineral reserves, depends on govemment subsidies equivalent to about 1.5
percent of GDP. The Govemment has been negotiating the sale of these assets with a prospective buyer
with due consideration to the issue of social and environmental liabilities. If mining is to maximize its
potential contribution to economic growth, the state must also redefine its role in the sector to encourage
new exploration and deliver improved management of the resource base and regulation of the extractive
process. This implies a range of regulatory, fiscal, institutional and structural reforms. The Bank will
support the authorities in further defining this agenda through policy advice and technical assistance in
the context of the proposed PRSCs, and in partnership with other donors active in the sector, namely the
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and the Canadian Intemational Development Association
(CIDA).

39. Forestry. The PRSP points to the further development of Guyana's forestry resources as a key
potential source of growth in the economy, while committing to the principle of sustainable natural
resource use. However, existing legislation does not provide a clear or robust regulatory and institutional
environment. The GOG has prepared revised forestry legislation, with support from DFID, which it plans
to submit to the National Assembly shortly. DFID is also providing support to strengthen the Guyana
Forestry Commission. The Bank will support the development of an appropriate regulatory framework
through the PRSCs.

40. Protecting the environment The PRSP recognizes the special importance of environmental issues
in Guyana and the country's vulnerability to environmental pressures. Over 75 percent of the land area is
forested and much of the coastal area is below sea level and vulnerable to flooding. The PRSP also
envisages expansions in forestry, mining and agriculture as future sources of growth, but commits to the
principles of sustainable natural resource use and the protection of unique habitats and biodiversity.
Additional environmental pressures are expected to come from growth in informal small scale mining and
agriculture, as displaced workers seek altemative livelihoods. 
In the PRSP, the Govemment undertakes
to strengthen enforcement of the Environmental Protection Act, raise public awareness on 
the
environment and involve local communities in management of vulnerable eco-systems and protected
areas. Among the priority areas for sustainable development are: reform of the current land use policy
(being supported by German Technical Cooperation (GTZ)); establishment of a functional protected areas
system; modemization of forestry and mining legislation; ongoing strengthening of institutions including
the Environmental Protection Agency and the Guyana Geology and Mines Commission, assisted by IDB
and CIDA respectively; and improved maintenance of sea defenses, transport networks, and drainage and
irrigation infrastructure. The Bank will support the development of environmentally sustainable
investment frameworks for mining and forestry through the upcoming PRSCs, and will help the GOG to
address biodiversity issues through an upcoming National Protected Areas System (NPAS) project to be
financed by the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) .

10

41. Developing new sectors to support growth. With its natural resource endowments, English-
speaking population, proximity to North America, benign climate and natural beauty, the potential for
Guyana to enjoy growth and investment in non-traditional sectors, including agro-processing, tourism and
transshipment has long been recognized. The PRSP proposes to strengthen Guyana's investment
promotion agency; build capacity at the National Bureau of Standards and provide technical assistance to
companies in order to raise quality; simplify business registration processes and expand micro-credit to
promote development of small business and cottage industries; establish manufacturing and agro-
industrial parks to take advantage of preferences under the Enhanced Caribbean Basin Initiative; and put
in place a National Tourism Board and environmental regulations to support eco-tourism. The majority
of Guyana's development partners, including IDB, CIDA, DFID, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), 
the European Union (EU) and the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID), are engaged in this effort through a variety of initiatives.

42. However, concrete actions on governance-related priorities, raised by both domestic and international
investors and recognized in the PRSP, will be even more important. These include, inter alia, the
simplifying, and reducing discretion in the administration of the tax system; and improving the
mechanisms for the allocation of land which is almost all publicly-owned and must be leased from the
state for private investment. The recent Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) also
recommends curtailment of discretionary powers in a number of public resource management agencies,
including the Commission on Natural Resources, the National Frequency Management Unit, the Guyana
Energy Agency as well as the Privatization Unit, as a means of improving governance in the business
environment. 3 In general, the Government is committed to reducing further its role in economic decision-
making to allow the private sector to flourish, although the PRSP still reflects a tendency to turn to
budgetary reallocations and government intervention, rather than to restructuring incentives, policies and
institutions, as a means of promoting the private sector. Through ongoing policy dialogue, including with
a Development Policy Review (FY03) which will focus on growth and competitiveness, IDA will work
with the authorities to refine its private sector development agenda.

43. Core labor standards. Sound labor market policies are equally important for ensuring that the
benefits of economic growth are broadly distributed and reach the poor. Guyana has ratified all eight
International Labor Organizations conventions on the core labor standards relating to the elimination of
forced and child labor; equal opportunity and non-discrimination in employment; and the freedom of
association and the right to collective bargaining. Since ratification, a number of laws have been enacted
to implement these standards. As recommended by Constitutional Reform in May 2001, the Government
is in the process of establishing five independent commissions to focus on the protection of basic rights.

44. Infrastructure to support growth. The PRSP recognizes that adequate infrastructure is a vital

corollary to an improved regulatory framework for private investment in Guyana. Although the country
made significant gains in this area over the last decade, many shortcomings remain. The road network is
not adequately maintained; frequent breaches of sea defenses pose major risks to coastal settlements and
economic activities; and flooding continues to threaten some of the most productive regions of the
country. The PRSP sets out an agenda to improve the coverage, quality and maintenance of
infrastructure, in part, by increasing private sector participation, introducing cost recovery mechanisms
and capacity building for local contractors. More importantly, Guyana will need to address the critical
governance and institutional weaknesses which have undermined the transparency and efficiency of
infrastructure spending in the past. The PRSP proposes strengthening 
tendering, monitoring and
supervision procedures, and modernizing 
legal and institutional structures related to infrastructure
spending. 
Several donors are providing substantial financial and technical resources 
to support

3 Recent work by the Bank's Foreign Investment Advisory Service also identified costly and unreliable electricity
and telecom services, poor infrastructure, shortage of skilled workers due to emigration, and socio-political tensions
as other key constraints to private investment

improvements. in sea defenses, roads and river transport, drainage and irrigation and rural electrification.
IDA will complement these efforts through support for the reform of the public procurement and public
financial management systems.

45. Water. 
In the water sector, authorities are implementing a comprehensive reform and investment
program aimed at increasing the share of the population with access to safe water from 92 percent to 98
percent by 2005, while ensuring the financial viability of the water utility. The Government has made
steady progress in implementing a gradual transition to full cost pricing for water services, with
provisions for a clear and transparent need-based subsidy. New legislation is under preparation which
will permit the merger of the two existing utilities to achieve economies of scale, and the introduction of
private management. The PRSP outlines an extensive sectoral investment program which is being
supported by IDB, EU, DFID and CDB. 
IDA will continue to support this agenda through policy
dialogue under the proposed PRSCs, in collaboration with the other donors in this sector.

46. Telecoms. Guyana currently has adequate telecommunication 
infrastructure to support further
development of information and communication technologies. However, the most important challenge
facing the Government is to successfully conclude ongoing negotiations to end the existing private
monopoly on telecommunications and related services. 
IDB has a substantial program in this sector
aimed at increasing connectivity and access.

B. Strengthening governance and increasing public sector capacity and accountability

47. Delivery of the higher economic growth and improved public services envisaged in the PRSP will not
be achieved without fundamental improvements in governance and public sector institutional capacity.
Weaknesses in these areas are the key constraints to private sector development and the major factor
explaining the low social and economic return on public spending.

48. Public Accountability. External accountability mechanisms acting on the Executive remain weak in
Guyana in spite of recent progress. One fundamental problem is that the persistent pattern of ethnic-
based voting has limited the role of the electorate in holding governments accountable on the basis of
performance. Despite steady progress in recent years, both civil society and the media remain under-
developed. Moreover, their role in oversight is constrained by the poor quality and availability of
information. In turn, perceived and alleged irregularities in the allocation of public resources exacerbate
the considerable social and political tensions. Furthermore, 
the current framework for legislative
oversight yields a concentration of power and discretion in the hands of the Executive, key appointed
officials and advisers. Weaknesses 
in procedures, principles, systems and 
institutional capacity
undermine key areas of public sector financial management, such as the budget process and internal
control, with negative implications for transparency and accountability. Aside from the efficiency costs
these entail, they also create incentives for corruption. A recent survey of public sector officials 4 found
that ninety-three percent of all officials who responded believe that corruption is significant in the public
sector, while only 9 percent of officials reported having known of another official being disciplined for
embezzlement.

49. The May 2001 Constitutional Reform lays the foundations for addressing some of these weaknesses.
It provided for a new Public Procurement Commission to have oversight of public procurement in place
of the Ministry of Finance, the independent status of the Auditor General's Department, and the
establishment of four sectoral Parliamentary committees to oversee policy and the budget, and five
independent commissions to protect basic rights. The authorities are planning to submit to Parliament a
new Procurement and Tenders Act which will strengthen the transparency and effectiveness of procedures

4Institutional Environment and Public Official's Performance in Guyana, World Bank Technical Paper No. 506,

May 2001.

12

for the awarding of public contracts, and a new Audit Act will, inter alia, make the Auditor General's
Department independent. The participatory nature of the PRSP also marked a potential turning point in
the involvement of civil society in the development of public policy. The Government has committed
itself to establishing a participatory mechanism for PRSP monitoring and evaluation which should
enhance the oversight role of civil society.

50. The recent Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR), Country Financial Accountability
Assessment (CFAA) and Public Expenditure Review (PER) for Guyana all concur on the need to
strengthen oversight as a means for improving accountability. The CPAR, completed 
in FY01,
recommended the new procurement legislation mentioned above, and a proposed action plan for the
implementation of a new legal framework. The CFAA and PER underscore the need to transform the
budget process into a genuine signal of Government's policy intentions to Parliament, the public, and to
its own civil service, and against which its performance can be judged. In particular, the Government
needs to achieve the timely presentation each fiscal year of a consolidated budget, integrating capital and
recurrent spending and based on a medium-term expenditure framework that relates sectoral plans with
explicit output targets. 
In addition, the authorities need to reduce the amount of supplemental and
contingency ("off-budget") expenditures, which currently average around 27% of the annual budget, and
ensure that policy proposals with spending implications are not made outside of the budget process. The
internal audit function also needs to be strengthened by clarifying the role and enhancing the capacity of
the Accountant General's Department, improving the programmatic classification for the budget; and
integrating the budget with expenditure control and reporting processes. The next stage of the CIDA-
supported Guyana Economic Management Project (GEMP) will focus on modernizing accounting and
control systems. The Bank is working with the GEMP team, and with the IDB (which is supporting the
institutional development of the Auditor General's Office) to ensure the CFAA agenda is fully integrated
into ongoing reform efforts. The Bank is also collaborating with the IDB on procurement reforr, which
is being guided by the CPAR.

51. The benefits of these reforms go beyond simply raising the efficiency of public spending. The
mechanisms to allow Parliament and civil society a role in ensuring transparency and accountability in
how resources are allocated would represent an important step towards improving the political climate in
Guyana.

52. Public sector reform. Recent outcomes of public sector reform in Guyana have been mixed.
During the 1990s, 
the Government successfully privatized a number of public corporations and
introduced private management into others, such as GUYSUCO. However, slow progress in establishing
appropriate institutional and regulatory frameworks for privatized industries has limited the welfare gains
to society, particularly in telecommunications, electricity and air transport. Since 1993, employment in
the civilian government (including regional administrations, police, statutory bodies, and ministries) has
fallen from approximately 56,000 people to about 31,000, but still remains high as a share of the
population. Complicated by the stagnant economy and difficult ethnic relations, progress on reform of
core public service management has been limited in recent years. As a result, key issues affecting the
public sector efficiency, including weak financial management, over-centralization of decision making,
overlapping and contradictory jurisdictions, persist. Moreover, there has been a continued deterioration in
the quality and composition of the public service, particularly at the management and technical levels,
due to inadequate compensation levels and emigration of skilled personnel. Supported by technical
assistance from IDB, the Government is set to embark on a reexamination of institutional roles and
human resource needs, as well as a process to build consensus for public sector and civil service reform.
IDA will support the financial management and procurement components of this reform agenda through
the PRSCs. 
In addition, the PSTAC will include some assistance for strengthening human resource
management systems and for improving policy analysis and decision making by building capacity in the
Office of the President.

13

53. Local govermnent reform. One of the major messages from the PRSP consultations, which was
also raised during the 2001 election campaign, was the public's general discontent with the functioning of
local government institutions and their failure to deliver basic services to the poor. At present, local
government laws accord a tremendous amount of power and discretion to the central government to
intervene in local administrations, which operate essentially as agents of central government with
delegated functions. This is compounded by the fact that the current party-list system for regional
elections diminishes the accountability of elected officials, because they do not require identifiable local
constituencies. The intergovernmental fiscal framework is weak and has no clear formula for allocating
resources among local governments. Furthermore, elections for some levels of local government have not
been held since 1994. Following the PRSP consultations, a Joint Task Force on Local Government was
formed, and is charged with proposing ways to implement the Constitutional Reform Commission's
recommendations on local democracy; leading the review and revision of outdated local government
laws; and formulating and implementing objective criteria for allocating resources to local governments.
IDA will support this priority agenda through the PRSCs.

C. Improving the delivery and quality of basic services and safety nets

54. Education. Guyana's education system, once one of the finest in the Caribbean, has suffered from
insufficient investment over the past 25 years. As a result, it now ranks among the weakest. 
In recent
years, with support from donors (mainly IDB, DFID and CIDA) and the HIPC initiatives, inputs to the
education system have increased significantly. However, the main issues relate to quality of education,
wide variations in quality and enrollment across regions, and the low efficiency of system in general.
Regarding efficiency, high levels of student and teacher absenteeism are critical factors contributing to
the under-performance of the basic education cycle. In some regions, absenteeism results in a loss of up
to one-half of total instructional time. 
In terms of quality, the percentage of untrained teachers in the
system is alarmingly high, estimated at around 40 percent of primary teachers and over 43 percent of
general secondary teachers in 1999/2000. This problem is further exacerbated by the exodus of about 14
percent of Guyana's trained teachers each year through migration. Moreover, it contributes to the
inequities in the system because of the difficulty of stationing and retaining qualified teachers in interior
schools.

55. The PRSP sets out ambitious goals to increase secondary school enrollments, reduce repetition and
dropouts, minimize overcrowding through better use of existing classroom space, and raise the percentage
of qualified teachers in the system. The strategy proposes curricula reform, construction of more
secondary schools, increased resources for school maintenance, expansion of in-service teacher training,
improvements in human and financial resource management, and better incentives for performance and
accountability. The Government has already initiated an Education Financial Reform program, which
will implement a formula-based mechanism for allocating resources across schools and permit school
boards with local community participation to be accountable for the governance of financial resources.
IDA has supported these reforms through the Secondary School Reform Project and will continue to do
so through this project and the PRSCs.

56. Health. Guyana has some of the worst health indicators in the hemisphere. The PRSP recognizes
that although expenditures have increased in recent years - in part due to the HIPC initiatives - important
reforms are needed to improve the health status of the population and to create greater equity in access to
health care services. The PRSP focuses on maternal and child health, mental health, nutrition and the
management of chronic and communicable diseases, including HIV/AIDS. Among other things, the
PRSP proposes upgrading of health centers and posts, particularly in hinterland areas, while streamlining
drugs and medical supply procurement and distribution. However, prevailing institutional weaknesses
will need to be addressed if they are not to compromise the benefits of new facilities and programs
throughout the regional network. These weaknesses include excessive centralization and discretion over
resource allocation, weak information systems and inadequate and overlapping 
legislation. 
The

14

authorities are currently considering reform options for the health sector that would build on the
corporatization of the Georgetown Public Hospital, and further decentralize authority and resources to the
regional health authorities. This program is supported by a number of donors including IDB, CIDA, and
the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO).

57. HIV/AIDS. The level of HIV/AIDS infection is growing rapidly, and already affects 3-5 percent of
the population. The Government estimates that providing universal care and treatment for all diagnosed
HIV/AIDS cases would cost about US$11 million per year, compared with the total Ministry of Health
budget of US$20 million. The authorities are currently putting in place policies and institutional
structures aimed at curbing the spread of the HIV epidemic by scaling up programs and activities targeted
to high-risk groups, expanding awareness about HIV/AIDS among the general population, and
strengthening institutional capacity to ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of the effort. A key role
of the forthcoming IDA project will be to work with the authorities and other donors to bring greater
coherence and coordination to the HIV/AIDS reduction effort.

58. Safety nets and Special Intervention Strategies. Formal social safety nets in Guyana are weak.
Benefit levels are very low and there is significant under-coverage, even of the limited target populations.
The Ministry of Human Services, Labor and Social Security, which manages several assistance programs,
is constrained by limited financial and human resources. These are supplemented by the donor-supported
Social Impact Amelioration Program (SIMAP) and the Basic Needs Trust Fund (BNTF), which are
targeted to the poor and finance mainly small-scale infrastructure at the community level. Although these
programs play a very important role in improving living standards in poor communities, it is debatable if
they constitute a bona fide safety net. Rather significant flows of remittances from the large number of
Guyanese emigrants overseas provide a crucial safety net function for many households. The PRSP
proposes steps to improve the focus of SIMAP and BNTF, as well as introduce a number of additional
programs.

59. The PRSP also sets out special interventions in Region5 1 in the north east of the country and Regions
8, 9 and 10, in the interior. These regions have poverty levels that are much higher than the national
average, significant Amerindian populations, and poor communications and transport links. 
In Region
10, an additional driver of poverty has been the decline in performance of the Linden bauxite industry.
The PRSP sets out a range of measures to boost income generation, upgrade transport networks and
access to markets, strengthen the provision of basic services, like health, education and water. These
priority actions emerged from consultations in these regions during the PRSP preparation. 
Indeed, a
striking feature of the PRSP consultations was the large extent to which priorities raised in the interior
Regions 1, 8, 9 and 10 correspond to those raised by communities in the coastal regions. This suggests
that progress at the national policy and institutional level on local government reform, decentralization of
basic services and 
infrastructure, as well as improvements 
in the framework for private sector
development, will bring important benefits to communities in these regions. Under the PSTAC, the Bank
will provide technical and analytical support toward improving the design, focus and administration of the
Guyana's social assistance programs, including those directed at households which are affected by
structural reforms.

60. Amerindians. Guyana has nine distinct indigenous groups comprising seven percent of the
population, who live mainly in remote communities in the interior which mainly rely on subsistence
farming, hunting and forestry. This isolation has helped to preserve many indigenous traditions, but has
also placed these groups at the margin of Guyana's growth and development - approximately 85 percent
of the Amerindians are poor. One issue of primary concern among Amerindian communities is land
rights. Only around half of the communities hold clear title to their land, despite a land titling program in
place since 1969. The existing 1976 Amerindian Act, which was the vehicle for transferring land titles to

5 Guyana is divided into ten administrative regions.

15

communities, leaves considerable discretion in the hands of the Government. Since the 2001 election,
and following strong Amerindian participation in the PRSP consultations, there has been renewed
attention to Amerindian issues resulting in the newly-established Ministry of Amerindian Affairs. An
Amerindian Development Fund has been set up and agreement has been reached on a process to revise
the Amerindian Act and resolve land demarcation issues. IDA will continue its involvement in this area
through capacity building for the Ministry of Amerindian Affairs and, more indirectly, through work on
protected areas, and on the regulatory framework in the forestry and mining sectors.

III. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. Objectives of the Bank Assistance Strategy and the CAS Development Process

61. Development objectives. The development objective of the Bank's Assistance Strategy for Guyana
is to help create the conditions for a sustained reduction of poverty levels in the country. To this end, the
Bank will support the key priorities of Guyana's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, namely: (i)
stimulating economic growth through sound macroeconomic management, more efficient implementation
of the public sector investment program, in particular in the sugar sector, and improving the environment
for private investment; (ii) improving public sector governance and accountability by strengthening
oversight systems and building capacity; and (iii) enhancing provision of, and access to, basic services
and safety nets.

62. Process for developing the CAS. The CAS is based on the rich material which emerged from
consultations held at the community, regional and national levels during the preparation of the PRSP. In
addition, the Bank held a joint programming mission to Guyana in June 2001 during which the basic
approach for supporting the PRSP through PRSCs was agreed with senior government officials. On the
basis of recent core economic and sector work including a PER and a CPAR both completed in FY01 and
updated in FY02, and a new CFAA, the Bank has worked with the Government to identify the specific
priorities within the PRSP for support through the CAS. Further consultations on the draft CAS were
held in-country with government officials, civil society and private sector representatives, and other
donors in May 2002.

B. Progress since the last Bank Assistance Strategy

63. The objectives of the 1993 Assistance Strategy were to assist the Government of Guyana to: (i)
redefine the roles of the public and private sectors to best sustain growth and reduce poverty; (ii) maintain
macroeconomic stability and increase private investment flows; (iii) refocus and strengthen the public
sector to address infrastructure constraints and improve the delivery of public services, especially for
human development and poverty alleviation; (iv) mobilize and coordinate external assistance; and (v)
elaborate and implement a sound environmental strategy.

64. What worked wel. Macroeconomic management and economic performance in Guyana have
improved significantly since 1993. In particular, a second debt reduction operation (FY99), an IDF grant
for debt management (FY96) and the original (FY98) and Enhanced HIPC (FY01) initiatives, have been
critical in addressing fiscal sustainability. A series of operations aimed at strengthening the financial
sector and the framework for private investment were instrumental in the substantial progress made on the
privatization program - the Government completed the sale/ liquidation of 60 percent of its total net asset
holdings at that time - as well as on banking supervision. Good progress was made on reforming the tax
system culminating in the establishment of the Guyana Revenue Authority in 2000. At the sectoral level,
sustained policy dialogue over many years is underpinning major reforms in the water sector and in
secondary education, and a similar process is now underway in the sugar sector.

16

65. Donor coordination. A successful model of partnership between the Bank and other donors - whose
resources are often greater than those of the Bank - was developed in the water sector, with the Bank and
DFID spearheading the policy dialogue and other donors providing financial and implementation support.
This was later built upon during the PRSP process in which the Bank played the lead donor-coordinating
role.

66. What worked less well. 
In implementing the strategy, the lending program shifted progressively
away from the policy-based lending that had supported the Economic Recovery Program (ERP) to a
phased approach with very selective sector investment projects. Progress in sectoral policy reform and
implementation of IDA-financed investments has nevertheless been costly and painstaking, in part
because of the poor design of some Bank operations. Between 1993 and 1997, the performance of the
portfolio was generally unsatisfactory, including incidents of misprocurement 6 , and contributed to the
joint Bank-GOG decision to withdraw two proposed operations, in health and for upgrading secondary
towns. Meanwhile, weaknesses in Govemment systems and procedures adversely affected project
implementation. These involved, inter alia: (i) weak implementation capacity due to lack of technical
and managerial staff; (ii) cumbersome procurement processes, including low thresholds that called for
frequent Cabinet involvement; (iii) limited capacity in the local construction industry; and (iv) difficulties
in attracting reputed intemational contractors to bid on projects in Guyana.

Table 2: IDA Portfolio Performance FY93-FY02
Approval 
Devt. Obj. 

FY 

Rating/a 

Percentage

undisbursed/b

1990 
1995 

S 
S 

--
--

Closed operations
Fast-disbursing assistance
Second Structural Adj Credit 
Private Sector Devt. Adj. Credit 

Investment/TA projects

Technical Assistance Credit 
Health Nutrition and Sanitation 

Public Administration 
Infrastructure Rehabilitation 

Sugar Rehab. & Privatization 

Fin. Sector & Business Environment. 

El Nio Emergency 
Average 

Active portfolio
Water Supply TA & Rehab. 
Secondary Education Reform 
Finance & Private Sector 
Average 

1990 
1992 

1993 
1993 

1994 

1995 

1999 

S 
S 

S 
U 

U 

S 

S 

1994 
1996 
2000 

S 
S 
S 

10
5

30
25

99

0

10
34

46
36
8
37

at For closed operations, outcome rating. For active portfolio, Implementation Progress rating.
b/ For active portfolio, amount undisbursed as of May 6, 2002.

67. Since 1997, the performance of the portfolio has improved significantly on the basis of frequent and

intense supervision missions, and the establishment of a Bank Country Office in Guyana in early 2001
with assistance from DFID. However, the rate of project implementation remains somewhat slow, with
37 percent of the net commitments undisbursed. 
In addition, preparation of the proposed GEF-financed
National Protected Areas System project has been stalled since 1997 when it was appraised. Recent
progress on a mechanism for resolving land use and management issues that had arisen between the

authorities and some Amerindians groups have raised hopes that the project can move forward again.

6 Under the Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project which closed with an unsatisfactory outcome in 1999, the

Government committed to repaying about US$1 million of ineligible expenditures carried out under the project.

17

68. Economic and sector work (ESW). Since the last Assistance Strategy, good progress was made on
core diagnostic ESW for Guyana. A CPAR was completed in FY99, and a PER in FY01. Both are
currently being updated. In addition, the Bank produced a technical paper on "Institutional Environment
and Public Officials' Performance in Guyana" (May 2001) that included a survey of public officials. A
CFAA is under preparation and will be delivered this fiscal year. A Policy Note was produced in June
2001 addressing the fiscal implications associated with the GOG's stated goal of universal secondary
education, and an informal review of the mining sector was completed in early 2002. The sugar sector
has been thoroughly examined with a major study, under the now closed Sugar Rehabilitation and
Privatization operation. This analysis has guided current reform efforts in that sector.

69. The general message from the core ESW is that the frameworks for public sector procurement,
financial management and expenditure management are generally very weak in Guyana. In fact, Guyana
is rated as a high risk country by the CFAA. Although the issue of inadequate personnel capacity is an
important one given Guyana's size and history of steady emigration of qualified people, the reports
identify an ineffective oversight framework as the critical deficiency, and in some cases, point to
outdated or inadequate systems as key constraints. For example, archaic procurement legislation does not
provide the basic elements for promoting competition, economy and efficiency. Meanwhile, financial
accountability suffers from weaknesses in the framework for Parliamentary oversight, which have led to
excessive centralization and discretion over public financial decisions vested in the top levels of the
Executive.

70. Several development partners have been supporting capacity building and institutional development
and, in fact, there have been a number of successes in these areas, but these efforts remain constrained by
the need for change at the policy level. For example, supported by GEMP, progress has been made
towards the integration of the recurrent and capital budgets in the Ministries of Health and Education.
However, full implementation across the public sector will require institutional and legal reforms to the
budgetary process. Likewise, SIMAP, which operates as an autonomous agency, has established a sound,
well-functioning procurement system for its purchases, but these cannot be replicated across the public
sector without the requisite regulatory and institutional reform.

71. Moreover, building enclaves of solid capacity is not a sustainable solution for issues which affect not
only the efficiency of public expenditure, but also impede the development of a competitive private sector
and pose serious questions about governance in Guyana. The PRSP proposes reform measures in several
areas related to governance, accountability and expenditure management. However, Bank experiences,
both in Guyana on other key policy reforms, and elsewhere, have shown that reaching successful
outcomes on these issues requires a programmatic approach. The combined recommendations and action
plans from the reports have informed a policy agenda that will be the primary focus of this CAS.

72. Lessons learned since the 1993 Assistance Strategy have guided the formulation of this CAS.

* The implementation of Bank investment projects is particularly challenging in Guyana.
The relative cost of project expenditure oversight versus policy dialogue and technical
assistance is high, given the small project size and severe capacity constraints. Moreover,
other donors with larger portfolios and, in some cases, significant local/regional presence,
are much better positioned to undertake the intensive supervision necessary for smooth
implementation of investments.
* Although not one of the major donors, the Bank has demonstrated a comparative advantage
and track record in policy reform. Building social consensus and political commitment on
difficult issues requires the Bank to stay engaged in the policy dialogue with both
government and civil society over the medium term.

18

* 

* Although there are significant risks attached to supporting homegrown reform initiatives in
Guyana - both momentum and consistency on the Government side are often hard to
sustain in the divisive political environment -
the potential rewards are high in terms of
deeper local ownership and long term development impact.
Incorporating the active participation of all stakeholders including local groups and relevant
Ministries (e.g. NPAS, road infrastructure project) from the earliest stage of interventions is
critical to assure sustainability.
* Systemic bottlenecks 
in 
the public sector, such as weak capacity and 
ineffective
procurement and financial management practices, mitigate more profoundly against
effective public investment and service delivery than even the shortage of resources in key
development sectors. In the current environment, even ring-fencing Bank projects may not
ensure that they achieve their development objectives. However, it is important to note
that successful strengthening of governance and accountability will require a programmatic
approach.
* Recent experiences, both in the water sector and with preparation of the PRSP have
revealed that intensive donor coordination is an effective, and feasible, way to scale up the
impact of the Bank's relatively small program, and improve the outcomes of the donor
effort as a whole.

C. Coordination with other development partners

73. Bank lending to Guyana represents only about 7 percent of annual disbursements of official
assistance. Table 3 shows how the main development partners are engaged in supporting the PRSP
priority areas. The IDB is by far Guyana's largest donor. With annual disbursements averaging US$40-
50 million over the past few years, the IDB outranks the next largest donor, the EU, by a factor of nearly
five. In addition, the IMF and USAID also have larger programs than the Bank.

Figure 3: Guyana: Distribution of Official Assistance Flows (disbursements) 2000.

IMF

1_ 

~~CANADA
~~~~~~~UK

6%

-______ 

USA

; 10%

~~ ~~~ ~CDB
~~EU 

IDA_7 

S%

11%

IDB 

.

49 

7% 

74. Within this context, the Bank has had some success in coordinating its policy work with financing
and implementation support from other donors to effect important reforms in Guyana. More recently, the
Bank built on this experience during the PRSP process, when it assumed a lead coordinating role among
the donors. Expanding and intensifying this effort will be a critical feature of the new CAS.

19

Table 3: Guyana's Development Partners and the PRSP

Specific Interventions 

Major Devt Partners 

Economic 
policies to 
stimulate 
growth 

IMF, CIDA, USAID 
IDB, IMF, DFID

USAID, CIDA, EU, IDB 
CDB, DFID, IMF 
CIDA, DFID, GTZ 
IDB, EU, USAID
IDB, UNDP, CIDA, DFID, EU 

Budget and fiscal policy 
Monetary policy and financial 
sector 
Private sector development 
Sugar 
Forestry/Mining 
Developing new growth sectors 
Environmental protection 
Public sector institutional and
Good 
regulatory reforms 
UNDP, CIDA, IDB 
governance & Improving public accountability UNDP, CIDA, IDB 
the business 
Justice and crime reduction 
USAID, DFID
environment Local government reform 
USAID 
Land administration 
DFID, GTZ, IDB
Investment in Education 
IDB, DFID, CIDA 
human 
Health 
IDB, CIDA, PAHO 
capital 
HIV/AIDS 
UNAIDS, CIDA, USAID, PAHO, CDC 
Infrastructure Water & sanitation 
DFID, CDB, IDB, EU 
to support
services 

Housing 

EU, IDB

Infrastructure Sea defenses 
to support 
Roads and river transport 
growth 
Drainage and irrigation 
Rural electrification 

Safety nets 

EU
EU, IDB, CDB
CDB
IDB
IDB, CDB, EU, DFID, UNDP 

Special 
Bariina-Waini (Region 1) 
E-HIPC
Intervention Region 8 Development 
E-HIPC 
Strategies Rupununi Development (Reg. 9) UNICEF, DFID, E-HIPC 
Linden Economic Adv. (Reg 10) EU

Proposed Bank instruments
Lending 
Non-lending
PRSCs/PSTAC

PRSCs/PSTAC 
PRSCs 
PRSCs

NPAS-GEF

PRSCs, 
PSTAC 

PRSCs

PRSCs 

HIV/AIDS 
PRSCs

Devt Policy
Review (FY04)

Governance
Review (FY05)

Devt Policy
Review (FY04)
Revew(F04

PRSCs, 

Poverty Assmt

IDF Amerindian
Affairs

D. Bank Assistance to Guyana in FY03-05.

75. The main approach of the CAS is to focus Bank support on the implementation of the policy reform
agenda set out in Guyana's PRSP. This will involve a fundamental shift away from individual sectoral
investment projects to a program of policy-based lending through a series of planned Poverty Reduction
Support Credits (PRSCs). The PRSCs will contribute to addressing Guyana's financing requirements
under the PRSP, and will supplement resources from the HIPC and Enhanced HIPC initiatives already
targeted to the social sectors. Within this framework, the Bank will further increase the selectivity of this
program by concentrating on a few critical policy areas for growth and poverty reduction. Given the risks
identified by the recent fiduciary reviews, the assistance strategy includes a low case lending scenario that
will be triggered by, inter alia, insufficient progress on improving the fiduciary environment for the
public sector. Recognizing that the implementation of even this selective agenda will be constrained by
serious capacity weaknesses in the Guyanese public sector, the Bank will rely heavily on the institutional
development and capacity building projects of other development partners, to provide further support for
the implementation of the reform program. The Bank is also planning a small Public Sector Technical
Assistance Credit (PSTAC), to be implemented over the CAS period, to help address some of those key
capacity constraints for which there are either gaps in external assistance or in which technical assistance
will help the Bank to strengthen the policy dialogue. In general, the success of this selective approach in
supporting Guyana's overall Poverty Reduction Strategy will depend heavily on effective coordination
and support for the PRSP among all of Guyana's development partners.

20

76. The policy reform agenda. The first planned PRSC, to be presented to the Board in early FY03, will
focus on reforms aimed at improving governance and increasing the efficiency of public investments and
key policies necessary for improving the delivery of some basic services. 
It will also support the
establishment of better arrangements 
for monitoring and evaluating 
the outcomes of PRSP
implementation, including the framework for public outreach and participation. Subsequent PRSCs will
continue to focus on governance-related reforms and also increase the emphasis on growth-enabling
reforms, including in the critical forestry and mining sectors (see Box 2 and Annex A2). The PSTAC will
support the implementation of the policy reform agenda, by helping to build capacities in the key areas of
procurement, financial management, decentralization, safety nets and statistics.

Box 2: PRSP Policy Reform Agenda to be supported by the CAS

A. STIMULATING GROWTH

1. Adeguate macroeconomic performance under the agreed medium-term economic framework.
2. Fiscal reform, including introduction of consolidated, program budgeting with a medium term
framework, implementation of a multi-year formulaic mechanism for determining public
sector wage increases, and initiation of a comprehensive tax reform program.
3. Strengthen framework for private investment, including the enactment of a new investment
law.
Implement the agreed modernization and investment strategy for the sugar sector including
the eventual restructuring of the Guyana Sugar Corporation (GUTYSUCO) 
to achieve
profitability targets within the agreed financing plan.
Introduce a new regulatory framework for the mining and forestry sectors.
Introduce new legal and institutional framework in the water sector, including passage of a
new water bill and the introduction of private sector management of the newly-consolidated
water utility.

5. 
6. 

4. 

B. 

IMPROVING GOVERNANCE & INCREASING PUB. SECTOR EFFICIENCY & ACCOUNTABILITY

8. 

7. Public procurement reform, including new legislation and regulations, and implementation
of the agreed CPAR Action Plan.
Improve public sector financial management, including the enactment of a new audit law,
strengthening the Auditor General function, and implementation of agreed CFAA Action
Plan aimed at improving oversight of public expenditures.
Implement local government reform, 
including 
improvements in fiscal framework for
transfers, and building the capacity for revenue mobilization at local levels.
10. Establish the framework for effective monitoring and evaluation of PRSP implementation,
including broad public participation, and improvements in statistical measurement of outputs
and outcomes.

9. 

C. IMPROVING DELIVERY AND QUALrrY OF BASIC SERVICES AND SAFETY NETS

11. Increase access by the poor to qualitv education, reduce dropouts, absenteeism and
overcrowding, improve teacher training, in part through the implementation of a formula-
based system for allocating resources to schools.
12. Improve the efficiency of social assistance programs, in part through a review of their
design and administration.
13. Address the spread of HIV/AIDS by formulating and implementing a national strategic plan
that is consistent with the Caribbean Regional HIV/AIDS program.

21

77. Lending Program FY03-05. The size of the base case IDA lending program corresponds to
Guyana's IDA-13 allocation of up to SDR 20 million (US$25 million), over a 3-year period. The planned
lending program will consist of the Public Sector Technical Assistance Credit (PSTAC) of
approximately US$4 million and a series of Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) for the
In addition, the Bank will commit around US$5 million through the upcoming
remaining amount. 
Guyana operation under the ongoing Caribbean Region HIV/AIDS Adaptable Program Loan (APL).

78. The low case scenario. Within the broad policy reform agenda outlined above, the Bank will focus
on a package of core reforms. The shift to a low case lending program would be triggered by the failure
of the authorities to achieve ay of the following:
(a) make satisfactory progress on key policy, governance and institutional reforms in the
water, sugar, mining and forestry sectors and on the procurement and financial
management action plans, identified by Nos. 4,5,6,7 & 8 in Box 2 above;
(b) follow prudent macroeconomic policy demonstrated, for example, by satisfactory
performance under the IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF);
(c) achieve satisfactory performance on the portfolio, including all credits and grants;
and
(d) allocate debt relief resources in accordance with the HIPC and E-HIPC agreements
and with the PRSP.
79. Under this scenario, the Bank would delay the preparation of the PRSCs until such time as the
conditions have been satisfied, in effect limiting the lending program to the PSTAC and the HIV/AIDS
operation. The Bank would continue to provide the non-lending services (outlined below) to help the
authorities strengthen and implement the appropriate reform program.

80. Debt Relief. Guyana is expected to continue to receive debt relief under the original HIPC initiative,
and interim debt relief associated with the Enhanced HIPC pending completion. The E-HIPC completion
point will be when the agenda of structural reforms is implemented and following the establishment of a
track record of sound macroeconomic management under the RMF's new PRGF arrangement.
81. Non-Lending Services. Non-lending services will focus on the following objectives:
* Strengthening the capacity of the authorities to deliver the PRSP reform agenda. 
In addition to
working through the lending program to address key capacity building needs, the Bank will support
the strengthening of macroeconomic policy management in Guyana through the recently established
Caribbean Technical Assistance Center, jointly funded by the IMF, UNDP and the Bank. The
Bank will also provide up to US$6 million from GEF resources for developing a National Protected
Areas System. Although the strategy is to focus capacity-building interventions on areas that affect
the public sector effectiveness broadly, the Bank will stand ready to explore various sources of
assistance for those key capacity needs that other donors may not cover, such as the recently approved
Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant for Capacity Building in Amerindian Affairs, and
through the new Poverty Reduction Strategy Trust Fund.
* Greater understanding of the necessary conditions for re-igniting and sustaining economic growth
over the medium-term. The overall success of Guyana's poverty reduction strategy hinges critically
on the country's ability to restart economic growth. Upfront attention to the constraints facing private
investors, both domestic and foreign, will be critical in this regard. To this end, the Bank will
undertake a Development Policy Review (DPR) in FY03 aimed at providing analytical basis for
refining the growth strategy within the PRSP. As such, this work will focus on identifying traditional
and non-traditional sources of growth and ways to enhance Guyana's competitiveness in the global
economy.

22

* Deeper understanding of the causes and consequences of poverty, as well as appropriate policy
responses for poverty reduction in Guyana, through a Poverty Assessment in FY04.

* Assessment of progress on governance. One of the key objectives of the PRSP and the CAS is to
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of public spending. In order to evaluate the progress made
on governance issues and public accountability, and set the agenda for future support, the Bank and
the GOG will jointly undertake a Governance Review in FY05. This piece will also serve to update
core fiduciary economic and sector work.

82. The Caribbean Regional Program. In addition to the regional HIV/AIDS APL, Guyana will also
benefit from a regional program of lending and non-lending services for the Caribbean over the CAS
period. In particular, the Bank is continuing its support for the region's efforts to address the impact of
global climate change on the Caribbean countries, through a second regional climate change project
(FY03). On the environmental front, preliminary work is underway, by the Global Environmental
Facility, toward a strategy for conservation for the Guiana Shield7 that includes part of Guyana's
territory. Guyana will also benefit from ongoing regional analytical work on Youth Development,
Natural Hazard Risk Management, and Catastrophic Insurance, and a future program which could
include work on Health Financing, Tertiary Education and Pension Reform.

83. International Finance Corporation (EFC). Given the difficult macroeconomic conditions and
constraints on private investment during the past several years, IFC's activity in Guyana has been limited.
Since FY98, IFC has invested a total of US$2.9 million in three small projects in the manufacturing,
financial and tourism sectors. IFC's experience in directly investing in these small companies has not
been as expected, due, in part, to the difficult business environment in Guyana. IFC's focus in the near
term will be on the management of its portfolio, while being very selective in project financing. Given its
past experience in small projects, IFC will place greater emphasis on the use of regional partners/facilities
such as the credit lines to Royal Merchant Bank Limited and Republic Bank Limited (both Trinidadian
banks with operations in Guyana) and the Caribbean Loan Facility (CLF), a joint IFC-Scotiabank US$50
million facility for small and medium-sized enterprises. 
IFC is currently reviewing a food-processing
project as a possible investment through the CLF. Additional opportunities for IFC to support the private
sector could arise in the mining and other sectors. Given the importance of these sectors in the Guyanese
economy, such EFC support could have a relatively significant impact. However, IFC's ability to support
these sectors depends on the establishment of the appropriate regulatory and investment framework.

84. Multilateral Guarantee Agency (MIGA). As of February 28, 2002, MIGA's gross exposure in
Guyana was $18.4 million, comprising a single guarantee issued in 1995 for a mining operation. The
agency is currently preparing to underwrite a telecom project in Guyana. However, given the particular
turbulence in the global telecom sector, it is not yet certain when the deal will proceed to financial
closure.

IV. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING AND RISKS

A. Program Implementation

85. Program implementation. The approach to focusing on policy reform, will require the Bank to
remain engaged in dialogue with the Government and other stakeholders in Guyana throughout the CAS
period. This will require continuous staffing by a multi-sectoral team. The program will provide support

7 The Guiana Shield is one of the oldest geological formations in the world on which a unique and diverse ecological
complex has evolved. The area designated by the geological formations is located in North East Brazil, French
Guiana, Suriname, Guyana, Venezuela and Colombia - up to the Andes. It is currently the focus of strong
conservationist efforts.

23

for follow-up work on the CPAR and the CFAA in support of the governance agenda. Additionally,
because the assistance program relies heavily on projects and programs supported by other development
partners, the CAS will require intensive donor coordination. Finally, the Bank will continue to operate a
small office in Georgetown in partnership with DFID, which is providing financial support.

B. Performance Indicators

86. The ultimate success of the Bank's assistance to Guyana will be measured against key PRSP
benchmarks in the following areas: (a) macroeconomic management and performance; (b) governance, in
particular, sustained progress on addressing key systemic weaknesses in public financial management like
procurement, public expenditure management, audit and tax administration; (c) social sector reforms and
the continued allocation of HLPC resources to social sectors, as set out in the E-HIPC document and
confirmed in the PRSP; and (d) improvements in the arrangements for monitoring and evaluating the
PRSP implementation.

CAS Performance Indicators

Macroeconomic management and performance.
*: Overall public sector deficit as a percentage of GDP consistent with the medium term
macroeconomic framework for the PRSP and the PRGF.

Governance.
*: Timely presentation of the consolidated budget to Parliament, fully integrating capital
and recurrent expenditures over a medium term time frame.
* Completion of procurement reforms, with new systems and procedures operational.
* Completion of the program to strengthen the independent Auditor General's Office
and initiation of regular full Parliamentary discussions of timely Audit Reports.
*: At the end of this CAS period, the Bank will undertake a Governance Review
(described above) to update the PER, CFAA and CPAR. An important measure of
progress would be a rating of lower than High Risk on such an independent
assessment.

Social sectors and safety nets.
*: Increases in social sector expenditures in line with E-HLPC targets, and adequate
balance between recurrent and capital expenditures.
*: Implementation of a transparent method for allocating public resources across
schools.
*: Containment of the increase in prevalence rates of HIV/AIDS.

Monitoring and evaluation for poverty reduction
*: Regular public progress reports and consultations on the implementation of PRSP,
with civil society and local government participation.

87. Development Outcome Indicators. The CAS will also monitor progress on the key PRSP targets
and MDG goals included in Table 1 as the measures of the development outcome.

C. Program Risks

88. Overall, this assistance strategy is a high risk one for the Bank, with a significant probability that the
low case scenario would be triggered during the CAS period. The most critical risks facing the strategy
and, by extension, the implementation of the PRSP are: (i) political instability; (ii) loss of momentum and

24

focus on policy changes; (iii) worse-than-expected capacity constraints that hinder the implementation of
the reform agenda, (iv) governance and fiduciary risks; and (iv) deterioration in fiscal performance.

89. Political instability. Guyana continues to be in a political transition from the recent divisive
atmosphere toward one of greater national consensus on development issues. The PRSP consultations
have created some momentum for reform, but institutional weaknesses and entrenched historical rivalries
mean that every effort will be needed to maintain this momentum. As such, the risk of escalating political
instability remains high, especially as the country embarks on politically controversial measures, e.g.
restructuring key sectors and public sector reform. The main challenge for the Government will be to
maintain the open dialogue with the opposition and civil society as a means of building consensus and
broadening national ownership of the policy agenda. As part of the support for building capacity to
monitor and evaluate the PRSP, the Bank will work with the authorities to broaden and deepen the
framework for public consultation and feedback on key development issues, both at the central and local
government levels.

90. Policy ownership and commitment. An additional, but related, risk is that of loss of momentum
and focus on the reform agenda. Most recently, the implementation of agreed policy reform has been
somewhat slow. Earlier expectations that the President, at the beginning of a new term and supported by
a popular mandate, would be in a position to drive forward critical policy changes have not yet been
realized. Some residual suspicion of market mechanisms within the PPP could impede specific policy
reforms. In the event that a serious reversal in policy ownership and commitment materializes, the Bank
would continue to engage the authorities in dialogue and to support capacity building initiatives, but
would defer new adjustment lending, as outlined in the low case scenario.

91. Fiduciary risks. Both the CPAR and the CFAA identify substantial weaknesses in the fiduciary and
accountability framework under which the public sector operates in Guyana. The PRSP consultations
demonstrated that concerns about irregularities and inefficiencies in the allocation of public resources are
a key priority among the population. Furthermore, the intense political friction that surrounds alleged
irregularities in public financial management stirs up ethnic tensions and adds to the risk of social and
political instability. The PRSP recognizes the importance of the fiduciary framework and commits to the
reform of procurement rules and processes and to strengthening the audit function. The Bank has worked
with the authorities, in particular through the CPAR and CFAA, to develop these commitments into a
comprehensive agenda for a public financial management framework supportive of poverty reduction and
growth. This fiduciary agenda is a major focus of the PRSCs and the PSTAC. As such, the base case
lending program is predicated, inter alia, on satisfactory implementation of the agreed CFAA and CPAR
action plans. At the same time, the Bank is coordinating extensively with other donors who are providing
key institutional development and capacity building support in this area.

92. Implementation capacity. Decades of outward migration, limited budgetary resources and outdated
government processes and systems have left the public sector ill-equipped to deliver against its key
objectives. Moreover, the PRSP sets out a wide-ranging set of reforms that imply fundamental changes in
the way the public sector does business. The PRSP agenda addresses this risk with a set of public sector
institutional reforms and investments in human capital. This CAS focuses the Bank's limited capacity-
building support on a set of key government-wide reforms that can influence the performance of the
public sector as a whole, in synergy with the assistance being provided by other development partners.

93. Partnership risks. The CAS relies heavily on an enhanced division of labor among Guyana's
development partners. The success of the Bank's inputs will therefore depend on key complementary
support from other donors. There is a risk that quality of outputs and outcomes could be adversely
affected by implementation delays related to other donor-funded interventions. To manage this risk, the
Bank has fully consulted with each of the donors involved in the various sectors. In addition, the Bank

25

will channel adequate resources into future donor coordination, in particular, at the project and program
level.

94. Fiscal management. The fiscal accounts have deteriorated steadily over the past few years, with
public sector wage increases, weaknesses in tax collection, and ongoing subsidies to public enterprises
being the main contributors. The PRSP not only calls for macroeconomic and budgetary stability, but
also envisages a shift from unproductive and inefficient public expenditure towards the social and growth-
oriented sectors. The Bank will work to mitigate these risks through the support of measures to raise the
productivity and efficiency of public expenditure and to reduce subsidies to state enterprises. The
inclusion of a macroeconomic management trigger for the low case scenario will also ensure that IDA
resources are not directed to government current consumption.

95. External shocks. Guyana is a small, commodity-dependent, economy, vulnerable to terms of trade
shocks. Adequate international reserves offer a degree of resilience to external shocks, though previous
failures to make adequate structural and exchange rate adjustments to external shocks have raised
vulnerability. Private capital flows account for a small share of Guyana's external financing so the
economy is not very vulnerable to adverse developments in global financial market. The PRSP sets out
core medium-term external financing needs which can be covered by available concessional resources.
However, in the event of further unanticipated deterioration in the external environment, the Bank would
work, together with the 1MF, to help the GOG strengthen the macroeconomic framework and social
safety nets. Under this scenario, and in the context of strong adjustment measures, the authorities would
likely seek additional resources from IFIs and other funding agencies.

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

96. The Bank Group program proposes a very selective package of interventions that would maximize
the impact of the small lending program available for Guyana by relying on the Bank's comparative
advantage in policy dialogue, strong coordination with the programs and projects of other development
partners, and synergies with the Enhanced HIPC program. These interventions will focus on reforms in
governance and a few key economic sectors that are critical for the implementation of Guyana's Poverty
Reduction Strategy. The Bank is cognizant of the major risks inherent is this approach, but also
recognizes the potential, and likely, rewards from helping Guyana to tackle key constraints to faster
growth and poverty reduction.

May 17, 2002
Washington, DC

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:

Shengman Zhang

26

GUYANA
Country Assistance Strategy

ANNEXES

ANNEX Al. Guyana at a glance
ANNEX A2. Country Program Matrix, FY03-05
ANNEX B 1. Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
ANNEX B2. 
IDA Program Summary
ANNEX B3. 
IFC and MIGA Programs
ANNEX B4. 
Summary of Non-Lending Services
ANNEX B5. 
Social Indicators
ANNEX B6. 
Selected Economic Indicators
ANNEX B7. Key Exposure Indicators
ANNEX B8. 
Status of Bank Group Operations Portfolio
ANNEX B9. 
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
ANNEX B 10. Summary of Development Priorities

27

Annex Al.

Guyana at a glance 

5/2/02

Latin 
Lower-
America middle-
Guyana & Carib. 
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development diamond'

2001
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method. US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

0.77 
840 
0.64 

516 
3.680 
1,895 

2,046 
1,140
2.327

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1995-01

Population (%) 
Labor force (#) 

0.5 
1.5 

1.6 
2.3 

1.0
1.3 

GNI 
per 
capita 

Gross
primary
enrollment

F--A- 

7- 

Most recent estimate flatest year available, 199501) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1.000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population aqe 15+) 
Grossprimaryenrollment (%6ofschool-agepopulation) 
Male 
Female 

\i/ 

35 
38 
63 
54 
12 
92 
1 
102 
103 
101 

.. 

..

75 
70 
30 
9 
85 
12 
113 

42
69
32
11 
80
15
114 
116 
114

Access to Improved water source

Guyana
Lower-middle-income group

.. 
.. 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

Economic ratios'

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic InvestmentVGDP 
Exports of goods and servicestGDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

0.57 
31.4 
68.9 
8.0 

0.34 
42.2 
116.5 
17.9 
-5.3 

0.71 
22.6 
96.1 
8.0 
7.3 

0.70
21.9
94.9 
5.6
3.1

Trade

.. 

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GOP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt servicelexports 
Present value of debVGDP 
Present value of debtexports 

-32.4 
6.3 
159.5 

-45.3 
14.0 
589.2 
26.5 

-15.3 
6.3 
205.8 
15.9 
118.3
115.6

-18.8 
6.5 
209.3 
15.0

Domestic 
savints
savings

Investment

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

Indebtedness

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

2001-05

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

-2.5 
-2.0 
-1.0 

4.5 
4.1 
1.7 

-1.4 
-2.0 
-1.9 

1.5 
0.8 
0.2 

2.7 
1.8 
1.3

-Guyana

Lower-middle-Income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Growth of investment and GDP (%)

(% of GDP)

Agriculture 
IndustrV 
ManufacturingJ 
Services 

22.2 
30.5 
14.9 
47.3 

38.4 
32.0 
12.9 
29.6 

31.1 
29.0 
8.2 
39.9 

31.3 
28.3 
8.2 
40.4 

30
20

10

-10 

95 

97

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

63.0 
29.1 
92.3 

60.9 
21.2 
140.9 

67.3 
24.7 
110.7 

69.0 
25.4 
111.3

-20 

GDI 

-

-GDP

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

(averaqe annual growth)

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestc investment 
Imports ot goods and services 

-0.5 
-5.2 
-8.6 
-1.1 

3.9 
6.6 
7.4 
3.7 

-9.1 
-1.6 
-13.8 
5.1 

3.4 
0.2 
2.5 
1.0 

I T

'ยฐ

5

0

-4.7 
4.1 
-2.8 
-2.2 

5.5 
6.8 
-2.3 
12 

1.1 
28.2 
-4.6 
4.4 

4.1 
4.4 
-1.9 
2.0

.5 
-10 i

9s 

97 

99 

co 

01

Exports 

e 

Imports

Note: 2001 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four kev Indicators In the country (in bold) compared with Its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

28

Annex Al. continued

Guyana

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflation (%)

Domestic pricesIS

(% change) 

'S T

Consumer prices 
ImplcitGDPdeflator 

.. 
.. 

101.5 
157.1 

6.1 
6.6 

2.7 
40.8

I: -

Central Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue (including current grants) 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

0

r

o 
s -

97 

.

9 

00

.. 
.. 
.. 

49.2 
14.3 
0.6 

39.5 
4.7 
-7.5 

39.8 
4.0 
0CPI
-8.6

9

-G 

DPdetator 

TRADE

(US$ millions) 
Total exports (fob) 

2000 
505 

2001 
490

Export and import levels (USS mill.)

.. 

254 

Rice 

.

1 8 

52 

50

Sugar 
Manufactures 
Total Imports (cdf) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

90 

119 

109 

soo

20 

78 

77 

_ 

307 

585 

584

Food 

.. 

23 

69 

69 

20o" 

" 

Ii'

Fuel and energy 

.. 

67 

121 

132 

1o _
o 

Capitalgoods 
Export price index (1995=100) 

.. 

139 

132 

115 

9 

9 

f7 

_9

.. 
.. 

108 

81 

84

Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

83 
131 

100 
81 

95 
88

nExports 

NImports

.. 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

t981 
369 
499 
-129 

1991 
357 
431 
-75 

2000 
685 
789 
-104 

2001 
662 
776 
-114 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

0
2

4 

*

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-55 

-107 
29 

-52 
47 

-61 
44 

4-

.. 

0 " 

'liii

Current account balance 

-185 

-153 

-109 

-131 

14

16

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

.. 
.. 

193 
-41 

171 
-62 

147 
-16 

.1e
20

Memo:
Reserves Including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locaU1US$) 

.. 

123 
111.8 

297 
182.6 

285
187.6

2.8 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of 2001 debt (USS mill.)

910 
42 
26 

1,984 
55 
134 

1,465 
8 
180 

1,460
6
188

Total debt service 

97 

102 

116 

105 

c 1C1

IBRD 

3 

11 

4 

4

IDA 

0 

1 

2 

3

Compositon of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

9 
111 
-15 
-2 
0 

158 
67 
-13 
0 
0 

39 
23 
0 
67 
0

..

E: 552

0
.. 

D: 443

Word Bank program
Commitments 
DIsbursements 
Principal repaVments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

23 
15 
1 
14 
2 
12 

18 
40 
6 
34 
6 
28 

0 
6 
4 
2 
2 
0 

0 
10 
5 
5
2
3

A -IBRD 
B-IDA 
C - IMF 

E - Bilateral
F-Private
G -Short-term

D-Othermuitilateral 

Development Economics 

5/15/02

29

Annex A2. Guyana: Country Program Matrix, FY03-05

PRSP 
Objective 

PRSP Diagnosis 

Strategic Direction 

Devt Partners 

Poverty 
reduction 

Poverty headcount ratio 
estimated at 35% for 2001 

Develop and implement UNDP, IDB, CIDA 
Poverty & PRSP M&E 
system 

PRSP Benchmarks 
*CAS Performance. 
Indicators (underlined) 
Reduce poverty 
headcount ratio to 31% 
by 2005 

World Bank Group
Woruments
Instruments
Lending: PRSC I and II
PSTAC (FY03)
AAA: Poverty Assessment
(FY04)

I: Enhancing 
Economic 
Growth. 

The PRSP recognizes that 
sound monetary and fiscal 
policies are required, if the 
unsustainable debt and deficit 
dynamics of the past are not to 
re-emerge, and to ensure the 
economy has the capacity to 
withstand external shocks. The
financial system must be 
strengthened to intermediate 
effectively between savers and 
investors. The traditional 
sectors must increase 
competitiveness to boost 
growth and new areas of 
growth need to be developed to 
diversify the economy. 
The framework for economic
growth must ensure 
environmental sustainability. 

STIMULATING GROWTH

* Strengthen fiscal 
policy and budget 
management 

* IMF, CIDA, 
IDA, USAID 

* Strengthen financial 
sector 

* IDB, IMF, 
DFID, IDA 

* Private sector 
development 

I IDB, USAID, 
CIDA, EU 

* Introduce MTEF & 
program budgeting 
* Comprehensive tax 
reform underway 
* Multi-year public 
sector wage policy 
Wreed

* GNCB privatized or 
liquidated 
* Review of Fin.
Institutions Act & Bank
of Guyana Act
* Introduce new 
Investment Code and 
new Small Business 

legislation

Lending
PRSC I and II
PSTAC (FY03)
AAA
Development Policy
Review (FY03)

Fin & Priv Sec Devt.
(ongoing)

IFC Possible IFC
investments (direct or
through regional facilities).

* Restructuring sugar 
sector 

* CDB, IDA, 
DFID 

Restructuring 
forestry and mining 
sectors

* CIDA, DFID, 
GTZ 

PRSC I and II

* Implement 
modernization and
restructuring strategy
* Introduce new mining PRSC II
and forestry legislation

30

PRSP 
Objective 

PRSP Diagnosis 

Strategic Direction 

Devt Partners 

* Environmental 
protection 

* IDB, UNDP, 
CIDA, DFID, 
IDA, EU 

VI: 
Infrastructu 
re to support 
growth 

Frequent breaches of sea 
defenses pose a major risk to 
settlements and economic 
activities. The road network is 
not maintained adequately. 
Flooding threatens the economic 
development of some of the 
most productive regions of the 
country. Access to electricity is 
inadequate.

Better maintenance, 
quality and coverage 
of: 
* Sea Defenses 
* Roads and river 
transport
* Drainage and 
irrigation
* Rural electrification 

* EU
* EU, IDB, CDB

* CDB

* IDB

Woruments

NPAS (FY03)

PRSP Benchmarks
*CAS Performance. 

Indicators (underlined)

* Introduce Protected 
Areas System
* Strengthen mining
and forestry
environmental
regulations.

* Maintenance, quality
and coverage of
infrastructure improved

IMPROVING GOVERNANCE AND INCREASING PUBLIC SECTOR EFFICIENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY

II: Good 
Delivery of improved public 
governance 
services and infrastructure as 
and the 
envisaged in the PRSP depends 
business 
on public sector effectiveness. 
environment At present the social and 
economic return on public 
spending is low. Problems 
include weak financial 
management, lack of effective 
control, over-centralization of 
decision-making,
overlapping/contradictory 
jurisdictions and responsibilities 

* Public sector 
institutional and 
regulatory reforms in 
place 

* CIDA, IDB, 
UNDP, 

* Improved public 
accountability 

* CIDA, IDA, 
IDB, UNDP 

* Justice and crime 
reduction programs

* USAID, DFID

31

* Institutional and 
organizational reform 
under the Public Sector 
Modernization Program

Lending
PRSC I and II
PSTAC (FY03)

AAA
*New Procurement and Governance Review (FY05)
Tenders Act gassed &
operational
*New Audit Act passed
& operational

PRSP 
Objective 

PRSP Diagnosis 

Strategic Direction 

Devt Partners 

PS 
ecmrsWrdBn 
PRSP Benchrarks 
Indicators (underlined) 

ru
World Bank Group
Instruments

and a deterioration in the quality 
and composition of public 
employment. 

* Implement local 
government reform 

* IDA, USAID 

*Legislative and
institutional reforms to
strengthen and ensure
viability of local
governments institutions

Stronger land 
administration 

* IDB, DFID, 
GTZ 

* Revise Land Use
policy

IMPROVING DELIVERY OF SOCIAL SERVICES AND STRENGTHENING SAFETY NETS

III: 
Investment 
in human 
capital 

Both the health and education 
systems provide poor quality 
service, with a wide variation in 
quality and accessibility. 

The HIV/AIDS infection rate is 
between 3-5% of the population
and rising. 

Secondary Sch. Reform
Project (ongoing)
PRSC I and II

* Reforms to increase 
enrollments, reduce 
overcrowding and 
absenteeism, and 
improve trained 
teacher ratio 

* Reforms to improve 
the health status of the 
population and 
provide equitable 
access to health care 

* IDB, DFID, IDA 

* IDB, CIDA, 
PAHO 

* PRSP goals for 
education attained 
* Establish a formula- 
based system for
allocation of financial
resources to schools

* PRSP goals for health
attained
* Implement model for
improved primary health
care system

* Implement strategy 
to prevent and treat 
HIV/AIDS infection 

* UNAIDS, IDA, 
CIDA, USAID, 
PAHO, CDC 

* National strategic plan HIV/AIDS proj (FY03)
for HIV/AIDS approved
and implemented

IV: 
Poor water quality and 
Infrastructu 
insufficient access have led to 
re to support water-borne diseases in most 
services 
parts of the country. Squatter 
settlements on government- 
owned land, spurred by 

* Improved water & 
sanitation 

* DFID, CDB, 
IDB, IDA, EU 

* PRSP Water & 
Housing goals attained 
* New water bill passed. 
and utilities merzed
* Private management
contractor appointed

PRSC I and II
Water Supply Project
(ongoing)

32

PRSP 
Objective 

V: Safety 
nets 

inadequate land allocation 
procedures and access to low- 
income housing have become a
major problem.

Coverage and benefit levels are 
low and relevant institutions 
have weak financial and human 
resource capacities. PRSP 
reforms may have employment 
implications in several economic 
sectors. 

VII: Special 
intervention 
strategies 

The PRSP identifies certain 
regions with poverty levels 
significantly above the national 
average. In Region 10, the 
decline in performance of the 
Linden Bauxite mine has been 
an additional driver of poverty. 

PRSP Diagnosis 

Strategic Direction 

Devt Partners 

PRSP Benchmarks
*CAS Performance. 

______________________ 

Indicators 
(underlined) 

Instruments
Instru ments

* Improved access to 
adequate housing

* EU, IDB

* IDB, CDB, EU, 
DFID, IDA, UNDP 

* Cash support 
mechanisms for 
displaced workers 
seeking employment 
* Targeted subsidies 
for electricity and 
water tariffs 
* Support for pregnant
and new mothers
Programs to boost income generation, access to 
markets and access to basic services in: 

* Barima-Waini & 
Region I 
* Region 8 Devt
* Rupununi
* Linden (Region 10)

* E-HIPC, DFID
UNICEF, EU

* Improve efficiency of 
social safety nets 
programs, including 
targeting
* Institutional
strengthening of benefit 
administration 

Lending
PRSC I and II
PSTAC (FY03)

AAA
Poverty Assessment (FY04)

Special Intervention 
Strategies in place and 
under implementation

AAA
Poverty Assessment (FY04)

33

Annex B1. Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of May 6,2002
1999 

2000 

2001 

2002

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects Under Implementation 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a 

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a c 

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

Portfolio Management

CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$'000s), 
Average Supervision (US$'000s/project) 

4 
3.9 
25 

31.4 

25.0 
31.4 
20.1 

Yes 
338 
84.5 

4 
3.2 
0 

0 

0 
0 
18.2 

No 
370 
92.5 

4 
4.2 
0 

0 

0 
0 
25.8 

No 
239 
59.75 

3
5.6
0

0

0
0
28.4

No
178
44.5

Memorandum Item 

Projects Evaluated by OED by Number 
Projects Evaluated by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 

17 
265.0 
37.5 
30.2 

Last Five FYs

5
66.3
20.0
30.7

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Perfornance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning of the year:
Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, which includes all active
projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B2. IDA Program Summary (as of May 6,2002)

IDA Base-Case Lending Programa

Fiscal 
year Projects 
2003 Public Sector Technical Assistance Credit 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit I 

Subtotal FY03 

2004 HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control b 

2005 Poverty Reduction Support Credit II 

Subtotal FY04 

Subtotal FY05 
TOTAL 

Strategic Rewards Implementation
(H/M/L) 
Risks (OWM/L)
H 
H
H 
H

H 

H 

H

H

US$(m) 
4.0 
12.0 

16.0

5.0 

5.0

9.0 

9.0
30.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. This project is not included in the Guyana's FY03-05 IDA allocation, because it is part of the Caribbean Region
HIV/AIDs APL approved by the Board in June 2001.

34

Annex B3. IFC & MIGA Programs, FY 1998-2001 in Guyanaa

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

IFC approvals (US$m) 
2.91 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
a. IFC has approved regional facilities for the benefit of the private sectors in Caribbean countries including
Guyana. They include:
Caribbean Loan Facility, US$50m (including a $25m B loan), FY97.
-
-
Credit line for Royal Merchant Bank, Trinidad and Tobago,US$40m, FY01.
-
Credit line for Republic Bank, Trinidad and Tobago, US$40m, FY01.

Annex B4. Summary of Non-Lending Servicesa (as of May 6,2002)

Cost ($000) 

Audienceb Objectivec

150 
119 

40 

12 
15 

100 
30 
25 
31 
20 
10 
IFC 

160 
160
160 
160
175 
175

G/B 
G/B/D 

G/B/D/P 

GIB/D/P 
G/B/D 

G/B 
G/B/D 
G/B 
G/B 
G/B 
B 
GIB/D 

KG/PS
KG/PS

KG

KG
PS

KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS
KG
KG

G/B/D/P 

KG/PD/PS

G/B 

KG/PD

G/B/D/P 

KG/PD

Product 

Completion 
Recent completions
Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR) 
FY99 
Public Expenditure Review (PER) 
FY01 
Institutional environment & public officials'
performance in Guyana (Working Paper) 
Fiscal implications of achieving the proposed
universal secondary education in Guyana (Policy
Note) 
Capacity Building Plan (informal) 

FY01 

Country Fin. Accountability Assessment (CFAA) 
Public Expenditure Review Update 
CPAR Action Plan Update 
Mining Sector Review (informal) 
Foreign Investment Advisory Service report 
Information & Comm. Tech. Review (informal) 
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises Review 

Development Policy Review 
Subtotal FY03 
Poverty Assessment 
Subtotal FY04 
Governance Review 
Subtotal FY05 
a. Does not include various regional studies.
b. Govemment (G), donor (D), Bank (B), public dissemination (P).
c. Knowledge generation (KG), public debate (PD), problem-solving (PS).

FY04 

FY05 

FY01 
FY01 
Underway
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
Planned
FY03 

35

Annex B5. Guyana: Social Indicators

Latest single year 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1994-00 

Same region/income group
Lat. Am & Lower-middle-
Caribbean 
income

515.6 
1.6 
75.3 
2.6 

2,046.0
1.0
42.4
2.1

3,680 
152 

1,140
149

3.4 
3.6 
7.4

91 

.. 
.. 

85 
93 
62 

90 
87 
9 

70 
67 
73 

30 
38 

2.7
4.7

99
100
99

80
95
69

87
87
11

69
67
72

32
40

192
133

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY (% of population)*
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural interior headcount index 
Rural coastal headcount index 

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index

0.7 
0.7 
30.0 
4.3 

.. 

.. 

.. 

690 

.. 
.. 

.. 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNI) 
4.9 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
1.5 
Net primary school enrollment rate (% of age group)
Total 
88 
Male 
88 
Female 
88 
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate (% under 12 months)
Measles 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

DPT 

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality

Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 

Adult (15-59)

0.8 
-0.2 
31.6 
2.9 

.. 

.. 

.. 

510 
48 

..

.. 

9.8 
4.4 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

40 
75 
22 

62 
59 
65 

66 
90 

0.8 
0.5 
38.2 
2.4 

35.0
16.3
92.5
36.7

870 
132 

2.4 ยง 
5.0 

.. 

97 

.. 
.. 

94 
98 

91 

87 
83 
12 

63 
59 
67 

54 
73 

.. 

25 

60 
58 
63 

72 
101 

36

Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 
93
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half of the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate
discrepancies between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data.
* Guyana PRSP 2001
ยง 2001 Central government social spending, only.

260 
144 
190

294 
210 

274 
217 

207 
122 

.. 
.. 

.. 

Annex B6. Guyana: Selected Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)

Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100 
35.4 
33.7 
30.8 

100 
34.6 
30.8 
34.6 

100 
34.6 
30.0 
35.4 

100 
31.1 
29.0 
39.9 

100 
31.3 
28.3 
40.4 

100 
31.9 
26.7 
41.4 

100 
32.2 
26.0 
41.8 

100 
32.6 
25.4 
42.0 

100 
32.8 
25.0 
42.2 

100
33.5
24.7
41.8

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

79.4 
30.3 
18.1 
12.3 

83.1 
28.8 
15.4 
13.4 

84.7 
23.4 
11.6 
11.8 

92.0 
22.6 
13.8 
8.8 

94.4 
21.9 
14.0 
7.9 

96.9 
22.0 
14.0 
8.0 

97.5 
25.0 
15.9 
9.1 

94.7 
31.5 
20.6 
10.9 

95.5 
27.5 
16.1 
11.4 

94.3
26.2
14.5
11.7

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

98.8 
108.5 

96.0 
108.0 

96.5 
104.6 

96.1 
110.7 

94.9 
111.3 

91.8 
110.7 

92.3 
114.8 

92.1 
118.3 

88.4 
111.4 

86.9
107.5

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

20.6 
16.2 

16.9 
15.0 

15.3 
12.6 

8.0 
7.3 

5.6 
3.1 

3.1 
1.8 

2.5 
4.7 

5.3 
8.1 

4.5 
8.3 

5.7
9.7

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

749.2 

717.6 

696.3 

712.0 

697.5 

715.7 

724.6 

753.2 

787.1 

833.8

900 

880 

890 

870 

840 

845 

854 

847 

878 

879

Real annual growth rates (%,
calculated from 1988 prices)
Gross domestic product at market
prices 
Gross Domestic Income 

6.2 
6.2 

-1.7 
-1.7 

3.0 
3.0 

-1.4 
-1.4 

1.5 
1.5 

1.8 
1.8 

2.7 
2.7 

3.0 
3.0 

3.4 
3.4 

4.2
4.2

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1988 prices)
Gross domestic product at market
prices 
Total consumption 
Private consumption 

5.8 
10.4 
9.3 

-2.2 
2.5 
2.4 

2.4 
4.3 
4.0 

-2.0 
6.5 
0.4 

0.8 
3.5 
3.4 

1.0 
3.2 
3.6 

1.9 
2.2 
-0.9 

2.0 
-1.5 
-1.6 

2.2 
2.8 
2.4 

3.5
1.9
1.8

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current private transfers 
Current account balance 

740 
592 
813 
578 
-73 
40 
-107 

689 
547 
775 
541 
-86 
44 
-98 

665 
518 
728 
495 
-63 
39 
-79 

685 
505 
789 
527 
-104 
47 
-109 

662 
490 
776 
526 
-114 
44 
-131 

657 
482 
792 
534 
-135 
46 
-144 

669 
490 
832 
567 
-163 
47 
-154 

694 
511 
891 
615 
-197 
48 
-183 

696 
507 
877 
598 
-181 
51 
-158 

725
532
896
610
-171
54
-143

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-termloans(net) 
Official 
Private 
Othercapitald 
Change in reservese 

52 
38 
18 
20 
14 
3 

44 
13 
10 
4 
24 
17 

48 
-111 
14 
-125 
151 
-9 

67 
43 
23 
20 
61 
-62 

56 
40 
13 
27 
51 
-16 

56 
32 
27 
5 
66 
-10 

58 
43 
52 
-9 
63 
-11 

60 
41 
32 
9 
62 
21 

61 
41 
28 
13 
63 
-7 

62
14
26
-12
88
-21

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates (1988 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-9.8 

-12.0 

-9.1 

-14.6 

-16.4 

-18.8 

-22.5 

-26.2 

-23.0 

-20.5

13.8 
13.8 
13.8 
12.7 

-1.6 
-1.6 
-1.6 
4.2 

-1.9 
-1.9 
-1.9 
-13.2 
continued

-0.3 
-0.3 
-0.3 
-1.0 

-5.4 
-5.4 
-5.4 
4.8 

-2.5 
-2.5 
-2.5 
0.9 

0.4 
0.4 
0.4 
6.1 

0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
8.6 

-2.5 
-2.5 
-2.5 
-3.5 

3.5
3.5
3.5
1.2

37

Annex B6. Guyana: Selected Economic Indicators (continued).

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
36.7 
Current expenditures 
26.5 
Current account surplus (+)l deficit(-) 
10.2 
Capital expenditure 
15.4 
Foreign financing 
1.9 

37.4 
27.3 
10.1 
11.8 
5.2 

41.4 
33.9 
7.5 
13.8 
5.3 

41.4 
34.3 
7.1 
14.0 
6.1 

40.6 
34.1 
6.5 
14.0 
4.5 

41.2 
34.8 
6.4 
15.9 
8.7 

42.1 
33.8 
8.3 
20.6 
8.2 

42.1 
34.4 
7.7 
16.1 
8.0 

42.3 
33.4 
8.9 
14.5 
4.6 

36.7
26.5
10.2
15.4
1.9

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2(%) 
Private sector credit growth /
total creditgrowth (%) 

Price indices( YR88 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)g 

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (p.a.% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

60.3 
11.7 

63.6 
6.8 

62.3 
12.1 

65.7 
10.9 

71.1 
8.9 

72.8 
8.8 

73.4 
6.7 

73.7 
6.0 

74.3 
5.9 

74.6
6.7

-65.3 

-367.2 

-119.4 

-103.2 

31.7 

96.7 

-137.9 

161.0 

212.5 

168.7

96.7 
108.2 
89.3 
117.4 

90.7 
97.3 
93.2 
102.7 

87.5 
102.6 
85.3 
104.8 

85.6 
110.2 
77.6 
112.9 

87.8 
104.9 
83.7 
108.2 

88.5 
105.7 
83.7 
108.2 

89.5 
105.6 
84.8 
108.2 

92.8 
105.6 
87.9 
108.2 

94.5 
106.5 
88.8 
108.2 

95.8
107.3
89.2
108.2

3.6 
1.4 

4.6 
3.0 

7.5 
11.2 

6.1 
6.6 

2.7 
-0.8 

4.3 
4.4 

4.5 
3.1 

3.5 
2.4 

2.8 
1.7 

2.5
1.9

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Excluding grants.
d. Net. Including errors & ornissions, exceptional financing. Exceptional financing consists of debt relief provided under o-HIPC for
years before 2003, o-HIPC debt relief provided through flow rescheduling and total e-HIPC relief since 2003, but excludes debt relief
from CMCF on repayment which are accounted for as stock of debt reduction in the BOG liabilities
e. Includes use of IMF resources.
f. Non-financial public service. Current Revenue includes HIPC assistance grants and other current grants
g. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

38

Annex B7. Guyana: Key Exposure Indicators

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a 

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)' 

Debt & debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDOMGDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public DS

(%)' 

IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

1635 

1686 

1524 

1465 

1460 

1474 

1451 

1500 

1524 

1531

12 

132 

27 

136 

18 

103 

-7 

-7 

18 

52 

50 

116 

116 

112 

108 

111 

25 

105 

10

123

208.4 
218.3 
16.8 
55.6 

224.5 
234.9 
18.1 
56.5 

209.0 
218.9 
14.1 
71.0 

199.4 
205.8 
15.7 
74.3 

206.4 
209.3 
16.4 

209.3 
206.0 
15.9 

.. 

.. 

202.6 
200.2 
15.2 

..

201.8 
199.1 
15.0 

204.1 
193.6 
14.1 

196.7
183.6
15.8

5.1 

4.5 

4.5 

3.7 

3.4 

1.8 

1.9 

0.9 

0.0 

0.0

54.1 
0.9 
19 

57.5 
0.8 
16 

56.5 
0.6 
12 

49.1 
0.6 
8 

45.3 
0.6 
6 

42.1 
0.3 
3 

44.8 
0.3 
1 

46.3 
0.1 
0 

48.6 
0.0 
0 

43.3
0.0
0

.. 

218 

.. 

235 

.. 

184 

.. 

180 

.. 

188 

.. 

199 

..

206 

211 

213 

214

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)
a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short- term capital.
Reflects the stock-write-off of the original and E-HIPC. E-HIPC completion point is assumed to take place in early 2003.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for
International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

39

Closed Projects 26 

Active Projects 

Difference bet.
Expected and
Last PSR 
Actual
Supervision Rating 
Original Amount in US$ Millions Disbursements
Devt 
Implement'n Fiscal 
IBRD 
IDA Grant Canc. Undis. Orig. 
Frm
Progress 
YearRed
S 
2000 
S 
1994 
S 
1996 

S 
S 
HS 

Project Project Name 
ProD 
c Prjc aeObjectives 
P057272 Financial & Private Sector 
4.8 
P007257 Water Supply TA & Rehab 
17.5 
P007269 Secondary School Reform 
17.3 
Overall Result 
39.6 
a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Annex B8. Status of Bank Group Operations Portfolio (IDA and Grants)
as of May 6, 2002

0.4 
8.0 
6.5 
14.8 

0
9.0 
7.5 
16.4 

8.9
4.0
12.9

Loans/Credits Summary in USD 
Principal: 
Cancellations: 
Disbursed: 
Undisbursed: 
Repaid: 
Due: 
Exchange Adjustment: 
Borrower's Obligation: 
Sold 3rd Party: 
Repaid 3rd Party: 
Due 3rd Party: 

IBRD 
79,950,000 
3,738,478 
76,211,522 
0 
71,394,827 
4,049,295 
1,259,930 
5,309,225 
767,400 
767,400 
0 

IDA 
307,724,655 
37,964,007 
257,910,207 
15,704,776 
62,287,175 
180,684,382 
0 
180,684,382 
0 
0 
0 

TOTAL
387,674,655
41,702,485
334,121,729
15,704,776
133,682,002
184,733,677
1,259,930
185,993,607
767,400
767,400
0

40

Annex B9. Guyana: Statement of IFC's Held ai Mu Disbursed Portfolio
as of May 6,2002.
(in US Dollars millions)
Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic

1998 
1998 
1998 

Guyam Bank 
SEF Cara Lodge 
SEF IDS 

Total Portfolio: 

0.0 
0.7 
1.2 

1.9 

1.0 
0.0 
0.0 

1.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 

0.0 
0.5 
1.2 

0.5 
0.0 
0.0 

1.7 

0.5 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0

Annex B10. Guyana: Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
performance 

Major Issues 

Poverty Reduction and Economic Management
Poverty reduction 
Rural and indigenous poverty 
Economic policy 
Fiscal management 
Public sector 
Public expenditure management 
Fiduciary reform
Decentralization
Political empowerment 

Fair 
Poor 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Gender 
Human Development
Education 
Health, nutrition and 
population 
Social protection 

Good 
Fair 

Quality and equity 
Quality and equity 
HIV/AIDS
Social impact of upcoming 
structural reforms
Strength of safety nets
Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Delivery of basic services, 
Special Intervention Strategies
Local government strengthening
Sugar sector reform,
Amerindian affairs
Environment 
Natural resource conservation 
Social development 
Amerindian affairs 
Finance, Private Sector and Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Fair 
Strengthening supervision 
Private sector 
Poor 
Completing privatization 
Strengthening investment
climate
Regulatory environment 
Water sector reforn 
Planning & procurement
practices

Energy and mining 
Infrastructure 

Poor 
Fair 

Country 
priority 

Bank 
priority 

Reconciliation
of Country and
Bank priorities

H 
H 
H 

M 

H 
H 

M 

H 

H 
M 

M 
H 

H 
H 

H
H
H

M

H
M 

M

H

H
M 

H 
H

H
H

HIV/AIDS proj

IDF grant

Fin. Sec proj.

41

IBRD 25723

AVX 

<(/+ <~~RIdgew/0f<t 

t 
JWa? Xtsw 

SU!E

s | || | | 

REIO 7 

lRt 

ItRGO 

1 

/ 

4 

11 S U R 

I N A M EA 

Zl 

) 

/ 

( 

f~~~~~~~~~~~~IN

@~~~~~~~~~~~~RGO 

CAIAM 

NAIOA 
rยขrnmoS 

\. 

5 

onais

5( 

RIVERS ~ ~~~~~~~~~ 
~ 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~h boundaries, 

REGION ~ ~ ~ 
\ol|ors,1l

R 

J 

I N A ME3

PRMARYROAS 

TAKIOEES 

. 10 

TOWNSf t

onAA thi mo 

do 

notIF 

status of any 

tJerr/itory,

ION94
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~AC 

WICHABAI ~ ~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

Report No.: 
Type: 

S

24073 GUA

