DOCUMENT OF

The World Bank

Report No. 23401-BY

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND OF THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR BELARUS

February 21, 2002

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIDS 
BoP 
CAS 
CAB 
CEM 
CIDA 
CSO 
CY 
DFI 
DOD 
EBRD 
ESW 
EU-TACIS 
FSU 
FY 
GDP 
GEF 
HIV 
IBRD 
IDF 
IFC 
IFI 
IMF 
LIL 
MIGA 
MOJ 
NGO 
NBB 
ODS 
OSCE 
PER 
PSD 
SME 
SMP 
SOE 
TA 
TACIS 
TB 
WTO 
UK DFID 
UNDP 
USAID 

Currency Equivalents

Currency Unit = Ruble (BYR)

January 2002: US$1=BYRI,600

Abbreviations and Acronyms
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Balance of Payments
Country Assistance Strategy
Current Account Balance
Country Economic Memorandum
Canadian International Development Agency
Civil Society Organizations
Calendar Year
Direct Foreign Investment
Debt Outstanding and Disbursed
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Economic and Sector Work
European Union - Technical Assistance for the CIS Countries
Former Soviet Union
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Human Immune Deficiency Virus
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
Intemational Finance Institution
International Monetary Fund
Learning Innovation Loan
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Justice
Non-Governmental Organization
National Bank of Belarus
Ozone Depleting Substances
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Public Expenditure Review
Private Sector Development
Small and Medium Size Enterprise
Staff Monitored Program
State Owned Enterprise
Technical Assistance
Technical Assistance for the CIS (EU Technical Assistance program)
Tuberculosis
World Trade Organization
United Kingdom Department for International Development
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International Development
Fiscal Year
January 1 - December 31

Government: 

The World Bank Group Team

IBRD 

IFC

Vice President: Johannes F. Linn 
Vice President: Assaad J. Jabre
Country Director: Luca Barbone 
Director: Edward Nassim
Task Team: Luca Barbone, Lilia Burunciuc, Eugenia Marinova, Sergiy Kulyk, Irina Oleinick,
Konstantyn Senyut, Luis-Alvaro Sanchez, Kutlay Ebiri, Carl Dagenbart

TABLE OF CONTENTS

.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
......................................................................... 
1. ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL BACKGROUND ..........................................................................
1
II. SOCIAL OUTCOMES AND POVERTY IN BELARUS ......................................................................... 3
W1. BELARIJS'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA: 
IS CONTINUED GRADUAL REFORM FEASIBLE? .................
6
A. Macroeconomic Stability and Growth .................................................................. 
........ 
7
B. Creating Opportunities for Job Growth .......................................................................... 
8
C. Improving Management and Efficiency of Public Expenditure ............................................. 10
D. Dealing with Environmental Challenges and the Legacy of Chernobyl ................................. 11
E. Facilitating the Emergence of Civil Society Voices and Organizations ........... 
...................... 12
IV. THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM .............................. 
...................................... 12
V. MEDIUM-TERM MACROECONOMIC SCENARIOS ......................................................................... 13
A. A Most Likely Scenario ......................................................................... 13
B. Stagnation ......................................................................... 
14
C. A High Case ......................................................................... 
15
VI. BANK ASSISTANCE AND LESSONS LEARNED ......................................................................... 
15
VII. Tm BANK ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR 2002-2004 ...................................................................... 
16

.

.

The Low Case Lending Program .................................................................. 1 9
The Base Case Lending Program ............. 
..................................................... 
20

A. Global Public Goods .2................................ 
_ ...... 
........................... 20
B. Mitigation of Social Risks ......................................................................... 21
C. Fostering Private Sector Development ......................................................................... 
22

A Potential High Case 
................................................................... 
The CAS and Civil Society ................................................................. 
.23
Partnerships ................. 
................................................. 
24
Financial Management and Fiduciary Responsibility .
................................................................ 
24
Monitoring and Evaluation .. 
................................................................. 
24

23

VIII. COUNTRY CREDITWORTHI-NESS AND RISKS ......................................................................... 
25
ATTACHMENT I - CONSULTATIONS WITH STAKEHOLDERS ............................................................ 27

Boxes: 
Box I: Recent Macro-Economic Developments 
Box II: Poverty in Belarus 
Box III: Civil Society in Belarus 
Box IV: Constraints to Business Development 
and History of Privatization 

Graphs:
Graph 1: Employment by Ownership

Tables:
Table 1: Main Economic Indicators
Table 2: Key Economic Indicators during the
Next CAS Period
Table 3: Triggers anid Lending Levels
Table 4: Proposed Lending Program 2002/04

Annexes:
Annex A2: Belarus at a Glance
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: Bank Group IBRD/IDA Program Summnary
Annex B3: IFC& MIGA Program Summary
Annex B4: Summary of Non-Lending Services
Annex B5: Social Indicators
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: Status of Bank Group Operations
Annex B8: (IFC)
Annex B9: Country Program Matrix
Annex B10: CAS Summary of Development Priorities

i

I

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
In the past six years Belarus has recorded substantial economic growth, accompanied by strict
controls over the political system and centralization of decision-making. The theme of the implicit
economic strategy espoused by the Government has been very cautious reform with great concem for
social welfare and stability. As such, it resembles the strategy followed by the China and Vietnam
modernizations. But the similarities end there: the lack of protection of property rights and the
unfavorable business environment have led to little SME growth, insignificant foreign direct investment,
and little reformn in agriculture. The growth of the past few years has been led by SOE-based increases in
production, and social outcomes have been disappointing. While the emergence of flagrant corruption
and bad economic govemance has been largely avoided, indicators of social development have not
substantially improved, and poverty, by Belarus national standards, remains high. The legacy of the
Chemobyl catastrophe continues to affect many aspects of Belarus's life.
ii. 
In shaping these developments, the economic and political relationship with Russia has been of
paramount and increasing importance. Belarus has enjoyed very large subsidies chiefly through below-
market price gas sales, and an open market for its products and barter practices. But this relationship is
undergoing changes that are putting pressure on Belarus's leadership. Russia now offers Belarus
financial assistance in hard cash conditioned on improved macroeconomic management and structural
reform. The political agreement for monetary unification and economic integration will add pressure to
improve the management of public finances and allow greater private sector activity. In sum, the over-
cautious strategy of the past few years seems less and less tenable.
In part in reaction to these developments, Belarus has recently introduced some important
changes in key economic policies (beginning from the exchange rate unification, and proceeding with
partial price liberalization and initial measures to reduce business harassment). But for the "gradual"
Belarus model to function, the country needs to substantially improve the business environment by
increasing certainty over property rights, reducing business harassment, introducing harder budget
constraints on SOEs and diminishing the constraints on their use of resources, and, critically, reforming
its inefficient system of social expenditures.
iv. 
The government program for the next few years sets a number of ambitious targets on the
macroeconomic front, while re-iterating the cautious approach to reforms in pricing and property rights.
As such, it still falls below the requirements for Belarus to enter on a growth path that will favor increased
employment and protection of the most vulnerable segments of society. 
In particular, macroeconomic
stabilization, still not yet achieved, was partially set back due to the election-driven wage increases in late
2001. It is important that responsible economic management again receive priority to avoid a reversal of
the gains achieved in the past two years.
v. 
The Bank group strategy for 2002-04 acknowledges these challenges and aims to address poverty
concerns through a combination of:

iii. 

* Advisory activities to provide "state-of-the-art" advice on reform, particularly with
regard to the business environment and social policies, and to nurture growth and
involvement of civil society;
Support to reform and to resolution of issues of social and global concerns, through
lending in three areas:
(i) 
Global Public Goods that are also high on Belarus' agenda:
(ii) 
Mitigation of social risks, including the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster; and
Fostering private sector development 
investment environment.

through a better business and

• 

(iii) 

vi. 
Under the low case scenario (which prevails at present), lending would be concentrated on Global
Public Goods areas and projects directly targeted to the poorest segments of society, and limited to
US$140 million (excluding GEF). Under the base case (predicated on substantial progress in reform of
the business environment and in transparency of public sector accounts) lending could reach up to
US$270 million for the three-year period. Lending under the base case would only commence after the
Government has accumulated a one-year track record in improvements in business conditions, and when
transparency of public sector accounts (including the Presidential Fund) is suitably ensured. A high case
is not envisaged at present. Such a case would be presented to the Board of Directors in a CAS update if
circumstances warrant it.

Issues for Board Discussion
vii. 
Executive Directors may wish to address the following questions:

* 

Is the strategy of limited engagement to allow government to build a track record before widening
the scope of Bank assistance adequate at this point?
* Are the triggers for the base case, focused on fiscal transparency, macroeconomic stabilization
and business environment, suitable?
* Are the public goods and social sector operations appropriate areas for the low case Bank
assistance?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF TH1E
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND OF THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO TBUE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BELARUS

1. 
The Belarus CAS for 2002-2004 (the third CAS since the countrv gained independence ten years
ago) has been prepared jointly by an IBRD-IFC team. The strategy fully integrates Bank and IFC
interventions, particularly in the key area of private sector development. World Bank Group assistance to
Belarus has been limited in the last seven years, and the previous FY99 CAS set a strict trigger for
resumption of IBRD lending to Belarus. This trigger (exchange rate unification) was met in September
2000. Since that time, quality and intensity of dialogue betwecn the country and the Bank have improved.
This proposed strategy seeks to advance cooperation with Belarus in critical areas to help the country
open up its economy and society, minimize social and environmental risks, and address global public
goods concerns. This document reflects the results of extensive consultations with the Government and
civil society held across Belarus during March-December 2001, a first for this country, as well as in-depth
discussions with other partners in development.

I. Economic and Political Background
2. 
Early Years of Independence. At independence, in 1991, Belarus inherited one of the highest
standards of living in the former Soviet Union (FSU), as it was its industrial park for consumer goods,
with a relatively better capital stock than other republics. But the economy was verv vulnerable, as it was
dependent on the FSU for 90 percent of energy and 70 percent of raw materials imports, with its exports
almost exclusively going to the former republics. 
In the late 1980s the country had suffered a major
setback due to the Chernobyl accident and its human and financial consequcnces.
3. 
Belarus, with the support of international organizations, initiated preliminary reforms towards a
market economy, including price liberalization and small-scale privatization. But the combination of
inadequate macroeconomic management, lack of establishment and protection of clear property rights and
the disruptions caused by the breakdown of the FSU, led to simultaneous acceleration of inflation and
collapse of GDP, as well as the emergence of serious governance problems.
4. 
After President Lukashenka was elected on an anti-corruption platform in 1994, the new
Government adopted an approach to economic policy based on emphasis on production, price controls,
and directed credit. It also instituted tough anti-corruption provisions. The state retained control of most
productive resources and a significant share of GDP was allocated to social expenditures and subsidies.
Market-oriented reforms were very limited.
5. 
The new policy orientation of the Government produced some tangible results. Economic targets
set in 1995 were met by the year 2000 (with the exception of the capital investment and agricultural
production targets), despite the effects of the 1998 Russia crisis. As a result, Belarus's official GDP level
is closer to its 1991 level than most FSU countries.' However, perhaps uniquely among the more
advanced former socialist economies of Europe, GDP growth has not been accompanied by private sector
growth: "true" private sector economic entities now account for about 10 percent of employment (and a
lower share of GDP), slightly less than in 1994. The economic recovery of the past few years has been
led by SOEs (or the "joint stock" successors to many of them, which behave as in earlier times2 ). It should

' There are some concerns regarding the methods and accuracy of GDP data. However, it is believed that these
statistical problems are not sufficient to radically change the reported trend of real GDP.
2 While about 20 percent of employment is now accounted by "corporatized" SOEs, the change in legal structure
has not led to any change in governance and behavior. A typical case is the Atlant refrigerator company, which has

2

GDP growth (percent) 
| (percent of 1990 level) 
Inflation (CPI percent p.a) 
Inflation (CPI percent e-o-p) 
Current Account Balance, (percent of GDP) 
Central Government Balance. (percent of GDP) 
General Government Balance (percent GDP) 
Trade wilh non-CIS countries (percent) 
Poverty Incidence (national definition) 

Table 1: Main Economic Indicators
1991 
1995 
1997 
-1.2 
-10.4 
100 
65.3 
94.1 
709 
147.5 
240 
-4.4 
-2.7 
-1.9 
37 
38.5 

1.7 

11 4 

74.8 
64 
63 
-5.8 
-2 2 
-1.2 
26.3 
32.1 

1998 
8.4 
81.1 
73 
182 
-6.1 
-1.4 
-0.5 
27 
33.3 

1999 2000 .s
3.4 
5.8 
4.1
83.9 
88.7 
91.4
294 
169 
61
251 
108 
42
-2.2 
-1.3 
1.6
-2.9 
-0.6 
-0.5
-1.8 
-1 
-1.8
38 7 39.7 
34.7
46.7 
41.9 
30.1

also be noted that the Belarus economy has received substantial economic benefits from Russia.
6. 
Political Developments. Since 1994, state power has been consolidated in the executive branch
of government. This process began with the Presidential election of July 1994 and was reinforced with
the 1996 amendments to the Constitution, which de facto extended the current presidential term of office
from 5 to 7 years and also granted the President the power to issue decrees with the force of law. To
protest these tendencies, the opposition (which remains weak and fragmented, as well as subject to
harassment by police and the judiciary) boycotted the parliamentary elections held in October 2000.
7. 
The tight presidential grip on the country has been supported by an internal security apparatus
that restricts personal freedoms and raises concerns abroad amongst governments and international human
rights organizations alike. These developments have isolated the country and limited the assistance and
support of the international community. The recent presidential elections, held in September 2001, led to
the re-election of president Lukashenka for a further 5-year term, but were criticized by OSCE and other
international observers as "free but not fair." Relations with OSCE, which has a mandate to facilitate
democratization, are tense.
8. 
Russia/BelarusAgreements. Economic developments in Belarus (see Box I) are deeply linked to
Belarus's political and economic relationship with Russia, which has provided the country with
substantial economic benefits. Belarus has received very large energy subsidies, which according to some
estimates amount to 10 percent of GDP, and it has enjoyed an open border providing easy access to the
Russian markets together with generous provisions for barter trading. The agreement on eventual
political unification of Russia and Belarus provided a political and psychological backing for the
leadership's desire and belief in a "third way" model of social and political development.
9. 
In the past two years, however, some re-thinking has occurred on both sides. Much stricter
signals, both on the economic and political front, have been sent to Belarus regarding the required
changes for implementation of economic and political unification. For instance, the Union State treaty
with Russia signed in 1999 includes detailed provisions on important common issues, such as Union State
budget, ecological safety, single border control policy, etc. Most importantly, the protocol puts foith a
plan for achieving a monetary union (by 2005) and harmonizing civil and economic legislation, including:
(a) price regulations; (b) tax code; (c) foreign trade and customs regime; and, (d) harmonization of
transport, energy, and telecommunications. Since the beginning of the year 2000, clear signals have
emerged with regard to the need to move relations with Russia onto a cash basis (particularly with regard
to gas imports), and on the need to improve public finance management in view of the challenge posed by

a good market in Belarus, Russia and even Western Europe. The factory's ownership structure is roughly dixided

between state (35 percent), municipality (25 percent) and employees. The stock is not tradable, no dividends are
paid, management style has not changed in recent times, and no shedding of social assets has occurred.

Box I: Recent Macro-Economic Developments

Overall Economic Activity. After the 1998 Russian crisis, Belarusian economic growvth slowed down in
1999, when real GDP grew by 3.4 percent compared to 8.4 percent in 1998 and 11.4 percent in 1997. With
Russia's recovery, economic growth increased to 5.8 percent in the year 2000. Since then, however,
economic activity has weakened, as suggested by the rising level of inventories, non-cash transactions and
domestic arrears, and the low level of profits and investments. This has affected mainly industrial production
-
the mainstay of economic performance. Agriculture output fluctuates with weather conditions. The
economic growth for 2001 is reported to be 4.1 percent,
Public Financev. The general government deficit was low at 2.9 percent of GDP in 1999, 0.6 percent in
2000, and in 2001 is at 0.5 percent. The deficit is financed mostly with intenal resources. Quasi-fiscal
operations related to directed lending to preferred sectors were estimated at around 1.4 percent of GDP in
2000. 
In 2001, however, the Government eliminated directed credits from the National Bank of Belarus
(NBB), including support for housing, and shifted the support for agriculture to commercial banks.
Monetary Policy. Monetary policy has considerably tightened over the years, shifting from an expansionary
stance in 1999 (the result of large quasi-fiscal expenditures) to tighter provision of credit to government in
2000 and 2001. Monetary, credit and banking sector targets under the IMF's Staff Monitored Program
(SMP) were met.
Inflation. Inflation rose in the aftermath of the Russia crisis from 182 percent in 1998 to 251 percent in 1999.
Since then, the end-of-period rate of inflation has come down to 108 percent in 2000 and around 42 percent in
2001 due to tighter monetary policies. It should be noted that price liberalization measures throughout 2001
have kept the inflation level at a moderately elevated level.

Exchange Rate. In September 1999, the Government decided to unify the exchange rates by the third quarter
of 2000. To prepare for the implementation of this measure, beginning in January 2000, the pace of
depreciation of the official exchange rate quickened, while the various parallel market rates converged to
within five percent of each other and remained stable in nominal terms. On September 14, 2000, the
unification of exchange rates became official. Since then, the foreign exchange market has been relatively
stable. The currency revalued by around 6 percent in 2001.
External Trade. Foreign trade and services contracted sharply following the Russian crisis, as the real
appreciation of the Belarusian ruble eroded Belarus' competitive position. Exports and imports declined by
17 and 23 percent, respectively, cutting the trade deficit in half and the current account deficit by more than
two-thirds (2.2 percent of GDP). This trade contraction was reversed in late 1999 and trade grew rapidly in
2000. The merchandise trade deficit increased from US$570 million in 1999 to US$838.1 million in 2000
and has come down in 2001 to U$580 million. Due to the positive balances in services' trade and net
transfers, the current account deficit remained stable at US$193.7 million in 1999 and US$161.9 million in
2000. A current account surplus of around US$193 million is expected for 2001 partly due to sluggish
domestic demand for imported goods that year. Some reorientation of external trade has taken place, but
Russia still accounts for over 50 percent of export and 65 percent of import shares.

the eventual monetary unification, Finally, Russian economic interests have renewed their attention to
Belarusian industrial assets, and some instances of debt-equity swaps or outright buyouts of important
enterprises have already occurred.

10. 
It is with regard to these developments, as well as to the deterioration in the financial
performance of state enterprises, that the changes in economic management and attitude towards IFIs over
the past year should be read. These external pressures are likely to continue to hold over the next few
years, and provide the backdrop for the Government's announced intention to proceed with reforms at a
somewhat accelerated pace.

II. Social Outcomes and Poverty in Belarus

11. 

Poverty. With a relatively high per-capita income relative to former CIS countries, and with little

4

Box I: Poverty in Belarus

By a US$4.3/day yardstick, commonly used, Belarus has the lowest level of poverty among FSU countries.
Hence, it does not appear that there is any significant poverty problem in Belarus, at least not as measured
with the yardsticks used in other countries. However, the Government is concerned about the elevated level of
poverty as measured by its national yardstick. A good household tracking system has been developed with
Bank help, which allows to understand the characteristics of the least advantaged in the country. The profile
that emerges from this system shares the general characteristics found in recent studies in other CIS countries.
As in other countries, children run a particularly high risk of poverty, especially in families with mmy
children (3+) and in single parent households. Poverty incidence is nmuch higher in rural areas, and among
population with low education level. Pensioner households are less likely to be poor than other households.
Gender differences in poverty rates are generally not significant.
Key facts are as follows:
.
There is a strong correlation between the size of households and poverty risk. Poor households have,
on average, more members, especially children, 
than non-poor households. Single provider
households which are generally headed by single mothers, are particularly vulnerable (58 percent: of
such families with 2+ children are poor).
The poverty rate for retirees is lower than the average for the country - 33 percent. Poverty among
pensioners is tempered by the fact that most of them keep working, including on private plots. In
addition, the real value of pension benefits is a better protected budgetary item than other social
payments and wages.
The highest poverty incidence rates are among households with working members engaged in
agriculture: 55 percent of them are poor, followed by those employed in education - 37 percent.
Poverty rates vary significantly by regions and between urban and rural areas - the respective poverty
rates are 33 percent and 43 percent. At the same time, poverty is higher in Brest, Vitebsk, Grodno
and Mogilev oblasts (41-44 percent of population), and the lowest in Minsk city (19 percent).
Although rural households have greater access to arable land and thus more in-kind income than
urban resident, their earnings from formal employment are significantly lower.
* There appears to be a strong relationship between education of able-bodied population and poverty
status of households. Only 20.6 percent of citizens who received university degree are below the
national poverty line whereas for those with incomplete or secondary education the figure stands at
50.1 percent.
The temporarily unemployed are also among the most vulnerable groups - 52 percent among
households with unemployed member(s) are poor.
Frequency of poverty spells, average duration of poverty and severity of poverty also tend to
deteriorate. The average duration of poverty over the course of a year has increased from 4 months
in 1998 to 6 months in 1999.
Source: World Bank; Ministry Labor and Social Protection; Ministry of Statistics and Analysis

.

.

.

.

.

economic restructuring having taken place, Belarus shows comparatively little poverty when using the
international yardstick of an equivalent consumption of $4.3/day. At this rate, only about 10 percent of
the Belarusian population was to be considered poor in 1999, compared to, say 50.3 percent in Russia or
18.4 percent in Poland 3 . Yet the perception in Belarus is one of continuing large poverty by local
standards, despite considerable amounts that are spent on social protection (about 45 percent of budget
expenditures, not including pensions, are classified as "social," with 5 percent going to direct social
assistance schemes). The incidence of poverty, measured as the share of population having incomes
below 60 percent of Minimum Consumption Budget, has shown an erratic trend, despite the GDP growth
recorded in the official statistics. Following the adjustrnent to the external shock brought by the Russia

3 There are serious statistical problems in using the US$4.3 poverty line in Belarus, owing to the fact thal PPP
estimates for 1996 (the base year for such computations) have been updated using a highly distorted CPI index,
which does not reflect accurately the price dynamics of the consumption basket of poor households.

crisis of 1998, officiallv estimated poverty rose to over 40 percent of the population in 1999; it declined
sharply, however, in the two subsequent years. During the first nine months of 2001, poverty measured
by this yardstick fell to 30 percent of the population (helped in part by the generous but not necessarily
sustainable policies of wage and pension increases decreed by the Government in 2001). The behavior of
this poverty indicator reflects in part the fact that income inequality has remained low, with a Gini
coefficient of 0.258 and 0.270 in 1997 and 2000, respectively. These patterns also indicate the
"shallowness" of poverty in Belarus, at least as measured by the minimum consumption basket, and that
small changes in per-capita expenditures can lead to large numbers of people falling below the poverty
threshold. At the same time, the duration of poverty spells has been rising over the recent years and
families with children have been affected disproportionately (families with children and particularly those
with more than 2 children have much higher poverty rates, they tend to stay in poverty longer and show
higher poverty depth coefficients). 
In addition, as discussed in Box II, poverty appears to be a rural
phenomenon, with large regional influences, and one that affects families with many children.

12. 
This poverty picture 
is posing important questions 
for social support policies and the
understanding of the labor market. Moreover, perhaps equally important to the perception of current
poverty is the concem within government of the potential for a substantial increase in poverty, with the
attendant threat of social unrest, if economic reforms were to accelerate. The Government and the Bank
have already begun exploring options for reforming the system of social assistance that could serve as the
basis for better targeting social assistance programs to those most affected. The Government is also
considering working with the Bank on the improvement of labor market data and analysis to provide
deeper insights into poverty developments and possible poverty reduction strategies. But a lesson that
emerges is that the growth path of the past few years, with little if any employment generation in the SME
sector and no agricultural reform, has not served well the least privileged segments of society, as it is less
likely to create income opportunities to prevent increases in poverty in the future.
13. 
Civil Society. Belarus, like other FSU countries, inherited weak civil society institutions, where
the community, trade, sports and other organizations were tightly linked to the state apparatus. The tight
control over civil society organizations influenced the slow transition process in Belarus. 4 The old civil
institutions have continued to operate. However, in parallel, new non-government organizations have
emerged, focused mainly on critical areas that do not receive enough attention from the state, such as: (a)
TB/AIDS; (b) environmental and other consequences of Chernobyl; (c) assistance to small businesses; (d)
health problems, especiallv for children, and (e) providing support to the poor, veterans, and other
vulnerable groups. Although the number of these civil society organizations is small, the difficult
circumstances under which they operate have led to the emergence of highly professional, committed and
resilient organizations, which have acquired the skills and know-how for a productive partnership in
development and implementation of social priority programs that seek to reach marginalized members of
society (See Box III for details).

14. 
Gender Issues. Gender-related problems in Belarus seem to be less pronounced mainly due to
the slow pace of reform and tight state control. However, some problems do exist. Young people have
increasing difficulties in finding jobs. Women have fewer possibilities for retraining after losing their
jobs, and limited access to credits makes it almost impossible for women and young people to engage in
entrepreneurial activities. On the other hand, some of the more dramatic problems that have hit young
women in other neighboring countries (such as increasing prostitution and trafficking), although not
unknown, are less pronounced due to the less permissive atmosphere. Special attention should be paid to
the worrisome trend in life expectancy, where the gap between men and women is one of the highest in

According to an opinion poll conducted in April 2000, the majority of Belarusians (57 percent) support
democracy, while 20 percent still believe that dictatorship can be better in some situations; over one third (35
percent) indicate their willingness to emigrate. This statistic illustrates the different perceptions and uncertainties
about the future of a society 10 years after independence. (Belarus: Choices for the Future, National Human
Development Report, 2000, UNDP).

6

Box III: Civil Society in Belarus.
Belarus, like other post Soviet countries, is in the process of "re-inventing" civil society with new forms of
institutions and 
functions 
(political parties, 
trade unions, 
religious organizations, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), etc.). Though freedom of citizens' association is guaranteed by the Constitution, since
1995 the state has imposed a complex regulatory framework for civil society organizations. Some activists
openly question the existence of civil society, and feel that currently there are only emerging entities trying to
define themselves and get recognition. Activity of non-registered organizations, including initiative groups
(which are often the only from of citizens' cooperation in small settlements) is prohibited. This situation was
further complicated with the introduction of NGO re-registration requirements in 1999 which drastically reduced
the number of operating entities. The Presidential Decree #8 "On Certain Regulatory Measures and Procedures
on the Receipt and Use of Foreign Aid," which came into force in April 2001, introduced another serious
obstacle to civil society organizations. It strictly regulates the receipt of foreign humanitarian assistance and the
establishment of networks with international institutions and with counterparts in other countries. Finally, civil
society organizations face difficulties in raising money for their activity, as there are no tax incentives for
donations by organizations or citizens. After the presidential elections, the attitude toward civil society
organizations has worsened further because authorities identify NGOs with political structures and do not
separate the purely development-oriented organizations from the political ones.
Despite this difficult enviromnent, meetings with representatives from the non-governmental sectors reveal the
existence of genuine development organizations set up by dedicated professionals, committed to their work and
willing to make a difference. In the absence of substantial donor support and grant money, NGOs have managed
to organize themselves and serve large communities. It is important to note that many Belarusian NGOs are
grass-root organizations that rely on voluntary work. Altlhough legal arrangements exist, no efficient mechanism
is in place for cooperation between the govermment and society. Some NGOs have managed to establish good
relations with local authorities and are recognized as valuable partners. For instance, the Ministry of Natural
Resources has created an advisory group of civil society organizations to cooperate in areas of common concem.
Currently, about 2500 (one per 4000 people) non-govemmental organizations are officially on record and active,
including the structures inherited from the Soviet era, such as the Belarus Federation of Trade Unions, with a
membership of 4.5 million, or 54 percent of the population over 14. NGOs and initiative groups test broad
spectrum of approaches to identify and address key community issues. The majority of organizations (about 60
percent) are concentrated in Minsk and regional cities, with a small number of non-registered organizations at
community level where population is often unaware of opportunities for self-realization and promotion of their
interests through NGOs. Lack of information exchange and coordination among and within different
constituencies and absence of basic communication equipment in small communities hampers Belarusian NGO
development. Political parties are undeveloped, thus compelling NGOs to fill the gap in an attempt to address
issues that normally belong to the political province. At the same time, the emerging business community, a vital
part of civil society, is playing an increasing role in the country's development. The main areas of NGO work
include cultural activities; the future of children, their health and education; problems of the handicapped and
invalids; gender issues; and Chemobyl matters. Membership is wide-ranging, however, it is worrisome that not
many young people are attracted to voluntary work.

the world - 63.4 years for men and 74.7 years from women. This is because of the serious male-related
problems, largely due to unhealthy lifestyles, including an increase in drinking problems.

III. Belarus's Development Agenda: Is Continued Gradual Reform Feasible?
15. 
Belarus has tried to follow, since 1995, a model of economic reform similar to that of other
successful transition economies 
in Asia (China, Vietnam). 
Slow liberalization of key economic
parameters (though not free of reversals and changes of course) is coupled with maintenance of a strict
apparatus of political control, and great attention is paid to social peace and consensus. As discussed, the
Belarus model has been relatively successful (certainly in the eyes of its proponents), avoiding some
undesirable consequences of reforms in other FSU countries, particularly in the area of SOE governance.

7

Can this model continue to provide positive economic results in the years to come'? The answer has to be
negative, unless substantial changes are introduced in key areas of economic policv-making and the
business environment. There are important differences between the Belarus reform way and that of
successful formerly centrally-planned Asian reformers, like China and Vietnam that lead to this
assessment. Four clements have been key to the success of the Asian transforming economies: (i) a
strong supply response in agriculture, based on price liberalization and reform of land use rights, that has
permitted the lifting of millions of peasants out of poverty; (ii) a large inflow of FDI, which has been key
for growth and creation of modem industrial and service sectors; (iii) high saving rates; and (iv) strong
growth of urban private sector and SMEs in particular, which have provided the engine for growth while
the SOE sector has generally languished.
16. 
In Belarus these four elements are neither present nor likely to materialize, unless substantial
changes to the business environment and to the institutions that protect private property and activity are
introduced. In the absence of progress in these key areas, the country is likely to see its margins for
maneuver reduced over time as enterprise profitability continues to decline, and as the subsidies from
Russia are reduced. A slowing economy, and the absence of job creation in the private sector, could end
up straining the social fabric of the country. Thus, even to effectively implement a gradual approach to
reform, Belarus needs to embrace a program predicated on5:

* Continued improvements 
in its macroeconomic situation and introduction of hard budget
constraints, while granting more operating flexibility to SOEs.

* 

* Bringing substantial improvements to the business environment to allow the creation of economic
opportunities by reducing price controls and other complementary measures.
Increased transparency and efficiency in the management of the budget, particularly with regard
to the social protection system, which is oversized and inefficient, and performs poorly in many
areas.
* Dealing with the important environmental agenda, and in particular with the continuing legacy of
the Chemobyl catastrophe, which has had important economic, fiscal and social consequences
which continue to this day.

* Facilitate emergence of civil society voices and organizations that will enrich the social fabric,
facilitating attention to social problems and the emergence of a strong SME sector.

A. Macroeconomic Stability and Growth

17. 
Since the year 2000, Belarus has made some progress in macroeconomic reform and stabilization
as well as, more recently, in some areas of structural policies. Already the economy is fairly open to
intemational trade, and the share of exports to non-CIS countries has increased. Through stricter fiscal
and monetary policies, inflation was sharply reduced, while the growth rate stayed high. Internal tariff
adjustments, which reduced the energy subsidies directed to domestic consumers, made it possible to re-
unify the exchange rate in September 2000. Subsequently, an understanding with the IMF was reached
on a Staff Monitored Program (SMP) which ran between April-September 2001. The program was only
partly successful. Most macroeconomic targets were attained, use of directed credit was curbed, and
several of the small but important reforms 
in price setting, business legislation, and small scale
privatization were introduced. However, the fiscal target was not met. The major reason for this was the
implementation of wage increase to US$ 100/month, which resulted in further deterioration of enterprise
profitability and a revenue shortfall. The Government needs to reconsider its policy of targeting wages in

5 These reform proposals are consistent with the lessons emerging from the more advanced transition countries

described in Transition: The First Ten Years: Analysis and Lessons for Eastern Europe and The Former Soviet

Union, World Bank, 2002.

8

dollar terms and move in the direction of productivity-oriented wage policies, allowing enterprises to set
wages independent of budgetary wage policies.
18. 
The country has been holding talks with both the IMF and the Russian Government regarding the
macroeconomic outlook for 2002 and beyond. In the absence of major shocks, it is reasonable to expect
that the target of monetary unification with Russia will become more realistic over time and will drive
improvements in fiscal and monetary policies. Still, wage polices and the situation in the SOE sector and
agriculture threaten macroeconomic stabilization. It will be necessary to reduce direct and indirect
subsidies to enterprises, conduct a prudent wage policy, and introduce hard budget constraints for SOEs,
while providing greater flexibility in their management. Although much progress has been registered in
the elimination of off-budget subsidies, one of the main reasons for the run-away inflation of the past, the
budget is likely to remain under severe pressure, and with it the macroeconomic framework, if wage
policies are not made consistent with the economic realities of Belarus. Failure to subject enterprises to
hard budget constraints, while providing needed managerial flexibility, can lead to substantial inter-
enterprise arrears as has been the
case in other CIS countries.
19. 
Hard budget constraints

Graph 1. 

Belarus: Employment by Ownership 

1 00°o1, 

.. .-...- 

s 3 .

..-. 

51 

5and 

for SOEs are needed to manage

the expected 

reduction 

in gas

subsidies and to lower the direct

indirect 
transfers 
to 
the
productive sectors. Phasing out

cross 

subsidies, 

especially 

in

60 

40c,'.r', 

11 

IIL 

1990 

1994 

1999 

|= 

lilthr 

' 0O Private 
energy and communal utilities,
-1 11 
will facilitate introduction of hard
LS 
budget constraints. The country
StE1|1 Eate will also need to tackle current
restrictions on wage setting, hiring
and firing, maintenance of social
assets, that limit the ability of
SOEs 
to respond 
to changing
conditions, and could prove a

hindrance in the years ahead as

Note: The "other" category includes companiies that have been transformed into 
joint stock, but where govenument retains control. 

the economy struggles to adapt to
a changing external environment.
20. 
Governance. Institutional developments in Belarus appear to have prevented the emergence of the
level and types of corruption and other governance problems found in other FSU countries. Belarus kept
in place the old institutions, which follow established practices. This has allowed public institutions to
function more effectively than other FSU countries. Relatively high levels of remuneration as well as the
lack of alternatives in the private sector have permitted the public institutions (at all levels) to retain high
quality specialists. But most of new market friendly institutions are yet to be built. The legal system has
not changed and would have to be radically modified if a market-based economy is to emerge.

B. Creating Opportunities for Job Growth

21. 
The environment for the "true" private sector remains unfavorable. 
It is estimated that private
sector employment accounts for no more than 11 percent (see Graph 1). With privatization proceeding
slowly and sporadically (basically on hold since 1998 except for few sales of mostly individual assets),
most productive assets are in the hands of the state and potential private entrepreneurs find it difficult to
get access to land and real estate and other basic inputs to undertake production. Small-scale privatization
has not been completed.

9

Box IV: Constraints to Business Development and History of Privatization

Constraints to Business Development. The level of development of private businesses in Belarus considerably
lags behiind all neighboring counitries both in their nmibers as well as in tlhcir sustainability. Belarus witlh
approximately 2.6 private small and medium enterprises (SMEs) per 1000 population has the smallest number of
SMEs in comparison with its FSU ncighbors', and is the only transitional economy in which the number of
private SMEs decreased in 2000 and 2001.

Surveys show that unfavorable business environment is the main reason for slow entry and low growNth of SMEs.
Excessive state regulations, close management of private business affairs by state agencies. formal anid informal
preferential treatment of state enterprises, all contribute to the current situation. Registration of new SMEs in
Belarus takes twvo to four times longer (57 days) and costs two to three times more (US$ 223) than in other FSU
countries. Similar is the situation with licensing, where cntrcprenieurs in Belarus (5.5 licenses per SME) have to
obtain three to five more licenses than tlhcir colleagues in Ukraine (1.6) or Georgia (0.9). The clearance of
import and export documents takes on average 3-4 days in Belarus compared to 1-2 days in Georgia or 2.6 days
in Ukraine. Over the last hvo years, the state has increased its interventions including monitorinig, control and
active management of private business affairs by the line ministries and state control organs. This includes
widespread control of contracts as well as price controls.

Businesses in Belarus are muclh morc rigorously inspected than anywhere else in the region -- average nvumber of
days someone is inspecting an SME in Belarus is threce times higher than in Ukraine, namuely 68 versus 24 days
in Ukraine. Only individual entrepreneurs in Belarus enjoy significantly lower inspection burden, which is
actually comparable to the inspection burden of enterprises in Ukraine.

The Goveriment's policies with respect to the private sector have shown some improvements lately. For
example, the Presidential Decree No. 40, issucd in November 1999, which had provisions for out-of-court
confiscation of property, was revoked on November 2001. The Govermnent has committed itself to some
improvements in conditions for entreprencurship, such as, for instance, a new law on licensing and a reduction
of the golden share provisions in privatization. So far, the most important measure that has brought about
benefits to the private sector has been liberalization of the currency regime. However, much more needs to be
done in order to build a conducive environtment to private sector growth. But even a simple reduction of
activities such as urnecessary licenses and price controls or elimination of state institutions that hinder business
development (state control body) and reduction of inspections to one per year. would have a major positive
impact on SME.

Privatization in Belarus. Consistent with the Government's strategy to maintain the status-quo as far as
ownership of means of production is concemed. privatization in Belarus has not yet taken place. In 1991, state
ownership restructuiring began in 40 enterprises. In 1993, Belanis adopted the Program of Dcnationalization and
Privatization, which allowed the privatization of two thirds of major public assets and stipulated that 50 percent
of privatized assets of state companies would be granted to the Belarusian citizens. However, in 1997 the
privatization process was suspended, and as a result the share of private sector in the economy has remained
virtually constant at about 10 percent (employment-based) since then. It should also be noted that none of the
supporting institutions for a market economy are in place. and therefore, it is important to focus on building the
necessary preconditions for privatization at this stage.

'Ukraine has 4 SMEs per 1000 people. Russia - 6 and Poland - 35.

22. 
In Belarus. certainty over property rights is strongly diminished through informal but powerful
measures taken bv the executive that result in arbitrary dispossessions, economic losses and forced
"voluntary" contributions to sectors of the economy that may be enjoying a favorite position (such as, for
instance, housing). Transaction costs are also very high, as little certainty exists as to the application of
laws that can be overruled by presidential decree and by other administrative fiat. Businesses are often
subject to registration drives and the overall macroeconomic environment has not been nurturing of new
economic activity. The result, not surprisingly, is that Belarus ranks very low in terms of creation of
SMEs, and has had one of the worst records of FDI in the FSU. And, yet, the limited experience in
Belarus shows that there is good potential for private sector development and that investing existing

10

resources in private rather than SOE sector can bring greater incomes and employment. (See Box IV on
Constraints to Business Development).
23. 
Constraints to growth are particularly significant in the agriculture sector, where very little
progress has been made in introducing market forces and creating property rights. As a result, the sector
has been declining steadily and suffers from a very poor financial situation (with notable exceptions
provided by the few private farms and by farms that have been allowed to restructure). The Bank has
provided considerable knowledge transfer on the experience of other economies in transition and on
options for reform in this area. So far, however, little progress has been seen in developing a strategy to
move forward, although the Government announced its willingness to experiment with several possible
models in the future.
24. 
Finally, the general consensus is that the financial sector does not fulfill a role of encouraging
savings and distributing resources towards the most productive uses, but rather that it has been influenced
by the Government to direct credit to favorite sectors (particularly agriculture and housing) and to
selected enterprises. While the Central Bank has been recently granted an independent status, there are
serious questions on its de facto independence. Equally, because property rights are not firmly
guaranteed the health of the portfolio of major banks is likely to be at least questionable. While this
subordinate role has been possible in the past few years, adoption of harder budget constraints and of the
Russia treaty are likely to exert substantial pressure on the system that will need to be addressed in the
years to come. There is need to improve the understanding of the status and operation of the financial
sector.

C. Improving Management and Efficiency of Public Expenditure

25. 
The public sector budget absorbs close to 47 percent of GDP, putting a high fiscal burden oin the
productive sectors. 
In addition, a significant amount of public resources continues to be managed off
budget by the government or subordinate agencies, which can use discretionary powers to draw resources
out of enterprises. This discretionary power drains resources from enterprises, now in a difficult financial
situation, and reduces the transparency in the management of public resources. The Government needs to
improve reporting of public expenditure and reduce expenses to improve effectiveness and lessen the
fiscal burden on the enterprise sector, which increasingly cannot comply with existing tax legislation.
26. 
This is especially true for the social sectors which today receive some 25 percent of GDP. Despite
this significant allocation of resources, poverty continues to be an important problem in the country and
delivery of health and education services need significant improvement. Most notably:

* With respect to Social assistance, the problem consists of the existence of a myriad of privileges
for different classes of beneficiaries that would, if funded, require multiples of what is actually
spent. A productive dialogue has taken place between the Bank and the Government (with the
participation of other donors). Bank assistance has led to the implementation of a pilot Targeted
Social Assistance Scheme, which has provided satisfactory results so far. The challenge now is
to extend the pilot nationwide, while introducing measures to reduce untargeted, untested benefits
that are too expensive.

* With regard to Health, Belarus faces multiple challenges - in prevention, treatment, policies, and
effective resource use. Natural population growth turned negative between 1990 and 1999, as the
falling crude birth rate dropped below the rising crude death rate mainly due to economic
hardships. Non-communicable diseases lead the causes of death, with alcohol playing the largest
role and adult male mortality well above rates in other countries. But communicable diseases -
led by MV/AIDS, TB and sexually transmitted diseases - threaten a sharp resurgence. Inherited
policies allocated resources ineffectively among many competing claims and caused their use to
be highly inefficient. Both policy makers and consumers have judged the sector's performance to
be unsatisfactory, but the Government is also unimpressed by health reform experiences in other

11

formerly Soviet republics, and has so far responded by: (i) launching a number of pilot initiatives
that begin to address 
the problems, 
including 
initiatives on health care financing and
communicable disease strategies; (ii) planning for further reforms in financing, service delivery,
and oversight within the health sector, and (iii) working with the Bank to prepare both a
TB/AIDS project and a health policy note. This has created a constructive and productive policy
dialogue on all aspects of health between the Government and the Bank.

D. Dealing with Environmental Challenges and the Legacy of Chernobyl

27. 
Belarus has made good progress in the protection of its environment, especially in energy
conservation and protection of natural resources. Energy intensity declined by 44 percent from 1990 to
1999 as a result of the change in the structure of production and of active energy efficiency measures
taken by the Government. Emissions of air pollutants have also declined as a result of the increased use
of natural gas. Most measures of air and water quality in Belarus have either remained stable or improved
over the last decade. The areas under protection, mostly wetlands, have increased by 30 percent since
1991 and are now close to 12 percent of the national territory. High collection rates of environmental fees
and fines and successful use of international environmental funds have resulted in higher overall levels of
funding to the environment than in some neighboring countries.
28. 
Nevertheless, Belarus is still facing many environmental problems. The forestry resources of
Belarus are growing in volume terms but the present management system encourages inefficient use of
raw materials and does not generate the maximum benefit in terms of income and employment. 
In the
water and energy sectors, government policies directed to promote social protection have led to a system
of complex price controls and low utility tariffs that did not generate sufficient resources for long-term
environmental friendly investments.
29. 
The required reforms to improve the environment include further improvements in energy
efficiency, relying more on locally based management to improve rural and small town water supplies and
introducing demand driven management of utilities such as water. One area of high priority for action is
the preservation of unique ecosystems and biodiversity present in Belarus. Finally, increases in forested
land can contribute to carbon sequestration.
30. 
A problem of key significance concerns the legacy of the Chernobyl catastrophe, which in
addition to environmental has economic, human and fiscal consequences. After the explosion at the
Chemobyl Nuclear power plant in 1986, over 70 percent of the radioactive fall-out landed on Belarusian
soil, contaminating almost 23 percent of its territory. As a result, economic activity on the 261,000
hectares of arable land (about 3 percent of the total arable land) and on 36,000 hectares of forests has been
banned due to the high degree of contamination. Chernobyl also has an enormous human dimension -
about 137,000 people were evacuated from the highly contaminated areas. As of January 1, 2001, about
1.6 million people in Belarus lived in areas with radioactive contamination. Although the precise health
effects of the Chernobyl catastrophe are yet to be determined, the link of significant increase in childhood
thyroid cancer to the accident has been proven.
31. 
The Government has been allocating significant, although declining, resources to address the
consequences of Chernobyl (1.6% of GDP in 2000) which has put significant pressure on the budget.
However, the effectiveness of some programs is questionable, and the sustainability of current programs
is unclear due to the projected further decline in resource allocation to this area. A new State Program to
deal with the aftermath of the Chernobyl disaster for 2001-2005 and up to 2010 was adopted in January
2001. The program is based on extensive assistance programs, which create dependency and diminish
people's own initiative in resolving their problems. There is a need to move away from this approach and
encourage people to take a more active role in re-building their lives.

12

E. Facilitating the Emergence of Civil Society Voices and Organizations

32. 
Civil society can play a central role in smoothening economic transition in Belarus. Active civil
society organizations identify emerging economic and social problems and contribute with imaginative
solutions, which in many cases complement or even substitute for government actions. Belarus, like other
FSU countries, does not have a strong civil society tradition; but, the limited experience in areas such as
HIV/AIDS prevention and the development of SMEs shows that, 
in Belarus too, civil society
organizations can be quite effective. Their further development, though, will require a nurturing
institutional environment. Thus, there is need to assure an adequate legal framework and guarantee an
ample scope for their operation without undue external interference.

IV. The Government Program

33. 
The leadership of the country is aware that the strategy that has supported economic growth in the
past has been largely exhausted and seeks to set a new course of gradual transition to a "socially oriented
market economy." The Government's long-term commitment to social policies would be complemented
by an acceleration of structural 
reforms, and tight fiscal and monetary policies 
to maintain
macroeconomic stability. In the fiscal area, the Government has announced its intent to maintain a budget
deficit of no more than 1.5% yearly. It plans to ease the tax burden (from 36.2% of GDP in 2001 to 33.9%
in 2002, with a further 5-6% reduction by 2005) and broaden the tax base by cutting individual
exemptions and privileges. It also plans to continue limiting credit from the National Bank to the Budget.
34. 
The Government also intends to reduce the impediments to growth of small and medium
enterprises (SME) by simplifying registration procedures; reduce the number of entrepreneurial activities
subject to licensing (from 165 to 42 in 2002 and to 10-12 in the next couple of years); streamline the
SMEs taxation procedures; and significantly reduce the burden of inspections and unwarranted controls.
The Government has already made initial progress in some of these areas.
35. 
A significant streamlining of the public administration was initiated in September 2001. This has
resulted in a reduction in half of the number of ministries (from 44 to 28) as well as in the number of
Cabinet members (from 60 to 38) and in the number of Vice-Prime-Ministerial positions (from 8 to 4).
The total bureaucracy headcount is to be cut by up to 10%.
36. 
The Government has been liberalizing, under the recently expired IMF Staff Monitored Program,
the extensive system of price controls and is planning to limit the controls to fuel, energy, natural
monopolies and some "socially significant" goods and services. Keeping price controls on selected goods,
as proposed, would still require pricing consistent with the cost of production. The Government will also
develop a strategy to phase out the cross-subsidy system in housing and communal services. Likewise, it
plans to pursue WTO accession which implies institutional changes, guaranteeing equal treatment for
domestic and foreign enterprises and trade reform. The Government expects that these measures will help
bring in foreign investment.
37. 
The unification agreement with Russia, currently under implementation, is likely to play an
important role in shaping Belarus's future macroeconomic and structural policies. Thus, the planned
common currency area by 2005 will constrain the use of fiscal and monetary instruments to subsidize the
productive sectors. The Governments of Belarus and Russia have already created a joint working group
for the development of common economic policies and defined a priority legislative agenda needed for
harmonization. The Central Bank of Russia has allocated funds in 2002 for the stabilization of Belarus'
currency and to facilitate procurement of energy resources.
38. 
Regarding social policy, the Government is planning to shift to a targeted system of public
assistance, which will reduce the fiscal burden and assure attention to the poor and needy. In this regard,
it has already initiated pilot programs with Bank support. It is also considering reforming the health care
system to reduce fiscal cost by increasing the number of paid-in services, propping the share of non-

budgetary financing from 30% in 2002 to 50% by 2005.

39. 
As a result of these policies the Government hopes to meet the targets set in its Work Program fol
2001-2005 approved by Parliament in December 2001, which sets numerical goals for economic
development, defines the role of the government structures and local administrations in the attainment of
the goals. It projects the following growth numbers for the 2002-2005 period: GDP -- 35-40 percent,
industrial production - 30 percent, agriculture - 25 percent, real wages - 80-85 percent up to the average
monthly level of US$250 by the year 2005.
40. 
Bank assessment. The overall direction of the Government's program is a gradual reform course.
which is aligned with meeting the requirement of the unification agreement with Russia, However, there
are several concerns that would need to be addressed. Despite the positive policy changes in the past two
years, including the exchange rate unification and stricter monetary policy, macroeconomic stabilization
is not vet secured. Late last year a set-back to economic stabilization was caused bv the decision to
increase wages in the budgetary, and enterprise sectors to the equivalent of US$100/month. This measure,
unaccompanied by corresponding increases in productivity, has resulted, predictablv in (i) a substantively
higher wage bill in the government sector, and in (ii) increased difficulties for enterprises, an increasing
number of which are falling into arrears to other enterprises or the tax authorities. This was the maill
reason for Belarus's inability to fulfill the IMF's Staff Monitored Program benchmarks. What is more
worrisome, the Government's program calls for further increases in wages in dollar equivalent, which, if
implemented, would most likely lead the country towards a new spiral of hyperinflation and external
insolvency. Therefore, wage policies should reflect the economic realities of the economv and not
political and unrealistic objectives.
41. 
Thus the quantitative targets of the program, appear over-optimistic. and are above the estimates
of the Bank given the marked inconsistencies among proposed policies, including wag,e setting, fiscal
balance and enterprise profitability. In these circumstances, it is important that the GovernmenL adheres to
more realistic forecasts in its macroeconomic program and eliminates inconsisteincies among p .
to
prevent shortfalls in revenue projections and the emergence of budgetary arrears. Lastly, there remain
areas of concern which are not properly addressed in the Government's program, as is the case of
agnculture and privatization.

V. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Scenarios

A. A Most Likely Scenario

42. 
A probable scenario for Belarus over the 2002-04 CAS period would be driven by the p.olicy
convergence needed for monetary union with Russia in 2005. Achieving this objective is complicated by
differences in economic structures and economic policies in both countries, but the process of integration
with Russia will likely encourage market reforms. 
In this scenario, the Government would partiallv
remove price controls aDd introduce partial reforns in the business environment consistent with the
slowly changing politico-economic environment and with social priorities. Despite likely advances in
small-scale privatization and growth in new SMEs, the private sector would stav limited in size and scope
and have only a relatively smiall impact on GDP growth and employment. The Govermment would
continue to make progress towards achieving a sound macro-frameveork by observing progressively
sound monetary policy and a reasonable fiscal policy. As a result, the inflation rate is projected to drop
from 61 percent in 2001 to around 10 percent in 2004. Furthermore, it is assumed that the exchange rate
will remain unified and that the Government would phase out the use of direct methodls to induce
production and exports and control quasi-fiscal expenditure. 
It is also assumed that the external
environment would remain favorable, especially the continued growth of the Russia's market.
43. 
Under this scenario, economic growth wouid slow down since capital utilizatiolu has already
reached a point where new investment and technological innovation are necessary for conatinued robust

14

growth, and the Russian market would be becoming increasingly more competitive. Taking account of a
slower export drive, it is expected that economic growth will drop to 1.5 percent in 2002. Thereafter,
economic growth would pick to reach above 3 percent by 2004. Given the decreasing population trend,
the rate of economic growth per capita would exceed 3 percent.
44. 
As indicated above, this base case scenario assumes that exports would grow at a rate slightly
lower than GDP due to (a) capacity constraint restrictions; (b) higher costs of energy and other imported
inputs; and (c) stronger competition in the FSU markets. Hence, adjustments in energy prices to
intemational levels and the general deterioration in the terms of trade would lead to a gradual worsening
of the current account deficit6 , which would go from an estimated surplus of 1.6 percent of GDP in 2001
to a deficit of slightly above 2.0 in 2004. 
In the past, current account deficits were typically financed
through a combination of accumulation of arrears, debt forgiveness and debt/asset swaps with Russia.
This scenario assumes that these gap-filling mechanisms would continue to operate during the next CAS
period and that additional finance from Russia would come to fill part of the incremental current account
deficit. Already Russia is providing assistance for U$250 million over 2001-2003.
45. 
Belarus's official public external debt stands at around 7 percent of GDP, among the lowest of all

Table 2: Belarus: Key Macroeconomic Indicators during the Next CAS Period
2001 
2002 
2003 
Estimate 
Projections

GrowthRate of GDP (percentp/a) 

Total Debt / GDP 

Debt Service / Total Exports 

Government Deficit / GDP 

CAB (incl official transfers) / GDP 

Memo: CAB in US $ Million 

4.1% 

7.4% 

3.0% 

1.8% 

1.6% 

193 

1.5% 

7.4% 

2.9% 

-0.7% 

-0.5% 

-62 

2.1% 

7.3% 

2.7% 

0.0% 

-0.6% 

-77 

2004

3.4%

6.9%

2.3%

0.0%

-2.1%

-271

transition economies7 . The relatively limited projected current account deficits under this scenario would
imply a slight decline in public external debt, to less than 7 percent of GDP by 2005. Even if reforms
proceed at a slower pace than needed for monetary unification with Russia, the mid-term scenario.
presented here would not be expected to change significantly.

B. Stagnation

46. 
If the Government fails to carry out the main elements of the base case reform package, a
significant slowdown in economic activity would be possible, with return to high levels of inflation and
general tightness on the external front. As seen in the past, under these circumstances it could be
expected that the authorities would resort to arrears and increased administrative controls on the exchange

6 Thus far, however, the recent agreement between Russia and Belarus has lowered gas prices even further to $25
per 1,000 cubic meters. Also, increases in oil prices may be more limited than thought due to the fact that 40
percent of imported oil is re-exported.
7 It is likely that the effective external debt of the country is higher once account is taken of the external debt of
SOE without government guarantee. But, this type of non-guaranteed debt is not likely to burden the balance of
payments, as it would have to be settled through individual arrangements between lenders and debtors, mainly
through debt/asset swaps.

15

rate.
47. 
While this development would be the result of economic behaviors not consistent with present
agreements with Russia and with the IFIs, it cannot be considered improbable at the present time. In that
case a number of alternative scenarios could present themselves, either leading to prolonged depression
for the Belarus economy, or to the emergence of open political conflict over the fundamental directions of
the country. In either case, the Bank would limit its assistance to global goods or poverty-related

activities.

C. A High Case

48. 
During CAS implementation reforms could possibly accelerate, leading to what could be called a
high case scenario. An accelerated reform scenario, though, is not likely to have a considerable positive
impact on the rate of economic growth over the next three years. Rather these reforms are likely to have a
significant impact on the rate and the quality of economic growth beyond this CAS. A scenario of
accelerated reforms, though not yet quantified, would likely require additional external financing to
sustain the reform drive. The Bank Group would prepare a CAS update if such a scenario were to arise.

VI. Bank Assistance and Lessons Learned
49. 
Belarus joined the Bank in 1992. Soon after, the Government embraced a stabilization program
and requested World Bank and IMF assistance. The Bank's response followed the sequence similar to
other interventions in the FSU countries. An Institution Building Loan (US$8.3 million) was approved in
July 1993 to assist in building new market institutions and to enhance the Government's ability to design
and implement economic reforms, followed by a Rehabilitation Loan (US$120 million, November 1993),
to facilitate adoption of key reform measures and provide foreign exchange for critical imports. The IMF
approved a Systemic Transformation Facility (STF) in July 1993.
50. 
The Bank prepared a limited CAS for Belarus in 1993, which was followed by the preparation of
a full CAS 
in 1995. This was withdrawn from consideration by the Executive Directors at the
Government's request.
51. 
Since 1995 lack of agreement on reform prevented further Bank lending. The only operation
approved between FY95 - FY00 was a GEF Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS) grant (FY97, US$6.9
million). Bank efforts focused on developing the basis for a stronger dialogue on economic reform. A
number of pieces of ESW were carried out, including a poverty assessment (FY96), two CEMs (FY93,
FY97) and sector studies in agriculture, energy, environment, 
transport, finance, and enterpnrse
development. The Bank also remained active in carrying out public education programs and facilitating
discussions on pressing reform issues with government agencies, research institutions, NGOs, and civil
society. 
IFC continued to carry out its program of technical assistance to SMEs and to small-scale
prvatization.
52. 
Discussions of the FY97 Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) ("Belarus: Prices, Markets and
Enterprise Reform") led to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the Bank and the
Government in July 1997. In retrospect, it became clear that the Government was not interested, or did
not have a mandate, to implement the provisions of the MOU. In parallel, discussions with the IMF on a
possible program did not progress either. With the August 1998 crisis in Russia, the Belarus Govermment
came under strong pressure on the external front, and resorted to stricter currency controls. This led to a
cooling down in relations with IFIs. When the Government of Belarus requested the preparation of a new
CAS for FY99, the lack of progress in MOU implementation led the Bank to set a single but strict
condition-exchange rate unification - as trigger for any future lending. The Bank, however, continued to
provide 
technical assistance 
in limited areas where there were opportunities 
for dialogue, 
like
environment and social protection. It also continued economic and sector work and prepared, in addition
to the CEM, a policy note on agriculture policies and a report on farm restructuring.

16

53. 
Recent Developments. Bank relations with Belarus have been improving since 2000 with a
successful dialogue on social protection, environment and on conditions for improvement of the business
environment. The unification of the exchange rate in September 2000, meeting the 1999 CAS trigger,
allowed the Bank to proceed with the preparation of the US$22.6 million Social Infrastructure
Retrofitting Project (retrofitting of 600 schools and hospitals), approved on June 5, 2001.
54. 
Main Lessons. Previous Bank experience in Belarus shows that (as in other countries) there is
little to be gained by pushing the policy dialogue (and conditionality) envelope beyond what the
Government can consider part of its own program. In addition, while setting "all-or-nothing" conditions
for lending relationships may protect the Bank's financial position from any risks as well as reduce the
risk of unsatisfactory development effectiveness outcomes, a strategy of non-engagement also has its
downsides. It makes it difficult to help address the basic social needs of Belarusian people, and does not
help in promoting and building the future basis for a more open economy. Moreover, it does not allow
addressing the risks of a global nature - environment, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, etc.

55. 
The positive experiences with the implementation of the ODS grant and with social safety-nets
and health reform programs provide evidence that the Bank can make a difference in areas of common
policy agreement. For these reasons, the present CAS takes a pragmatic approach on areas where there
can be collaboration based on shared objectives between Government, country's development needs and
global public goods.
56. 
A second important lesson is that the decision to maintain a presence on the ground despite the
poor state of relations between Bank and Belarus was in retrospect strategically correct, as it allowed the
Bank to maintain one of the few avenues for dissemination of international experience and opening a
bridge to the nascent civil society. Maintaining this open contact and window on the outside world is
expected to continue to provide high payoffs in the future.
57. 
IFC Relations. Currently, IFC's activity in Belarus mainly consists of a donor-funded technical
assistance8 . To date, IFC has completed two TA projects: a USAID-financed Small-Scale Privatization
Project and a Post-Privatization Project with funding from the British Know-How Fund. IFC is presently
implementing a USAID-funded Small and Medium Enterprise Development Project.
58. 
IFC's technical assistance projects have helped set up the practice of small-scale privatization.,
and created the core of a local business consulting industry organized through business centers. Under its
Small and Medium Enterprise Development Project, IFC has assisted the national and local business-
associations to expand their coverage and consolidate their role in the civil society; and provided public
education programs.
59. 
IBRD Portfolio Overview. The Belarus portfolio currently consists of two projects - the Forestry
Development (FY94, US$33.9 million, closing in April 2002) and the Social Infrastructure Retrofitting
Project (FY0 1, US$22.6 million), which has just recently become effective. An ODS project (GEF grant,
FY97, US$6.9 million) has fully disbursed and has been closed ahead of schedule. This project was rated
highly satisfactory and represents a model project in the region.

VII. The Bank Assistance Strategy for 2002-2004
60. 
Objective. The objective of the Country Assistance Strategy for 2002-04, is to help Belarus in
increasing the living standards of its people. This is to be accomplished by (i) addressing social and
environmental risks that affect or could affect the welfare of its population, particularly its weakest

8 In the Spring of 1998, IFC approved and signed an equity investment in a joint-venture steel coating project.
However, legal uncertainty surrounding the agreed site lease stalled the project, and the foreign partner lost interest
following protracted negotiations. The project was subsequently cancelled.

17

members, and by (ii) helping government and civil society overcome the constraints that have prevented a
more balanced and job-intensive growth. In addition, the strategy will support Belarus's efforts in areas
involving Global Public Goods considerations, where benefits can accrue not only to the Belarusian
population, but to the rest of the world as Nvell. The stated objective is fully in line with the Millennium
Development Goals for alleviating poverty and creating an environment conductive of development in the
2 1 ' century. While compared with other countries Belarus fares better in most of the categories under the
Millennium Development Goals, the CAS would seek to help the Government in furthering these
achievements.
61. 
The Bank Strategy. The CAS is tailored to the challenges posed by the gradual reform approach
that the present Government is likely to follow. The Bank will provide advice, technical assistance and
good practice dissemination, particularly in the critical areas of business environment, social protection
and reform of social services. A key objective of the strategy is to help the nascent civil society of
Belarus grow by supporting capacity building and by offering opportunities for collaboration in Bank
projects. The strategy will capitalize on the already-extensive dialogue and common work with
Belarusian small and medium entrepreneurs, while reinforcing third sector organizations that are active in
social and environmental causes. Modest amounts of lending will be targeted to meeting the most urgent
needs of the population in those areas where there is coincidence between the Government program anid
the Bank agenda. In addition, the Bank will concentrate on areas of action where global public goods
considerations are part of the country's agenda.
62. 
The strategy supports work in these three key areas:
(i) Global Public Goods that are also high on Belarus's agenda;
(ii) Mitigation of social risks, including the consequences of Chemobyl disaster; and
(iii) Fostering private sector development 
through a better business and 
investment

environment.

63. 
In each area the CAS would seek to develop effective partnerships with government, civil society,
other donors and stakeholders. Bank support would come in the form of lending operations, economic
and sector work and technical assistance, and, possibly, grants (e.g., GEF).
64. 
Advisory and AnalyticalActivities. The Bank group intends to use its economic and sector work
as a major vehicle for spreading knowledge, developing ideas, disseminating information and sharing the
experiences of other countries. This has been a very important mainstay of our activity over the past few
years, and has led to a well-regarded standing of the Bank in Belarusian society, provided useful policy
information to policy-makers, and has resulted in some changes on the ground. The involvement of local
experts in this work will continue and be expanded.
65. 
The Bank intends to address the lack of information concerning many aspects of the Belarus
economy and society that has resulted from the low level of activity of the past. A Poverty Update and an
Environmental Update are close to completion and will be complemented early in the CAS period by a
study on the Aftermath of Chemobyl (2002) and a key study on Obstacles to Business and Investment
(focusing on the environment for private business and issues of corporate govemance, SOEs included).
Several due-diligence activities are being planned in 2003 to assess the country's fiscal, financial and
procurement systems -- Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA), Public Expenditure
Review (PER), and a Financial Sector Assessment. The PER will seek to provide the analytical basis to
assist Government's effort to increase control and transparency over all forms of public expenditures,
streamline public expenditure and set a new institutional basis for the delivery of social services. It will
also review the energy subsidy structure and its impact on the economy and the budget. The Financial
Sector Assessment would analyze the current challenges of the financial sector, and those likely to obtain
with the currency unification with Russia. A Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) (2004)
will be prepared as a contribution to improvement of budgetary practices and public sector accountability.
66. 
Later in the CAS period, the Bank will prepare a Development Policy Review (2004), to analyze

18

Table 3: Triggers and Lending Levels

Proposed Lending Scenarios 
Low Case

Triggers

1. No deterioration in portfolio performance

2. Strict adherence to financial and fiduciary obligations.

3. No re-introduction of multiple exchange rates, or equivalent
restrictions.

Exclusive concentration on activities that 

address issues of global and social nature 

(AIDS, tuberculosis, environment, social 
protection). 2002-04 lending to total up to 
US$140 million.

Base Case 

1. Same as above.
Activities extended to support reform efforts 2. Sustainable macroeconomic situation, as evidenced by the
in the areas where Bank and Government 
following indicative targets: (a) reducing and maintaining
goals coincide - (such as SME support, farm 
the level of inflation below 40 percent, (b) maintaining the
restructuring). 2002-04 lending up to a total of 
current account balance greater than -4 percent of GDP,
US$270 million. No adjustment lending is 
and (c) maintaining a fiscal deficit below 3 percent of GDP.
envisaged. 
3. Continued liberalization of price controls on goods and
services.
4. Positive track record in the implementation of a credible
plan to significantly improve business and investment
climate, covering (a) registration, (b) licensing, (c)
inspections and control, (d) exit, and (e) other relevant
areas. (See section on Triggers below).
5. Satisfactory progress in increasing the accountability in the
use of public resources. The 2003 budget to quantify the
size of quasi fiscal accounts and to eliminate of-budget
resources for line ministries, including the innovation
funds.

the economic and institutional implications of a gradual transformation of the economy, including the
consequences deriving from the integration agreements with Russia and efforts to join the WTO. In
addition, during the CAS period the Bank will undertake a series of Civil Society Building Activities
(2002-04) to facilitate greater participation of citizens and civic organizations 
in determining the
country's future. The Bank will also seek donor support to undertake a joint Social and Gender Analysis
(2003) to identify additional areas in need of action. To enhance communication and information sharing
between various segments of civil society, an E-Development program is planned in 2003. The IFC
technical assistance to SMEs would continue providing support to business community throughout the
CAS period, subject to continued donor funding.
67. 
Lending scenarios and triggers. Bank assistance will revolve around two lending case seenarios:
a base case and a low case. At present Belarus is in the low case scenario - the country has adopted a
unified exchange rate and the Bank has resumed lending operations according to the 1999 CAS. Given
that the country's Bank portfolio is performing adequately and there have been no issues of concern with
financial and fiduciary obligations in the use of Bank resources, the country meets the conditions for the
low case scenario as detailed in Table 3. Maintenance of the low case would be predicated on no reversals
with regard to exchange rate unification. The lending envelope will be limited to US$140million over the
CAS period under this case.
68. 
Triggers for the Base Case. The base case would be triggered by (i) maintaining a satisfactory
macroeconomic environment; (ii) an adequate track record in improving the business environment,
according to a program elaborated jointly with the Bank (see triggers), and (iii) implementing the agreed
measures to improve accountability of public finances. The base case lending envelope would reach
US$270 million for the three-year period.

19

69. 
In the absencc of an IMF supported program, the macro situation will be assessed by the Bank
based on the soundness of the overall macroeconomic framework. The following indicative indicators
will be specifically considered: (a) achievement of reduced inflation and its maintenance at below 40
percent level, (b) keeping the current account balance above -4 percent of GDP, and (c) maintenance of a
sound fiscal position as evidences by a consolidated fiscal deficit below 3 percent of GDP. The numerical
targets would be re-aligned with those of an IMF supported program if such a program were put in place.
Finally, a thorough assessment of the soundness of the overall macro situation would be carried out if the
base case lending scenario were imminent.
70. 
Regarding private sector development, it would be expected (a) a gradual shrinkage in the system
of price controls 9 , limiting it to natural monopolies and a few social goods'"; and (b) satisfactory progress
in removing the main obstacles to businesses. On the former, consumer goods and services subject to
price controls will be reduced to a weighted 20 percent of the CPI basket. On the latter, it is expected that
the President would enact an Action Plan on streamlining business registration, substantially streamlining
business licensing, eliminating excessive inspections and control of business activity by state agencies,
facilitating enterprise exit, removing internal trade restrictions, facilitating access to land and real estate,
and eliminating other limitations to doing business. The plan would include a clear timetable and progress
indicators. The trigger for the base case would be a positive track record (minimum six months) in the
implementation of this plan. Thereafter, the Bank and Govemment would access the effectiveness of
these actions through notable improvements in business environment measured by increase in the number
of registered new private businesses and through regular business surveys. Positive developments in the
business environment would be needed to remain in the base case.
71. 
Actions to improve the transparency in the use of public resources would initially focus on
enhancing budget coverage, beginning with the (a) identification of quasi-fiscal accounts and extra-
budgetary funds, (b) periodic reporting and auditing of all off-budget accounts, and, (b) when possible,
routing of these operations through the national treasury. 
It is expected that the Government would
present to Parliament a 2003 budget that would include a quantification of the effects of the quasi-fiscal
accounts and elimination of all off-budget resources in the line-ministries, including the innovation funds,
as well as adequate provision for full accountability to Parliament of the Presidential Fund. An action
plan for the reform, including a specific timetable and monitorable indicators, would be developed jointly
by the Bank and Government. The adherence to the provisions of the action plan will be a base case
trigger.
72. 
Given past experience, this CAS proposes a period of one year, after the elimination of the
Presidential Decree #40 last November, for the country to build a track record and access the base case.
The track record will be built around improvements in Belarus's approach to private sector development
and the transparency in the use of public resources.

The Low Case Lending Program
73. 
Under the low case scenario, which is in effect at present, efforts would be made to maintain high
levels of non-lending assistance, including support to meet the country's commitments under international
environmental agreements, and to increase involvement with civil society, particularly in areas of greatest
social concern. Under this case, lending would include: a project to help fight the spread of TB and AIDS
(2002); a LIL to pilot the implementation of a system of targeted social assistance (2002); an operation to
help alleviate the human and economic consequences of the Chernobyl catastrophe (2003); a project (co-
financed with GEF) to address urgent environmental priorities, including climate change mitigation; and a
Social Investment Fund (2004). The lending envelope would be limited to US$140 million over the three-

' The current system controls both the price levels and the rate of increase. Both of these would have to be removed
to meet the price control liberalization trigger.

10 This will require amendment of the Presidential Decree N285 dated May 19,1999.

20

year period. A detailed description of the above mentioned projects is presented in the section on the base
case lending program.

The Base Case Lending Program
74. 
The base case lending envisages three areas of activity: (i) Global Public Goods; (ii) Mitigation of
social risks, including the aftermath of Chernobyl; and (iii) Fostering private sector development through
a better business and investment environment.

A. Global Public Goods

75. 
Both in the base and in the low cases a number of activities are envisaged that address some of
the global public goods concerns and that also coincide with the country program and government
priorities.
76. 
TB/AIDS. The first lending operation envisaged under the CAS is a project to help Belarus meet
the challenge posed by the spread of HIV/AIDS and the increase in the incidence of Tuberculosis. The
Government has already put in place or facilitated several programs for HIV prevention, and has shown
great interest in adopting WHO-recommended procedures (DOTS) for dealing with prevention and
treatment of tuberculosis. The project will seek to involve NGOs dealing with these problems in project
implementation, as they are the most appropriate vehicles for reaching communities at risk.

TABLE 4-PROPOSED LENDING PROGRAM-2002/04 (MILLION US$)

CV02 

Low Case 

TB/AIDS 
Social Assistance LU. 

Subtotal 

Base Case 

CY03 

Low Case 

CY04

Low Case

40 Chemobyl 

5 Environment/Climate 

Change (GEF/IBRD)

45 

20

Social Investment Fund 

30

45 Subtotal 

65 Subtotal 

Base Case 

Base Case

30

30

40
30

l00

Low Case lending 

45 Low Case lending 

65 Low Case lending 

Private Sector 
Development 
Health Policy Reform

30 Rural Development 
30 Social Assistance Reform 

Tota1 

45 Total (excl. GEF) 

125 Total 

77. 
Environment. The Bank has been active in supporting Belarus with its environmental challenges.
This support included two GEF grants: a Biodiversity project (2003; US$1 million) and an Ozone
Depleting Substances grant (FY97, US$6.9 million), and a Forestry Loan (FY94, US$ 42 million) that
included support for pollution monitoring and fire management. The Bank also conducted several
environmental studies, including an ongoing Environment Sector Review. This ongoing study shows that
environmental issues continue to represent a high risk for the population and the overall development
effort. The study also shows that the Government has a high degree of commitment to address
environmental challenges and has been effective in developing and implementing programs.

21

78. 
A GEF operation (2003) would assist Belarus in dealing with environmental issues on greenhouse
gas (GHG) emission reductions and carbon sequestration. This operation will be developed in conjunction
with the Social Infrastructure retrofitting Project already in place. It is expected that GEF resources would
be complemented by an IBRD loan. Also, a Chernobyl project (2003) would focus on mitigating the
environmental impact of Chernobyl, in addition to the social, fiscal and economic development issues
related to the Chernobyl aftermath. The Chernobyl Review currently underway would provide the
underpinning for this operation.

79. 
Financial Sector. While Belarus's financial sector does not pose grave systemic threats to the
international financial architecture, little is known regarding its present status and the potentials for a
crisis spillover, were it to occur. For this reason, the Bank will conduct a financial sector review (2003),
which might provide the basis for further policy advice, particularly in the context of the envisaged
currency unification with Russia. Under the improvements stipulated in the base case, IFC may be able to
attract foreign banks to partner with Belarusian financial institutions, especially in the area of trade
financing.

B. Mitigation of Social Risks

80. 
The Bank will provide advice and resources to mitigate the social risks of reform, to support the
poorest segments of the population and to deal with the human consequences of the Chernobyl
catastrophe.

81. 
Chernobyl. The Bank will cooperate with other international agencies 
in supporting the
Government in addressing direct and indirect lingering effects of the Chernobyl accident through the
investment operation mentioned above (2003). Chernobyl still continues to affect Belarus through a
variety of different channels: economic and social consequences of displaced people, need for special
techniques for keeping consumer and other products radiation-free, environment contamination, health
effects, absorption of public resources, and an overall negative stigma on the country. The Bank, through
the current Environment Study now being completed and an ongoing Chernobyl Study, will take stock of
the lingering effects of the Chernobyl catastrophe, and design the proposed operation. It is expected that
this operation would attract other donors' interest. Interventions could include:

* Streamlining Chernobyl-related benefits under the targeted Social Assistance Prograni
* Helping develop economic activity and improve delivery of social services in the Chernobyl-
affected areas
* Deepening the understanding of health and other consequences of radiation
* Building community support to healthier lifestyles in the contaminated territories
* 
Improving the radiation monitoring systems
* Undertaking investments to maintain and upgrade equipment needed to monitor and control
radiation impact.
82. 
The project would also contribute to strengthening of civil society's participation 
in the
mitigation of the Chernobyl aftermath through collaboration with NGOs (small grants, contracting out),
and involvement of local communities in project implementation.
83. 
Social Safety Nets. The Bank has had an active dialogue and technical assistance with the
Government to develop a better system of social safety nets. A new targeted system is being designed
and several pilots are currently under implementation to test the new system. The first results are
encouraging-they showed that through better targeting the assistance reaches the most needy while
reducing overall fiscal costs. The Government is keen to proceed with the introduction of a fully targeted
system of social assistance and the Bank is planning to provide continued support in this area through
technical assistance and training, as well as through a Social Assistance LIL (CY02). Building on the
lessons learned from the LIL the Bank would develop a Social Assistance Reform Project in CY04.
Based on the results of the PER, the Bank will assist government efforts to streamline social expenditure,

22

with the objective to target social assistance to the poorest members of society, to ensure effective
functioning of safety nets as structural reforrns are implemented, and to develop mechanisms to involving
civil society in program design and implementation.
84. 
Social Investment Fund. The Bank has accumulated positive experiences in the Region in setting
up Social Investment Funds that can serve to reach directly to the poorest communities and allow them to
improve the social infrastructure and create job opportunities. Capitalizing on the nascent dialogue with
civil society, as well as on Government's desire to relieve poverty, a SIF could be proposed for Belarus as
well (2004). This would require, in a complex political and social environment, finding sufficiently
credible mechanisms for independence and accountability of the SIF, and for ensuring that poverty relief
is the criterion used in allocating funds to communities.
85. 
Health Reform. Building on the dialogue opened under the preparation of the TB/HIV project,
the Bank has begun to discuss options for more general reform in the health sector. A Health Sector
Review is now underway and preliminary results show that, despite the large amount of resources
provided to the sector, there are a number of reforms (particularly in the hospital sector) which could
greatly increase the efficiency of the system. The Government has been interested in discussing options
for reform, and has introduced important changes to the financing system in the region of Vitebsk. If this
dialogue proves fruitful and the Government is in a position to commit to a clear path of reform, an
operation could be considered in 2003.

C. Fostering Private Sector Development

86. 
The Bank Group (particularly IFC) would seek to improve the general environment for the
creation and operation of private business in Belarus, through technical assistance, policy dialogue, ESW
and lending, if warranted. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) would play a leading role in
developing this agenda, based on the existing service network to provide technical and legal support to
small and medium enterprises (SMEs) that it has already developed. The IFC has learned through its TA
activity in Belarus that SMEs are able to survive even in a less than friendly environment. To do so,
however, they require information and legal support.
87. 
Targeted grassroots efforts through the IFC's TA (funded by USAID and British Know How
Fund) have contributed significantly to strengthening civil society through building two business centers,
and conducting regular seminars to improve SME efficiency. More importantly, it helped small and
micro enterprises to organize themselves in associations to improve the business environment.
88. 
Continuation of IFC's existing TA and any new TA is entirely dependent on donor support.
There is an urgent need for post-privatization support, specifically in the areas of information and legal
support, strengthening of business associations, leasing, development of micro-credit institutions and
other forms of services to small and medium businesses.
89. 
Rural business is another area in strong need for TA identified by the IFC team. Among the
reasons that prevent farmers from exiting the state and collective farm system is the lack of private
distribution/marketing and agricultural service companies, and finance and support services. Therefore,
IFC is preparing a project to: (i) stimulate the development of SMEs in rural areas to foster rural
diversification and create an alternative to the collapsing state and collective farm system; (ii) encourage
investment in rural SMEs; (iii) spur entrepreneurship among the rural population; and (iv) promote cross-
border business relationships between Belarus and neighboring countries.

90. 
Were the sources of donor support to dry up, and provided that credible mechanisms could be
found to prevent government interference in business decisions, an IBRD operation (CY03) to support
PSD development could be prepared based on similar models developed in Ukraine, Moldova and
Georgia. The operation would draw heavily on the lessons of IFC involvement, as well as on the
indications of the already-mentioned study on Impediments to Business. A prerequisite for this operation
would be the development of a regulatory environment that supports the emergence of private sector

23

activities and a commitment to its continuing improvement, as lessons from program implementation are
gathered. 
It is expected that this project would cover the following areas: (i) training of potential
entrepreneurs; (1i) improving regulatory framework; (iii) special SME programs for one-company towsns,
and (iv) developing complementary private economic activity in agriculture.
91. 
An important partner in the area of private sector development is EBRD, which focuses on
support to SME developmcnt through the SME Line of Credit and is also planning to provide selective
investments in larger private enterprises. 
In the financial sector, the EBRD is planning to expand the
trade facilitation program with local banks and the development of a micro-lending facilitv.
92. 
Provided that the Government acts on its stated intent to allow experimentation in agricultural
reforms on a regional basis, and that this leads to the strengthening of private operators using market
transactions. the Bank would consider a Rural Development operation (CY04). This operation, primarily
focused on private farmers and kolkhozes undergoing substantial restructuring, would focus on rural
infrastructure, agriculture sectors reforms (farm restructuring, land titling, etc.), and environmentally
friendly production methods in crop production and livestock.

A Potential High Case
93. 
The potential reform agenda in Belarus is certainly large enough that it could justify a high case
scenario. However, a discussion has yet to take place with the Government on such a case. 
It is
envisaged that such a case could well arise if: (a) significant institutional reforms in public sector
accountability arc undertaken; (b) the environment for private business is considerably improved; and (c)
an IMF supported program comes into place. It would be expected that under high case scenario
assistance would additionally focus on health, education, agriculture, financial, energy, and public sector
reform. With an improved business climate, IFC would be able to make use of its intimate knowledge of
the country to mobilize foreign investors and financing both for real and financial sectors. A CAS update
will be presented to the Board if a high case becomes feasible.

The CAS and Civil Society
94. 
The Bank views civil society as an important partner in the implementation of its strategy.
Discussions with representatives of civil society during the CAS consultation process have shown their
interest in engaging in dialogue and taking active part in the preparation and implementation of the CAS.
The Government has been supportive of these consultations and expressed willingness to recognize civil
society and its organizations as important partners in our dialogue. A summary of CAS consultation is
presented in Attachment I.

95. 
The present strategy seeks to involve civil society in all its activities in Belarus. Under our
lending program, the Bank will try to work closelv with all stakeholders and to reach out to communities.
There has been very positive experience with grass-roots NGO participation in the implementation of
pilot programs on targeted social assistance as well as on HIV/AIDS programs. These NGOs have been
successful in voicing the concern of affected segments of the society and representing their interests vis-a-
vis authorities. The proposed SIF (CY04) would rely on community participation. Civic engagement
will also be key for the programs dealing with the distressed territories affected by the Chernobyl
catastrophe.
96. 
The Bank will also continue investing in disseminating knowledge. 
It has accumulated useful
experience in conducting public education activities - round tables, seminars, and discussions on various
reform topics in Minsk and in the regions. These discussions, that have brought various segments of the
societv to the table, have plaved an important role in debating reform issues.
97. 
An important role in the implementation of the outreach program is being assigned to the Bank
office in Minsk. The Minsk team has established good relations with all stakeholders and will continue to

24

be responsible for the day-to-day contacts with our partners, dissemination of information, development
of new ideas, organization of seminars and round-table discussions, as well as cooperation with NGOs
and other representatives of the civil society. IFC's country technical assistance teams, who have been
working closely with the business and trade associations for half a decade, will also contribute to the
efforts on the ground.

Partnerships
98. 
The proposed program is designed to capitalize on the Bank's comparative advantages and
maximize synergies with other donors and international financial institutions. The Bank will work in
close cooperation with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD), European Union (EU), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
bilateral donors.
99. 
Most institutions have reduced their activities in Belarus to modest proportions. This may
change, depending on conditions in the country. Donors have indicated their interest in issues such as
HIV/AIDS, environment, private sector development, and social protection. An important part of donor
aid revolves around assistance to post-Chernobyl issues.
100. 
UNDP is among the most active donor institutions. 
It has been supporting programs on
environment, social assistance, health and development of civil society. 
It is planning to be active in
these areas. For example, the proposed GEF-supported climate change mitigation operation (2003) would
be implemented in close collaboration with UNDP, which is pursuing similar objectives through the
removal of barriers to the utilization of renewable energy (biomass). UNDP is also interested in
promoting education through creating an Internet culture.
101. 
EBRD is an important partner in the area of private sector development. It is focusing on support
to SME development through the SME Line of Credit and is also planning to provide selective
investments in larger private enterprises. In the financial sector, EBRD is planning to expand its trade
facilitation program with local banks and develop a micro-lending facility.
102. 
Coordination with the IMF. The Bank and Fund teams work in tandem and excellent relationship
has been maintained. The IMF would have a key role focusing on macroeconomic issues, while the
World Bank will focus on the structural agenda. The Bank and the Fund teams will continue to work as
complements, particularly if a new Staff Monitored Program were to be agreed, and would carry out
together other related activities continuing to strengthen both institutions' knowledge base on key fiscal
and structural issues. There are several joint activities planned, including work on the PER and FSAP.

Financial Management and Fiduciary Responsibility
103. 
Since Belarus has kept many elements of the command economy in place, it has also kept the old
financial management practices, which provide a modicum of order and control. Progress has been made
in recent months in identifying sources of lack of transparency in public resources management, chiefly
through the existing extrabudgetary funds (including the Presidential Fund). During the CAS period, the
Bank will seek to increase its knowledge about financial management practices in Belarus. The PER and
CFAA planned in 2003 would help further identify weaknesses of financial management practices and
develop recommendations for their improvement. Belarus has been accurate in following the Bank.
procedures under Bank-financed projects. The Bank team will continue monitoring the situation in this
area and will ensure that the required Bank procedures are followed.

Monitoring and Evaluation
104. 
A monitoring and evaluation system will be put in place to determine if the key objectives of the
CAS are being achieved, namely: (i) addressing the global public goods agenda; (ii) mitigation of social

25

risks; and 
(iii) 
fostering private sector development 
through a better business and investment
environment. Aimex B9 contains a detailed list of specific benchmarks, which will serve to measure
progress in each area covered by the CAS. However, the following key indicators have been selected in
order to determine the overall success of the CAS in meeting the abovementioned objectives: (i)
improved fiscal transparency measured by enhancing budget coverage, including reporting and auditing
of all off-budget funds; (ii) containment of Tuberculosis and AIDS epidemics; (iii) enhanced compliance
with international environmental requirements; (iv) introduction of a targeted system of social protection
(v) better business and investment environment as evidenced by surveys; (vi) active civil society
participation in the countrv's life. The attainment of these key objectives at the end of the CAS period
(end-2004) will be monitored against the baseline information at the time of preparation of the present
CAS (end-2001).

105. 
Some useful baseline 
information on the abovementioned 
indicators was described in the
previous sections of this report. In brief, on fiscal issues, although the Government has been making good
progress in increasing the fiscal transparency, there are still off-budget funds that are not properly audited
and reported to Parliament. The planned PER will provide additional useful insights as far as the off-
budget funds are concerned. On Tuberculosis (TB), there has been an average 8% yearly increase in TB
cases over the last ten years. Similarly, on HIV/AIDS, Belarus has a rapidly emerging epidemic with the
second worse rate (0.28%) of adult infection in Europe (see also para. 26). On social protection, Belarus
has a very generous and inefficient system which does not target those most in need (see also para. 26).
On the business environment, a list of baseline indicators in provided in Box IV. Additional information
will be gathered through the ongoing survey carried jointly by an IFC/IBRD team. Additional baseline
information will be provided through project documentation, especially concerning the benchmarks on
targeted social protection and TB and HIV/AIDS epidemics.
106. Monitoring and evaluation will be carried out through several 
instruments. The primary
instrument will be monitoring through key lending operations. The Bank 'will systematically review
whether or not the key operations are reaching their objectives and will propose adjustments to specific
operations and to the lending program to maximize their contribution to the CAS objectives. Another
important instrument is surveys, which will be conducted periodically to assess progress on the ground,
especially in the areas of private sector development and civil society participation. Finally, the Bank will
conduct regular consultations with civil society to receive first hand feedback on stakeholder perceptions
about the effectiveness of Bank activities in Belarus.

VIII. Country Creditworthiness and Risks
107. 
Belarus's creditworthiness for IBRD lending is poor. Thlis reflects the country's weak liquidity
position (reserve coverage 
is currently only about 2 weeks of imports), fairly substantial external
payments arrears that could represent contingent claims on the Government, heavy dependence on barter
trade, heavy dependence on Russia for trade and finance, and lack of progress on the key reforms required
to underpin sustainable growth in the medium term.
108. 
On the positive side, Belarus's external indebtedness is low (7.4 percent of GDP at end-2001) and
the matunrty structure of its debt is favorable (medium- and long-term debt accounts for 94 percent of
total debt). However, debt to the IFIs (IBRD, IMF and EBRD) is high as a share of public external debt
at 36.8 percent and is expected to remain high throughout the CAS period, reflecting Belarus's
dependence on official financing.

109. 
External payment arrears on official government debt amounted to about US$3.9 million at the
end of 2001. However, arrears of Beltransgas to Russia - which formally are not part of the Belarus's
official government debt stood at approximately US$194 million at end-September 2001. Belarus has
been successful so far in negotiating its energy debt with Russia through debt cancellations, rescheduling,
and barter transactions, and thus has avoided using its foreign currency reserves. Moreover, Russia has
committed US$250 million in BOP support over 2001-2003 driven by the Union agreement, of which

26

US$100 million has been committed to the National Bank of Belarus and US$150 million to the Ministry
of Finance for fuel imports. Belarus has already received the first installment of US$30 million to the
National Bank of Belarus and the next US$30 million is expected in early 2002.

110. 
External balances, and hence debt servicing capacity, are highly vulnerable to changes in trade
and financial relations with Russia, and to expansionary domestic macroeconomic policies. Any change
that reduced official financing and/or resulted in a reduction in demand for Belarusian products or
willingness to accommodate/negotiate arrears on quasi-commercial transactions could result in severe
payments difficulties. Similarly, expansionary policies such as the current wage policy could make the
balance of payments situation untenable.
111. 
These risks will be managed by linking the level of Bank lending to macroeconomic performance
(see paragraph 70 and Table 3). Severe deterioration in macroeconomic performance and backtracking
on reforms that resulted in the resumption of lending (e.g., reintroduction of multiple exchange rates)
would lead to a suspension of new IBRD lending.

112. 
There is also a risk that the governing regime could become excessively rigid, triggering social
unrest and/or a new round of macroeconomic instability. A judgment would have to be made at that point,
if there is enough room for maneuver and ability to involve civil society to compensate for the financial
and reputational risks of even modest interventions, directed to either global public goods or to the
poorest segments of the population.
113. 
As the Bank Group's experience shows, the existence of appropriate policy and institutional
frameworks is key for achieving satisfactory development effectiveness. Neither is in place in Belarus at
present. This risk is mitigated by the modest low case lending program focused on global public goods
(environment, HIV/AIDS) and social/poverty issues. Only those projects that are likely to achieve results
in a less than favorable policy environment and that have benefits that extend beyond Belarus's borders
were selected for the low case. In case better policies are put in place, as evidenced by attainment of base
case triggers, the lending program would be expanded to include additional projects in areas where the
Government's and Bank Group's priorities coincide and there is a high chance of reaching development
results.

Jarnes D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Shengman Zhang 

By: Peter Woicke

Washington, D.C.
February 21, 2002

27

ATTACHMENT I - CONSULTATIONS WITH STAKEHOLDERS

1. 
The Government of Belarus gave its support to opening the CAS consultation process to civil
society. Prior to consultations, the Country Unit prepared an information note for participants, explaining
the CAS process, the rationale behind extensive consultations with all stakeholders, timeline, and history
of World Bank involvement in the country. A questionnaire was distributed to all participants requesting
their feedback on major issues and on priorities and possible ways of cooperation.
2. 
Consultations, which started in the spring of 2001, were held in 14 towns"' in all regions in the
form of information seminars on the overall Bank strategy, thematic round-tables on health, environment,
social protection, and private sector development, Internet communications, and media. Consultations
were open for all those interested, which is a very new approach for Belarus. Moreover, the meetings
were not limited to offices; they were also held in hospitals, educational facilities and even penitentiary
institutions. The information and comments received during the first round formed the basis for the first
draft of the CAS. The second round of consultations started in June 2001 and was completed through
concluding meetings in December 2001.
3. 
Over 1500 individuals attended meetings representing non-governmental organizations dealing
with health, HIV/TB problems, children 
issues, gender, veterans' affairs, handicapped people,
environment, small and medium business, and media. Special attention was paid to problems resulting
from the Chernobyl accident. The Country Director met with nearly 400 students at the Vitebsk
Technical University as well as with students from the Minsk Polytechnic Academy who were interested
to learn about the World Bank and how its involvement would help Belarus.
4. 
A CAS web-site in Russian and English has been set up where all relevant information has been
posted, including minutes from consultations, proposals and comments received from participants.
Though Internet is not widely available, this option helped to facilitate the dialogue and ensure the
transparency of the process.
5. 
As a result of the discussions throughout the March-November period, two NGO thematic groups
were set up on health and social development issues and working contacts were established with the NGO
council on sustainable development. At the last meeting with civil society, held in Minsk in December,
participants were provided with drafts of this annex, summary of the proposed CAS, and Box III on Civil
Society. Valuable information was received both on the format and the content, as well as concrete
suggestions on the CAS.
6. 
Civil society representatives appreciated the opportunity for discussion of important issues
provided by the World Bank through the CAS consultation process. 
The role of international
organizations in facilitating the dialogue between the government and civil society on critical issues was
seen as particularly valuable. Some very useful suggestions and ideas were voiced on sustainable
development, liberalization of business activity, health sector reform, capacity building, as well as on
forms of cooperation, to mention a few. These initial contacts give hopes for building a constituency for
reforms in the country by establishing a regular network of collaboration with the government and
maximizing on the available human capital.

General Comments
7. 
The theme of social partnerships camne out as a key factor that could affect the future reform and
activities identified under the CAS. While a legal mechanism for contracting NGOs under government

" Minsk, Vitebsk, Mogilev, Brest, Grodno, Gomel, Polotsk, Novopolotsk, Gorki, Smolevichi, Molodechno,
Verhedvinsk, Bobruisk, Smorgon

28

programs was established with the adoption of the "Law on Social Services," there are still very few
examples of its practical implementation. The positive experience shared by some organizations, shows
that the NGO contracting process is time-consuming but the benefits of the joint NGO/government work
are worth the effort. While most organizations have had mostly negative experience on this issue so far,
some participants were convinced that a lot more needed to be done by NGOs themselves to make their
activities transparent and visible, and to initiate an open dialog with government agencies that would
recognize 
the value of such cooperation. 
The need for collaboration among NGOs was also
acknowledged, taking into consideration the big difference that exists between Minsk-based organizations
and those located elsewhere, regarding availability of funding, capacity building, experience, etc.
* Civil society representatives wanted to know how exactly their comments and suggestions would
be incorporated in the CAS and what kind of involvement they could expect in future Bank
projects under the current political situation.

* Civil society representatives highlighted the importance of having clear and transparent rules and
regulations for all Belarusian NGOs especially with respect to benefits and privileges relating to
functioning of public associations. Participants in all meetings stressed the fact that the main
activity carried out by NGOs is public awareness and education of civil society at large. NGOs,
being flexible, effectively reach vulnerable groups and individuals in addressing complex and
delicate issues. The predominant opinion is that legislation ought to differentiate between public
awareness activities and core education by providing favorable conditions for the development of
public education activities conducted by civil society organizations. There is also need for
improvement of the education system in general to provide more training in foreign languages,
computer skills, management, etc.

* Participants underlined the importance of donor involvement in the ice-breaking process between
government and the third sector, and specifically emphasized the significant role played by the
Bank in bringing civil society to the negotiating table, stressing that consultations is a three-way
process in which they want to be fully involved.

Follows a summary of observations, commentaries and suggestions on the main topics.

Social Sector, Human Development and Poverty Reduction
8. 
The discussions centered on the current system of social assistance, development problems during
the transition period, and poverty that is acquiring wider dimensions despite the relatively high ranking
occupied by Belarus in official human development statistics. 
In addressing social issues, NGO
representatives stressed the fact that people should not rely exclusively on outside help but mobilize all
available resources for community self-help. Thus, civic organizations see a big role for themselves in
providing social services. Representatives of the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection acknowledged
the importance of introducing the targeted social assistance programs and the role that non-government
organizations could play, especially in raising public awareness, stressing the inadequacy of local
infrastructure and the need for new funding instruments to facilitate local initiatives. A critical remark on
the CAS was the lack of mention of education among its issues. Although education problems are not
seen as particularly serious, they nevertheless deserve attention in the overall attempt to change popular
mentality and introduce new curricula in line with the 2 1 st century globalization requirements.
9. 
The specific comments can be summarized as follows:

* The social assistance system cannot further provide numerous benefits to all citizens free of
charge. Development of targeted social care is absolutely necessary and should be transparent, well-
timed and simple, addressing the problems of the most needy, provided under "social contract"
conditions that would motivate recipients to make the best use of what is available without abusing
the system.

29

* NGOs could play a substantial role in education for disease prevention and establishing relations
with government agencies to support the implementation of the targeted social assistance reform.
This would require a mass education and advertising campaign.

* Worsening of the demographic situation is becoming a major problem and requires in-depth
analysis.

* There is a need to address the problem of orphans, and their growing numbers, particularly as a
result of alcoholism.

* 

Issues of hidden unemployment and finding ways to encourage entrepreneurship.

* Deepening social problems (expressed in delinquency, abuse, growing alcoholism and drug use,
increasing number of homeless people) in families unable to maintain reasonable living standards due
to unemployment.

* 

Insufficient government aid for people with disabilities who cannot provide for themselves.

* Social assistance should also look into the pension system and the development of private pension
funds.

* Children's healthcare, preventive measures and recuperation, as well as protection of children's
rights (i.e. invalids, disabled children).

* The spread of TB, AIDS and viral hepatitis is seen as a major health problem whose prevention
and treatment should be addressed most urgently including, retraining of medical personnel and
introduction of new diagnostic methods for early detection and prevention, and development of the
local pharmaceutical industry that could provide needed medication.

* Free medical care is seen as unsustainable by NGOs, and the healthcare system needs a major
reform (need to study the Vitebsk experiment) to avoid the emergence of corruption and illegal
payments for treatment. Deterioration of health services is reflected in appalling hospital conditions
and need for relatives to provide round-the-clock assistance to the hospitalized. In rural areas medical
services are particularly poor with very few qualified personnel, insufficient communications and
access to health facilities.

10. 
Gender-specific problems in Belarus are rising, especially in smaller communities, although some
of the dramatic consequences of the economic transformation on gender inequality have been avoided due
to the slow pace of reform and tight state control. The overall situation is not considered to be very grave
by representatives of civil society organizations, however, several issues have been brought up:

* 
Increasing unemployment hits women and the young the hardest. Women have scarce
possibilities for retraining after losing their jobs.

* The old system of social guarantees, such as extended maternal leave and child-sick days, is
officially still in place, thus making women less attractive on the labor market. At the same time,
child-care facilities are not readily accessible, putting women with children in a very vulnerable
employment category.

* Mothers with handicapped children are in a particular disadvantage and are lacking financial aid.
This problem is both acute and extensive given the high number of newly-born diagnosed with some
health deficiency, requiring special medical and parental care (according to some non-government
organizations this is the case in over 90 percent of births, which is mainly attributed to the effects of
Chernobyl). Necessity to establish special houses for disabled children as young families slip out
from social life when sick child is born.

* The limited access to credits makes it almost impossible for women to engage in entrepreneurial
activities.

30

Environment and Sustainable Development
11. 
Civil society groups expressed their concern with the overall situation of the natural environment
and the desire to see a long-term national action plan that would involve both government and NGOs.
Participants pointed out that the CAS should pay special attention to the Chernobyl affected regions. The
importance of education and raising public awareness on environmental 
issues and sustainable
development, in the broadest sense of the term, was voiced as a prerequisite for successful reforms and
change in mentality. The major issues raised are summarized below:
* 
Insufficient information on environmental issues and need for more efficient structure of
government agencies. A National Environmental Strategy has been elaborated but it has not been
publicized and the population is unaware of its existence;
* Priority should be given to projects that would meet the principles of sustainable development,
biodiversity protection; natural resources management and development of regional environmental
development plans;
* Developing eco-tourism;
* 
Involvement of NGOs in the process of project selection and implementation and need for the
introduction of special mechanisms to guarantee such participation. The Ministry of Environment
and Natural Resources 
is in the process of setting up an information center charged with
dissemination of relevant information and announced the creation of an advisory group of NGOs with
the Ministry. The World Bank has been invited to be part of the working group;
* 
Introduction of environmental education early in the school curricula. To that effect the Ministry
of Education has been developing a new curriculum for all levels of education that includes
environmental subjects, healthy lifestyle, etc.;
* Efficient use of cleaner and cheaper environmentally-friendly fuels;
* Addressing the issues of climate change and carbon absorption, land reclamation;
* Environmental problems should not be limited to Chernobyl consequences only;
* A possible project financed by the World Bank could be one on accessibility of clean water to the
population.

Private Sector Development
12. 
All representatives of the private sector expressed their appreciation for the assistance that IFC
has provided to small and medium enterprises which has been virtually the only source of support for
regional entrepreneurs and were hopeful that this trend would continue in the future. The Ministry of
Entrepreneurship and Investments announced that steps were being taken in improving the environment
for private business, such as modification of the business-related legislation and development of micro-
financing system. SME businesses are not protected by the current legislation and centers for legal
support were suggested as a form of assistance. All private sector representatives see the presence of the
World Bank in Belarus as a sign that would attract foreign investment. Private businesses see themselves
as providers of social security programs and generators of employment, and an important contributor to
the development of the country and the rehabilitation of the regions, including Chemobyl-affected areas,
should the conditions be improved for their growth. Following are the impediments to private business
development mentioned by businessmen:
* Absence of a political will and economic incentives for private sector development;
* Excessive state interference in the operations of privately-owned businesses;

31

* Preferential treatment for state enterprises (unfair competition between private and state
enterprises);

* Difficult entry procedures for private businesses, e.g. registration requirements, administrative
procedures, property rights;

* Lack of education in marketing, management, business development;
Several issues were pointed out as crucial for the development of the private sector:

13. 

* Simplification of market entry procedures for private businesses;

* Need for training for start-up for would-be businessmen, especially encouraging women and
younger people up;

* The importance of attracting foreign direct investment; comparative advantages: cheap and highly
qualified labor force;

* Taxation/licensing and application of the same rules for state and private enterprises;

* Credit availability for private businesses and possibilities for development of agribusiness and
credit mechanisms (e.g. credit unions).

* Need to develop trust and confidence between authorities and the business community;

* Raising public awareness on the fundamentals of market economy;

* Restructuring of privatized enterprises and regional development.

Chernobyl Issues
14. 
The views expressed on the consequences of Chemobyl cannot be easily summarized.
Sometimes the effect of Chernobyl is overblown, while at other times it seems to be underestimated.

* One of the major problems for those living on the territories is the decline in agriculture which
was the main occupation. The disruption has upset the life style of the population and caused loss of
jobs, which coupled with the other negative effects valid for the rest of country has complicated
further the situation in some of the Chemobyl-affected areas.

* Victim-perception is prevailing and is used by some for enjoying benefits that would otherwise be
unavailable.

* Chemobyl Committee program is not good enough and does not encourage community
development, regional development and civic participation. Current programs aim to address
individual concerns rather than looking into the comprehensive picture of social degradation at a
family and community level.

* Concerns were expressed that donors seem to have created a consumer oriented society quoting
as example the fact that some children from Gomel have already been 5-6 times to Western Europe
on Tecuperation while others have not had even one chance.

* There is a perception that too much money is spent on Chernobyl while other regions are
neglected. In this sense, Chernobyl population is considered by some as undeservingly privileged.

* Unemployment seems to be a bigger stress factor than radiation. According to a study conducted
in 1993-95 people have somehow adapted to the radioactivity which ranks 5 th in their concerns, after
earnings, social care, unemployment, and crime.

* Resettled people feel they are temporarily living at their current locations and are not making an
attempt to adjust and improve the environment or their living conditions.

32

* The general ecological culture and radiological awareness is lacking in some of the smaller places
where according to representatives of the regional authorities the population has other harmful living
habits, e.g., alcoholism.

* Parents quite often disregard the safety norms for lack of knowledge on the radiological hazards.
Sometimes being sick is beneficial because one can enjoy some privileges. The notion exists that the
government should provide and pay for health treatment.

* The situation of the agricultural lands was seen as particularly important for the populations
living in contaminated zones given that many households grow their own produce which cannot be
controlled for radiation and endangers the health of people eating them. Forest produce is especially
contaminated in some areas.

* Some of the suggestions coming out of the discussions include:

* Stricter control over the quality of produce coming from the contaminated areas.

* Setting up of modern social and psychological territorial centers that would deal with the most
vulnerable categories, such as families with disabled children; resettled families, etc.

* Training medical personnel in the field of psychology and in the social sphere, including direct
grants to promising specialists, and assistance in improving these research areas is seen as an
important step toward addressing issues that are not only Chemobyl specific.

* Better healthcare and prevention for the youngest in the Chemobyl areas

* Most important for revival of the region and overcoming the Chemobyl effect is seen the
development of businesses.

Annex A2

Page I of 2

Belarus at a glance 

9/6/01

Europe & 
Lower-
Central middle-
Asia 
income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Befarus 

Development diamond*

2000
Population, mid-year (millions) 

10.0 
2,870 
28.7 

475 
2,010 
956 

2,046 
1,140
2,327

Life expectancy

GNI per capita (Atlas method, USs) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

Average annual growth, 1994-00

Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 

-0.5 
-0.2 

0.1 
0.6 

1.0
1.3 

GNI 
per 
capita 

Gross
primary
enrollment

Most recent estimate (latest year avallable, 1994-00) 

., 

Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 

42

Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population) 
Male 
Female 

70 
69 
11 

67 
69 
21 

42
69
32
I1 
80
15
114 
116 
114

.. 

.. 

Access to improved water source

100 
0 
100 
100 
100 

90 
3 
100 
101 
99 

-Belarus
Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1980 

1990 

1999 

2000

Econtomic ratios'

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

.. 
.

35.2 
26.5 
46.0 
28.8 
28.8 

26.8 
23.7 
59.2 
21.3 
22.4 

29.9
22.8 
67.8
21.3
22.3

Trade

.. 
.

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debt/exports 

.
.
.
.
.
.. 

-0.7 
0.2 
4.2 
3.1 
4.1
16.9

-0.5 
0.2 
2.8
2.8

Domestic
omens 

Investment

Indebtedness

1980-90 

1990-00 

1999 

2000 

2000-04

(average annual growth)

GDP 
GOP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

.
.
.. 

-1.6 
-1.4 
-5.1 

3.4 
4.4 
7.0 

5.8 
6.1 
4.9 

2.9 
3.7 
2.7

Belarus

Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Growth of investment and GOP I%)
20
20

(% of GDP) 

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

.. 
.. 

23.5 
47.1 
39.2 
29.4 

14.6 
39.2 
32.5 
46.2 

15.3 
37.4
30.8 
47.3 

97 

98

.. 

-20

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

.. 
.. 
.. 

47.4 
23.8 
43.6 

59.2 
19.5 
61.6 

59.2 
19.5 
69.3

-40

-GD1 

GDP

(averageannualgrowth) 

1980-90 

1990 00 

1999 

2000 

IGrowth of exports and imports (%)

(average annual growth)

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

.. 
.
.

-4.1 
-1.9 
-0.8 
-0.5 

-7.2 
76 
8.7 
7.3 

8.0 
6.0 
72
4.2 

40

20

o

56 6 

57 

95 

0

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

-0.6 
-1.8 
-7.8 
-9.3 

6.5 
5.8 
-16.0 
-0.2 

2.6 
7.2 
6.2 
-2.1 

20
.40

.

i 

Exports 

-

Imports

.. 

_

Note: 2000 data are preliminary estimates.
- The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex 2
Ps-v 2 of 2

Belarus

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domesic prices 
(% change) 

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Inflation (%)

3,000

Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

.. 
.. 

4.2 

294.0 
316.8 

169.0 
185.0

2.000

.. 

Govemment finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 

1,

0 .

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

45.0 

27.9 

9s 

96 

97 

9o 

99 

00

Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

5.6 
-1.7 

0.4 
-0.6

-

GDP deflator 

*CPI

TRADE

(USS millions) 
Total exports (fob) 
Food 

1980 
1990 
.. 38,747 

1999 
5,646 
438 
544 

2000 
6,987 
1,275
931 

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)

10*000

Energy 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 

7,500

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
25,589 

4,392 
6,674 

3,190
7,942 

s

2,328 

755 

483

3,198 

1,420 

3,634

Capital goods 

689 

1,282 

998 

o

94 

9s 

9o 

97 

00 

00 o

Export price index (1995=100) 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

..

Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

..

0 Exports 

* Imports

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

_

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

1980 

1990 

1999 
6,400 
6,655 
-256 

2000 
7,980 
8,257 
-277 
-42 

Current account balance to GOP (%)

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

0 -

_ 

_ 

.-

Net income 
Net current transfers 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

-42 
104 

-2

157

-3

Current account balance 

.. 

.. 

-194 

-162

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

.. 
.. 

., 
.. 

159 
35 

238
-76 

<

memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 

.. 

.. 

294 

351

Conversion rate (DEC, locallS) 

.. 1.23E-4 

112.9 

304.7

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000

(USS millions) 

ComposItIon of 2000 debt (USS mill.)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 

.. 

.. 

1,136 
122 

851

IBRD 

.

.

105

IDA 

0 

0 

G:43 

A 105

Total debt service 

.. 

.. 

202 

229

IBRD 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

20 

20 

c: 114

IDA 

0 

0

F- 290

Composition of net resource flows 

.

Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

5

-32 
169 
225
0 

-23
32 

D: 116

Portfolio equity 

.. 

.. 

.. 

E. 183

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

0 
13 
11 
1 
8 

0 
6 
14 
-9
6

A - IBRD 
B - IDA 

E -Bilateral
F - Private

D -Other mulblateral 

C-IMF 

G - Short-term

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.

-7 

-15

Development Economics 

9/6/01

CAS Annex B2 - Belarus
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date January 15, 2002

Annex B2
Page I of I

2002

2

4.1

0
0

O

O

2 

3.6 

0 

0 

O 

O 

49.9 

12.5

no 
87 
43 

no
56
28

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 

Average Implementation Period (years) b 

Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a.d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management

CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US'000$) 
Average Supervision ('000US$/project) 

1999 

2000 

2001 

1 

5.1 

0 

0 

O 

O 

12.5 

no 
60 
60 

2 

4.6 

0 

0 

O 

O 

25.4 

no 
107 
53 

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
4 
1
132.4 
6.9
25 
0
0 
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary Belarus 

As Of Date January 15, 2002

Annex B3

Page I of I

Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program 8

Year 

Proj ID 

US$;(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(HIMIL) 

Implementation b
Risks (HIM/L)

2002 

2003 

2004 

TB/AIDS 
Social Assistance LIL 

Chernobyl 
Environment (GEF/IBRD) 
Private Sector Development 
Health Policy Reform 

Social Investment Fund 
Social Assistance Reform 
Rural Development 

TOTAL 

M
L

M
L
M
M

M
M
M

H 
H 

H 
H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
M 

40.0 
5.0 
45.0

45.0 
20.0 
30.0 
30.0 
125.0

30.0 
30.0 
40.0 
100.0

270.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L).

Template created on 02120/2002.

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Belarus

Belarus - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002

Annex B3 (IFC MIGA)
Page I of 1

IFC approvals (US$m)

Sector (%) 

Investment instrument(%)

1999 2000 2001 2002

0 

0 

0 

0

MIGA guaranitees (US$m) 

0 

0 

0 

0

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Belarus

As of January 15, 2002

Product 

Completion 

Cost (US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objectiveb

Annex B4
Page I of I

Recent completions 
Farm Restructuring 
Farm Restructuring II 
Agriculture Sector Review 
Climate Change 
Health Sector Study 

Underway 
CAS 
Social Sector Dialogue 
Chernobyl Impact 
Private Sector Business Asst. 
Health Policy Dialog 
Health Policy Note 
Environmental Strategy Update 
Public Awareness 
Civil Society Activities 
Poverty Update 
Macro Monitoring 
IFC TA to SMEs 
Enterprise Sector Study 

Planned
PER 
CFAA 
CEM 
Social and Gender Study 
Financial Sector Review 
E-development Study 
Development Policy Review 
Country Procurement Assessment 

1999 
2000 
1999 
2001 
2001 

2002 
2002-04 
2002 
2002 
2002 
2002 
2002 
2002-04 
2002-04 
2002-03 
2001-04 
2001-04 
2002 

2003 
2003 
2003-04 
2003 
2003 
2003 
2004 
2004 

(Actual)
48.4 
68.2 
90 
25 
60 

(Budgeted)
240 
40.0 
101.6 
148.0 
90.0 
104.0 
115.0 
200.0 
100.0 
87.0 
140.0 
240.0 
140.0 

B, G, PD 
KG, PS
B, G, PD 
KG, PS
B, G, PD 
KG, PD
B, G, PD, CS KG, PS
B, G, PD 
KG, PS

B, G, PD, CS,D KG, PS, PD
B, G, PD, CS 
KG, PS
B, G, PD, CS, CKG, PS
B, G, PD, D 
KG, PS
B, G, PD, D 
KG, PS
B, G, PD, CS KG, PS
B, G, PD, CS KG
B, G, PD, CS KG
B, G, PD, CS,D KG, PS, PD
B, G, PD, CS KG, PS, PD
B, G, PD 
KG, PS
B, G, D 
KG, PS
B, G, CS, PD,D KG, PS, PD

210.0 
200.0 
300.0 
60.0 
120.0 
100.0 
150.0 
130.0 

B, G, PD, 
KG, PS, PD
B, G, PD,D 
KG, PS, PD
B, G, PD, CS KG, PS
B, G, PD, CS 
KG, PS, PD
B, G, PD,D 
KG, PS, PD
B, G, PD,D,CS KG, PS, PD
B, G, PD, CS 
KG, PS, PD
B, G, PD, D 
KG, PS, PD

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination, civil society.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Annex B5
"age I of I

CAS Annex B5 Belarus Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

Europe & 
Central 
Asia 

Lower-
middle-
income

1970-75 

1980-86 

1993-99 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

9.4 
0.7 
49.9* 
2.2 

10.0 
0.7 
61.2* 
2.1 

10.0 
-0.5 
69.3* 
1.3 

474.4 
0.1 
66.5 
1.6 

2,093.0
1.1
42.9
2.1

POVERTY
(% of population)

National headcount index (disposable incomes) 
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index 

.. 

.. 

46.7*

.. 

..

INCOME

GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1 995=1 00) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.

2,550 
1710.3* 

2,160 
182 

1,200
137

Food price index (1995=100) 

0 

1759.8*

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

26.9*
9.3.

Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

37.0*

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNI) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.
.. 

4.9 
5.9 
10.8 

4.0 
5.1 
8.8

2.3
4.8

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

100 
100 
100 

92 
93 
92 

99
100
99

Access to an improved water source
(% of population)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

100 
100 
100 

90 
95 
82 

80
94
69

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

98 
97 

97 
97 

87
87

.. 

.. 

9

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 

70 

71 

68 

69 

69

Male 
Female 

66 
74 

67 
76 

62 
74 

64 
73 

67
72

Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 

.. 
.. 

15 

12 
15 

21 

32

Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 

.. 

26 

40

Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

196 
85 

255 
95 

335 
115 

289 
127 

191
133

Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

.. 
.. 

.. 
..

20*

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to improved water
source data is 2000.
2001 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank
* Source: Ministry of Statistics and Analysis of Belarus, 2001.

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Belarus - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
1997 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2002 
2003 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

1996 

1998 

1999 

2001 

2004

100 
17 
39 
44 

100 
15 
41 
43 

100 
14 
41 
46 

100 
15 
39 
46 

100 
15 
37 
47 

100 
16 
38 
46 

100 
16 
38 
46 

100 
15 
37 
47 

100
16
38
47

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 

81 
21 

79 
25 

78 
26 

79 
26 

79 
23 

76 
22 

78 
23 

78 
24 

79
24

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

46 
50 

60 
66 

59 
64 

59 
62 

68 
69 

70 
69 

71 
72 

76 
78 

77
81

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

19 
20 

21 
21 

22 
22 

21 
22 

21 
22 

24 
25 

22 
23 

22 
23 

21
22

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

14757 

14109 

15264 

12104 

12727 

11757 

12036 

11998 

12762

2060 

2350 

2520 

2630 

2090 

1580 

1280 

1270 

1330

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Grossdomesticproductatmarketprice. 
2.8 
11.4 
Gross Domestic Lncome 
2.8 
7.0 

8.4 
13.0 

3.4 
2.3 

5.8 
4.8 

4.1 
2.3 

1.5 
0.7 

2.1 
0.9 

3.4
2.3

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Grossdomesticproductatmarketprice. 
3.1 
11.7 
9.4 
Total consumption 
2.1 
5.6 
15.0 
Private consumption 
3.6 
4.9 
18.3 
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Inports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

4.4 
7.3 
7.5 

6.1 
4.2 
2.9 

4.0 
2.6 
2.0 

2.5 
2.4 
2.9 

3.1 
1.6 
1.0 

4.4
3.5
3.1

6698 
5790 
7275 
6939 
-576 
91 
-516 

7838 
6919 
8691 
8326 
-853 
78 
-859 

7097 
6172 
8117 
7673 
-1019 
96 
-1017 

6400 
5646 
6655 
6216 
-256 
104 
-194 

7980 
6987 
8257 
7825 
-277 
157 
-162 

8247 
7314 
8127 
7694 
120 
124 
193 

8489 
7525 
8666 
8206 
-177 
155 
-62 

9100 
8044 
9324 
8849 
-224 
185 
-77 

9878
8690
10319
9805
441
210
-271

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 

105 
44 
33 
11 

350 
66 
43 
23 

201 
-10 
91 
-101 

443 
-2 
-25 
23 

90 
64 
-24 
88 

84 
22 
126 
-104 

60 
3 
59 
-56 

120 
-36 
-32 
-4 

25'5
-18
-14
.4
'0

Other capital (net, inc. errors & ommissions) 

446 
-79 

366 
77 

771 
55 

-282 
35 

84 
-76 

-277 
-22 

50 
-52 

50 
-57 

Change in reservesd 

-57

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% ofGDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)

-3.9 

-6.0 

-6.7 

-2.1 

-2.2 

1.0 

-1.5 

-1.9 

-3.5

Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..
..

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

Manufactures

Merchandise imports (CIF) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Belarus - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator 

1996 

Actual 
1997 

1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

Projected
2002 
2003 

2004

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
30.6 
Current expenditures 
27.7 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
2.8 
Capital expenditure 
4.8 
Foreign financing 
-0.1 

31.8 
27.1 
4.7 
6.7 
0.4 

29.1 
25.9 
3.2 
4.4 
-0.3 

28.7 
23.9 
4.8 
7.0 
-0.8 

29.2 
24.5 
4.7 
4.9 
-0.6 

14.2 
52.4 
46.3 

15.8 
111.4 
54.0 

30.9 
276.0 
44.8 

16.7 
132.7 
47.5 

17.7 
219.3 
46.0 

33.9 
26.5 
7.3 
9.5 
-0.2 

17.5 
76.8 
46.3 

34.3 
25.9 
8.4 
9.4 
0.0 

17.5 
37.4 
47.3 

32.6 
24.6 
7.9 
8.3 
-0.6 

17.5 
16.5 
59.0 

31.9
24.1
7.8
8.1
-0.5

17.5
12.5
61.1

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
GrowthofM2(%) 
Privatesectorcreditgrowth/ 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR90 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Realexchangerate(US$/LCU)f 

Real interest rates
Consumerpriceindex (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

..
..
..

102.5 

82.9 

96.4 

96.5 

96.5 

102.5 

105.8 

113.1 

113.1

53.0 
53.7 

64.0 
71.6 

73.0 
76.6 

294.0 
316.8 

169.0 
185.0 

61.1 
77.9 

39.1 
35.4 

16.1 
14.1 

11.7
S.8

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Belarus - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator 

Actual 
1997 

1996 

1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

Projected
2002 
2003 

2004

1105 

1171 

1154 

982 

851 

865 

897 

881 

884

35 

113 

152 

143 

-62 

-106 

-103 

22 

33 

-16 

2

146 

202 

232 

248 

251 

247 

231

16.3 
7.5 

1.7 

7.8 

7.3 
27.0 

0.1 
121 

14.8 
8.3 
1.8 
7.3 

5.8 
27.3 

0.1 
124 

16.1 
7.6 
2.0 
7.4 

5.6 
52.0 

0.1 
135 

15.2 
8.1 
3.1 
8.6 

9.9 
57.3 

0.3 
122 

10.5 
6.7 
2.9 
9.8 

8.9 
54.5 

0.3 
105 

10.3 
7.4 
3.0 
9.4 

8.2 
36.8 

0.2 
96 

10.4 
7.4 
2.9 
8.7 

7.8 
35.9 

0.2 
95 

9.6 
7.3 
2.7 
8.4 

8.7 
34.2 

0.2 
143 

9.8
6.9
2.3
7.9

10.1
29.6

0.2
221

.. 

0 

.. 

0 

.. 

0 

.. 

0 

.. 

0 

..

0 

0 

0 

0

Totaldebtoutstandingand 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

Total debt service (TDS) 

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 

DS (%)C

IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)' 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)

Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 

IDA TDO (US$m)d 

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the RIMl, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

CAS Annex B8 - Belarus

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of Januray 16, 2002

Annex B8
Page I of I

Active Projects 

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Disbursements a/

Project ID 

Project Name 

Development 
ObLectives 

P 
Proaress

P008302 
P044748 

TOTAL 

FORESTRY DEVELOPMEV 
SOC INF RETROFIT 

S 
S 

S 
S 

FY 

1994 
2001 

IBRD 

IDA GRANT Cancel. Undisb. 

Orig. 

Frm Rev'd

41.9 
22.6 

64.5 

8 

3.1 
22.6 

11 
0

8 

25.7 

11.1 

2

2

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Annex B8 (IFC)
Page I of I

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Belarus

Belarus
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio

(In US Dollars Millions)

FY Approval Company Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic

Held 

0 

Disbursed

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan Equity Quasi Partic

Country Program Matrix

Sectors 

1. Macroeconomic 
Environment 

2. Price 

Liberalization 

3. Public Sector 
Accountability 

Country Strategy & Key 
Actions 

i. 

Sustained 
rnacroeconomic stability: 
inflation and budget 
* Liflaton and budget 
deficit under control 
* 
unified foreign 
exchange rate policy
maintained

* Eliminate price and 
margin controls, except 
natural monopolies and 
some socially important 
goods. 

__ 

* 

Increased fiscal 
transparency 
* 
Improved public 
procurement rules 

BELARUS COUNTRY ASSISTANCF STRATEGY

Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA
No Bank lending 
* Public Expenditure 
directed specifically 
Revicw (2003) 
at this area 
* Development 
Policy Review (CEM) 
(2004) 
* Mcomntrn

Amnex B9
Page 1 of 4

Progress Benchmarks 

Partners

* 

Sustained foreign 
IMF is considering a
exchange policy 
follow-up to thc Staff
* Reduced level of inflation Monitoring Program (SMP).
Increased foreign 
A Stand-BY Arranlgement is
exchange reserves 
not likely in the nearest future

* 

* 

No Bank lending 
directed specifically 
at this area 

* Business 
environment 
surveys (annually) 
* Development 
Policy Review 
(CEM) (2004) 

No Bank lending 
* Country Financial 
directed specifically Accountability 
at this area 
Assessment (2003) 
* Public Expenditure 
Review (2003) 
* Country 
Procurement
Assessment (2004)

* At least 80 percent of 
prices are liberalized (except 
natural monopolies and some 
socially important goods) 

* The 2003 budget to 
quantify the size of quasi- 
fiscal accounts and to 
eliminate off-budget resources
for line niinistries, including
the innovative finds.

* 

IMF: Price liberalization
is an important issue on the
IMF agenda
IFC: Business
environment surveys will be
carried out in close

* 

partnership w~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ith 
the IFC
* 

IMF is planning to
include the issue of fiscal
transparency in its dialogue

Sectors 

4. Poverty 
Reduction 

Country Strategy & Key 
Actions 
* Government is 
concerned about the rising 
poverty and is planning to 
introduce a system of target 
social assistance nationwide 

5. Health 

* Contain Tuberculosis 
and HIV/AIDS epidemics 
* 
Improve the efficiency 
of the sector 

* 

Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA
Social 
* Poverty 
Assistance LIL 
Assessment (2003) 
(2002) 
* Social sector 
* Chemobyl 
dialogue (2002-03) 
Project (2003) 
* 
Social and Gender 
* 
Social 
Analysis (2003) 
Assistance Reform 
* Chernobyl Impact
(2004) 
Study (2002)
* 
Social
Inivestment FunDd
(2004)
*Rural
Development (2004)
* TB/AIDS 
(2002) 
* Health Policy 
Reform (2003) 

* Health sector note 
(2002) 
* Health sector 
dialogue (2002) 

6. Social Sector 
Infrastructure 

* 

Improve heating and 
lighting conditions in 
schools and hospitals 
* Reduce fiscal burden
through energy savings

* 

SIRP (2001) 

Annex B9
Page 2 of 4

Progress Benchmarks 

Partners

* System of targeted social 
assistance in place 
* At Icast 30 communities 
covered by SIF 

* UNDP and TACIS have
been implementing programs
that address poverty
* The Italian Government
has been active in providing
TA for social protection.

* UN has provided
extensive TA on HIV/AIDS
and illicit drug use
prevention
* OSCE supports TB
control pilots in prisons
* TACIS and WHO have
also been active in this area

* Tuberculosis and 
HIV/AIDS epidemics 
contained 
* Decrease in total TB cases 
of 2% per year. 
* A strategy for AIDS 
prevention approved by the 
Government 
* Vitebsk health reform
pilot implemented
countrywide.
500-600 schools and
hospitals rehabilitated umder
the SIRP

* 

Sectors 

7. Private Sector 
Development. 

Country Strategy & Key 
Actions 
* Develop a sound 
business and investment 
climate for SME sector 
* Simplify entry 
requirements 
* 
Streamline licensing 
procedures 
* 
Improve governance 

8. Financial Sector 

* 

Improve the efficiency 

of the sector 

Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA
* PSD (2003) 
* Continuation of the 
IFC program on SME 
support (2002-04) 
* Obstacles to 
Business and 
Investment Study 
(2002) 
* E-development
(2003)

* Financial Sector 

Review (2003) 

Progress Benchmarks 

Partners

Annex B9
Page 3 of 4

* 

* 

Increase number of SMEs 
by 20 percent annually 
Improved environment for 
businesses as evidenced by 
surveys, including business 
registration, licensing, controls 
and inspections. 

* EBRD provided crcdit
lines and supported SME
development
* USAID supported the
SME development program
* UNDP has been
supporting SME development

* Develop a program for 

* EBRD has provided

finawcial sector reform 

equity investments and credit
lines to the banking system

9. Agriculture 

* 

Implement pilot farm 

* Rural 

* 

IFC is planning to 

* Number of rural SME

restructuring 

development (2004) 

10. Environment 

* Mitigate the 
environmental 
consequences of Chemobyl 
* Preserve the 
biodiversity 
* 
Implement climate 
change prevention measures 

provide TA on SME 
development in rural 
areas

* Environmental 

* GEFIIBRD 

Environment Project Strategy Update (2002) 
(2003) 
* Chemobyl 
Project (2003) 

doubled during the CAS
period.

* Compliance with 

international treaties and 
protocols on environment 
* Preserve unique 
ecosystems and biodiversity 
* 
Improved radiation 
monitoring systems in place 

* UN has created an

Interagency Task Force to
coordinate international effort
on Chernobyl.
* 
IAEA is the most active
agency in addressing the
Chemobyl issues in Belarus.
They expressed interest in
working with the Bank in this
area and offered grant co-
financing in the order of $10
million
* TACIS has bccn very
active in international water
issues as well as Chernobyl-
related programs
* UNDP has a range of
environmental programs,
including climate change,
biodiversity, and Chermobyl.

Country Strategy & Key 
Actions 
* Government is willing 
to listen to NGO concerns 

Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA
Civil society 
activities (2002-04) 
* 
Social and Gender 
Study (2003) 

_ 

Sectors 

11. Civil Society 
Development 
Build the civil 
society's capacity to 
voice its concerns 
and become a more 
important partner in 

the country's life. 

Amnex B9
Page 4 of 4

Progress Benchmarks 

Partners

* NGOs play a greater role 
in country's life (measured 
through surveys) 
.
Increased delivery of 
services through NGOs 

All major donors (UN,
TACIS, USAID, OSCE, and
bilateral donors) have been
active in supporting the
development of democracy,
building the NGO capacity,
supporting civic engagement,

public education, gender, etc.

CAS Annex BIO - Belarus 
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

As Of January 15, 2002

Annex B IO
Page I of I

Network area 

Country 

performancea 

Major issue 

Country 

Bank 

Reconciliation

priorityc 

priorityc of country and
Bank priorities d

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management

Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Private sector 
Energy & mining 
Infrastructure 

fair 
poor 
fair 
fair 

fair 
poor 
fair 

poor 
good 
fair 

poor 
poor 
poor 
fair 

anticipated increase in incidence 
sustainability 

high 
high 
high 
moderate 

high
high
high
moderate

targeted quality improvement 
TB/AIDS, cardio vascular 
not targeted 

moderate 
high 
high 

moderate
high
high

lack of reform 
Chernobyl related 

lacking infrastructure 
hostile environemnt 
controlled prices 
lack of investment 

moderate 
high 
high 

moderate
high
high

moderate 
high 
moderate 
moderate 

high
high
moderate
low 

not a Bank priority

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Template created on 02/20/2002

