d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 23927-BUL

M]EMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND THE

INTERtNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

BULGARIA

May 31, 2002

Bulgaria Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

The International Finance Corporation
Southern Europe and Central Asia Department

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency init: Bulgarian Lev (BGN) as November 1, 2001
$1 = BGN 2.1700000

FISCAL YEAR

ABBREVIATION AND ACRONYMS

APL 
ARPP 

BCC 
BDZ 
BIHS 
BNB 
BSP 
BTC 

CAS 
CBA 
COM 
CWR 
DH 
EBRD 

EC 
EFF 
EIB 
EPRB 

EU 
FDI 
FIAS 
GDP 
GEF 
HBS 
HE 
IDF 
IFC 
IMF 
IT 

Adaptable Program Loan 
Annual Report on Portfolio 
Performance 
Bank Consolidation Company 
Bulgaria Railway Company 
Bulgarian Integrated Household Survey 
Bulgaria National Bank 
Bulgarian Socialist Party 
Bulgarian Telecommulnications 
Company 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Currency Board Arrangement 
Council of Ministers 
Child Welfare Reform 
District Heating 
European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
European Commission 
Extended Financing Facility 
European Investment Bank 
Executive Program of the Republic 
of Bulgaria 
European Union 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Foreign Investment Advisory Service 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environmental Fund 
Household Budget Survey 
Higher Education 
Institutional Development Grant 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 
Information Technology 

JPR 
LIL 
LSMS 
MIGA 

MoF 
MOLSP 
MRF 
NEK 
NGO 
NHIF 
NSI 
OECD 

PAL 
PER 
PSO 
RIF 
RWC 
SAPARD 

SIINM 
SIF 
SiC 
SME 
SOE 
TATF 
UDF 
UK 
UNDP 
USAID 

WTO 

Joint Portfolio Review
Learning and Innovation Loan
Living Standards Measurement Survey
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Labor and Social Policy
Movement for Rights and Freedom
National Electric Company
Non-governmental Organization
National Health Insurance Fund
National Statistical Institute
Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development
Programmatic Adjustment Loan
Public Expenditure Review
Public Service Obligation
Regional Initiatives Fund
Regional Water Company
Special Accession Program for
Agriculture and Rural Development
Simeon If National Movement
Social Investment Fund
Supreme Judicial Council
Small-and Medium-Size Enterprise
State-Owned Enterprise
Technical Assistance Trust Fund
Union of Democratic Forces
United Kingdom
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International
Development
World Trade Organization

The World Bank Group Team

IBRD 
Vice President: 
Johannes F. Linn 
Country Director: 
Andrew N. Vorkink 
CAS Team Leaders: Julits Varallyay 
Leila Zlaoui 

Vice President: 
Director: 
Manager: 
Task Leader: 

IFC
Assaad Jabre
Khosrow Zamani
Sujata Lamba
Gjergj Konda

BULGARUA: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...............................................................

i

I. 

POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE 
A. Political Developments .1
B. Economic perfoimance 
.2
II. BULGARIA'S TRANSITION: PROGRESS ACHIEVED AND CHALLENGE AHEAD.... 2
A. Unemployment, poverty and social assistance 
.3
B. Building human capital 
C. 
Improving the business climate 
Public Administration 
Legal and Judicial 
Enterprise and Financial Sector 
Infrastructure 
.7
Agriculture, Natural Resources and the Environment 
D. Emerging Challnges 

.4

.9

.9

.6

.7

..

.6

.7

III. GOVERNMENT RES,PONSE TO THE DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ...................... 10
A. Government Program Statement ............................................................. 
10
B. Main Elements cf the Government Program ............................................................ 11

IV. ECONOMIC PROSP]ECTS AND EXTERNAL FINANCING ............................................... 

12

3

.1 

V. BANK GROUP ASSSTANCE .13
A. Past assistance .13
Bank Portfolio 
IFC and MIGA Programs .14
What are the lessons from past Bank Group assistance and the 1998 CAS? 
Consultations in preparing this CAS .15
B. Bank Group Strategy and Main Themes .16
Promoting Competitive Private Sector-Led Growth .16
Strengthening Public Administration and Anticorruption Initiatives 
.1 
9
Mitigating Social Irnpact of Restructuring and Delivering Social Services More Effectively 19
C. CAS Instruments .21
Partnerships .21
Portfolio Management .22
Analytical and Advisory Assistance .22
IBRD Lending Scenarios and Triggers .23
CAS Monitoring .26
Outreach .26

.1 

4

VI. CREDITWORTHINESS AND RISKS ............................... 
Creditworthiness and Exposure ............................... 
Risks ............................... 

26
26
28

BOXES

Box 1: 
Box 2: 
Box 3: 

TABLE

Millennium Development Goals in Bulgaria .................. 
................................ 5
Lessons From 1998 CAS and Conclusions of the 2002 CAE ............................................ 
15
Triggers to Stay in Base Case .................................................. 
25

Table 1: 

Bulgaria: Key Economic Indicators, 2001-2005 (in percent of GDP) ................................ 12

CHART

Chart 1: 

Bank Group Strategy, Themes and Instruments .......................... 

........................ 16

ANNEXES

Annex A2 
Annex B2 
Annex B3 

Annex B4 
Annex B5 
Annex B6 

Annex B7 
Annex B8 

Annex B9 
Annex B IO 
Annex C 
Annex D 

Bulgaria at a glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002
Summary of Non-lending Services
Social Indicatoi-s Table
Key Economic Indicators
Selected Indicators Table
Key Exposure Indicators
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
CAS Matrix
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
An Update on Poverty
CAS Consultation - Main Findings

THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S COU1NTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. 
Following the Board discussion of the last CAS in May 1998, Bulgaria has enjoyed political
stability for the first time since the end of Communist rule. 
The UDF Government continued
comprehensive reforms and the currency board arrangement (CBA), and the economy responded
remarkably well, with high ewonomic growth, and declining inflation and poverty. However, high
unemployment and corruption persisted.

2. 
Since the 2001 electicns, the Government of former King Simeon the Second has continued
reforms, and has pledged to improve living standards, reduce poverty and decrease the country's
indebtedness. Commitment to EU accession and completing the transition to a market economy remains
strong. Yet, high expectations for a quick turnaround in the economy, festering high unemployment and
perceptions about poverty and corruption have disaffected many and present tough political and social
challenges to the Government.
3. 
Bulgaria's economic outlook remains good, provided that structural reforms remain on track. A
two-year Standby was approved by the Fund in February 2002, supporting the CBA, a continued strong
fiscal stance and deeper structural reforms. Robust economic growth arising from an improved business
environment and strong FDI flows can be expected to reduce poverty, bring public debt under control,
and provide adequate financing for crucial social services.

4. 
The October 2001 Government program provides a good framework for achieving Bulgaria's
main objectives of growth, poverty reduction and EU accession, and a sound basis for external assistance.
Further international support and partnerships, as well as official and commercial financing, will play a
major role in the next stage of economic transition. The Bank's assistance strategy would support
implementation of the Government program and complement the IMF Standby. With the main CAS
emphasis on promoting competitive private sector led growth, strengthening social administration and
governance, mitigating the soc:ial impact of further restructuring, and delivering public services more
effectively, the Bank Group would be well positioned to assist the Government in reducing poverty,
raising living standards and facilitating EU accession.

5. 
Under the most likely base case scenario, the Bank would lend up to US$750 million in FY03-05,
at a somewhat higher level than under the previous CAS, and focus on providing support to Bulgaria's
program. IFC and MIGA are also planning to expand their programs.

6. 
A series of three programmatic adjustment loans (PALs) totaling up to US$450 million would
support a robust medium-term policy reform program. The PALs will focus on: 
(i) regulatory and
institutional reforms, and restructuring and privatization 
in the real sectors to improve the business
environment and attract FDI; 
(ii) governance, public administration and anti-corruption measures to
improve Government capacity; and (iii) on labor market and social policies to achieve poverty reduction,
sustainability of social protection and education and health reforms. The robust reforn agenda under the
PALs and strong investment project pipeline would support economic growth, lower unemployment and
poverty reduction. The design of the PALs and specific investment operations is fully consistent with the
recommendations of the Country Assistance Evaluation recently prepared by OED. Implementation of
the overall program would benefit from the upgraded Bank presence on the ground after decentralizing
the Country Unit, together with the Country Director, to Zagreb in November 2001.

7. 
Despite the planned higher level of lending to Bulgaria, Bank exposure will remain manageable,
given the country's sound economic program, debt management plan, and access to the international

11 

Executive Summarv

financial markets at improving terms. The program's main risks include possible policy slippages,
regional instability and weakening external demand. Adequate safeguards are built into the program to
protect against these risks. The strong commitment of the Government to pursue a viable reform path
would further mitigate those risks. If such risks were to materialize, the Bank would in the absence of --
an appropriate policy response - scale back its lending and limit it to essential poverty related investment
projects.

8. 

The Executive Directors may wish to focus their discussion on the following issues:

* Appropriateness of poverty reduction measures: 
are the proposed Bank actions 
for
addressing key capacity and policy issues on poverty appropriate, including the FY02 Poverty
Assessment and its intended role in the policy dialogue?

* Business environnment and FDI: are the proposed actions for 
improving competition
enhancing policies, institutions and the investment climate appropriate, given the centrality of
FDI to sustainable growth and job creation?

* Bank Exposure: is the proposed Bank program, including adjustment lending, appropriate,
given the prospects for major progress in transition to a fully functioning market economy?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT,
AND THE, INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR BULGARIA

I. 

POLITICA]L DEVELOPMENTS AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

A. 

Political Developments

I. 
Since the end of Communist rule, Bulgaria witnessed political stability for the first time only after
the 1997 elections. With an absolute majority in Parliament, the UDF coalition pursued a coherent
program and coped successfulhl with a series of international crises. Parliamentary elections held in June
2001 gave a clear mandate to the National Movement for Simeon the Second (NMSS) headed by forner
King Simeon the Second Saxe-Coburg Gotha. A coalition Govemment, including the Turkish minority-
based Movement for Rights and Freedom (MRF) was formed subsequently. 
In a run off for presidential
elections in last November, the socialist candidate Georgi Parvanov unseated the incumbent Peter
Stoyanov, even though the latter had the support of both the UDF and NMSS.

2. 
The new Govemment has pledged to boost economic growth, improve living standards and
reduce 
the country's indebtedness. Accelerating privatization, 
reducing poverty and eradicating
corruption are at the heart of the program of the new Government. So are the overarching national goals
of joining the EU and NATO. While there is a strong continuity between the previous and the new
Government in their commitment to a market economy, the current Government has, in addition, made
public its pledge to alleviate poverty and to reform public administration and the judiciary. The new
cabinet includes both young dynamic reformers drawn from international investment banks and more
traditional political figures with experience in government from the pre-1997 period.

3. 
The Govemment faces difficult challenges: it needs to gain the confidence of the population by
explaining the rationale for reforms and making a convincing case for their urgency. Without broad
political support, it will be very difficult to proceed with reforms that are expected lo have additional
social costs. The election of President Parvanov, a socialist, and recent internal dissent within the NMSS
that quickly led to the departure of five deputies from the PM's party, have complicated the political
landscape. Consensus building behind reforms may now require re-doubled efforts both within and
outside the coalition. Moreover, the high expectations of the population, reflected by the volatile voter
attitude in last year's parliamentary and presidential election, is putting a great burden on the Government
to deliver visible results in the short run. The 2001 campaign only heightened expectations, and the
voters expect a fairer distribution of the benefits of sustained growth, and the elimination of corruption.
While confirming poverty reduction through a better monitoring capacity and increasing transparency in
public administration would help, it is unlikely to reduce skepticism in the public. Continued high
unemployment and a large number of disaffected within society will continue to challenge policy makers.
Besides the complicated political economy, the Govemment needs to address the problem of limited
administrative and coordinating capacity, so that reform decisions can be well articulated and then
effectively implemented. Whi'le some progress has been made in Government capacity building, it is
becoming an issue in the reform process that requires the Government's full attention.

4. 
Bulgarian foreign policy has been dominated by the drive for EU and NATO membership. With
negotiations on a few chapters of the acquis completed, the EU's 2001 Report notes progress toward

2 

Bulgaria. Country Assistance Strate

accession, but emphasizes the need for administrative reforms, in particular 
membership is expected after 2007.

in the judiciary. EU

B. 

Economic perlformance

5. 
The previous government's comprehensive reform program, following years of social turmoil and
economic mismanagement, and a 30 percent drop in output in 1996, has transformed Bulgaria's economy,
lowered inflation, and improved investor confidence. As a result, many of the foundations for high and
sustained growth have been laid. The currency board arrangement (CBA), introduced in July 1997, was
underpinned by a conservative fiscal policy and a much needed acceleration of the structural reform
effort. Wide-ranging reforms included major trade and price liberalization, reform of the social sectors,
and the restructuring of the financial, enterprise, agriculture and energy sectors, includinlg, in particular,
divestiture of SOEs.

6. 
Despite an adverse external environment marked by turmoil in international markets, unfavorable
commodity prices and the trade disruptions associated with the crisis in Kosovo, real GDP growth
averaged 3 percent per year in 1998-99, and 5 percent in 2000-01. At the same time, inflation was
brought down to single digits in 1999-2001 from hyperinflationary levels in the mid-1990s. The budget
has remained broadly balanced, registering a surplus of 1 percent of GDP in 1998 and a deficit of just
below I percent of GDP over the three following years, but maintaining a primary surplus throughout. '
This prudent fiscal policy has succeeded in reducing total public debt by more than 30 percentage points
of GDP from above 100 percent: in 1997 to around 69 percent in 2001.

7. 
Bulgaria's economic recovery was accompanied by a growing external current account deficit.
Driven by a fall in exports in the wake of the Kosovo crisis, the current account balance moved from a
surplus of 3.6 percent of GDP in 1997 to a deficit of 5.3 percent of GDP in 1999. 
In 2000, exports
rebounded by 16 percent in volume terms (about 20 percent in US dollar terms), nearly offsetting the
effect of rising oil prices on imports and thus containing deterioration of the current account deficit to 5.8
percent of GDP. The economic; slowdown in the EU and the financial crisis in Turkey led to a decline in
export growth in 2001 (the EU and Turkey account for about 50 and 10 percent of 13ulgarian exports,
respectively). The Government responded by tightening the fiscal stance in the last quarter of 2001 and
managed to keep the current account deficit at 6.4 percent of GDP.

8. 
Bulgaria's overall external position has improved substantially since 1997, even though the
current account deficit increased recently. With the exception of 2001, the current account deficit has
been more than fully covered by FDI. In fact, the country's external debt (public plus private) has fallen
substantially to around 78 percent of GDP in 2001, while foreign reserves have remained at satisfactory
levels. 
International financial markets have responded favorably to the achievements of the reform
program. 
In November 2001, the authorities issued a Euro 250 million 5 year eurobond at 367 basis
points over the benchmark 5 year German bonds. This issue was oversubscribed. Also, at the end of
2001, Standard and Poor's and Moody's upgraded Bulgaria's credit rating. A successful debt swap in
March 2002 helped reduce outstanding public debt and spread out service payments over several years.

II. 

BULGARIA'S TRANSITION: PROGRESS ACHIEVED AND CHALLENGE AHEAD

9. 
The recent robust economic performance augurs well for Bulgaria's prospects, provided that
structural reforms remain on track. The challenge facing the country is to harness and sustain this
performance so that it can achieve the Government's objectives of sustaining economic growth, creating
employment and reducing poverty, all of which are key to Accession to the EU. The exient of the

Recording privatization revenues as financing items, as in Table 1.

Bulgaria: Countrv Assistance StrategV 

3

challenge facing Bulgaria is illustrated by the fact that per capita income levels are about 25 percent of the
EU average while unemployment rates are about double. The Government's strategy hinges on creating
an improved environment for private-sector led growth and empowering all segments oi the population,
especially the poor, to participal:e in the growth process. Key elements of the strategy include measures
aimed at: (i) attacking poverty and improving social assistance; (ii) building human capital; and (iii)
creating an investment climate that encourages increased productivity, employment creation and balanced
growth.

A. 

Unemployment, poverty and social assistance

10. 
Unemployment and poverty have become a persistent feature of Bulgaria's post-communist
landscape and a growing source of disaffection among the population. The erosion of full employment
and income security during the early 1990s increased vulnerability across the population. Labor shedding
in Bulgaria has been drastic. By 1996, unemployment was at 13 percent and since then was growing
steadily to reach 18 percent in 2001 - among the highest in the region. Long-term unemployment in
Bulgaria has been particularly severe, over one-half of the unemployed had been out of work for over one
year in 1993, and this share increased to 62 percent in 2001. The long-term unemployed lack motivation,
have low skill, and are hard to train. High unemployment in Bulgaria has been caused by enterprise
restructuring, low skills and regional mismatches, slow growth of new enterprises, skills gaps, and labor
market rigidities. Reducing unemployment will require an improved business climate for job creation,
addressing the skills gap through improvements 
in education and training, enhancing labor market
flexibility, and implementing well-targeted demand driven employment services.

11. 

But, reforms are payintg off. The recent economic recovery has led to a reduction in poverty
since the 1997 crisis. The economic crisis in 1997 seriously affected living standards, and poverty
escalated to 36 percent of the population, according to the household survey conducted that year.2 Since
then, poverty rates have declined significantly, to 12 percent, as consumption levels have recovered from
the crisis. The Gini coefficient declined from 31 percent in 1997 to 29.5 percent in 2001, and the poverty
gap was estimated between 1.4-2.1 percent of GDP.3 This suggests that the period of sustained economic
growth between 1997 and 2001, as well the social safety net have had an important impact on living
standards. Annex C outlines the key results from the most recent household budget survey. Nonetheless,
the combination of four years of high growth, decreasing poverty head-count and persistent high
unemployment is puzzling. Social spending and programs explain this in part: a rising number of early
retirees and reasonable pensions levels together with family reliance and informal employment, have
contributed to declining poverty rates without affecting unemployment.

12. 
The nature of poverty has changed, and deep poverty persists among certain vulnerable
groups. Despite the improvements since 1997, poverty remains at twice the levels of 1995 when it was
measured at 5.5 percent. The nature of poverty has evolved, as recent improvements in welfare have not
been equally distributed across the population. There are "pockets of poverty" among certain groups,
particularly the unemployed, ethnic minorities, most notably Roma, and families with more than four
children. Roma are ten times more likely to be poor than ethnic Bulgarians. Poverty also has a
significant rural dimension. U7rban areas experienced a more significant drop in poverty levels since
1997, from 34 to 6 percent, while in rural areas poverty rates were less than halved from 41 to 24 percent.
Considerable scope remains to obtain further reduction of poverty through the development of targeted
poverty intervention (e.g. for the Roma) and improving the targeting of social assistance, particularly
social assistance to mitigate the impact of restructuring. Moreover, capacity in the Government to

2 "Bulgaria: Poverty during the Transition", June 1999 The World Bank, report no. 18411.
3The poverty line is a relative line from 1997, set at two-thirds mean per capita consumption of $2.76 per day,
adjusted to 2001 prices - this is being used as an absolute poverty line in the FY02 Poverty Assessment.

4 

Bulgaria. Country Assistance Sirateg

monitor poverty and assess the impact of policies on vulnerable groups needs to be strengthened, as
demonstrated by the need to contract out the last household budget surveys (HHBS) and the absence of a
living standard measurement survey (LSMS) - both of which are being addressed with Bank assistance
(para. 69).

13. 
Social protection reforms helped the poor cope witlh transition shocks, but significant issues
still remain for furthter enhancing the effectiveness of the system and its sustainability. The previous
government implemented reforms to provide a comprehensive safety net for the poorest households. It
strengthened and consolidated means-tested social benefits, targeted benefits to the most vulnerable
individuals and households, and reduced duplicative benefit programs. 
Institutional and administrative
capacity within the social assistance system was strengthened. Licensing requirements, contractual and
funding transfer arrangements and minimum standards for delivery of social care services by NGOs and
the private sector were specified. While the targeting and cost-effectiveness of social assistance cash
benefits have improved (where full funding was available) and community/private participation in
delivery increased, the programs have as yet not benefited from new policy initiatives.
A weakness of the system of social assistance cash benefits is the financing mechanism.
14. 
Responsibility for funding mcst social assistance programs 
is shared equally between the state and
municipal governments. However, some local governments - and particularly the poorest which have the
greatest need - are unable to finance benefits fully. In other cases, the amount of the transfer from the
central government budget is not sufficient. As a result, benefits are delayed or unpaid in some areas.
Another pending issue is the reform of the system of child and family benefits. The outdated
1968 Birth Promotion Act has, as yet, not been substituted by an effective and fiscally affordable Family
Support Law. Currently benefi: levels are too low to have an impact on poverty. This is a critical issue as
poverty is concentrated among Families with many children. The new government is looking at options to
increase child support for the most needy families through different targeting mechanisms.

15. 

16. 
The reform of the pay-as-you go pension system into a diversified multi-pillar system started in
2000 with the aim of gradually shifting up to 5 percent of contributions to a mandatory second pillar to be
invested in private pension funds. The legislative framework has been in place since 1999, however, a
number of challenges remain. In the short run, pension indexing, disability claims, effectiveness and
reconciliation of contributions, accounting and valuation procedures, and building a strong supervisory
agency need to be resolved. Over the longer term, capital market development will be expected to absorb
system savings, although raising the foreign diversification ceiling for pension funds from 10 to 30
percent would provide attractive alternatives for placements of funds. Measures will also be needed to
ensure equity 
in contributions between various employment categories, and to establish a strong
regulatory body for private pension funds. Fiscal implications of the reform need to be monitored based
in light of decisions on the above short-term issues, and the expected financial performance of the
National Social Security Institute (NSSI), which has shown a deficit of 1.2 percent of GDP in 2001. At
the same time, high payroll taxation needs to be reduced in a fiscally prudent manner to stimulate
investments and generate jobs.
B. 
Building humain capital

17. 
Similar to many transit:ion countries with aging populations, inadequate delivery systems, and
excess infrastructure assets, the modemization of education and health services poses a rnajor challenge to
the Government. The extent of this challenge is demonstrated by the substantial reforms and investment
in the education and health sectors that will be required to first reverse the deterioration 
in social
indicators since the baseline was established, and then to reach the Millennium Development Goals in
2015 (Box 1).

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Strategy 

5

Box 1: Millennium Development Goals in Bulgaria

Goal 

Baseline (1990 
unless specified) 

Most recent 
data 

Target
(by 2015)

Eradicate extreme poverty

% of population be-low $2.15 PPP per day 

3.1 (1995) 

6.4 (2001) 

Achieve universal primary education

gross enrollment rate in basic education (7-14) 

Improve maternal healtil

maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births) 
Ensure environmental stability
GDP per unit of energy use (Kg oil
equivalenlJ$1,000 GDP [@PPP]) 

Combat HIJV/AIDS, malariat and otlher diseases

98.6 

20.9 

95.1 (2000) 

23.5 (1999) 

526 (1997) 

Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people) 

25.9 

45.5 (1999) 

1.5

100

16

250

25.9

Sources: poverty datafrom the Bulgaria Integrated Household surveys; education datafrom the
NSI; health datafrom UNICEF TransMONEE.
Note: indicator definitionsfior poverty and education enrollments have been modifiedfrom the MDC
because of relevance and data availability; for health, because the reported HIV cases at 314 are
low, TB - with a doubling o)f cases in 1990-1998 - has been selected (para. 19).

18. 
Optimization of the sciool network and staffing is a high priority in Bulgaria. Since the school
network was established 
in 
tlhe 1960s, total enrollment has declined by almost a half, without a
commensurate reduction in the number of schools, classes and teachers. As nationally regulated class
sizes, teacher-class ratios and t:eaching hours have not been adjusted, salaries account for a substantial
share of the budget. A 20 percent increase in class-size could free up almost 20 percent of the budget for
currently neglected maintenance and limited materials/equipment spending. Quality of education is also
affected by outdated curricula which contributes to the significant skills gap and unemployment.
Ongoing decentralization has not been completed in education. Municipalities do not have adequate
resources, nor can they deploy and supervise teachers and directors. 
In higher education, despite higher
enrollment, the budget has not increased and educational outcomes have deteriorated. Many isolated,
narrowly focused institutions of higher education only aggravate resource constraints. Budgeting in the
sub-sector needs to respond to new demands, especially in light of changing enrollment, more cost-
recovery for those who can afford to pay, and the need for quality improvements.
19. 
Bulgaria's health systenm is over-burdend by excess health facilities and overstaffing. Even
though the average length of stay in the hospital is high, hospital beds remain underutilized. Excess
capacity and staff in urban areas is a problem. A lack of service standards, quality control, and
management capacity, coupled with inadequate incentives for high quality care, have led to under-the-
table payment practices. As a result, health care, as well as the health status of the population, have
deteriorated. To rationalize the hospital system and capacity, and to strengthen primary care, Bulgaria has
started a broad systemic refort. The central focus of the reform is the National Health Insurance Fund
(NHIF), which is financed primarily from payroll-based contributions. NHIF has, since July 2000,
contracted with physicians for out-patient (or pre-hospital) care and, since July 2001, with hospitals for
in-patient care. The shift to an insurance-based system with both purchasers and providers, coupled with
consumer choice, will improve overall efficiency and quality of health case. Reforms have also reduced
the number of doctors and given high prominence to general practice. Capacity reduction will need to be

6 

Bulgaria.- Country Assistance Strategy

accompanied by targeted investments to modernize remaining facilities, which could be financed from
savings from cutbacks in capacity. The incidence of HIV/AIDS is very low at 314 reported cases, which,
however, is no reason for complacency. The spread of TB since 1990 gives a grim picture. Both the
incidence and number of new cases roughly doubled by 1998, dropping off somewhat afterwards. A four-
year National Program for prevention, early diagnosis and treatment of tuberculosis started in 2000 and
promises to produce further results, including a monitoring system for newly-discovered patients.
Improving the business climate

C. 

20. 
The reforms implemenl:ed since 1997 have played a decisive role in the resumption of growth and
the reduction of poverty in Bulgaria. There were four critical steps that needed to be taken to lift the
country out of stagnation ancl begin the transition to a market economy: (a) creating stability and
predictability of the macro- and policy environment; (b) removing assets from state ownership and
eliminating direct intervention; (c) building up an institutional and policy framework (laws, regulations
and administrative procedures) to spur private sector activity; and (d) improving the capacity, integrity
and oversight of public administration, and its credibility with the public.
21. 
Progress has been substantial, though not even across all areas. Actions already taken and issues
still remaining are reviewed below in areas that affect governance, delivery of public services and the
business environment, including: (a) public administration and local government reform; (b) legal/judicial
reforms; (c) privatization/businiss climate, including finance, (d) infrastructure; and (e) natural resources
and environment.

Public Administration

22. 
Public administration reforms have been launched but implementation is at a relatively early
stage. Program design and irnplementation continue to be weak and reforms have lagged, affecting
implementation of Bank supported adjustment operations. The main weaknesses are 
inadequate
compensation systems, difficulties in retaining qualified staff, inadequate budgets of Ministries and
agencies in face of the reforrn agenda and EU accession, poor monitoring and evaluation systems,
inadequate service delivery standards, and limited modern information and communications technology.
The public sector workforce in education and health 
is excessive. Accountability and transparency
mechanisms are absent and a persistent perception of corruption and patronage induce strong public
criticism of the political establishment. A recent Bank report "Anticorruption 
in Transition: A
Contribution to the Policy Debate" 
identifies Bulgaria as having high state caplure and medium
administrative corruption putting the country at the bottom of EU Accession candidates. The current
Government has responded to widespread public concerns by clearly stating its "zero tolerance" for
corruption. For this policy to become effective, preparation of a nationwide action program will need to
be based on wide consultations involving civil servants, trade unions, the private sector and civil society.
Additional areas for public administration reform will 
include customs, property rights, public
procurement, and the civil serviee.

23. 
Local governments constitute a weak link in the delivery of social services to the poor and
infrastructure services to the business community. Municipalities face several institutional and financial
challenges that cut across all sectors: (a) bureaucratic public administration practices are still in place,
complicating decision making; (b) municipal finances are weak, relying on uncertain and often
insufficient central transfers, and inadequate tax base and tariffs; (c) a clear framework for service and
fiscal decentralization does not exist; (d) civil society is not involved in decision making, affecting
accountability and efficiency; (e) municipal services are inefficient, poorly managed and lack incentives
to improve; and (f) private sector provision of infrastructure services is non-existent, mainly because the
regulatory framework does not exist for concessions and the business environment (tariffs, collection,
financing, etc.) 
is not attractive. 
In the resulting resource-constrained environment, maintcnance

Bulgaria. Country Assistance Strateg 

7

expenditures have declined, 
,iecapitalizing enterprises mainly 
in infrastructure (e.g. water supply,
transport), public services and electricity. 
In education, health and social assistance, weak human and
administrative capacity, inadeqitate financing and lack of accountability also affect service delivery.

Legal and Judicial

24. 
The legal and judicial system remain an obstacle to competitive economic activity, slowing
conflict resolution, bankruptcies and commercial court cases. Corruption in the judiciary is a major
problem and mechanisms to hold judges accountable are limited and ineffective. 
In particular, the
Supreme Judicial Council (SJC) is not equipped to perform its judicial oversight function. Selection of
magistrates does not follow uniform criteria and training programs are inadequate. The curriculum of law
schools has not been modernized. As a result, capacity to implement and enforce new laws is lacking,
and contract enforcement is weak. Chronic delays in processing court cases undermine commercial and
civil rights and obligations. Sufficient resources are not available for proper functioning of the legal
system which is overburdened by a sharply rising number of court cases after collapse of central planning
and the surge of the private sector. Property registry and titling are also outdated.

Enterprise and Financial Sector

25. 
Privatization and the Business Climate. As of end-2001, about 90 percent of non-energy and
non-infrastructure assets were privatized. Privatization of the remaining assets requires an improved legal
framework and preparation of divestiture strategies. In addition, the Government still holds shares in
already privatized SOEs that need to be sold. An Administrative Barriers Report of the Foreign
Investment Advisory Service oi the World Bank (FIAS) recommended removal of administrative barriers
to private investment by enhancing the flexibility of labor markets, ensuring competition, and improving
public services such as custom;s, the tax office, and regulators. The scope for improvement is illustrated
by the fact that company registration still involves a dozen procedures, several institutions and excessive
administrative costs. Building permits are unduly complex and take long time to be issued. 
Insolvency
provisions of the Commercial! Code have already been amended to facilitate bankruptcy and the
regulatory regime has been rationalized through the Licensing Optimization Program. 
Implementation
and enforcement remain weak, however, especially in the commercial courts.

26. 
Better intermediation of finance requires further bank privatization and a stronger legal and
regulatory framework. As a result of an overhauled legal and regulatory framework, upgraded banking
supervision, liquidation of bankrupt banks and privatization of five public banks, the banking sector is
now healthier. The private sector holds over 80 percent of banking assets compared to 40 percent in
1999. But, efficient intermediation of resources requires further reforms. Privatizing remaining banks
will involve Biochim, DSK (tlhe State Savings Bank), and sale of Government holdings in the Bank
Consolidation Company (CCB). Banking regulations are not yet harmonized with EU directives, and the
institutional mechanism for dealing with insolvent banks is weak. Oversight by the BNB is not
sufficiently comprehensive, partly because a Bankruptcy Law for banks is not in place. The regulatory
framework for non-banking financial institutions is not fully developed, yet - after the adoption of the
second pillar pension reform - i-t acquires greater importance. State-owned insurance companies have not
been privatized.

Infrastructure

27. 
Energy sector reforms have been slow. Bulgaria has the highest energy intensity among EU
accession countries due to lagging sector reforms. Legislation has been promulgated to phase in
competition, separate ownership, regulatory and policy functions, establish a regulatory body, unbundle
the energy company (NEK) and restructure Bulgargaz. Despite these measures, transparent market rules

8 

Bulgaria: Countrv Assistance Strategy

with a clear schedule for opening the domestic energy market to competition are not yet in place, massive
cross subsidies in electricity and heat tariffs persist, and the State Energy Regulatory Commission lacks
authority for adequate regulatory enforcement. Energy efficiency should be addressed as a matter of
urgency. Electric power generation, transmission and distribution continue in state ownership. Adequate
sequencing of regulatory reforrns and investment is crucial to the success of energy sector restructuring.
Yet, in the absence of reforms in the above areas, a more robust presence by private investors would only
expose the State to unaffordable contingent budget liabilities. District heating (DH) remains a drain on1
the budget of about two-thirds of one percent of GDP per year. To put DH on a commercial footing, the
Government adopted a comprehensive strategy 
in September 2000 that devolves tariff setting to
municipalities, encourages increased operational efficiency (to measure/control consumption), strengthens
the regulatory framework, and mncourages better management via private sector involvement. Operating
subsidies have already been cut back and will be phased out for all DH companies by 2004-05. An
energy benefit program for the poor costs US$2 million per year, but it is inadequate, as DH bills account
for 16 percent of the average wage and 50 percent of pensions. The program will need to be expanded, as
operating subsidies are phased out and tariffs rise; detailed program design and its costing will benefit
from the findings of the ongoing Poverty Assessment.

28. 
Progress in modernizing the transport network is uneven. The road transport industry has been
fully privatized and a proper regulatory framework is in place. However, poor road conditions due to
inadequate maintenance expenclitures threaten the efficiency of road transport services. For ports and air
transport, concession arrangements are not in place. Although the State Railways, BDZ, has taken steps
to improve efficiency including major reductions in personnel and divestiture of most ancillary activities,
it continues to provide uneconomic services, even in the absence of public service obligations (services
maintained in the public interest at Government request). It is financially fragile, and operates like an old
SOE. To attract private capital for transport investments, operations would have to be commercially
based and investments would lhave to be justified by economic priorities. Harmonization of transport
regulations with EU requiremen!ts will require considerable efforts.

29. 
Private participation in the management of water companies is needed. Despite a 90 percent
coverage of the population, service efficiency is low. Unaccounted-for water at 50 percent is very high,
bill collection at 75-80 percent is low, and tariffs - kept low for social reasons - at US$0.25/m3 cannot
cover rehabilitation needs that are very substantial due to decapitalization of most water companies over
the last decade. Efforts thus far to modernize the sector include harmonization of national standards with
EU requirements, but it would cost some US$300 per capita, which is fiscally unaffordable over the
medium-term. A comprehensive Water Sector Strategy is being completed by the Ciovernment and a
regulatory framework is being prepared which will permit Regional Water Companies (RWCs) to award
concession contracts to private operators; the first concession contract for water and wastewater services
in Sofia has been awarded and others are in preparation for the Varna and Shumen RWC's.

30. 
Despite notable progress in reforming tlte telecommunications sector, privatization of fixed
wire telephone has not been completed and regulatory capacity needs to be strengthened. Key
achievements 
include 
the adoption of WTO's basic 
telecommunications 
agreement, a new
telecommunications 
law and policy, and establishment of an 
independent 
regulator 
(State
Telecommunications Commission). Several operators compete in the mobile and data communications
services market. Privatization of the state-owned monopoly Bulgarian Telecommunications Company
(BTC) which provides fixed wire services is expected to be completed in 2002. A Telecommunications
Law is under preparation and BTC is being prepared for privatization. Significant upgrading of the
capacity of the National Regulatory Authority (NRA) is necessary for successful liberalization of the
sector.

Bulgaria: Countrv Assistance Strategy 

9

Agriculture, Natural Resources and the Environment

31. 
Despite progress in the rural sector (agriculture, agro-industry and forestry), an important
agenda remains for facilitating efficient production and rural markets. Bulgaria has recently
completed wide-ranging reforms in three main areas: (a) incentive regime (pricing, subsidies and trade),
(b) privatization, and (c) institutional and regulatory reform. Almost all agricultural land has now been
restituted and titled and forest restitution is being finalized. Yet, in the absence of a well functioning land
market, ownership structure remains fragmented with many small family-owned farms. Production
inefficiencies and rigidities in [and tenure and rural finance markets still persist. Fragmentation of land
also limits effectiveness of environmental services on farms, and biodiversity and recreational services in
forests. The State Reserves still hold large amounts of grain, inhibiting market development, agro-
industry is not competitive, irrigation companies have not been restructured, forestry regulations have not
been updated, and soil erosion., water pollution and wetland degradation pose problems. To accelerate
market-driven restructuring of 'the sector, the primary issue is to advance land titling and registration to
allow land market development and to improve competitiveness-both a prerequisite for EU accession.
Upon progress in these areas, il is expected that private investment will increase in agriculture and agro-
industry; though the necessary complementary public investments in forestry and rural infrastructure will
also have to be provided to support this process.

32. 
Toward environmentaily sustainable development. The socialist era left Bulgaria with serious
environmental problems and a relatively weak and ineffective 
institutional and regulatory system.
Negligent environmental management practices created "hot spots", typically around large industrial
plants, where people were exposed to high levels of pollution. Accumulated hazardous materials and
contaminated drinking water resources threaten ecosystems with irreversible damage. Forest restitution
and devolution of related state functions to municipalities are also affecting forestry resources. 
In
response to inherited environmental problems, Bulgaria has made progress in integrating environmental
protection 
into the overall development agenda and moving 
toward sustainable environmental
management. Some specific environmental hazards have been addressed, public-private partnerships
have been forged for pollution abatement and environmental management has been improved in order to
comply with EU norms.

33. 
Sustainable environmental management will 
require adoption of economic 
incentives,
introducing cleaner technologies and enforcement of regulations. Compliance with E,U directives will
entail a significant financial burden for both the budget and private sector, and ultimately to the
consumers. This underscores the importance of prioritizing future investments within flexibility of EU
directives, so as to spread compliance costs over a transition period. Planning has to assure that
compliance costs do not crowd out other essential investments and that the private sector is allowed
sufficient time to adjust.

D. 

Emerging Challenges

34. 
Overall, three key challenges are facing Bulgarians in their efforts to sustain economic growth,
generate employment, and reduce poverty. These themes form the core of the Government's medium
term reform program and provicle the basis for the Bank's assistance strategy. They include:

* Stimulating private sector led growth and employment creation bv completing the
privatization process, restructuring the energy, railway, telecommunications, and water
sectors, and strengthening the business environment through regulatory and judicial
reform, measures to facilitate entry and exit of private firms, improved public services,
development of financial markets and reforming agriculture;

10 

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Strategjy

* Sharpening the focus on reducing poverty and unemployment by investing in human
capital, strengt),iening social programs, and improving the targeting of social assistance,
particularly assistance programs aimed at mitigating the impact of restructuring; and

* 

Improving governance and social services through aggressive implementation of anti-
corruption measures, 
reform of public administration and 
strengthening 
local
governments.

III. 

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

35. 
In October 2001, the new Government issued a comprehensive and detailed Executive Program
of the Republic of Bulgaria (EPRB). The EPRB defines the main government priorities and its programs
of action. The main priorities are: (i) macroeconomic stability; (ii) improvement of living standards and
development of the human capital; and (iii) sustainable economic development and improvement of the
business environment. As the Government strives to achieve its objectives, its capacity will be tested over
the next three years. Public sector performance will be scrutinized closely by 13ulgaria's people,
international markets and development partners. The summary below has been prepared by the
Government.

A. 

Government F'rogram Statement

36. 
Macroeconomic stability is a key "condition for rapid economic growth aimed at the creation
of employment and the increase of incomes". The Government monetary policy aims at preserving
macroeconomic stability through the maintenance of the fixed exchange rate of the Bulgarian Lev to the
Euro until Bulgaria's accession to the Economic and Monetary Union. The EPRB envisages a tight fiscal
stance and low inflation in support of the CBA with the objective of a zero budget deficit by 2005.
Aggressive policies to create a favorable environment for small medium and large enterprises, to attract
foreign direct investment and to stimulate the exports of high value-added products are the instruments
envisaged to improve external imbalance.

37. 
"Tlle efforts will continue towards the protection of children rights, the securing and
maintenance of gender equality, shielding minorities, protecting 
the disabled and the protection of
consumers". Improving living standards and developing human capital, the second main priority of the
government program, is based on continuing reforms of the education and health sectors. Enhancing the
flexibility of the labor market, developing the social dialogue, and continuing the reforms of the social
protection system to better address the needs of the most vulnerable groups are at the center of the social
development objectives.

38. 
In education, the ERPB emphasizes a realignment of the curricula with labor market requirements
and the use of information technologies in the teaching process. Also prevalent in the Government
education policies is securing education for all, regardless of gender, ethnic origin and religious
affiliation. The same concern about access dominates the Government health program. The main
priorities are to continue the health care reform towards an insurance-based system, the optimization of
health care costs, and the enhancement of the medical professions through mandatory registration and
creation of specialized chambers. Special attention is paid to the needs of high-risk groups: pregnant
women, young children, orphans, disabled, drug addicts and the elderly.

39. 
The third pillar of the .EPRB, sustainable development of the economy and improvement of the
business climate, calls for aligning policies to globalization and world trade liberalization trends. The
government program envisages the completion by 2005 of the program of privatization and restructuring
of natural monopolies. InfrastrLcture development is a priority in so far as it is a first order condition for

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Strategy 

11

economic growth and attracting foreign investment. Of utmost importance to the program of the new
Government 
is the adoption of communications and high technologies. The government intends to
liberalize and modernize the sector and create the conditions for the building of a communication
infrastructure and the creation of a competitive and export-oriented software industrv. Building on the
availability of high tech skills in the country, the government's aim is to position Bulgarian companies in
the global economy among other as main providers of material, software and components for large
international companies.

40. 
Transport policies aim at the transformation of Bulgaria's transport network into a competitive
and efficient transport bridge between Western and Central Europe and the countries of the Middle East,
West and Central Asia. Liberalization of the transportation market, completion of the legislative and
institutional 
reforms, 
the development of environmentally 
friendly 
transportation 
systems and
technologies, and the introduction of modern insurance, telecommunication and information systems in
transport are seen as key requirements to achieve the Government objectives. The principles underpinninig
energy policies include efficiency, rapid and transparent privatization of generation and distribution
facilities, competition, opportunities of choice, free access for consumers, and effective social protection
for the disadvantaged.

41. 
In agriculture, the creation of conditions for a rapid consolidation of agricultural 
land, the
development of a land market and the improvement in market infrastructure are at the center of the
Government program. Forestry policy aims at protection and sustainable use and management of national
forests. Environmental protection policies will aim at the maximum possible level of compliance with
EU requirements.

B. 

Main Elements of the Government Program

42. 
In thze Bank's view th2e EPRB provides a satisfactory framework to tackle tlte country's most
pressing social problems of poverty and high unemployment. 
It outlines measures for poverty reduction
and an improved business environment, without which sustained economic growthi could not be secured
and poverty and high unemployment would continue to persist. The essence of the EPRB can be
summarized as follows:

* Keep preparations for EU accession at the center of strategy. Bulgaria has an Association
Agreement with the EU, and a National Programme for the Adoption of the acquis (NPAA)
approved by parliament in June 2001. The CEC's 2001 "Regular Report" on Bulgaria took
stock of progress reporting that it has been significant but uneven across the various chapters
of the acquis. EU accession is not only a central theme of the Government agenda, but it also
enjoys broad popular support;

* Modernize the business environment, in order to attract FDI as well as domestic investors at a
level that significantly increases Bulgaria's export capacity, allowing continuous economic
growth and maintenance of external balance; the objective is to reduce the stock of public
debt to around 60 percent of GDP, complete privatization, modernize the regulatory
framework, build Iup infrastructure, reform the energy sector and tackle agriculture and
environmental sector issues.

* Build up the public administration into a modern and efficient system, which will enable the
Government to design and promptly implement the necessary second generation structural
reforms, including major new initiatives in the energy sector and institutions responsible for
competition policy and enforcement;

12 

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Strategy

* Reform public expenditure management, in order to ensure long-term stability and fiscal
viability, which wil I underpin a growth oriented framework; and

* Provide social assistance to the most vulnerable segment of the population and finance human
capital developmernt, focusing on health care and education - emphasize new curricula, equal
education opportunities for all (poor, gender, ethnic minority), provide insurance based health
care.

43. 
The Government's administrative and technical capacity needs to be improved further, as the next
stage of increasingly demanding structural reforms and related programs are implemented. Successful
implementation of the EPRB will also require better technical capacity. 
In the absence of significant
external assistance in this area, and limited interest in borrowing for technical assistance, the Government
needs to make good use of available assistance, in order to monitor implementation and avoid slippages in
reforms.

IV. 

ECON'OMIC PROSPECTS AND EXTERNAL FINANCING

44. 
Macroeconomic prospects. Bulgaria's macroeconomic prospects have improved substantially
since 1997. The challenge facing Bulgaria today is to consolidate this improvement by continuing the
next generation of structural reforms while maintaining sound macroeconomic policies. 
Finanicial
fundamentals and the investment climate have improved. Fixed investment surged in recent years,
growing annually by an average of about 20 percent. Much of this investment was made to replace or
rehabilitate the existing capital stock. Nevertheless, at 17 percent of GDP, the level of investment
remains low by regional standards (fast growing Central European countries have investment to GDP
ratios of nearly 30 percent). An environment of continued reform, global recovejy, and continued
progress towards EU accession 
is likely to lead to higher levels of investment as well as improved
efficiency. Policy makers will face the challenge of maintaining robust growth while gradually reducing
the current account deficit and containing inflation. 
In addition to implementing the next round of
structural reforms the Government will need to continue prudent fiscal policies to help ensure that
national savings 
is mobilized to finance the expected increase 
in investment. Ongoing industrial
restructuring and increased financial discipline should help to ensure that enterprise profitability will
increase and bolster savings. Also, household savings could increase in the medium-term in response to
new savings instruments offered by a restructured financial sector, a return to positive real interest rates
for deposits (following increased competition from foreign banks now entering the market), and also as an
endogenous effect of sustained growth.
Table 1: Bulgaria: Key Economic Indicators, 2001-2005 (in percent of GDP)

Estimate 

-Projection-

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005

National Accounts
GDP growth (percentage change) 
CPI Inflation (percentage change) 
Gross domestic investment 
Gross national savings 

Public Sector
Primary surplus 
Overall balance 

4.5 
7.5 
16.9 
10.5 

4.0 
4.5 
17.3 
11.4 

3.1 
-0.9* 

2.4 
-0.8* 

External Sector
Current account balance 
-6.4 
Foreign Direct Investment 
5.0 
Total Debt Outstanding 
77.7 
* Privatization revenues are recorded as a financing item.

-5.9 
6.4 
72.2 

5.0 
3.5 
17 6 
11.8 

3.0 
-0 6 

-5.8 
5.8 
68.1 

5.5 
3.5 
17.9 
12.2 

3.0 
-0.3 

-5.7 
5 9 
64 4 

5.5
3.5
18.2
12.9

3.0
0 0)

-5.:3
5 4
60 :;

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Strategy 

13

45. 
Base case scenario. The medium-term scenario for the CAS envisages a sustained structural
reform effort, an improved overall business climate, and sound macroeconomic policies. The scenario
also assumes a gradual improvement in the global outlook by the second half of 2002. Under such
assumptions, GDP growth is likely to slow further in 2002 to 4 percent in the wake of sluggish external
demand, but it could accelerate to over 5 percent in 2003 and remain in that range in the medium-term
underpinned by healthy investniment and export growth.

46. 
The current account deficit could fall to 5.9 percent of GDP in 2002 as a decline in world interest
rates would lower external interest payments and lower world oil prices would dampen import growth. A
prudent medium-term target for the current account deficit would be about 5 percent of GDP. This is the
average annual flow of greenfield FDI during the past few years and, arguably is a reasonable expectation
for future flows. Privatization-related FDI will boost total FDI flows above this level in the short-term
but will peter-out with the eventual culmination of the privatization process. A gradual reduction in the
current account deficit in the face of robust investment growth would require prudent fiscal policies. The
Government's medium-term fi,cal plan supported by the IMF Standby envisages holding the primary
surplus at about 3 percent of GDP, allowing the overall deficit to gradually move towards balance by
2005, and reducing total public debt to 60 percent. In the event that private savings were not mobilized as
discussed above, the fiscal stance would have to be tightened further. Current account deficits largely
financed by FDI will ensure a continued reduction in external debt ratios to about 60 percent of GDP by
2005.

47. 
Downside scenario. Alternative outcomes can certainly be envisaged. A prolonged recession In
EU economies would slow down the recovery of exports and undermine the investment climate.
Bulgaria's external position cculd come under pressure. Moreover, there is always a possibility of a
slowdown 
in structural reform implementation and/or a lack of willingness to tighten fiscal policy,
especially in an environment cf slow growth or recession, with sagging Government popularity in the
polls. Slower progress in restructuring the administrative and judicial systems, for instance, would
adversely affect private investment, while delays in restructuring infrastructure and in particular the
energy sector would hurt competitiveness. Slower reforms would lower prospects for growth, cause a
deterioration in competitiveness, and lead to higher fiscal and external imbalances. A rising current
account deficit would in such a case require higher private inflows, which would, however, increase the
risks because maneuverability would be limited under the CBA, with an already tight fiscal position.

V. 

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE

A. 

Past assistance

Bank Portfolio

48. 
As of March 31, 2002, total Bank lending to Bulgaria amounts to US$1,543.1 million for 27
operations. These include 9 adjustment operations (US$870.8 million) and 18 investment 
loans
(US$672.3 million). A Bank-managed Global Environmental Fund (GEF) grant for US$9.9 million was
also granted. Of the 27 loans, 16 have been completed, of which two have been partially cancelled, and
11 are under implementation. Bank lending in 1998-2001 amounted to US$499.9 million, including
US$355.8 million in adjustment lending, compared to the respective ranges of US$300-700 million, and
US$300-400 million, envisaged 
in the 1998 CAS. AAA activities programmed in 1998 have been
delivered, with the following important difference: while the PER has been delayed (para. 80), the
proposed EU policy paper was upgraded to a full-fledged CEM, at the request of the Government.
Portfolio performance targets proposed in 1998 have been met, as the number of unsatisfactory projects
did not reach the allowed 20 pjercent and the disbursement ratio remained consistently above the high
target of 20 percent throughout. Moreover, joint and proactive portfolio management 
led to major

14 

Bulgaria: Country Assistance StrateZV

restructuring of one project and resulted in canceling US$57 million under three projects. The operations
currently under implementation are designed to increase overall efficiency of the social protection system,
upgrade education and health services and child welfare, support community-based development and
environmental interventions, and to modernize the energy, water supply, and transport sectors.

IFC and MIGA Progrcums

49. 
IFC has responded to the improved economic environment in Bulgaria after 1997 by business
promotion. As a result, IFC's portfolio in Bulgaria grew significantly and by January 2002, IFC had on
its books 16 projects for a total amount of about US$180 million (including B loans, and about US$160
million for IFC's own account). Of those, 12 projects for a total cost of about US$140 million were
approved during the last CAS period. 
IFC has invested 
in post-privatization modernization of
manufacturing companies, in sectors where Bulgaria has a competitive advantage, such as wood and pulp
and paper industry, 
in credit lines and technical assistance to SMEs, and in bank privatization and
restructuring. To date, MIGA has issued ten guarantees in Bulgaria, totaling US$70 million and
facilitating US$311 million in FDI. Guarantees covered four projects in the financial sector, two In
manufacturing and one in the power sector. That power project may require additional guarantees.
Another power project and steel project are currently under consideration. As of March 31, 2002, MIGA
has three outstanding contracts with a gross exposure of US$21.6 million, and a net exposure of US$11.6
million.

Wlhat are the lessons from past Bank Grouip assistance and thle 1998 CAS?

50. 
The Bank and the Government have drawn important lessons from implementing the 1998 CAS.
Resumption of growth and decline in poverty recorded since 1997, and a good start by the Government o01
the "acquis" demonstrate the slrategic relevance of the Bank's assistance program. Adjustment lending
has been generally successful since 1997, especially in agriculture and the environment, and significant
progress has also been made in reforming the social protection system and targeting cash benefit
programs to the truly needy. Experience during the last four years sheds light on preferred modalities of
adjustment lending, the role ancl nature of conditionality, priorities of analytical and advisory services and
good practice in portfolio management. Community involvement was shown to have a positive effect on
project implementation. The main lessons are summarized in Box-2 and have been taken into account in
designing the 2002 CAS.

51. 
A recent Country Assistance Evaluation (January 11, 2002) prepared by OED reviewed the
Bank's assistance to Bulgaria since 1990, and its conclusions are summarized in Box 2. The Bank's
assessment of priorities for future assistance broadly agrees with those of OED. Bank lending and non-
lending services would follow the three areas identified in the CAE: (i) public administration reform
under PAL 11 and 111, focusing on policy and institutional issues, modernizing public administration, the
judicial system and resource allocation/management; 
(ii) poverty alleviation is a central objective of this
CAS, and both lending operations and AAA would support new initiatives in this area; and (iii) energy
sector reform is one of the main goals of Bank assistance, in order to phase out fiscal support, involve the
private sector, reduce energy dependence in the country and increase efficiency -
these would also be
supported through the PALs antd strategy notes. Programmatic adjustment lending offers a particularly
effective framework to support the Government's medium-term reform program in the three priority
areas, as it focuses on up-front conditionality and provides flexibility for shifting the policy focus in
FY03-05 CAS period.

Bulgaria. Country Assistance S!rategv 

15

Box 2: Lessons From 1998 CAS and Conclusions of the 2002 CAE

1998 CAS:
Based on the past CAS period, it is clear thiat adjustment operations focused on up-front conditionality, i.e. single tranche operations and
based on strong ownership by the Governiment (e.g. ASAL) out performed multi-tranche operations where changes in circumstances
sometimes made second tranche conditions irrelevant or difficult to achieve. Operations that emphasize up-fiont conditionality such as
PALs offer an effective approach to supporting reforms in an uncertain environment as they allow for flexibility in response to the
inevitable changes in circumstances as the Government's reform program moves forward.

Intensive joint portfolio reviews (JPRs) have contributed very much to cleaning up a poorly performing portfolio since 1998.

Triggers for both second tranche release and for base case lending, which involved any degree of interpretation have produced a more
protracted process and agreed benchmarks vere more difficult to meet (EPSAL).

2002 CAE:
A CAE prepared by OED in early 2002 concluded that the Bank responded appropriately by cutting assistance in response to the
unfavorable country conditions (high debt 
imprudent lending by state banks, frequent change in governmenis, and flagging interest in
reforms) through 1997, which precipitated financial crises in 1994 and 1996, and cut total output by a third in 1996. 
Ihe Bank strategy
could not achieve the desired outcomes in 1990-97. After 1997, a reformist Government with adoption of the CAB opened the way to
more fruitful Bank collaboration. Through expanding Bank and IFC activities, most objectives of Bank lending have been met, with the
notable exception of public administration reforms.

Remaining challenges now lie in areas of iristitutional development for EU accession, poverty reduction, shortcomings in privatization and
lagging public sector reforms. The CAE recommended three principal areas of action for the Bank: (a) public sector reforms, completing
the PER, prioritizing public investment and strengthening financial accountability; (b) poverty alleviation, completing the Poverty
Assessment, helping build capacity for monitoring poverty and design appropriate strategies and policies, and (c) in energy, help clarify
the mandate and functions of different regu]atory bodies to ensure competition and private sector involvement.

Consultations in preparing this CAS

52. 

To ensure the widest possible feedback from stakeholders, the Bank conducted a comprehensive

review process of its past and proposed assistance in 2001. A long series of town meetings, round table
discussions and smaller caucuses on the proposed draft CAS involved more than 500 people from among
local officials, NGOs, the private sector, business associations, civic groups, the general public and
representatives of the donor community in Bulgaria. Separate discussions were held with the EC in
Brussels. A detailed overview of the issues raised in the various meetings is presented in Annex D.

53. 
On many of the topics raised during consultations, the Bank and stakeholders agreed fully and
most of those have been reflected in this CAS and the Bank's work program for FY03-05. Among these
topics, social and economic issues received the greatest attention in the discussions (including high
unemployment, HIV/AIDS prevention, poverty, 
social 
safety net), 
followed by governance
(decentralization, municipal 
finance, public administration 
and corruption), 
agriculture 
(land
fragmentation, farmers association and rural credit), environment, water and growing involvement of the
private sector, including SME promotion and utilities. However, there were issues on which agreement
could not be reached with stakeholders. Those included (a) the Bank's critical evaluation of health and
education reforms, identifying the excessive number of health sector workers and the low student/teacher
ratios in education, as sector blidget drivers; and (b) the absence of Bank lending for infrastructure and
post-privatization 
assistance, which adversely affected 
the Government program, according 
to
stakeholders. The exchange of ideas around these topics and sharing of lessons of experience from other
transition economies demonsirated good practice policy outcomes and contributed 
to a better

understanding of the policies involved.

16 

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Stratezv

B. 

Bank Group Strategy and Main Themes

54. 
The Bank Group Assistance Strategy 
is designed to support Bulgaria's reform program as
outlined in Section III above. The strategy is built on close cooperation with Bulgaria's other main
partners, 
including the EU, IJNDP, EBRD, EIB, IMF and a number of bilateral donors. These
partnerships allow each partner to focus on selected areas of support for the Government's overall reform
program. The Bank Group's two overarching objectives are poverty reduction/raising living standards,
and support the country's efforts towards EU accession. As shown in Chart 1, the main themes of the
proposed strategy are (a) promotion of competitive private sector-led growth, (b) strengthening public
administration and anti-corruption initiatives, and (c) mitigating the social impact of restructuring and
delivering social services more effectively. Because of selectivity, however, the Bank would not provide
financial support in all of these areas, as for instance, in infrastructure and health, and it would limit its
support in environment to GEF grants. The assistance strategy is shown in matrix form in Annex B9 and
the related work programs are shown in Annexes B3 and B4.

Chart 1: 

Bank Group Strategy, Themes and Instruments

OVERARCHING CAS OBJECTIVES

Reduce Poverty, Raise Living Standards

Support Move Towards the EU

I +

MAIN CAS THEMES
.
Promoting Competitive Private Sector-led Growth
.
Strengthening Public Administration and Anti-corruption Initiatives
. Mitigating the Social Impact of Restructuring and Delivering Social Services More
Effectively

CAS INSTRUMENTS
Partnerships/Donor Coordination

Portfolio Management JPR/Targets
AAA
Lending
CAS Monitoring

Outreach

.

.
.
.
* 

.

Promoting Competitive Private Sector-Led Growth

55. 
Privatization and Imrroved Business Environment would be promoted through accelerated
privatization of non-infrastructure SOEs, improved business regulations to reduce administrative
barriers and development of non-banking financial institutions. A series of three Programmatic
Adjustment Loans (PALs /II/III) would help promote these goals.

56. 
To help attract domestic and foreign private investors, and improve Bulgaria's competitiveness,
the Bank, IFC and MIGA would provide complementary technical and financial assistance. MIGA
would provide political risk guarantees, IFC would assist with loan and equity financing, and IFC and

Bulgaria: Countrv Assistance Strategy 

17

the Bank would be prepared to provide contractual compliance guarantees, partial risk/credit guarantees,
as well as analytical and advisory support on policy and institutional matters. Areas for IFC involvement
would include: financial sector development, SME support (credit), micro-finance institutions, information
technology and other high tech investments, as well as post-privatization assistance. IFC expects to play an
important role in promoting in-estments in these areas, and FDI would bring technology transfer that is a
prerequisite for productivity gains. IFC would also support development of competitive food supply
chains, including development of marketing infrastructure and the rehabilitation/expansion of food
processing units.

57. 
IFC also envisages to provide post privatization support, mainly in sectors where Bulgaria has a
comparative advantage, 
including export-oriented sectors such as wood, clothing, pharmaceuticals,
shipyards, tourism and agribusiness. IFC's objectives are to provide additionality, be innovative, foster
public/private partnerships and catalyze FDI. IFC is also ready to provide advice on restructuring and
privatizing strategic sectors. To review achievements and identify remaining tasks in improving the
business climate, the Bank would, by the end of the FY03-05 CAS period, carry out a Private Sector
Assessment.

58. 
In thie financial secttor, IFC's strategy has evolved with the sector's development. After
supporting bank privatization (Bulbank), the IFC strategy is focused on the following: (i) in the banking
sector, IFC will continue to stimulate financial intermediation. 
In particular, IFC is exploring ways of
supporting the nascent mortgage market, and providing funding and derivative products to enable banks
to better meet the demand for long-term local currency loans; (ii) in the non-bankfinancial sector, IFC
has already helped establish leasing (Interlease) and a venture capital fund (Euromerchant/Global
Finance), and would now focus on broadening the capital markets by increasing the volume and
sophistication of private placements, mortgage bonds, and corporate bonds. This is particularly relevant
given the expected strengthening of local investor-base through the newly created pension funds; and (iii)
financial support for SMEs; to date, IFC has financed an SME bank and a micro-lending bank, but will
now help to develop new financial products appropriate for SMEs (e.g. factoring), and seek to expand the
coverage of existing products.

59. 
The challenge in the energy sector is to contain energy consumption and to bring about efficiency
gains in supplying future demand. 
In response to the recommendations 
in its 2001 Energy and
Environment Review and the EU's 2001 Report, 
the Bank intends to support development of a
comprehensive policy framewcrk capable of attracting private investors. The PAL I and 11 (FY03-04)
would help amending the Energy and Energy Efficiency Act to (i) concentrate regulatory functions in the
State Energy Regulatory Commission, (ii) enhance its financial autonomy and ability lo attract qualified
staff, (iii) commercialize district heating companies, (iv) allow third party access to gas and electricity
and (v) in a subsequent step, harmonize the Energy Act with EU electricity and gas directives. A
National Energy Efficiency Study (FY03) would focus specifically on efficiency gains by: (a) assessing
realistically achievable energy savings and use of renewable energy; (b) designing a sound institutional,
policy and regulatory environment, including a much overdue tariff rebalancing; 
(c) developing a
portfolio of high impact energy efficiency and renewable energy projects; and (d) proposing suitable
financing mechanisms to overcome existing funding constraints. Tariff rebalancing is expected to have
an adverse impact on the poor/vulnerable, so that an ongoing albeit small Government program to
mitigate that impact will need to be expanded while sharpening its targeting. A Bank supported FY04
District Heating Project would help implement action in some of the above araeas, in order to improve
quality of services and financial performance of DH companies in Sofia and Pemik Toplofikacias. These
companies would be managed Iby private concessionaires. Under the EUAccession/Energy TA program
(FY05), the Bank would help develop a market and tariff liberalization scheme that is consistent with the
EU "acquis". An Energy Efficiency GEF (FY05) would provide further assistance in accelerating energy
saving and efficiency measures.

18 

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Strateg

60. 
In oil and gas, IFC is lDoking for investment opportunities in three areas: (i) mobilizing finance
for a small offshore Black Sea gas project that will supply gas to the local market; (ii) promoting private
development of the country's downstream refining and chemicals sector, including assistance to new
investors to deal with the clean up of environmental problems from past operations; and 
(iii) should
prospects materialize for a major transit gas pipeline - offering an alternative route for oil from the Black
Sea - the IFC would help attract private investors and put together a financing package for the required
investments. IFC is also following power sector reforms, and would provide finance when privatization
of power distribution was undertaken. It would also evaluate projects in district heating and gas sectors.

61. 
Bulgaria's infrastructure cannot meet the challenges of European requirements at the moment.
To help the country strive towards EU accession, the IFC is expected to suppolt privatization in
infrastructure, including seaports and airports, which it would coordinate with the EIB, EBRD and
Stability Pact. As the Government progresses in establishing a market-based regulatory environment,
strengthens local government structures through decentralization and begins to privalize infrastructure,
IFC plans to evaluate potential investments. A Bank supported FY05 Municipal/Community Social
Services Project would help develop institutional capacity at the local level for, inter alia, building fiscal
autonomy, raising and allocating resources, managing expenditures and monitoring local government
performance. 
It would also continue ongoing technical assistance in water and waste water sector for
developing regulations, advising on fair and transparent transactions for private sector involvement and
setting service standards and tariffs.

62. 
With respect to transport policy, the Bank would help the Government to speed up progress in
private sector involvement, 
improve planning and budgeting of public expenditures, and to assist
transport dependent export industries in becoming more competitive. The National Transport Strategy
Paper (FY04) would formulate recommendations for improving regulatory, institutional and financial
framework, and prioritizing investments, and provide inputs for the design of PAL II.

63. 
In the telecommunication sector, IFC could consider a pre-privatization investment in the form
of a convertible loan or preferred convertible shares to help privatize Bulgarian Telecom Company
(BTC). An IFC investment would enhance the Company's attractiveness and increase the chances of a
successful privatization. 
In information and communication technologies (ICT), the Bank and IFC
would look at sector issues, in order to assess EU accession requirements, including a potentially growing
digital divide with the rest of Europe, and Bulgaria's potential to build a knowledge-based economy. The
Bank would provide technical assistance to advise the Government on practices and incentives that have
worked elsewhere in building a successful ICT industry. Recommended policy measures could be
supported through the PAL ]/II and III, including 
increased spending in education and training,
development of business skills, as well as fiscal measures for the IT sector.

64. 
To identify specific investment opportunities in ICT, IFC has been looking at system integrators,
value added resellers and outsourcing companies (call-centers, remote help desks, contracted software
development, etc.). These are typically the first companies to benefit from increased ICT spending within
any country. The success of these pioneers is key to the growth and development of the whole industry,
even companies with a stronger technological base. They may also create export opportunities for the rest
of the sector. IFC will, on a case-by-case basis, try to identify such opportunities and help to create
partnerships to increase their innovative and executive ability. IFC might use a range of financial
products, from early stage equity to later stage debt facilities, which can target a wide variety of small and
well-established companies thal are engaged in efforts to expand their market and offerings. IFC may
also consider regional initiatives, especially in the areas of access and software development and
integration.

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Strategy 

19

65. 
In the rural economy, the Bank is helping raise the efficiency and competitiveness in agriculture
under the Second Agriculture Sector Adjustment Loan (FYOI) that includes action in rural land market
development, cereal marketing and food security, privatization of agricultural and food enterprises,
irrigation system development, rural finance, trade and market regulations and forestry. The Registration
and Cadastre Project (FYOI) is helping consolidate the property markets. A Rural Finance Project
(FY04) would improve the rural financial system further, focusing on both banks and non-banking
institutions, supporting policy and institutional reforms, and dealing with the associated regulatory risks.
A Forestry Project (FY05) would address forestry restitution, forest fire protection, improved forest
management and the adoption of modern standards consistent with EU requirements. The project would
include a GEF financed component for protection of forest biodiversity and afforestation activities under
the prototype carbon fund. An Agriculture Sector Note (FY05) would focus on rural infirastructure, market
development and remaining EU accession requirements.

66. 
The Bank's support in environment would include -
in addition to anti-pollution measures
envisaged under energy and water programs - ongoing support for environmental mitigation of newly
privatized industries through the second and third tranches of the Environmental and Privatization
Support Adjustment Loan (FY00) and promoting economic incentives and public awareness for reducing
inefficiencies in the economy through the PAL I/II and III. Under the GEF supported Black Sea program,
a GEF Medium Sized Project (FY04) would be provided for wetland restoration and introduction of
environmentally friendly farming practices. These efforts would all contribute to compliance with the
"acquis" and to sustainable growth.

Strengthening Public Administration and Anticorruption Initiatives

67. 
Progress in public administration and legal and judicial reforms has been slow in 1996-2001.
Further reforms designed to support public sector program effectiveness, efficieni human resource
management, pay reforms and transparency and accountability, as well as anticorruption initiatives,
would underpin the conditionality of Programmatic Adjustment Loans (PALs) I/lI and III (FY03-05). To
improve allocative efficiency iin, and budgeting of, public resources, an ongoing Public Expenditure
Review(PER) would be completed in FY02. The PER covers a whole range of public expenditure
management issues and the fiscal dimensions of the reforms of social and infrastructure sectors. 
Its
findings are contributing to the policy content of the PALs and a FY03 Revenue Administration Reform
Project will strengthen public sector resource mobilization. To help modernize local government
operations, the Bank is financing the Sofia Comprehensive City Development Strategy and TA provided
under the FY94 Water Companries Project. Because local government reform requires an inter-sectoral
approach and the solution of cross-cutting systemic issues, the Bank is planning a Study of Service and
Fiscal Decentralization (FY03). 
Improving efficiency of the court system, and strengthening the
Supreme Judicial Council and legal education, would be supported under PALs I/I1 and III. In response
to strong recent initiatives by the Govemment for judicial and legal reform, the Bankc could add to its
investment lending program a Judicial Reform LIL, if conditions were right on the ground and agreement
was reached on reforms.

Mitigating Social Impact of Restructuring and Delivering Social Services More Effectively

68. 
After a dramatic collapse in output in 1996, poverty surged in Bulgaria to unprecedented levels.
While adequate policies have since then significantly reduced poverty in the country, the Bank's strategy
needs to focus on reducing poverty furthier, promoting human capital development and raising living
standards.

69. 
To reduce poverty, Bank assistance will build on dialogue 
initiated through the Poverty
Reduction Policy TA (FYOI) program. To assist in the design of suitable poverty reducing policies, a

20 

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Strateg

Poverty Assessment is being uiidertaken in FY02, using the results of the HHBS contracted out by the
National Statistical Institute (NSI) 
in 2001. A key focus of this Assessment 
is an analysis of
unemployment and labor issues. To enhance the effectiveness of a generally well functioning social
safety net, and to increase welfare and improve services, poverty monitoring capacity needs to be
improved at the level of Goverrnment and the NSI. Recommendations of the ongoing Poverty Assessment
will assist Govemment efforts in building up the required technical capacity for monitoring with the
support of the IDF grant and other donor programs. A new IDF Grant for Poverty Monitoring,
Evaluation and Policy Design 
started in FY02 would facilitate capacity building 
in this area in
coordination with other donor programs to strengthen poverty monitoring. 
Issues relating to the Roma
and other minorities 
likely to be vulnerable are being addressed under an ongoing IDF Grant for
Integration of Ethnic Minorities (FY02). The Poverty Assessment (FY02) is also looking at gender issues
in the context of poverty and will provide an adequate forum for policy debate and formulation, involving
Government, local stake holders and the donor community. As such interventions have important fiscal
implications, the ongoing Public Expenditure Review (FY02) is evaluating related financing issues. To
promote growth and employment generation, devise programs designed to reach those below the absolute
poverty line, and to help develop social capital at the level of local government and communities, the
Bank is working on a Social Investment and Employment Promotion Project (FY03). 
It is expected to
focus on persisting "pockets" o-f poverty, where the generally effective social protection system programs
need to be complemented. 
In those areas, it will address prevalent poverty related issues, such as
exclusion, weak social capital, poor access to markets and basic services, long-term unemployment, and a
lack of financing for family-sized business ventures. Project activities will be developed through
components of community infrastructure, labor market services and micro-finance. 
Increased labor
market flexibility is essential to reduce unemployment. Therefore, labor market reform measures are
being identified in the Poverty Assessment and will be supported through the PALs.

70. 
An ongoing Child Welfare Reform Project (FY01) 
is helping to develop community-based
service alternatives to institutionalize and to professionalize social work. Once the Social Investment and
Employment Promotion Project (FY03) and the Child Welfare Reform Project are well underway, the
Bank would follow up with a Municipal and Community Social Services Project (FY05). The latter
would further strengthen community organization, build municipal management capacity and improve
municipalities' ability to deliver a large array of social and infrastructure services. Outcomes under the
various initiatives by the Government and the above mentioned Bank programs will be assessed in a
Gender, Age and Ethnicity Assessment (FY05), so that policy adjustments necessary for improved
targeting and cost effectiveness can be recommended to the Government. Assistance for the aged
population will need to be based on a modern, effective and fiscally affordable pension system. To
ensure that issues related to the: completion of the ongoing pension reform can be adequately evaluated,
the Bank expects to complete an ongoing Pension Reform Note in FY03.

71. 
Human resource development is a central theme of EU accession and essential for self-reliance in
lifting out of poverty. An Education Modernization Adaptable Program Loan (APL) in three phases over
nine years is supporting initiatives to overhaul the education system. Phase I was launched in 2000 and
Phase II is scheduled for FY05, which will support new standards, modern educational materials and
equipment, upgraded planning and resource management, and monitoring, and evaluation capabilities. It
will also establish a demand-driven resource allocation system for the sector and, in particular, for higher
education. An innovative experimental paper-based distance learning component in trade and transport
management is being financed under the TTFSE Project. The Government launched under APL I a
reform to modernize education. Besides closing excess physical facilities and reducing overstaffing,
responsibility for management of school budgets will be passed on to municipalities and schools over the
next four years. A pilot program involves community participation to ensure efficient resource use and
innovative school management and teaching activities.

Bulgaria. Country Assistance Serategy 

21

72. 
In the health sector, under the recently completed Health Sector Restructuring and ongoing
Health Sector Reform Projecr the Bank is supporting primary and ambulatory care programs and
beginning to address the needs of the hospital sector. Bulgaria has already introduced an insurance-
funded general practitioner-based system. Emphasis on primary care will be helpful in containing the
spread of TB, which reached a peak in 1998. An internal Study of HIV/AIDS on Bulgaria, Croatia and
Romania would be completed in FY02 and provide valuable recommendations to the countries involved
and for future Bank involvement. IFC expects to assess the prospects for private seclor involvement in
health care - especially benefiting from cross country experience 
in other transition countries in the

region.

C. 

CAS Instruments

73. 
To achieve the objectives under the three themes introduced above, the Bank will implement the
CAS through the following instruments: 
(a) partnership/donor coordination, (b) portfolio management,
(c) AAA, (d) lending, (e) CAS monitoring, and (f) outreach.

Partnerships

74. 
Coordination among partners became particularly important after the 1997 CBA, when external
flows increased dramatically, rcaching close to $1 billion per year. But it still leaves much to be desired.
The Bank - fully aware of the heightened importance of coordination -- has since then used the Sofia
Country Office to good advantage. 
It co-hosted with the EU a CG in Brussels in April 1999 and helped
form donor working groups for important sectors and called meetings in Sofia every two-to-three months.
These initiatives were taken te assist the Government in (i) ensuring adequate financing, (ii) avoiding
duplications among the various partner programs, and (iii) maximizing program benefits by enhancing
complementarity with related donor initiatives. Working groups involved Bulgaria's main partners,
including the EU, IMF, UNDP, EBRD, EIB and a number of bilaterals such as DFID, USAID, Japan, The
Netherlands, France, Germany (GTZ), Israel, Switzerland, Canada - just to mention the more important
ones. Just recently, the Bank has stepped up efforts to assist the Government in building capacity for
donor coordination, which would facilitate effective absorption of donor assistance in FY03-05 period.
Decentralization of the Bank's South Central Europe Country Unit to Zagreb in late 2001 has reinforced
coordination efforts.

75. 
To avoid duplications, the Bank has designed the proposed assistance strategy and work program
taking into account what other clonors are doing. Where needed, close coordination will be undertaken
with other donors. The EU, thc single largest donor, is using the PHARE, ISPA and SAPARD programs
and is assisting in public administration, customs agency, energy, infrastructure, environment, SME
support, credit lines for micro-enterprises, and a sundry of assistance programs related to administrative
reforms required under the chapters of the "acquis". The IMF focuses on the macroeconomic program,
notably on the CBA and fiscal sustainability. The UNDP is concentrating on poverty alleviation,
governance and anti-corruption initiatives. The EBRD is focusing on banking, enterprise restructuring
and privatization, and infrastructure. EIB is supportive of energy and infrastructure. DFID is supporting
public administration reforms and governance programs. USAID has an important program of technical
assistance for SMEs, banking, privatization, anti-corruption, local government support and agriculture,
and 
it also provides a line of credit and is engaged in establishing the American University at
Blagoevgrad. 
Japan supports energy and infrastructure investments. The Netherlands 
is funding
MATRA programs and new accession activities. France is providing support through the Stability Pact
and ISPA and SAPARD. Germany is helping with EU consistent public procurement, ITC, credit for
SMEs, transport and border crossing, including a second bridge over the Danube.

22 

Bulgaria. Country Assistance Stratezv

76. 
The foregoing review shows that: (a) assistance for the social sectors has been somewhat limited,
especially in health, education and social assistance and to a lesser extent in judicial reforms; 
(b)
assistance 
to local governments has been provided mainly by other donors, whereas 
the Bank
concentrated more on assistance to the central Government; 
(c) infrastructure investments have been
supported by other donors; 
(d) where Bank assistance has been limited to ESW, the findings provided
essential inputs for program financed by other donors; and 
(e) while other donors did provide BOP
finance, the design of structuratl reforms that justified BOP lending in the first place has been provided
mainly by the Bank, in close cooperation with the Fund. The above conclusions have been taken into
account in designing the proposed strategy.

Portfolio Management

77. 
Effective portfolio management is decisive for maximizing economic benefits from operations,
and completing them without clelays. Both are pre-requisites for sustained Bank ending in support of a
robust reform agenda. Portfolio performance varied over time. During FY94-96, about one half of the
Bank's portfolio were rated unsatisfactory for either Development Objectives (DO) or Implementation
Progress (IP). The disbursement ratio was also very low in the 5-7 percent range, compared to an ECA
average of about 18 percent.

78. 
To address portfolio problem, a number of joint Government-Bank initiatives were taken,
including integration of portfolio issues into the overall country dialogue; a proactive Sofia Country
Office-based supervision; and annual Joint Portfolio Reviews (JPRs). On the Government side, a unit in
the Council of Ministers was established for coordinating all Bank-supported activities. As a result, all
problem projects were upgraded to satisfactory status by 1999 and the disbursement ratio rose to 39
percent. However, because of the government transition in 2001, performance deteriorated somewhat, the
disbursement ratio dropped to about 22 percent, and one project was rated unsatisfactory. The February
2002 JPR, the first such review with the new Government, addressed performance problems and agreed
on remedial actions for timely decision-making in procurement, the functioning and autonomy of PlUs,
timely availability of counterpart funding and coordination among Government entities. A disbursement
ratio of not less than 20 percent has been targeted and 80 percent of projects should be rated satisfactory
during the next CAS period.

79. 
Good performance will need to be maintained during FY03-05. Annual JPRs will be held, and
portfolio monitoring will focus on project management capacity; financial management; procurement;
and improving the linkage between public investment programming, Government guaranteed external
borrowing, and budget allocations. Arrangements for financial management and accountability have been
strengthened: a Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes by the IMF in 2001 recognized solid
progress towards international standards; a single treasury account system has been adopted with IMF
support; and financial management under Bank projects since 1997 has been fully satisfactory. 
In
addition, a CFAA is scheduled to be completed in FY03. The Bank prepared a Country Procurement
Assessment Review (CPAR) in FY00, which recommended a set of improvements in public procurement,
some of which are already being implemented with bilateral assistance, including revision of the Law on
Public Procurement.

Analytical and Advisory Assistance

80. 
As Bulgaria's reform agenda is advancing to face more complex challenges, the Bank's analytical
and advisory work need to focus on public sector management, the business climate, energy sector
reforms and poverty alleviation. IFC's record shows that while it has done well in the financial sector,
small business investment, and post-privatization modernization - as recommended 
in the 1998 CAS,
significant challenges remain in infrastructure, energy and rural infrastructure. Some of the ongoing Bank

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Strategy 

23

supported analytical work will address the above issues, including work under way in energy, on anti-
corruption measures, public administration, and legal and judicial reforms. FIAS completed a study of
administrative barriers to investment at the request of the Bulgarian Foreign Investment Agency, and it is
already playing a catalytic role in policy design. The Bank's 2001 economic report entitled "Bulgaria.
EU Accession CEM - The Dua, Challenge of Transition and Accession" took stock of progress made by
the country and the road map it laid out for transition and accession continue to be used by the
Government, the Bank and EU. The CEM, at Government's request, was undertaken before the Public
Expenditure Review that is being completed now, in FY02.

81. 
Looking ahead to the ]FY03-05 CAS period, the Bank intends to deepen its analysis of reform
policies 
(Public Expenditure Review, Poverty Assessment, Energy Efficiency Study, EU
Accession/Energy TA, Pension Reform Note, Transport Strategy Paper, Environmental Sequencing
Study, Service and Fiscal Decentralization Study), and to focus on evaluating reform outcomes and fine-
tuning subsequent policy measures (Gender, Age and Ethnicity Assessment as a follow-up to poverty
reduction measures, Private Sector Assessment to analyze the impact of private sector reforms, and a
CEM Update to assess Bulgaria's progress in dealing with the key areas of EU accession).

IBRD Lending Scenarios and Triggers

82. 
Bulgaria's continued strong commitment to reforms and a market economy bodes well for a
successful Bank assistance program in support of ambitious structural reforms and poverty alleviation.
Therefore, only two lending scenarios have been designed: (i) a comprehensive base case, which
represents the most likely outcome in the country over the next three years, and (ii) a low case, if
downside risks were to materialize.

83. 
In the base case scenario, Bank lending would amount up to US$750 million during FY03-05, as
shown in AnnexB3. The base case lending program envisages a blend of adjustment loans and
predominantly poverty-focused investment operations. Total Bank lending of up to US$250 million per
year would be intended to: first, support poverty alleviation; second, provide support for comprehensive
structural reforms, including institution building for a business environment that can attract DFI and spur
sustained economic growth; arid third, provide incentives for carrying out the Government program
(EPRB), to support EU accession, reduce poverty and help progress towards the MDGs.

84. 
The three PALs would support the Government's policy framework that underpins the Bank's
overall assistance program in FY03-05. To justify up to US$450 million adjustment lending, i.e. US$150
million a year, policy measures outlined in paras. 35-43 and referred to in para. 85 below would have to
be implemented. The Government's policy framework would, over time, (a) enable the Government to
maintain a primary fiscal surplus of three percentage points of GDP through 2005, which represents a
credible effort to contribute to the financing of the Government program, (b) help create conditions
necessary for reducing the stock of public debt; (c) foster completion of privatization and restructuring in
energy and infrastructure; (d) improve the environment for private sector led growth; (e) lead to reduced
poverty, improved human capital and better delivery of social services; and (i) support public
administration reform and aniti-corruption programs. A two-year fMF Standby Arrangement was
approved in February 2002. Full adherence and successful completion of the program would secure the
required stable macroeconomic environment, without which the Bank could not proceed with the PALs.
Adjustment lending at US$450 million would account for 60 percent of total Bank lending over the three-
year period. Although the Ciovernment would have desired 70 percent of total Bank lending in
adjustment operations, the Banlc is of the view that the proposed 60 percent share would be sufficient to
provide adequate incentives for a multi-year reform program described in Section III of the CAS. All the
more so, because if the proposed PALs and the Fund program remain on track, Bulgaria's access to the

24 

Bulgaria. Countr Assistance Stratesv

intemational markets on favorable terms is expected to be secured, thus providing alternative sources of
finance.

85. 
Programmatic Adjustment Lending (PAL) is considered to be the most appropriate instrument to
support the Government's medium term program (see accompanying box). The program - benefiting
from, among others, the findings of the PER now under completion -
is well-articulated and covers key
priorities in a logical sequence of actions and measures designed to achieve overall program objectives.
The three PALs would support Bulgaria's program objectives of sustained economic growth and poverty
reduction, which would be achieved through a Government strategy for building an investment climate
that 
facilitates 
private 
investment, 
and 
for
empowering 
all 
segments Df 
the population, 
especially the poor, to participate 
in the growth 

Advantages of Series of Three PALs

in design of policy

PALs provide 

flexibility 

.

.

process. To achieve these over-arching objectives, 
each adjustment operation would have 
its own 
strategic focus. PAL I would advance structural, 
regulatory and 
institutional 
reforms 
in the real 

conditionality, but triggers prior to PAL 11/111 would
help 
ensure 
satisfactory progress 
in 
reforms
undertaken under PAL I and 11;
Up-front conditionality is suitable in Bulgaria, as

.

across sectors;

evidenced from previous CAS implementation;
One series of consecutive PALs provides a single
umbrella for remaining structural reforms that cut

sectors that are key to reforms, including energy. 
Policy measures in these areas would continue under 
PAL 11, but 
it would -
in addition -
focus on 
reforms in areas which take longer to prepare, like 
public administration and 
the. 
legal and judicial 
system, and on measures to eliminate corruption. 
PAL III would -
in addition -- cover labor market 
and social sector policies, 
including 
long-term 
sustainability of the social protection system and 
restructuring of the health and education sectors. 
The Government's reform program (EPRB) would 
provide an umbrella, under wvhich programmatic
adjustment 
lending would 
be designed 
and
implemented. A Letter of Development Policy (LDP) to be issued by the Government to launch PAL I in
2002 would describe in greater detail the overall medium-term policy framework under the EPRB. With
fiduciary reviews already carried out for procurement, and scheduled for completion in FY03 for financial
management and accountability, arrangements would be fully adequate for quick disbursing operations
(para. 79).

* Disbursements would be based on progress achieved
and external financing would be more predictable
than from a number of unlinkedl adjustment loans;
and
Substantive PAL borrowing would be justified by
the Government's robust policy framework over the
medium-term.

.

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Strategy 

25

86. 
Satisfactory progress towards the triggers shown in Box 3 would have to be met to stay in the
base case:

Macroeconomic 
Sustainability
Portfolio Performance 

Structural Reforms 
and Private-Sector 
Development 

Social Sustainability 

Fiduciary 

Box 3: Triggers to Stay in Base Case

* Satisfactoiy macroeconomic performance.

* a disbursernent ratio of not less than 20 percent;
* satisfactory performance ratings of not less than 80 percent of projects.
Satisfactory progress towards:
* Enacting a new Privatization Law and privatization of large SOEs and banks (Bulgartabac, DSK,
Biochim, and remaining Government holding in CCB); establish separate generation, transmission and
distribution companies for electricity; and rationalization of power and DH tariffs;
* Terminating major loss-making services in railways which are not subject to public service
obligations (se rvice maintained in the public interest at Government request);
* Reducing substantially overall time for company registration, and adopting streamlined procedures for
approval of building permits;
* Establishing a Unified Revenue Information System, including corporate taxes, social security,
pension contributions, and customs duties; replicate pilot procedures under TTFSE Project to border
crossings handling 80% of all international traffic;
* Completing functional reviews for civil servants in two ministries;
* Amending insolvency provisions of Commercial Code and Civil Procedure Code.
Satisfactory progress towards:
* Completing the establishment of a multi-pillar pension system;
* Implementing transparent allocation of partial contributions to second pillar pension scheme;
* Implementing winter energy subsidy programs.
* Completicn of the CFAA in FY03
* Satisfactoi-y progress in implementing action plan developed in the FY00 CPAR

87. 
In order to monitor the Bank's exposure and associated risks most prudently (paras. 94), the
processing of PAL III would be subject to a set of additional triggers. The specific triggers have been
designed to confirm that prior reforms have been efficiently absorbed and that the probability of a
downside risk in economic performance 
is decreasing, as measured by a number of indicators of
macroeconomic outcomes and structural improvements 
in the economy. Specifically, the following
developments would trigger reconsideration of proceeding with presentation of PAL III to the Board:

* A material deviatio n from the downward trend in total public debt to GDP ratios as projected in the CAS
(see Annex B6);
* A lack of improvenient in the spreads on Bulgaria's sovereign borrowing vis-a-vis countries with similar
risk rating, or deterioration in its own risk rating;
* A material deviation from the improving trend in the fiscal balance projected in the Government's
medium-term program, reaching fiscal balance by 2005 (se Annex B6);
* A material slow-down in the present trend of increasing SMEs' share in total employment; and
* 
Inadequate progress in reducing arrears in tax payments, social insurance contributions, and energy bill
payment as set out in the Government program.

88. 
Low case scenario Lending to Bulgaria would be self-regulating, because if the macroeconomic
framework were unsatisfactory, progress in implementing the structural reform program were inadequate,
as evidenced by the Government's inability to meet the above triggers, and if portfolio performance were
to fall below the parameters sat for the base case above, Bank lending would shift to the low case
scenario. Bulgaria would revert to a muddling through scenario, in which creditworthiness would
quickly deteriorate, and Bank lending, including adjustment lending, could not be effectively absorbed.
Therefore, the Bank would limit lending to essential investment projects, not to exceecl US$180 million
for the FY03-05 period. Projects would focus on community-based development, rural development and
poverty reduction. AAA activities would be scaled back, limiting Bank advice to poverty, social

26 

Bulgaria. Country Assistance Strateg

assistance and energy/environrnent sectors that have an important impact on EU accession. The
probability that Bulgaria would allow serious slippages 
in reforms or fail to respond to changed
circumstances appears to be low, based on recent performance and current commitment to reforms.

CAS Monitoring

89. 
The Bank would monitor a number of key reforms measures, outcomes and quantitative
indicators (shown in box):

* Government's 
poverty 
monitoring
capacity is installed wvith the support of 
the IDF Grant and other donor financing; 
Implementation of agenda of successive 

* 

PALs are on track; 

* Proposed bank privatization is completed 
and Bankruptcy Act for Banks adopted; 
* Enact amended Energy and Energy 

Efficiency Act; 

* Divestiture of non-irifrastructure SOEs 

completed; 

* Anticorruption Strategy adopted; 
* 
Introduce affordable cost-effective active 
labor market programs.

Outreach

* 
.

.

.

.

Per capita 

Outcomes
Pe aianational income growvth
Reduction in poverty rate using Bank-proposed
poverty line (see Annex C);
Level of long-term unemployed decreased;
Level of total unemployment reduced;

Indicators

Increased number of workers enrolled in second

pillar of pension system;

* Delegated education budget is extended to 75%

c 

of municipalities;
Portfolio performance measured by

disbursement ratio and percentage of U rated

projects.

90. 
Efforts to consolidate the Bank's outreach 
in Bulgaria for disseminating 
its development
objectives and achievements would continue to focus on key stakeholders and involve the following:
First, Government counterparts, including, for instance, the various PIUs, local governments, etc. A
retreat with all PIU staff was held prior to the JPR in early February 2002. More recently, the Deputy
Prime Minister has been invitecl to chair periodic donor meetings in Sofia, so as to build up ownership of
periodic and systematic donor coordination within the Government. Second, NGOs, including local
foundations, as, for instance, in the recent sponsoring of analytical work over-viewing external support
for SMEs, and in a small grant program authorized by the Bank, which helped reach local communities
with direct involvement of beneficiaries. Third, the media, in order to keep civil society continually
informed about the Bank's activities in the country. This also involves media outreach by the Country
Manager and the Country Director. Fourth, representatives of the donor community delegated to Sofia, to
ensure proper coordination of all donor activities. The Bank has been co-chairing donor events in Sofia
with the UNDP, arrangements for which will be maintained as responsibility for these initiatives is
gradually transferred to the Government. Fifth, the trade unions, which have become a key player in
forging the social consensus necessary for economic reforms at this stage of the country's transition.
Special events will be organized as in the past to share the Bank's strategic objectives and enlist support.
Sixth, the business community, to broaden the Bank's understanding of current issues and to disseminate
the rationale of reforms.

VI. 

CREDITWORTHINESS AND RISKS

Creditworthiness and Lxposure

91. 
Financing Requirements. Medium-term financing requirements are estimated to be about US$2
billion per year under the base case scenario. FDI flows are expected to provide the bulk of external

Bulgaria: Country Assistance Strategy 

27

financing (more than 40 percen,t of the total) in the years ahead. In the event of significant shortfalls in
FDI, the most appropriate response would be a somewhat tighter fiscal stance to ensure a smaller current
account deficit and therefore a lower financing requirement. Bank disbursements under the base case at
about US$180 million a year would cover about 10 percent of total financing needs. A 24 month SDR
240 million (about US$300 million) Stand-By Arrangement was approved in February 2002 succeeding
the 3 year EFF which expired in September 2001. Official grants mainly from the EU, along with project
lending from the EIB, EBRD and the EU are expected to grow and help cover EU accession related
investments.

92. 
Under the base case scenario Bulgaria's creditworthiness will continue to improve (see below),
widening access to international capital markets and enabling the Government to pursue actively its debt
management strategy. The private sector's access to international capital markets on better terms would
also become easier.

93. 
Bulgaria's creditwortlhiness has improved since the last CAS. Sound macroeconomic policies
and deep structural reforms during the last four years have resulted in a significant improvement in key
indicators of financial and external vulnerability. Total external debt declined markedly during this
period from 96 percent of GDF' in 1997 to around 78 percent in 2001, while gross official reserves rose
from 1.6 months of imports in 1996 to about five in 2001. These improving indicators and encouraging
future prospects are reflected in favorable assessments by international capital markets. Spreads on
Bulgaria's Brady bonds have fallen from 1400 basis points in 1996 to below 400 basis points in early
2002. 
In acknowledgement of sound achievements, major credit rating agencies upgraded Bulgaria's
credit ratings in the past few months. Standard & Poor's upgraded Bulgaria's long-terni foreign currency
ratings to BB-, while Moody's has raised its long-term ratings to BI. 
In November 2001, the authorities
issued a Euro 250 million 5 year eurobond at 367 basis points over benchmark 5 year German bunds. The
issue was heavily oversubscribed. These upgrades and the successful launch of the eurobond reflect
favorable market expectations for the continuation of sound macroeconomic policies and implementation
of structural reforms. Contagion from the difficulties in Argentina and Turkey has been limited. Even
the collapse of the CBA in Argentina has not reversed the trend in narrowing spreads.

94. 
IBRD exposure will remain manageable in the base case. IBRD debt service will rise from 1 .0
to 1.3 percent of exports, and from 8 to 12 percent of public debt service during the CAS period. The
ratio of preferred creditor debt service to public debt service has remained above 35 percent and increased
sharply in 2001. It is projected to decline to about 37 percent in 2004 before rising again to 46 percent in
2005. These high ratios are partly the result of debt restructuring in the mid-1990s which stretched out
Bulgaria's public debt repayments to private creditors over decades with the issuance of Brady bonds, and
of limited commercial bank lending until the strong recovery following the 1997 reforms. The new
Government is pursuing a more active debt management policy and intends to retire public debt to private
creditors through a series of buy-backs. About 70 percent of public external debt is at floating interest
rates and two-thirds is denominated in US dollars. The Government would like to reduce the floating and
dollar components of the debt stock, locking in current low interest rates and reducing exposure to
movements in the dollar/euro exchange rate. Also Brady debt ties up collateral which could be freed if
replaced with eurobonds or other private debt. Continued substantial adjustment lending would seriously
reduce the Bank's headroom in Bulgaria, especially for further adjustment loans beyond FY05. Since the
three PALs - designed to support a robust reform program that has a high probability to succeed - are the
cornerstone of the overall Bank strategy, high adjustment lending is justified, but would have to be
carefully monitored. The additional triggers for processing PAL III shown in para. 87 have been adopted
to ensure that the level adjustment lending reached the proposed US$450 million level only, if indicators
of economic outcomes confirmed that Bulgaria substantially improved its standing as a result of reforms
under PAL I and 11, and if the downside risks of overall economic performance at that time were low.

28 

Risks

Bulgaria. Country Assistance Strategy

95. 
CAS implementation is faced with three risks. First, while the broadly shared objective of EU
accession within society firmly sets Bulgaria's reform agenda for the decade, coalition building in support
of socially costly reforms might run into resistance, because of a perception of corruption, high
unemployment and festering discontent in society about low standards of living and poverty. 
In the
absence of sufficient political will and cohesiveness to forge support for reforms, and if the persisting
limited technical and administrative capacity in Government cannot be improved, policy slippages may
slow down reforms and break the momentum of sustained high economic growth. Second, although
recent developments 
in Yugoslavia augur well for regional stability and trade, thus offering better
business opportunities for Bulgaria, any setback in the security situation in the region could have a severe
impact on Bulgaria's external position and slow down economic growth. Third, an enduring period of
slow global growth and, in particular, a recession in the EU where Bulgaria sends 50 percent of its exports
could seriously affect economic growth in the country and - because of the constraints of the CBA -
erode the country's international competitiveness, thus widening 
the current account deficit and
undermining external viability. If FDI flows were to fall short of the projected current account deficit, the
threat to external viability coulcl become critical.

96. 
Failure to act promptly to correct policy slippages or to redress growing internal or/and external
imbalances could shake confidence in the CBA and precipitate a financial and macroeconomic crisis. A
number of factors mitigate 
the risks of policy slippage or delayed response to adverse external
developments. The current Government's resolve to complete the transition to a fully functioning market
economy and speed up EU accession, and a broad based commitment to the CBA in the country provide
powerful motives for continued macro discipline and reforms. Analytical and sector work and adjustment
lending in the CAS would - through the next three years - provide opportunities for a continuous policy
dialogue between the Governrent and the Bank and provide inputs for policy design, thus bringing
policy makers and major stake holders to a realization of the high stakes involved in abandoning the
strong commitment to reforms 1:he Government has shown to date. Moreover, Bulgaria's recently-gained
access to the international financial markets and the country's need to rely on commercial borrowing to
finance its program, are likely 1:o intensify pressures for macro-discipline, continued partnership with the
IMF, and staying the course on structural reforms. And continued strong reforms will ensure that the
business environment can attract the required FDI for growth and external viability. 
If the current
account deficit were to widen, fiscal policy would have to take a tighter stance than currently envisaged.
Economic policy makers in Gcvernment have wide experience in international investment banking and,
therefore, are unlikely to misjudge the high risks involved in major policy slippages or delayed policy
responses 
to unfavorable external developments. As regards the need for betier technical and
administrative capacity in Government, the proposed PAL I would help put in place a framework for
improved coordination, 
and public administration and 
legal/judicial 
reforms would strengthen
administration in general. Both efforts would have a positive effect across the board within the public
administration. Under these circumstances, the probability of serious domestic policy slippage or delayed
policy response to exogenous developments is low.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter Wojcke

By:

Shengman Zhang 

Washington, D.C.
April 16, 2002

CAS Annex A2
Page I of 2

B3ulgaria at a glance 

2/19102

Europe & 
Lower-
Central middle- 
Asia 
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

-

Bulgaria 

Development diamond'

2000
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

8.2 
1,520 
12 4 

475 
2,010 
956 

2,046 
1,140
2,327

Life expectancv

Average annual growth, 1994-00

Population (%) 
Labor force(%) 

-0.5 
-0.5 

0.1 
0 6 

10
1 3 

GNI 
per 
capita 

/ 

Gross
pnmary
enrollment

-

Most recent estimate (latest year avallable, 1994-00) 

Poverty (% of populaion below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (%6 of populabton) 
lliteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (%of school-age population) 
Male 
Female 

.

68 
72 
13 

67 
69 
21 

42
69
32
11 
80
15
114 
116 
114

Access to improved water source

98 
2 
99 
100 
98 

90 
3 
100 
101 
99 

-Bulgana
Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

Economic ratios'

GDP (US$billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

201 
35.5 
35.6 
36 6 

109 
22 6 
43 5 
26.9 
18 3 

120 
16 6 
58 5 
11 0 
10 7 

130
16 9
57 4 
9.5
10.5

Trade

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debtWGOP
Present value of debtexports

-0.7 
0.8 
107.3 
6 6 

-5 8 
3 7 
86 5 
16 3 

4 4 
3 4 
77 7
16 5

Domestic 
savings 

Iv/ste
Investment

0 2 

' 

-- 

Indebtedness

19E1-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

2001-05

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

2.2 
2 4 
11 4 

-1 0 
-1 2 
5.3 

5 8 
6 3 
24.2 

4 5 
5 1 
5 9 

5 0 
5 8 
10 0

-Bulgana
Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Growth of investment and GDP (%)
2
20
o

(% f GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

16 6 
51 9 

15 4 
57 8 

12 8 
24.6 
15.4 
62.6 

12 0 
24.9 
15 7 
63.1

98 

99 

00 

01

314 

268 

-20)

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

48 7 
14.7 
34.5 

54.1 
19.0 
39 2 

71 4 
17 7 
64.1 

73.2 
16 9 
64.8

-30

-GDI 

-O-GDP

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

Growth of exports and Imports I%)

(average annual growth)

Agriculture 

-1.9 

1.2 

-101 

0.0 

30 -
20
10x
o 

Industry 

3.0 

-1.8 

15 3 

6 0 

Manufactunng 
Services 

4.2 

-1 1 

56 

5.1 

-

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

-1.1 
-7.2 
0 8 
5.7 

3.6 
9.8 
-2.0 
14 6 

4.5 
2.7 
5.5 
6.8

_lo 
-20

00 

0o

Exports Oimports

Note 2001 are projections.

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average If data are missing, the diamond wVi
be incomplete.

CAS Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Bulgaria

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domestic prices 

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflabon I%)

(% change) 

1,330

Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

10.4 
5.6 

7.5 
7.0 

886
rf 

226 6 

443

Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/defici 

222

o 

0 

> 

.

43 6 

42 1 

39 4 

96 

97 

9a 

99 

Do 

01

-1.2 
-4.2 

3 5 
0 4 

2.0 
0 7

GDP deflator 

CPi

TRADE

(US$ millions) 
Total exports (fob) 
Consumer goods 
Commodity 2 
Manufactures 
Total imports (fob) 

1981 

1991 
3,737 

2000 
4,812 

2001 
5,084 

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

7,000
6,000
5,Dooo*
3,000d iii 
4,000
2,000

655 

604 

3,769 

5,988 

6,634 

ii i .

Food 

.

.

Fuel and energy 

1,000

Export pnce index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995= 100) 

.. 

49 
159 
31 

81 
93 
87 

97 
104 
93

95 

96 

97 

9r 

99 00 o

, 

* Exports 

* Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 

1981 
9,338 
9,046 
292 
-261 
90 

1991 
4,137 
4,255 
-118 
-28 
69 

2000 
6,987 
7,657 
-670 
-321 
290 

2001 
7,481 
8,445 
-964 
-326 
455 

Current account balance to GOP I%)
10 J

12

6

Resource balance 

Net income 
Net current transfers 

4

2

Current account balance 

121 

-77 

-701 

-835 

, v 

V.

Financing Items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

-490 

-4 

975 

816 

-

J a 

[1j

369 

81 

-273 

19 

.a

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, localVUSS) 

.. 

616 
00124 

3,460 
2 12 

3.579
2 19

0.0014 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

(USS millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of 2001 debt (USS mill.)

11,742 
61 
0 

10,371 
824 
0 

10.121
844
0

0 
0 

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

276 
0 
0 

1,190 
75 
0 

1,293 
80
0

1,153

0 
0 

Composition of net resource flows 
Official grants 

D 803

19 

74 

138

Official creditors 

.. 

29 
30 

-77 
107 

-148 
495 

,. 

E 728

Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

,, 

F 6,375s 9 

;

56 
0 

1,003 
-179 

647 
-61

, 

,

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Pnncipal repayments 
Net fows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

267 
58 

135 
71 

66 
88 

A -1RD 

E- B-laterat
F -Pnvate
G -Short-tem

B -IDA 

D -Other mullateral 

0 
58 
0 
58 

27 
44 
49 
-5 

32 
56
48
8

C- IMF 

Development Economics 

2119/02

CAS Annex B2
Page I of I

CAS Annex B2 - Bulgaria
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 1/31/2002

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessmen'
Number of Projects lnder Implementation a 
Average Irnplementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002

9 
2.6 
0 
0 
11.1 
12.1 
20.3 

yes 
510 
56.7 

10 
3.1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
39.1 

yes 
753 
75.3 

12 
2.6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
29.4 

yes 
907 
75.6 

10
3.1
10
2
20
28
11.3

yes
904.8
75.4

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 8OLast Five FYs
14 
9
958.9 
539.8
21.4 
0
0 
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Perfornance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation
progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are fbr projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3
Page 1 of 2

Bulgaria
Bank Group Program Summary
As of 03/31/2002

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal 

2003 

2004 

2005 

Fiscal 
Proj D 

year 

Social Investment and Employment Promotion 
District Heating 
PAL I 
Subtotal 
GEF Medium Size: Project for Wetlands Conservation

Revenue Administration Reform 
PAL II 
Rural Finance 
Subtotal 

Education Moderrization APL Phase II 
PAL III 
Municipal/Community Social Services 
Forestry 
Subtotal 
GEF Energy Efficiency

TOTAL FY2003-2005 

US$(M) 

50.0 
30.0 
150.0 
230.0

40.0 
150.0 
60.0 
250.0

30.0 
150.0 
60.0 
30.0 
270.0

750.0

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Strategic 

Ipeetto 
Imsplenatio b
Risks (HIM/li)IMIL

Rewards b 
(H/A'~~~~~) 

H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 
H 

M
M
M

M
M
M

L
M
L
L

a) This table presents the proposed Bank notional program for the next three fiscal years.

b) Project ratings indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected
to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).

CAS Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Bulgaria
IFC and MIGA Program
FY 1999-2002

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002

IFC approvals (US$milion) 

42.60 

22.30 

48.64

Sector (%)

FINANCE & INSUJRANCE 
FOOD & BEVERAGES 
INDUSTRIAL & CONS PROD 
PRIMARY NETALS 
PULP & PAPER 
WHOLES. & RETAIL TRADE 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other 

Total 

64 

36

lO 

56 
33 
11 

loo 

16
84 

l00 

91 

9 
0 

100 

37

29
24

10

100 

59
37
4
0

100 

0

0

MIGA guarantees (US$million) 

15.90 

16.18 

0.00

CAS Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

BULGARIA
Summary of Nonlending Services

As of 03/31/2002

Product 
Recent completions

1. Sector Work

Child Welfare Reform Startegy 
GAS Sector Review 
Energy and Environment Review 

11. Economic Report

Country Economic Memoranduin 
Country Assistance Strategy 

111. Technical Assistance
Poverty Workshop 
Social Capital Workshops 
IDF Strengthening Policy 
Techmcal and Advisory Services on Strategic
Communications 
Energy Sector Advisory and Institution Building 
Poverty Reduction Policy TA 

IV. Fiduciary

Completion FY 

Cost
(US$1,000) Audience" Objective b

FY00 
FY00 
FYOI 

FYOI 
FY02 

FY00 
FY00 
FYO 

FYOI 
FYOI 
FY02 

30 
20 
0 

G, D, PDi, 
G, D, PDi, 
G, B 

I'S
PS
PS

450 
110 

B, G, D, PDi PS, KG
G, B 
PS

25 
19 
18 

22 
56 
38 

G, B 
G, B, D 
G 

PS, KG
PS, KG, PD
PS, KG

PDi 
G, D 
G, D, PDi 

PD, PS
PS, KG
PS

Country Procurement Assessment 

FY00 

75 

G, B 

PS, KG

Underway
Public Expenditure Review 
Poverty Assessment Update 
Financial Sector Assessment Paper 
HIV/AIDS Sector Dialogue 

Planned c

1. Economic Report

FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 

208 
75 
50 
20 

G 
G, D, PDi 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 

PS, KG
PS
PS, KG
PS, KG

CEM Update - Fiscal Impact of EU Accession 

FY04 

800 

G, B 

PS, KG

11. Sector Work

Pension Reform Note 
Environmental Sequencing Studyv 
National Energy Efficiency Study 
Service and Fiscal Decentralization Note 
Private Sector Assessment 
Transport Strategy Paper 
Gender, Age and Ethnicity Assessment 
Agriculture Sector Note 

Ill. Technical Assistance

IDF Poverty Monitoring, Evaluation, and Policy Design 
IDF: Integration of Ethnic Minor-ities 
EU Accession/Energy TA 

IV. Fiduciary

FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY04 
FY04 
FY05 
FY05 

FY02 
FY04 
FY05 

45 
70 
90 
60 
80 
30 
75 
60 

17 
42 
170 

G, D 
G, D, PDi 
G, D, PDi 
G, D, PDi 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, PDi 

PS, KG
PS, KG
PS, KG
PS, KG
PS, KG
PS, KG
PS, KG
PS, KG

PDi, G, D 
PDi, G, D 
G, PDi 

PS, KG
PS, KG
PD

Country Financial Acccountability Assessment 

FY03 

80 

G, B 

PS, KG

a. Government (G), Donor (D), Bank (B), Public Dissemination (PDi)
b Knowledge Generation (KG), Fublic Debate (PD); Problem -solving (PS).
c. Reflects proposed base-case scenario

Bulgaria - Key Economic Indicators

CAS Annex 16
Page 1 of 5

Indicator 

Actual 
1998 

1997 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 
2001 

Projected
2003 
2004 

2005

2002 

National accounts (as % of GDP at current market prices)

Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100 
23.8 
25.3 
50.9 

100 
18.7 
25.5 
55.7 

100 
15.1 
23.4 
61.5 

100 
12.8 
24.6 
62.6 

100 
12.0 
24.9 
63.1 

100 
11.7 
25.3 
63.0 

100 
11.3 
25.8 
62.9 

100 
10.9 
26.3 
62.8 

100
10.5
25.8
63.8

Total Consumption 

83.1 

86.1 

88.7 

89.0 

90.5 

89.4 

89.4 

88.6 

87.7

Gross domestic fixed
investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in
stocks)

10.8 
1.0 
9.8 

13.2 
3.8 
9.4 

15.9 
4.7 
11.2 

16.2 
4.1 
12.1 

16.6 
3.9 
12.7 

16.9 
3.4 
13.5 

17.1 
3.5 
13.6 

17.4 
3.5 
13.9 

17.7
3.5
14.2

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

61.9 
56.4 

16.9 
15.8 

48.0 
50.9 

13.9 
13.5 

44.1 
51.9 

11.3 
12.2 

58.5 
64.1 

11.0 
10.7 

57.4 
64.8 

56.3 
63.1 

55.9 
62.9 

55.8 
62.4 

9.5 
10.5 

10.6 
11.4 

10.6 
11.8 

11.4 
12.2 

55.5
61.5

12.3
12.9

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current
prices)
GNP per capita
(US$, Atlas method) 

Real annual growth rates
(%, calculated from 1995
prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices 
Gross Domestic Income 

10146 12258 12403 11995 13024 14165 15484 16986 18622

1180 1230 

1390 

1520 1590 

1670 

1850 2050 2270

-7.0 
-8.6 

3.5 
6.0 

2.4 
3.2 

5.8 
3.7 

4.5 
3.7 

4.0 
5.0 
4.2 
4.2 
(Continued)

5.5 
5.2 

5.5
5.4

Bulgaria - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

Actual 
1998 

1997 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 
2001 

2002 

Projected
2003 
2004 

2005

CAS Annex B6
Page 2 of 5

Real annual per capita
growth rates (%, calculated
from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices 
Total consumption 
Private consumption 

Balance of Payments (US$
millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 

Net current transfers
(including official current
transfers) 
Current account balance
(after official capital grants) 

Net private foreign direct
investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, incl.
errors & ommissions) 
Change in reservesd 

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of
GDP at current market
prices) 
Real annual growth rates
(1995 prices)
Merchandise exports
(FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports
(FOB) 

-6.5 
-14.5 
-16.7 

4.2 
8.2 
8.9 

3.0 
5.7 
6.3 

6.3 
5.0 
4.1 

5.1 
4.8 
5.1 

4.7 
4.4 
4.7 

5.7 
5.2 
5.3 

6.3 
6.2 
5.8 

6.4
6.1
5.9

7011 
5981 
4809 4193 
5845 5989 
4488 4574 
1166 
-8 

5795 
4006 
6561 
5087 
-767 

6987 
7481 
7981 
8656 9482 10339
4812 5084 5450 5895 6429 
6998
7657 
8445 8935 
9740 10596 11444
5988 
6634 7019 
7651 8324 8990
-670 
-964 
-954 -1084 
-1114 
-1105

237 

230 

300 

290 

455 

474 

533 

531 

512

1046 

-61 

-654 

-676 

-835 

-838 

-897 

-969 

-981

507 
-133 
-81 
-52 

537 
114 
63 
51 

802 
355 
147 
208 

1003 
234 
-77 
311 

647 
346 
-148 
494 

900 
364 
233 
131 

900 
294 
172 
122 

1000 
328 
143 
185 

-177 
-1243 

-258 
-332 

-138 
-365 

-288 
-273 

-178 
19 

-319 
-107 

-331 
34 

-105 
-254 

1000
526
157
369

63
-608

11.5 

-0.1 

-6.2 

-5.6 

-7.4 

-6.7 

-7.0 

-6.6 

-5.9

2.6 

-12.8 

-4.5 

20.1 

5.6 

7.2 

8.1 

9.1 

8.9

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

..
..

-1.7 

1.9 

11.2 

17.7 

10.8 

5.8 

9.0 

8.8 

8.0

(Continued)

CAS Annex B6
Page 3 of 5

Bulgaria - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Indicator 

Actual 
1998 

1997 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 
2001 

Projected
2003 
2004 

2005

2002 

Public finance (as % of
GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators

M2/GDP (at current
market prices) 
Growth of M2 (%) 
Private sector credit
growth / 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices (1995 =100)

Merchandise export price
index 

Merchandise import price
index 

Merchandise terms of tracle
index 
Real exchange rate
(US$/LCU)f 

Consumer price index
(annual % change) 

GDP deflator (annual %
change) 

35.7 
33.5 
0.3 

38.3 
33.3 
-0.7 

41.2 
36.3 
1.1 

42.1 
38.6 
-1.7 

39.4 
36.4 
-0.3 

38.1 
35.4 
-0.3 

38.0 
35.1 
1.3 

38.0 
34.8 
1.0 

38.0
34.5
0.9

33.7 
362.1 

29.3 
10.1 

30.4 
9.2 

35.0 
28.8 

39.4 
26.1 

41.6 
14.0 

44.4 
16.0 

47.1 
16.0 

50.1
16.0

48.9 

-64.0 5659.3 

95.7 114.0 113.7 110.0 107.3 105.4

94.4 

96.8 

84.5 

91.1 

86.6 

89.9 

93.5 

95.7 

97.1

92.9 

91.5 

93.2 

108.4 104.0 108.0 112.3 115.0 116.6

101.6 105.9 

90.6 

84.0 

83.3 

83.3 

83.3 

83.3 

83.3

108.3 

89.3 

92.4 

96.4 

98.3 100.8 103.0 105.1 

107.2

1058.4 

18.7 

2.6 

10.4 

7.5 

4.5 

3.5 

3.5 

3.5

949.1 

22.2 

3.1 

5.6 

7.0 

4.0 

3.5 

3.5 

3.5

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated general government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

CAS Annex B6

Page 4 of 5

Bulgaria - Selected Indicators Table

Base-case (most likely) projection

Actual 
1997 
1998 

Estimate 
2001 

Projection
2003 
2004 

1999 

2000 

2002 

2005

Part A: Main Macro Aggregaltes

Annual growth rates, calculatedfrom constant 1995 price d
GDP (mp) per capita 
-6.5 
4.2 
3 0 
Total consumption percapita 
-14.5 
8.2 
5 7 

6.3 
5.0 

5.1 
4.8 

4.7 
4.4 

5.7 
5.2 

6.3 
6.2 

6.4
6.1

GDP at market prices 
Total consumption 
Private consumption 
Gross domestic investment
(GDI) 
Gross dom. fixed
investment (GDFI) 

-7.0 
-15.0 
-17.2 

3.5 
7 5 
82 

2 4 
51 
5 7 

5.8 
4.5 
3.6 

4.5 
4.2 
4.5 

4.0 
3.7 
4.0 

5.0 
4.4 
4.6 

5.5 
5 4 
5 0 

5.5
5 2
5.0

2.9 

17.3 

7.3 

-2.0 

5.5 

5.1 

5.0 

50 

5 0

-23.9 

32.9 

25.3 

8.2 

11.9 

10.0 

10.0 

10.0 

10.0

Exports volume 
Importsvolume 

3.1 
-2.6 

-10.4 
7.0 

-5.2 
5.1 

24.2 
14.6 

5.9 
6.8 

8.6 
10.6 

10.3 
10.7 

10.7 
11.3 

9.8
10.1

Savings-investment balances, as percentage of GDP

Gross Domestic investment 
of which Govemment
investment 

11.4 

16.9 

19.0 

16.6 

16.9 

17.3 

17.6 

17.9 

182

1.0 

3.8 

4.7 

4.1 

3.9 

3.4 

3.5 

3 5 

3.5

Foreign savings 
Gross national savings 
Govemment savings 
Non govemment savings 

-10.3 
21.7 
2.2 
19.5 

05 
16.4 
5.0 
11.4 

5.3 
13.8 
5.0 
8.8 

5.8 
10.7 
3.5 
7.2 

6.4 
10.5 
3.0 
7.4 

5.9 
11.4 
2.7 
8.7 

5.8 
11.8 
2.9 
8.9 

5.7 
122 
3 2 
9 0 

5.3
129
3.5
9.5

Grossdomestic savings 

16.9 

13.9 

113 

11.0 

9.5 

10.6 

10.6 

11.4 

12.3

Other
GDP inflation 
Annual average exchange rate
(LCU/US$) 

949.1 

22.2 

3.1 

5.6 

7.0 

4.0 

3.5 

3.5 

3.5

1.7 

1.8 

1.8 

2.1 

2.2 

2.2 

2.2 

2.2 

2.1

Index real average exchange
rate (1995 =100) 

108.3 

89.3 

92.4 

96.4 

98.3 

100.8 

103.0 

105.1 

107.2

Terms of trade index (1995
=100) 

101.6 

105.9 

90.6 

84.0 

83.3 

83.3 

83 3 

83 3 

83.3

Incremental capital-output ratio
(GDI based) 
Import elasticity with respect Io
GDP 

-3.6 

8.0 

13.3 

5.7 

6.9 

7.8 

6.3 

5.7 

5.7

24.2 

54.3 

466.7 

305.2 

240.0 

145.0 

181.5 

160.0 

145.5

Money growth 

362.1 

10.1 

9.2 

28.8 

26.1 

14.0 

16.0 

16.0 

16.0

CAS Annex B6
Page 5 of 5

Bulgaria - Selected Indicators Table
(Continued)

Actual 

Estimate 

Projection

[1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005

Part B: Government Finance Indicaitors

Percentage of GDP
Total revenues, of which 
Tax revenues 
Total expenditures, of which 
Consumption 
Deficit(-)/Surplus(+) 

36.2 
27.9 
34.1 
14.3 
2.1 

38.7 
30.3 
36.0 
15.6 
2.7 

41.8 
31.4 
40.3 
19.4 
1.5 

42.6 
30.4 
42.1 
19.9 
0.4 

39.4 
30.1 
38.7 
15.7 
0.7 

38.1 
29.2 
37.7 
14.5 
0.4 

38.0 
29.0 
38.6 
16.3 
-0.6 

38.0 
29.0 
38.3 
16.1 
-0.3 

38.0
29.0
38.0
16.0
0.0

Financing: 
Foreign 
Monetary sector 
Other domestic 

-2.1 
0.3 
0.0 
-2.4 

-2.7 
-0.7 
0.0 
-2.0 

-1.5 
1.1 
0.0 
-2.6 

-0.4 
0.0 
0.0 
-0.4 

-0.7 
-0.3 
0.0 
-0.4 

-0.4 
-0.3 
0.0 
-0.1 

0.6 
1.3 
0.0 
-0.7 

0.3 
1.0 
0.0 
-0.7 

0.0
0.9
0.0
-0.9

Other
Total Debt/GDPmp 
Total interest payments/Tax
revenues 

107.7 

80.2 

86.7 

81.8 

68.9 

63.9 

59.0 

54.0 

49.2

30.3 

14.6 

12.5 

14.0 

13.2 

11.3 

12.4 

11.5 

10.2

Part C: Debt & Liquidity Indicators

Total DOD and TDS
DOD (US$ millions) 
DOD / GDPmp ratio 
TDS (US$ millions) 
TDS /exports (XGS) ratio 

9760 
96.2 
932 
12.9 

10274 
83.8 
1296 
20.6 

10204 
82.3 
1151 
19.0 

10371 
86.5 
1190 
16.3 

10121 
77.7 
1293 
16.5 

10231 
72.2 
1273 
15.2 

10540 
68.1 
1185 
13.1 

10933 
64.4 
1115 
11.2 

11263
60.5
1340
12.4

Total gross reserves (months'
imports G&S) 

4.6 

5.6 

5.5 

5.0 

4.7 

4.4 

4.1 

4.0 

4.1

Part D: External Financing Plan

(USS, millions)
Official capital grants 
Private investment (net) 
Net Long term borrowing
excl. IMF 
Adjustments to scheduled debt
service 
All other capital flows 
Financing Requirements (incl
IMF) 
of which current account 

0.0 
639.4 

0.0 
295.8 

-2.4 
602.3 

24.9 
824.6 

0.0 
586.0 

0.0 
583.0 

0.0 
521.0 

0.0 
789.0 

0.0
857.0

-133.0 

114.0 

355.0 

234.0 

346.3 

364.1 

293.8 

328.4 

525.7

0.0 
-309.6 

0.0 
-16.7 

0.0 
61.9 

0.0 
-109.0 

0.0 
-116.7 

0.0 
-2.0 

0.0 
48.1 

0.0 
105.5 

0.0
206.2

196.8 
-1046.3 

393.0 1016.8 
61.4 
651.7 

974.6 
701.4 

815.6 
835.0 

945.1 
838.1 

862.9 1222.9 
896.9 
968.9 

1588.9
980.9

* Internal and External public debt
** External public and private debt

Bulgaria - Key Exposure Indicators

CAS Annex B7
Page I of I

Indicator 

Actual 
1998 

1997 

Estimate 
2000 
2001 

1999 

2002 

Projected
2003 
2004 

2005

Total debtoutstandingand 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

9760 10274 10204 10371 10121 10231 10540 10933 

11263

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

267 

232 

593 

248 

178 

235 

328 

271 

336

Totaldebtservice(TDS) 

932 

1296 

1151 

1190 

1293 

1273 

1185 

1115 

1340

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicato

(%)

TDO/XGSb 

TDO/GDP 

TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditorDS/ 
public DS (%)C
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)' 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (,'o) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

135.2 163.4 168.4 
96.2 
83.8 
82.3 
12.9 
20.6 
19.0 
1.6 
1.6 
2.1 

141.9 129.4 122.3 
86.5 
77.7 
72.2 
16.3 
16.5 
15.2 

116.1 
68.1 
13.1 

110.2 
64.4 
11.2 

104.0
60.5
12.4

.. 

.. 

..

5.4 
43.2 

5.4 
47.0 

8.0 
35.3 

8.3 
35.8 

6.8 
49.6 

8.9 
43.4 

10.9 
38.2 

11.9 
37.1 

11.9
45.7

0.6 
501 

0.9 
697 

1.1 
829 

1.0 
824 

1.0 
844 

1.2 
1013 

1.2 
1160 

1.2 
1293 

1.3
1249

0.5 
0 

0.6 
0 

0.7 
0 

0.7 
0 

0.7 
0 

0.8 
0 

1.0 
0 

1.1 
0 

1.1
0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF creclits and net sh
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF
and the Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Bulgaria Social Indicators

CAS Annex B5
Page I of I

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUT'ION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consurr,ption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNI) 
Social security and welfare (% of GD,D) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to an improved water source

(% of population)
Total 

Urban 

Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 

DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand ve births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1, 000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 

Births attended by skilled health staff (%l) 

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

1970-75 

1980-85 

1994400 

8 7 
0 5 
57 5 
22 

8.9 
0.2 
64 5 
20 

8 2 
-0.5 
69 6 
1.3 

Europe & 
Central 
Asia 

474 7 
0 1 
66 8 
1 6 

Lower-
middle-
income

2,046 0
1.0
42 4
2.1

1,980 

5 5 

96 
96 
96 

99 

99 

71 
68 
75 

15 
25 

190 
106 

.. 

1,520 
3,448 

26.4
10.1
36 8

3 9 
3.4 
117 

93 
94 
92 

98 

96 

96 

72 
68 
75 

13 
16 

227 
106 
23

99

96 
96 
97 

71 
69 
74 

23 
32 

172 
106 

.. 

2,010 
192 

1,140
149

4 3 
51 
88

92 
93 
92 

90 
95 
82 

97 

97 

69 
64 
73 

21 
26 

289 
127 

2 7
47

99
100
99

80
95
69

87

87
I 1

69
67
72

32
40

192
133

CAS Annex B5 This table was producei from the CMU LOB system. 
Note 0 or 0 0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age po,gulation and reported enrollment data.

04/16102

CAS Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Closed Projects 16

Bulgaria
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA)
As of 03/31/2002

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 

Tntal Dis-b,r- 

llcprlf 

of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active +Closed) 

173.20
9.63
967.90
120.30

1 1A1 10
JArtirS 

129.95
166.54
1.23
167.77

Active Projects 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

Original Amt in US$Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/

Project ID 

Project Name 

P008319 
P008315 
P008323 
P033965 
P057927 
P055157 
P070086 
P064536 
P055158 
P055021 
P057926 
Overall result 

Water Companies Rehabilitation 
Railway Rehabilitation 
Social Insurance Administration 
Environmental Remediation Pilot 
Environmental Privatization Structural Adjustment 
Health Sector Reform 
Trade & Transport Facilitation in South East Europe 
Child Welfare Reform 
Education Modernization (APL Phase I) 
Registration and General Cadastre 
ASAL II 

11 

Development 
Objectives 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

Inplementation Fiscal Year IBRD Cancel. 
Progress
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 

1994 
1996 
1997 
1998 
2000 
2000 
2000 
2001 
2001 
2001 
2001 

98.0 
95.0 
24.3 
16.0 
50.0 
63.3 
7.4 
8.0 
14.4 
30.0 
50.0 
456.4 

41.0 

41.0 

Undisb. 

Orig. 

Frmn Rev'd

8.9 
10.4 
1.7 
3.1 
30.9 
55.5 
6.5 
7.5 
13.1 
29.1
0.0
166.7 

16.3

-0.4

57.3 
15.1
4.5
3.1 
16.6
-6.5
1.8
4.9
-0.6

96.2 

15.9

CAS Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Bulgaria
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of October, 2001
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1999 BAC Bank 
2001 Bulbank 
1999 Celhart 
1998 Devyna 
2001 Doverie 
2001 Epiq 
1994 Euromerchant FND 
2000 Florina 
1996 Interlease Inc. 
2000 Kronospan Group 
2001 ProCreclit Bank 
1997 Sofia Hilton 
2001 Sofia Med 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.00 
0.00 
5.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
5.00 
0.00
0.00 
17.47 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
17.47 
0.00 
0.00
13.90 
1.50 
0.00 
0.00 13.90 
1.50 
0.00 
0.00
26.70 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 26.70 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
2.76 
0.00 
1.61 
0.00 
0.92 
0.00 
0.46 
0.00
8.09 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
5.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
5.00 
0.00 
0.00
3.78 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.47 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
2.36 
0.30 
0.00 
0.00 
0.86 
0.30 
0.00 
0.00
17.53 
0.00 
0.00 10.05 17.53 
0.00 
0.00 10.05
0.00 
1.05 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.05 
0.00 
0.00
10.80 
0.00 
2.00 
9.26 10.80 
0.00 
2.00 
9.26
12.13 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00

Total Portfelio: 

98.05 

25.32 

8.61 19.31 73.18 25.32 

7.46 19.31

Total IFC Held (excluding participants) 
Total Participants Held 
Total IFC Disbursed (excliding participants) 
Total Participants Disbursed 

131.98
19.31
105.96
19.31

Approvals Pending Commitment

1999 BP Ban'< 
2000 Podem 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
10.00 
12.40 
0.00 
0.00
3.10 
0.00 
2.00 
0.00

Total Pending Cornimitment: 

13.10 

12.40 

2.00 

0.00

Bulgaria CAS Program Matrix: Framework for Country Program

CAS Annex B9
Page lof 12

Development 
Objectives/Issues 
I 
l 
MACROECONOMIC STABILITY AND GROWTH

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

I 

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

Partner
Programs

- Maintain macro 
stability and accelerate 
growth 

- Maintain a prudent fiscal policy 
and pursue the implementation 
of structural reforms to 
accelerate growth and exports. 

- Under the CBA, 
- Broadly balanced 
Bulgaria has 
budget
achieved macro- 
- Reduced current
stability and 
account deficit
resumed growth 
- Higher growth
IMPROVING THE BUSINESS CLIMATE AND ACCCELERATING PRIVATE SECTOR LED GROWTH
Regulatory and Institutional Reform
-
Facilitate ousiness 
various surveys 
entry and reduce 
have identified 
regulatory costs 
licensing and 
regulatory regimes 
as constraints to 
private sector 
growth, especially 
in the SME sector 

Eiiminate iicensing 
regulatory regimes as 
per agreed plan 
Reduce regulatory 
costs 
Reduce company
registration time

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Improve public 
services to private 
sector 

-

Ensure a 
competitive 
environment 

-

!mprove insolvency 
process 

Privatization

-

Various surveys 
have provided 
feedback on the 
performance of 
various government 
offices and agencies 

-

-

Barriers to entry, 
protection, and 
govemment 
subsidies are the 
main constraints to a 
competitive 
environment 
The insolvency 
process is long and 
tedious, delaying the 
exit of insolvent 
enterprises 

-
-
-
-

-

-
-

-

-

-

-

Streamiine iicensing ana 
regulatory regimes 
Rationalize introduction of 
new licensing and regulatory 
regimes 
Reduce company 
registration processing time 
Establish Administrative
Courts
Reform Customs 
Reform Tax Administration 
Reform real estate registry 
Apply performance 
monitoring to government 
offices and agencies 
Use one-stop shop service 
model to service delivery 

Enact the Law on State Aid 
Strengthen Competition 
Law 
Strengthen the Agency for 
the Protection of Competition 

Enact amendments to Part 
IV of the Commercial Code 
Enact amendments to the 
execution provision of the Civil 
Procedure Code
Establish a system of
selection and monitoring of
trustees

-

-

-

-

-

-

Meeting of 
standards for customs 
clearance and 
processing (2005) 
Reduce VAT refund
processing from six to
two months (2005)
Attain efficiency of
EU property registry
systems (2004)
Rationalization of 
unweighted MFN tariff 
to 6 percent (2006) 
Reduce arrears in 
tax payments, social
insurance contributions
and energy bills
Reduction of 
processing time for 
insolvency 

- Macroeconomic indicators 

- PAL UI/IIII 

- IMF

-

-

Puniic Registry or 
regulatory regimes 
Annual administrative 
survey (ARCS) and regulatory 
costs

-
-

-
-

-
-

rAL I/R/1iii 

Private Sector Assessment 
(FY04) 

PAL l/IVIII 

Private Sector Assessment 
(FY04) 

PAL 111111 

Private Sector Assessment 
(FY04) 

-

-

PAL ,l'L'!! 
Private Sector Assessment 
(FY04) 

- UaAiD
- EU
- DFID
- EBRD

- USAID
- EU
- DFID
- EBRD

- USAID
- EU
- DFID
- EBRD

- USAID

- EU
- DFID
- EBRD

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

Partner
Programs

CAS Annex B9
Page 2 of 12

-

About 90% of 
assets of non- 
infrastructure SOEs 
divested 

-

-

-

Transparent/competitive 
divestiture of large SOEs to 
strategic investors 
Enact amended Law on 
Privatization 
Reorganize Privatization 
Agency 

-

Quarterly progress reports 

-

PAL 1U111111

-

-

(eiiillidiii 

Eiuigy pIlhce 
cross-subsidies, adopt cost- 
based tariffs and competitive 
prices)
Energy consumption by 
customer group and energy 
balance of the country 

-

-

-

-

-

FiAL iLii/iii 

District Heating Project 
(FY04)

National Energy Efficiency
Study (FY03)
EU Accession/Energy TA
(FY05)
Public Expenditure Review
(FY02)

- EUPhiru
- EU SARA

-

-

-

-

-
-

-

-

-

-

Complete 
divestiture of large
non-infrastructure
SOEs
Complete
divestiture of small and
medium SOEs
Complete
divestment of residual
shares in privatized

entelpris 
Auiiie iiEEEA 
Adjust tariffs 
Privatize hydro 
power plants, power 
distribution and power 
generation 
Implement district 
heating strategy 
Privatize district 
heating 
Award licenses for
developing gas market
Adjust energy
subsidy program and
guaranteed minimum
income program

Development 
Objectives/issues 
Complete divestiture 
of Non-infrastructure 
SOEs 

Energy Sector 

-

-

-

-

intensity 
Improve sector 
efficiency 
Mitigate adverse 
social impact of sector 
restructuring measures 
Meet EU 
requirements 

Transport Sector

- Increase the efficiency, 
competitiveness, and 
sustainability of 
transport services 
Facilitate trade and 
exchan-e 
with 
exchange with 
neighboring countries 

R'C,uuvZ elicigy 

-

rg 

cirelgy 
intensity of the 
economy will 
hamper its 
competitiveness 

- Cross subsidies and 
non cost recovery 
pricing creates 
distortions 

l

-

-

-

-

-

ililptuvr Eicigy aIIUi Eiicigy 

Efficiency Act (EEEA) and 
enact appropriate regulations to 
promote private sector 
investment and harmonize with 
EU directives 
Rationalize electricity 
pricing to eliminate cross 
subsidies and to reach cost 
recovery levels 
Privatize the power sector 
by selling the hydro power 
plants; unbundling NEK into 
distribution, generation, and 
transmission companies; and 
privatizing the distribution and 
generation power companies
Commercialize district
heating in the medium term and
privatize DH in the longer term
Open the gas market

- Large parts of the 
sector still State- 
owned 
- SOEs (especially 
railway) need 
restructuring, 
- Institutional/legal 
framework for 
private provision of 
services incomplete 
- Public expenditure 
policies need 
strengtheninig 

- Continue restructuring of the 
railway. 
- Improve institutional and 
regulatory framework for 
railway. inland water. maritime 
transport, air transport, and 
urban transport 
- Formulate/implement measures 
for private transport services. 
- Plan/budget public expenditures 
based on economic analysis 
- Improve efficiency of customs 
and access of transporters to 

- Railway covers 
operating costs and 
contributes investments 
- Institutional/reg.

framework in place 
- Privatized railway 
operating company, 
Bulgarian Maritime 
Navigation, and river 
shipping is being
readied
- Concessions for ports.
airports, and urban

- Data provided by traders and 
transporters. 

- Railway Rehabilitation Project 
(ongoing)

~ 

- FSE Projcct (ongoing) 
- Public Expenditure Review
(FY02)
- T'ransport Strategy Paper (FY04)

- EU (Phare)

- EBRD

- IJNECE

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

Partner
Programs

CAS Annex B9
Page 3 of 12

Water Sector
- Assist water utilities to 
be financially viable to 
better serve the 
consumers, especially 
uie pour 

- Barriers to cross- 
border transport, 
and fragmented 
networks limit 
trade and 
efficiency of 
transport services

information (market/regulation) 
- Harmonization of regulations 
- Investments to promote 
"seamless" operations. 

IlidifLlill iil1l1 

-

- Sector assets 
deteriorated due to 
lack of funds to 
rehabilitate and 

1. Involve private sector in 
operations as quickly as possible 
a) Enact Water Act 
b)Approve concession contracts 
for Regipu.al Wvyai CoUiipainies 
Service efficiency 
(RWC) of Vama and Shumen 
is low because of a 
c) Approve concession contracts 
lack of incentives 
for three other RWCs 
- Institutional 
2 Create a regulatory framework
capacity at utility 
to facilitate private participation
level is lacking 
while ensuring that the interests of
- Cost of meeting EU 
the consumers, including the poor
requirements not 
are protected
affordable (US$ 300 arpotce
per capita)

Telecommunications and ICT
- Improving legal 
- Sector liberalization 
regulatory environment 
incomplete 
and enhancing 
competition 

- Telecommunication 
Law and National 
Regulatory 
Authority (NRA) 
need to be 
strengthened 

- Expand and complete 
liberalization of services and 
infrastructure 

- Prepare BTC for competition 
through private sector 
participation 

transport in progress
- Expenditures for roads
and rail infrastructure
economically justified
- Cost of international
transport reduced

- Concession contracts, 
between municipalities 
and intemational 
operators, effective 

deirVCpiIeCIi of

regulations (economic,
and technical) for the
water sector

- Progress on acquis 
- Amend Telecom Law 
- Transition to NRA and 
institutional 
strengthening 
- Enhancing 
competition, including 
preparing BTC 
- Adopting and
implementing plan for
authorizing an alternate
network provider
- Improving NRA's
dispute resolution
capacity

- Regulations in place and 
being enforced by regulator 

- Water Companies Modemization 
and Restructuring Project FY94) 

- PAL /11/ 

- Possibly Dutch
bi-lateral,
USAID, and
DFID

- Technical and advisory services 

- EU-Phare

- PAL I/II/UIl 

- USAID

- EU reports showing progress 
- Deployment and use of
altemate infrastructure 
- Availability of choice of
network providers
- BTC'c competitive
performance
- NRA performance reports

- Raise efficiency and 
competitiveness in 
agriculture 

I) Reforms in pricing 
and trade regime 
mostly complete, with 
a few exceptions 

1I) Maintain liberal trade and 
pricing regime, 
initiate reforms in 
tobacco sector, continue 
reductions of fertilizer tariffs 

1) Continue policy of no 
trade interventions 
(including temporary 
- duty exemptions), except 

l 

l 

-

ASAL 11 (FY01) 

-

EU
(SAPARD/
PHARE)

I

A GRICUL TURE SECTOR - FORESTRY

] 

1 I) Official Gazette 

Development 
Objectives/issues 
Improve 
income 
- Improve income 
earning opportunities 
and raise living 
standards for a broad 
spectrum of the rural 
population 

Develop export- 
oriented and 
environmentally 
sustainable agriculture. 
^ AAAIA A+A 
preparation for EU 
Apreparation 
accession. 

f rEU 

Develop competitive 
forestry sector based on 
sustainable management 

Environment
- Improve environmental 
functions of forests; 

2) (a) Encourage market-driven 
farm restructuring through 
maintenance of liberal sale and 
leasing environment and 
institutional development. 
(b) Rationalize management of 
State Reserve (SR) grain stocks 
for emergencies, releasing and 
rotating grains stocks, including 
use of warehouse receipt system 
3) Complete privatization or
liquidation of MAF privatization 
aillnd ar- 

.r-ornm 

r-ain 

7 o 

-o-- 

r--o-- 

industry
4) Complete irrigation sector 
strategy, enact law on Water User 
Associations and complete 
institutional reforms, implement 
investments 
5) establish legal framework for 
savings/credit coops, depositor 

protection, register coops, 
improve access to finance by 
regulating non-banking 
institutions (NGOs and savings 
coops) and create capability for 
oversight of rural financing 

institutions 
6) prepare draft Action Program 
for National Food Safety 
Program, pass Law on Seeds, 
reduce fertilizer tariffs and 
maintain low protection 

2) Rural markets not 
well developed, both 
for grains and land 

3) Privatization of 
agricultural and food 
enterprises not 
completed and 
industry not 
comperntitively 
Internationally) 

competitive 

oIrrigation systems 
not fully developed 
and legal and 
institutional 
framework incomplete 

5) Rural financial 
system is weak, non- 
bank institutions pose 
regulatory risks 

6) trade and market 
regulations need to be 
developed for food 
safety 

7) Forest restitution 
has all but completed,
but need to encourage 
sustainable private 
management of forests 

for low and uniform 
tariffs 
2) (a) Modemrize land 
registration and cadastre 
system and do public 
information campaign
(b) SR to comply with
new regulations and to
change its status to full
public disclosure

3) Virtually complete
privatization programs of
MAF and MOE 
4) Economically justified 
investments carried out, 
establish Water User
Associations and transfer
infrastructure
5) laws approved,
existing coops registered, 

BNB given authority to
regulate and intervene in 
rural banks and non- 
banks and to improve
access to credit introduce
mortgages and collateral
6) Action Program for
food safety is prepared,
low protection is
maintained, and
temporary import duties
not used

7) Apply and enforce
forestry standards, 
procurement 
arrangements are applied,
TA extended to new 
foiest uwiiels

7) Prepare national forestry 
standards consistent with EU 
regulations, adjust legal 
framework and adopt 
procurement rules, and regulate 
groups or association of forest 
owners who have priority claim
assistance, thus improving 

_ _ _ _ _ I 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 

- Losses of forest 
resources and of 

- Maintain forest resources as a 
maor source oftradable carbon 

- Forest fires and pest 
infestations reduced 

- Number of forest fires and Ha 

Ibumt, 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

CAS Annex B9
Page 4 of 12

Partner
Programs
USDA (grain
m Arkets)
markets)
DFID (Rural
development)

-

-

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ _

- WB/WWF
Alliance TA

Official Gazette
Official statistics

-

-

-

ASAL II (FY01)

5) Rural Finance Project

(FY04)
ASAL 11 (FY0 1)

ASAL 11 (FY01 )
Forestry Project (FY05)

ASAL 11 (FY01 )

Official Gazette

I _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ A SA L 11 (FY 01) 

CAS Annex B9
Page 5 of 12

Development 
Objectives/Issues 
Maintain headroom for 
tradable carbon under 
the Kyoto Protocol 
Expand economic 
incentives and market 
based instruments as a 
powerful tool for 
reducing inefficiencies 
of the economy 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

biodiversity 
through increased 
risk of fires, pest 
infestation/logging; 
- Loss of headroom 
for tradable carbon 
- Insufficient 
institutional 
coordination 

(Annex B country of Kyoto 
protocol); 
- Reduce losses of biodiversity 
and degradation of forests 
- Integrate environmental 
objectives into sectoral 
plans;Expand further public 
awareness and involvement for 
environmental protection. 

- Losses of forest cover 
reduced and carbon 
storage capacity
improved 
- Pilot system of integr. 
environmental permits 
developed 
- Develop sector plans 
for industries, energy 
and agriculture under 
UNFCCC.

- Standing volume of forests 
increased

- EPSAL (FY00) 

- Pilot integrated permit given
to large enterprises
- Menu of market 
instruments
leading 
to efficient use of
resources 
and 
stipulating
investments 
in 
abatement
technologies expanded.

Partner
Programs
PHRD grant

-

Develop policies and a 
body of legislative acts 
and regulations to 
comply with EU 
environmental acquis 
which lead to 
sustainable growth 

- Fragmented sector 
policy/development 
need to be 
integrated in a 
framework for 
sustainable 
development. 

- Introduce strategic environment 
assessment of sector policies 
and development plans. 

- Adopt an Environmental 
Protection Law harnonized 
with EU requirements

- Strategy for sustainable 
implementation of EU 
environmental acquis 
approved 

- Environmental 
investments 
prioritized 
and 
sequenced 
based on assessment of public
an private costs and benefits
of environmental compliance
for the society

- Environmental Sequencing Study
(FY03)

Financial Sector
Improve legal and 
institutional framework 
for lending 

Complete banking 
reform 

- Enforcement of 
claims needs to be 
improved 
- Quality of financial 
information is poor 
- There are tax 
distortions and 
inconsistencies 

- The agenda for 
banking reform is 
not yet complete 
- Bankruptcy 
procedures are slow 

Deveiop contractuai 
savings institutions and 
capital markets 

- Capitai markets are 
practically non- 
existent 

- Enact amendments to the 
foreclosure provisions of the 
Civil Procedure Code 
- Enact amendments to the
Contracts and Obligations Act
- Enact an Accounting and
Auditing Law to bring national
standards to international ones
- Rationalize financial sector
taxation
- Privatize the remainder of the 
banking system 
- Enact the Bank Bankruptcy Act 
- Strengthen banking supervision 

- Develop the pension tund 
industry 
- Strengthen capacity of pension 
fund supervisor 
- Develop the insurance sector. 
including privatizing DZI 
- Strengthen capacity of the 
insurance supervisor

- Increase in private 
sector loans to GDP
ratio

- Privatization of 
Biochim, DSK, and the
shares in CCB (2003)
- Rationalization of the
Business Promotion
Bank
- Increase in the market 
capitalization and
tumover of the stock
market
- Increase in the ratio of
insurance premiums to
GDP

- PAL 1/11111

- PAL 1/11/1ll

- PAL /1/1111

Development 
Objectives/lssues 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

CAS Annex B9
Page 6 of 12

Partner
Programs

-

-

EC Tacis
PAR support

U
PAR support

IMIPROVING GOVERNANCE
Public Administration Reform 
Public 
-
Administration Reform 
Program Effectiveness 

Little emphasis 
on monitoring and 
evaluating outcomes 
of public 
administration 
reform measures. 

Application of merit 
principle in recruitment, 
promotion and general 
human resource 
management 

Depoliticization 

Performance 
management 

Pay rcform 

Accountability and 
transparency 

-

-

-

-

-

Institutional 
framework needed 
for checks and 
balances 

High turnover of 
civil servants when 
Govemments or 
Ministers change 

Need to improve 
cost-effectiveness 
and accountability at 
all levels of public 
administration 

Severe 
recruitment and 
retention difficulties 
in some agencies 
and professional 
skills areas. 
Need to 
strengthen 
formaUinformal 
accountability and 
transparency 
mechanisms 
(Ministries, regions 
and municipalities). 

-

-

-

-

-

- Enact the Mortgage Bond Law
- Enact amendments to the
Commercial Code to strengthen
corporate govemance

-

-

Develop monitoring 
indicators for measuring 
outcomes of reforms 
Develop indicators for local 
NGOs to use in measuring 
outcomes of reforms; and help 
drvclup icicvaxiINGO Lapauiiy 

-

Develop credible State 
Administration oversight body 

-

Effective application of 
provisions of civil service 
legislation/regulations 

-

-

-

-

-

Introduce performance 
management scheme based on 
hierarchy of objectives 
(Government entity; division; 
unit; employee) 

Identify private sector pay 
and benefit comparators (formal 
& informal compensation) 
Develop target pay positions 
for the public sector and 
timescale for transition 
Develop public service 
delivery and performance 
standards for all 
entities/agencies 
Establish consultations with 
private sector, NGOs, citizens 
and service users

Monitoring 
indicators of 
institutional 
performance agreed 
with Bank 
Annual, biannual or

quaUcriy rupurfiizg uy

Govemment using
agreed indicators.
State 
Administration 
oversight based on 
merit principle 

Expand new 
scheme to all 
Ministries, regional and 
local govemments 

Increased 
Govemment 
competitiveness in 
recruitment and 
retention in areas of 
difficulty

Monitoring indicators T -
.

-

PAL IIUIII 

I 
IUKDFID

I 

-

PAL UIU/tII 

-

EC Tacis
PAR support

-

PAL UIUII

-

PAL UIUIII 

-

PAL UIUIII 

-

PAL UIUIII 

-

UK DFID
performance
appraisal
program

-

UK DFID
PAR support

-

UK DFID
one stop shops
initiative

-

-

-

-
-

Public Officials Surveys 
Targeted vacancies filled 
through competitive
recruitment procedures
Indicators of credibility in
Public Officials Surveys
.
- % high level staff turover
after change of Goverment
or Minister
Feedback from Public
Officials Survey
Number of Ministries, 
units, employees and regional 
and municipal govemments 
under new management 
scheme
Public Officials Surveys
Compare public sector pay 
to private sector (baseline and 
pay and benefits surveys)
Decompression for
managerial and technical staff

-

-

-

-

Number of agencies 
adopting service and 
performance standards and 
reporting outcomes against
standards and targets to
Parliament and public

-

Improved assct and income

Development 
Objectives/issues 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

Partner
Programs

CAS Annex B9
Page 7 of 12

-

-

Strengthen public trust in 
probity of public administration 

Policies on conflicts of 
interest tightened and enforced. 

-

Adopt regulatory reform: 
setting standards for business 

Iirlspectlbfl 

slllipillytijr 

business registration; reducing 
licensing requirement as per 
"acquis"; simplifying 
regulations for SMEs; removing 
barriers to investmentVFDI. 
Develop anticorruption 
strategy and program 
Develop anticorruption 
strategy for judiciary 
Restructure functions in 
problem areas
Functional and efficiency 
reviews against explicit criteria 
Review of education and 
health sector staffing 

-

-

-

-

-

Anticorruption 

Efficiency and cost- 
effectiveness 

-

-

-

-

-

Need readiness 
to tackle incidence 

-o. 

s.a.eLUpaIf 

Need to 
accelerate 
regulatory reform 
Need to apply 
impartial, timely, 
consistent, credible 
and effective 
sanctions. 

Areas of 
overstaffing and of 
understaffing 
Areas of poor 
performance/weak 
administrative 
capacity (EU 
Regular Reports). 

Govemment Intranet 
and MIS 

Public expenditure 
management 

-

Use of Intemet 
for service delivery 
(relative advanced) 
needs extension 
- Development of 
Govemment MIS 
and Intranet needs
to be quicker
- spending not 
justified by program 
outcomes; and 
performance data 

I 

- Extend Govemment Intranet 
and MIS to provide links 
among central agencies and 
with regions/municipalities 
- Extend further range of service
through "e govt"

- Plan for gradual change to 
outcomes-based budgeting once 
controls of inputs and finances 
and internal and external audits 

-

-

-

-

-

-

Results of Bank 
anticorruption surveys 

uib 

issei iaied 

iy Go-v. 

Anticorruption 
strategy adopted by 
Gov. and Parliament 
Create capacity for 
regulatory impact 
analysis in Council of
Ministers/Parliament.
Restructure
Customs
Administration

Functional/efficienc 
y reviews undertaken 
in Ministries/agencies 
(where weaknesses as 
per EU Reports) and in 
pilot Regions 
municipalities; 
implement 
recommendations from 
reviews 

- Govemment Intranet 
feasibility study 
competed 

-

-

-

-

-

declaration by public officials
Baseline/service delivery
surveys

Accounting Chamber
adopts multi-year
performance targets for all
entities
Civil servants' morale
from Public Officials Attitude
Surveys
Monitoring: outcomes of 
business inspections; 
time to

MegIbLie 

'o11bb; 

lusii.eses,ilud VI

licensing requirements
eliminated
Enterprise/household/offici
als surveys on performance of
problem agencies year on year

-

-

Number of Govemment 
entities with reviews
completed
Establish schedule for
functional/efficiency reviews
across all public sector
Adjust number of posts
(+/-) as per results of reviews
Wage bill and public
expenditures/revenues as % of
GDP
- Rise in (a) number of services 
delivered through "e govt".
(b) volumes of transactions;
and (c) "hits" on websites.

-

-

-

PAL 1/11/111

-

PAL /IUIIIVII t/II

-

PAL 1/11/111

-

-

Public Expenditure Review 
(FY02) 

PAL 1/11/111

-

USAID
municipal
finance program

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

Partner
Programs

CAS Annex B9
Page 8 of 12

Development 
Objectives/issues 

Municipal 
budgeting; absorption 
of EU funding 

not available 
- Budget/finance
reports limited to
financial aspects,
not covering outputs
- Mismatch between 
spending mandates 
and available 
resources leads to 
contingent liabilities 

all operate reliably

- Strengthen financial risk 
management framework 
- Review municipal finance
system, borrowing authority 
- Strengthen capacity for
managing EU Structural Funds

- Clarify functional roles and 
sources of financing (service 
and fiscal decentralization) 
- Explore ways to increase local 
revenues (property tax, etc.) 
- Introduce hard budget 
constraints in local govemment 
- Increase management capacity 
at local level 
- Introduce financial 
management techniques 
- Involve private sector in 
delivering services mandated to 
local govemment

-

-

Public Expenditure Review
(FY02)

PAL VIUIII

- Enhanced fiscal 
discipline and 
autonomy and 
management capacity 
- Increased investments 
for rehabilitation 
- Improved accounting 
and reporting system 
- Hard budget 
constraints for local 
govemments 

- Better balance between 
central transfers and revenues. 
- Increase share of locally 
decided expenditure 
- Hard budget constraints in 
place 
- Financial management system 
in place 
- More concessionaires 
providing local government 
services 

- Water Companies Modernization 
Project (FY94) 
- Private Public Infrastructure 
Advisory Facility (TA ongoing) 
- TA to prepare private sector 
entry (ongoing)
- Municipal/Community Social
Services (FY05)
- Service and fiscal 
Decentralization (FY03)
- Public Expenditure Review
(FY02)

-

USAID has
completed the
diagnosis of the
sector and is
willing to work
with the Bank

UNDP

- Creation of unified information 
system, case-tracking, file 

management and dockcting 

- More courts with 
access to unified 

information systei n

- Modernizing curriculum and 
training educators in the new 
curriculum 
Improve land registry and 
cadastre system. institutions. 
procedures and management 

-

- Adopt new curriculum, 
and train law school 
professors 
Action taken to 
implement reform 
program based on new
Cadastre/Registry Law

-

1 - Number of courts and number 
of trained court personnel 

| - PAL 11/111 

-
-

USAID
EU/Phare

- Qualitative assessments of 
education methods and
curriculum
Progress in implementing 
Bank project 

-

- PHRD Grant and PAL Il/Ill

-

Real Property Registration
and Cadastre Project (FY01)

(a) 

Local Government Reform

- Lack of fiscal and 
administrative 
autonomy 
- Devolution of 
responsibilities, but 
no authority to raise 
funds or decide on 
expenditure 
- Limited autonomy 
to address priorities 
- Credit-worthiness 
poor, because a) soft 
budget constraints; 
b) poor financial 
standing;
- Inefficient services
because
infrastructure
allowed to de-
capitalize
- high investments
needed to meet EU.

- Improvement of 
caseload 
.managemcnt 
- Lack of capacity to 
teach in some areas. 
outdated curriculum 
Inadequate land 
registry and cadastre 
system 

-

Legal and Judicial Sector
Efficiency of the 
court system 

Enhancing the 
quality of legal 
education 
- Help develop property 
markets 

Development 
Objectives/Issues 
REDUCING POVERTY, RAISING LIVING STANDARDS AND PROMOTING SOCIAL CAPITAL

Strategy/Actions 

Diagnosis 

Benchmarks 

[ 

CAS Annex B9
Page 9 of 12

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

Partner
Programs

Poverty Reduction & Social Capital

- Reduce poverty and 
strengthen human 
capital and good 
govemance at the local 
level. 

- Poverty has declined 
from 36% in 1997 to 
11.7% in 2001 but 
the current rate is 
still twice the 5.5% 
in 1995. 

- Special programs targeted to 
hard-core poor, reintegrating 
long-term unemployed in the 
labor market and breaking 
down barriers against ethnic 
minorities. 

- Build analytical capacity on 
poverty, social policy and 
distributional issues within 
Government. 

- Hard-core poverty 
remains with long- 
term unemployed, 
people with low 
education, families 
with many children, 
- Build up social capital at the 
rural households, 
local level and help the poor to 
and ethnic 
organize themselves and 
minorities such as 
provide incentives to sound 
the Roma. 
the Roma. local governance. 
local govemance. 

- Lack of a coherent 
poverty reduction 
framework and 
consistent focus in 
Govemment 
decisions. 

-

- Low-levels of social 
capital and trust
The social 
safety-net is too 
broad and yet too 
shallow targeting is 
still inadequate. 

Enhance the 
effectiveness of the 
social safety-net to 
increase welfare, 
improve services and 
protect the poor during 
economic transition. 

- Build up capacity to monitor 
and evaluate social assistance 
needs and programs 

- Effective MIS 
established for social
assistance. 

- Professionalize social work 

- Insufficient 
community 
involvement in the 
provision of services 
for the 
disadvantaged 

- Develop community-based 
altematives for service 
provision to children, elderly 
and handicapped to prevent 
institutionalization. 
- Ensure that pension reform is 

- Pension reform 
needs to be 
consolidated 

fully implemented 

- Reduction in poverty 
head-count and severity 
indices by 2004. 

- LSMS-style poverty 
monitoring surveys and 
analysis. 

- NES statistics on 
unemployment. 

NCEDI data on social 

cxCIusiUII Wu UIsCiiiiiiiiaiiUJI. 

- Public opinion polling and 
focus groups to examine 
access to services and the 
prevalence of informal 
payments (especially for poor 
and marginalized groups). 
- SIEP project M&E reports 

- Reduction in number of 
long-term unemployed 
by 2004. 

.
- Reuuceu IdLCS01 SUciai 

exclusion and
discrimination against 
ethnic minorities by 
2004 

- Poverty policy 
monitoring unit 
established in MoSP by 

~~~~~2002. 

.
- Numberof communty 
established. 

-Number of micro- 
projects implemented

under the SIF.

Technical and Advisory Services 

- Poverty Policy Dialogue (FY01) 
with updated poverty profile and 
enhance capacity of NSI to 
monitor poverty.

Poverty Assessment (FY02) 

Financing 

I 
- IDF Grant on Ethnic Integration
(ongoing) 
- SIEP Project (FY03) 
- IDF Grant on Poverty 

Monitoring, Evaluation and 
Policy Design (ongoing) 
- JSDF Grant for Social Capital 
Building in Disadvantaged 
Comnmunities (ongoing) 

- UK DFID
grants on child
welfare reform
and social
inclusion.

- EU grants on
Roma
integration.

- UNDP support
for poverty
reduction.

- NGOs especially
those
representing
ehi

-

minorities.
USAIDI
USDOL support
through
PLEDGE

- MSAS MIS reports. 

Technical and Advisory Services 

WBIUNICEF

- Number of trained 
social workers 
employed by 
municipalities. 

- Public opinion polling and 
focus groups to examine 
access to services and the 
prevalence of informal 
payments (especially for poor 
and marginalized groups) 

- Decrease in the number 
of institutionalized 
children and elderly. 

- Child Welfare Project 
Reports 
- NSSI data on pension 

- Pension Reform Note (FY02) 
Gender, Age & Ethnicity
Assessment (FY05). 

Financing 

- Child Welfare Reform Loan
(ongoing)
- JSDF Grant for Child
Development in Disadvantaged

CMP2 Project

-

USAriD
Blai
Pension Ret rm
Project

- Number of community- 
based alternative
services provided.
--Number of workers 

participation 

Communities (ongoing)

Community Social Services Loan

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

- Encourage employment 
through greater labor 
market flexibility. 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

Partner
Programs

enrolled in pillar two of 
the pension system.

(FY05)

CAS Annex B9
Page 10 of 12

- Labor Force Survey 

- PAL UIUIII

- Administrative unemployment 
data

- SIEP Project (FY03)

- Net impact evaluation of
ALMPs
- Special surveys (e.g short
tSermalao markesetg phroetios
tr ao aktpoetos
IJ ulVeMilieli

UiC aziilubliilL 

climate)

- Some rigidities in 
the labor market 

- High and increasing 
unemployment of 
long duration 

Concentration of 
unemployment 
among 
disadvantaged 
groups, such as low- 
skilled workers, 
youth, and ethnic 
minorities 

- Reform 
the 
labor market 
to 
remove rigidities and improve 
its adjustment capacity 

- Improvements made to 
the labor code.

- Assess the causes of
unemployment with a view of 
reforming labor market 
institutions and designing 
effective labor market policies 

- Periodically review active labor 
market programs in terms of 
their targeting, outcomes and
impact and reallocate resources
toward interventions that are
most cost-effective

- Implement affordable and cost-
effective active labor market
programs to (a) create
temporary jobs, (b) improve
human capital of the
unemployed, (c) improve
employment chances of the
disadvantaged groups, and
(d) support self-employment
and small business creation.

(a) 

Education Sector

Improve efficiency 
of resource utilization at 
all levels of education. 

-

Management 
practices at school 
and higher 
education levels are 
outdated. 

-Dramatic 
reduction in the 
school age 
population due to 
demographic
changes 

-

Enhance planning, 
monitoring and evaluation 
capacity of the education sector 

-iExpand program to 
introduce delegated budget in 
schools

-

-

Reform the current system 
of financial aid in higher 
education. 

Reform the resource 
allocation system in higher 
education 

-

-

-

Education 
management 
information systen 
established for higher 
as well as general 
education.

Modern student
assessment system
operational in general
education.

Delegated budget is
expanded to 75% of all
municipalities

-

Monitoring and Evaluation 
reports of Education 
Modernization Project 

-

Education APL Phase I and 11 

-

Open Society
foundation
program on
general
education

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

Partner
Programs

CAS Annex B9
Page 11 of 12

-

-

-

-

Municipal
. Muiia 
discretion to manage 
education isstdnlonyte
undercut by 
excessive 
regulations and 
national guidelines. 

Large number of 
relatively isolated 
and narrowly- 
focused higher
education
institutions.
Curriculum, 
program of studies 
and teaching 
practices are 
outdated 

Lack of modem 
education materials 
and equipment at all 
levels of education. 

Improve quality and 
relevance of education 
at all level of 
education. 

-

-

-

-

Develop and implement new 
standards and curriculum, 
including training of inspectors, 
school directors and teachers 
. .
Provision of modem
education materials and 
equipment to schools 

Establishment of 
competitive teaching and 
management fund for higher 
education.

Establishment of a demand- 
driven in-service training 
system for teachers. 

Health Sector
- Stop deterioration of the 
health status of the 
population and 
gradually improve to 
European Union 
standards 

- Uncertain financing 
and unequal access 
to health services. 

- Implement a sustainable and 
efficient health financing 
regime. 

- Lack of modern 
management 
capacity 

- Strengthen institutional 
capability at central and local 
health facilities 

- Uneven distribution 

- Improve information flows to 

-

Establishment of
student loan system

-

-

-

-

complemented by a
need based stipend
system in higher
education.
New allocation
process for seats and
resources in higher
education established.

Most teachers are 
using active teaching 
methods and are 
integrating the subject 
of their teaching

Schools and
universities have
updated teaching
materials, library books
and computers to
support teaching.

Eighty percent of
higher education
institutions have
presented projects for
financing to the
competitive fund.

- Laws and regulations
modified to allow the
accreditation of new
providers of in-service
training for teachers.

- 2000 - begin financing 
physician services 
through National 
Health Insurance Fund. 

- 2001- begin financing 
hospital services
through National 
i 

ntwiI 

F,,lid 

r- 

I 

-

Monitoring and Evaluation 
reports of Education 
Modernization Project 

-

Education APL Phase I and 11 

-

Open Society
Foundation
program on
higher education

- Public opinion polling and 
focus groups to examine 
access to services and the 
prevalence of informal 
payments (especially for poor 
and marginalized groups). 

- Health Sector Restructuring 
Project (closed end-2001) 

- Health Sector Reform Project 
(ongoing) 

- Regular review of 

tr,,t,u. 

--

rrrlc rf 

'r, 

fn-in, 

__ 

_ccm't 

- Sviss (SDC)

grant for loan
preparation and
implementation
of national
health insurance

- USAID grant to

in hpslth

CAS Annex B9
Page 12 of 12

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement Tools 

Bank Group Instruments 

of health services. 

- Excess capacity, 
especially in urban 
areas 

- Deteriorating 
physical plant and 
equipment 

better manage both finances 
and clinical outcomes 

- Rationalize the hospital and 
ambulatory care sectors to 
ensure that limited funds are 
used in the most effective
manner. 

administrative records of the 
NHIF and the Ministry of 
Health to determine progress 
on the health reform program 
and assess financial 
sustainability.

Health Insurance Fund. 
.
- 2001-2004- selective 
improvements in 
medical equipment and 
information systems 

- 2001-2004-
rationalization of
facilities and reduction
of surplus staff.

-

2003-2006-

remaining hospital
infrastructure to bring
it up to EU standards.

Partner
Programs
assist in health
insurance
operations and
other elements
of health reform.

CAS Annex B 10
Page lof I

Bulgaria
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
As Of Date 03/31/02

Country 
peror ance 
performance apriority' 

Country 
r 

Bank 
priorityc 
priorityc 

Reconcilialion of
country and Bank
priorities d

Major issue b 

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management

Poverty reduction 

Fair 

Unemployment, rural poverty, ethnic minorities, 
children and women

High 

High

Economic policy 

Good 

External imbalance 

High 

High

Public sector 

Poor 

Corruption, civil service reform, weak public 

.ih 

Hgh

Publlc~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

setr or.. a*_ 

J.+: J _S .A OS ........ 

.
: 

.. 

I 

I ~HghH

Gender 

Fair 

Equal access to education, job opportunities and 

Moderate 

Moderate

I 

~ ~~pay__ 

_ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ _ _ _ _

Human Development Department

Poor and ethnic minorities' lack of access,
inadequate financing, excess infrastructure assets 
and overstaffing
Excess infrastructure assets, overstaffing, weak 
delivery of social services
Inadequate financing at the local level, ineffective 
family benefits program and pension system

Education 

Fair 

High 

High

Health, nutrition & population 

Poor 

High 

High

Social protection 

Poor 

High 

High

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Fair 

Rural poverty 

High 

High

Environment 

Poor 

Costly compliance with EU directives 
Consolidate civil society and capacity building 

High 

Moderate Other development
partners active
Moderate

Social development 
Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure

Fair 

Moderate 

Legal and regulatory framework. bank and
insurance companies' privatization, upgrade 
banking supervision, liquidation
Business environment, upgrade communication 

Financial sector 

Good 

High 

High

Privatc scctor 

Good 

High 

High

infrastructure 

l 

H 

In

Energy & mining 

Poor 

Delayed sector restructuring and SOE divestiture, 
subsidies 

Moderate 

High 

Active policy
dialogue

Complete SOE divestiture, restructure loss- 

EIB, IFC, bilateral

Infrastructure 

Poor 

makers, low maintenance and rehabilitation 

High 

Moderate 

donora

expenditures 

donors

a. Rated as "excellent," "good." 
fair," or "poor." 
b. Principal country-specific issues for each sector are indicated. 

c. Priority is indicated by "lowv," "moderate," or "high."
d. Explanation is provided where priorities do not agree.

An Update on Poverty 4

CAS Annex C
Page 1 of 5

The recent poverty proFile for 2001 shows a notable decline in poverty since the last survey which
was conducted in 1997. For the analysis relative poverty lines from 1997 -
two-thircds mean per capita
consumption (high) and one-half mean per capita consumption (low) - were held constant and adjusted to
2001 price levels to document trends.5 The results indicate that poverty in Bulgaria has fallen by nearly
two-thirds since 1997, but petsists at levels more than double the pre-crisis rates (11.7% vs. 5.5% in
1995) (Table 1). In addition, in 2001, the poor have become less poor compared to 1997, in terms of
deptlh, or severity of poverty (ineaning how far below the poverty line, poor people are). Inequality for
2001, as measured by the Gini coefficient, is down from 1997, but higher than it was in 1995 (29 versus
3 1 and 27 respectively).

Table 1: Poverty and Inequality Trends

Poverty estimates 
Headcount ratio 

Gap 

Depth 

Avg. per capita consumption 

(June 1997 BGL) 

Gini coefficient 

1995 

1997 

High 
5.5 

1.7 

0.8 

Low 
2.9 

0.9 

0.4 

High 
36.0 

11.4 

5.3 

Low 
20.2 

5.9 

2.7 

_ 

2001
High 
11.7 

3.6 

1.7 

Low
6.0

1.9

0.8

117,208 

62,604 

103,767

_ _ 

_ _ _ _ 

_ _ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ _ 

_ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ _

27.1 

31.4 

29.5

Sources: BIHS95, 97, 01

Note: Poverty rates are based upon per capita consumption. The "high" poverty line (equivalent to
$2.76/day) is set at two-thirds median consumption in 1997, the "low" line (equivalent to $2.07/day) is
set at one-half median consumption.

Absolute poverty in EBulgaria in 2001 is comparable with neighboring countries, although it
exceeds levels in the high-performing countries of Central and Eastern Europe (Table 2). Using the
absolute poverty line of $2.15 (ppp) per day for purposes of international comparison, poverty in Bulgaria
was 6.4 percent, close to that of Romania and Latvia in 1998. This remained significantly higher than
poverty in the more advanced l_U Accession countries such as Hungary and Poland (1.3 and 1.2 percent
respectively at the above mentioned poverty line). The Bank intends to work with the Government to
develop a national poverty line which is relevant and accepted by the country. For the purposes of the
Poverty Assessment Update, the Bank is using the high poverty line, equal to $2.76 per day adjusted for

ppp.

Table 2: Poverty Rates in Selected Countries of Central and Eastern Europe
Country 
:Survey Year 
at $2.15 ppp/day 
at $4.30 ppp/day

Bulgaria 

Bulgaria 

Romania 
Latvia 

Ukraine 

Hungary 
Poland 

1995 

2001 

1998 
1998 

1999 

1997 
1998 

3.1 

6.4 

6.8 
6.6 

3 

1.3 
1.2 

18.2

29.1

44.5
34.8

29.4

15.4
18.4

Source: Making Transition Work for Everyone, World Bank, 2000.

4This section is based upon preliminary results from the 2001 Poverty Assessment Update which is scheduled for
completion by end FY02. The Update is based upon the new Bulgaria Integrated Household Survey which was
implemented in Spring 2001.
5As a result, the relative poverty lines for 1997 function as 'absolute' poverty lines in 2001.

CAS Annex C
Page 2 of 5

Despite the rising unemployment associated witlh the restructuring of the economy, poverty has
fallen since the 1997 crisis: growth-oriented structural reforms combined with enhance safety nets and
sharper targeting appear to have helped the poor. The decline in measured poverty rates has taken place
within a context of increasing unemployment, suggesting a large role for social protection income,
informal employment and remittances in mitigating the impact of the labor shedding in the formal sector.
As expected, poverty is highest among unemployed and economically inactive indivicluals. The share of
households whose head is unemployed grew from 7 percent 
in 1997 to 15 percent in 2001, and
individuals in households whose head is unemployed make up almost 40 percent of the poor.

In the context of increasing unemployment, the impact of social social protection transfers on
poverty was sizable. Bulgarian households on average derive 12 percent of their income from social
protection benefits and this share jumps up to more than one third among the poor. Pensions play the
largest role in protecting consu(mption. In the absence of social protection benefits, poverty would be 18
percentage points higher. This 
is largely the result of pension income - other benefits, 
including
unemployment and social assisixance, reduce poverty by I percentage point.

Improvements in welfare since thie 1997 crisis have not been distributed evenly across the
population. Preliminary analysis of the poverty profile indicates that poverty rates, which measure the
proportion of people below the poverty line, have declined less for some groups than others. For example,
urban areas experienced a more significant drop in poverty levels, from 33.5 to 5.9%, while in rural areas,
poverty rates were less than halved (from 41.2 to 23.7 percent). Similarly, poverty rates for other high risk
groups, including individuals with low education levels and the Roma and Turkish minorities have fallen
less than for the population as a whole. This suggests the existence of important 'pockets' of poverty
which have not benefited as much as the rest of the country from recent economic improvements.

Poverty 
in Bulgaria still has a significant regional dimension, with 
large geographical
differences. According to the 2001 data, poverty rates in Plovdiv and Bourgas Regions were four times
higher than in Sofia and almost twice the rates reported for Lovech and Montana Regions. It is important
to note that these results are based upon the previous administrative division of the country into 9 large
regions. There is substantial within region variation in poverty levels and this is not captured by the
household survey.

Poverty in Bulgaria still has a significant ethnic dimension. In particular, the Roma minority,
which is thought to comprise 3-10 percent of the population, is over represented among the poor. The
2001 data indicate that Roma are ten times more likely to be poor than ethnic Bulgarians. Although Roma
represent only 8.8 percent of the individuals in the sample, they constitute nearly half of the total poor.
The Turkish minority also has consistently higher poverty rates than the total population. In the 2001
survey, poverty rates for Turks are four times higher than those for ethnic Bulgarians.

Poverty is most severe among younger people. Although children 10 and below represent only
10 percent of the population, they make up almost 20 percent of the poor. Severe poverty is widespread
among both children and teenagers who bear almost 40 percent of the poverty share and one out of every
two children under the age of 5 in rural areas lives in poverty.

Poverty 
is not gender neutral. The preliminary profile provides a mixed picture on the
relationship between gender and poverty. According to the 2001 survey, there are no significant
differences in the poverty rates of individuals in male and female-headed households. However, the
national figures conceal significant urban-rural differences: poverty rates are higher among female-
headed households in urban areas, as compared to male-headed households, while they are lower in rural
areas. Particularly in urban areas other than Sofia, poverty rates among female-headed households are
double those for male-headed households (10.0 vs. 5.4%). Complementary analysis confirmed that

CAS Annex C
Page 3 of 5

consumption in households headed by single women was lower than for other two-person and other
single-headed households.

Ongoing research indicates that several categories of women are among the most vulnerable
social groups in Bulgaria. Especially vulnerable are women with young children, women with very low
levels of education, especially Roma women, and women living in remote rural communities. They are
marginalized and practically excluded from formal market structures.

The good news is that female access to education has improved. Net enrollment in basic
education which in Bulgaria is slightly higher for girls than boys, increased from 92.31 in 1997 to 93.89
percent in 2001. The gender gap in secondary education has narrowed significantly. Female net
enrollment rose sharply from 67 percent in 1997 to 76 percent in 2001, close to the male net enrollment
rate of 78 percent.

Education matters. Consistent with previous studies, results from the 2001 survey highlight a
close inverse relationship betveen poverty and educational attainment. Education provides the most
effective insurance against poverty. Poverty rates for individuals with university or higher education are
significantly 
less, at 3 percent, than those with basic or secondary education, 46 and 26 percent
respectively. Poverty rates are also highest among younger, less educated individuals: almost two-thirds
of those between 18-21 with primary education or less are poor.

There is some evidence of declining educational attainment, particularly among tlle poor and
ethnic minorities. Precisely because education 
is an effective 
tool to lift people out of poverty,
developments concerning access to education for poor children over the last 4 years are worrisome. The
household survey data for 1997 and 2001 
indicate that while enrollments in basic education have
increased slightly for the country at large, enrollment rates for poor children have fallen ten percentage
points from 84 percent in 1997 to 74 percent in 2001. In some Roma neighborhoods, there are reports of
children not attending school. The Turkish minority may also be affected. For example in Kurdjali, a
region with a high percentage of ethnic Turks, enrollment rates of 76 percent are substantially lower than
the national average of 95.5 percent.6 The trend in secondary education is even worse, with a nation-wide
decline of about 26 percentage points in the net enrollment of the poor from 60 percent in 1997 to 34
percent in 2001.

Existing evidence suggests that social exclusion, economic hardship -
including increasing
formal and informal costs of education to households -- unemployment, low quality of schools in poor
areas and low demand for education among certain groups are causing an increasing number of children
to drop out of schools. These factors also contribute to increase in the number of street children (the exact
number is unknown, but is thought to be between 3,000 and 5,000) , as well as those who end up in
institutions (estimated at some :5,000).

Health indicators have shown little improvement and have sometimes deteriorated over the
transition period. Life expectancy at birth, which increased in the 1980s has fallen slightly through the
last decade to 72 in 1997. The incidence of new cases of tuberculosis increased steadily throughout the
decade from 25.9 new cases per 100,000 people in 1990 to 49.9 in 1998. The incidence of hepatitis in
Bulgaria, which stands at 95 cases per 100,000 people in 1998, while at similar levels to Eastem
European countries, remains four to five times higher than that in Central European transition economies.

6 Based on administrative data.

CAS Annex C
Page 4 of 5

And immunization coverage 7 , which was virtually universal at the beginning of the transition, had fallen
to 95 percent by 1999.

An active dialogue on poverty issues is ongoing withl the objective of mainstreaming poverty
reduction into the overall Government economic and social policies. 
In 2000-01, the previous
government and its development partners engaged in an active dialogue on poverty reduction. In January
2000 the Bank hosted a high level poverty retreat on "Mainstreaming Social Development and Poverty
Reduction" under the leadership of the Prime Minister. The retreat was attended by much of the cabinet,
and key donors including the IMF, EU and UNDP. At the retreat, the government expressed 
its
commitment to building capacity for on-going poverty monitoring, and requested Bank assistance for
developing this capacity and updating the analysis of the 1999 poverty assessment. An update of the
poverty profile was prepared last summer. Its preliminary results, were presented to the Council of
Ministers in December 2001, and are at the center of the proposed strategy.

Poverty monitoring needs to be strengtlhened Despite the increased level of activity related to
poverty, actual monitoring capacity in Bulgaria remains weak. The Bank supported the implementation of
a third Bulgarian Integrated Household Survey (BIHS) in April-June 2001 to update measures of living
standards and poverty. Previous rounds of the survey were conducted in 1995 and 1997, and formed the
basis for the 1999 poverty assessment. These surveys are a valuable instrument for analyzing poverty and
living standards, and it will be important for the government to establish its own capacity for poverty
monitoring within the government.

The National Statistical Institute (NSI) conducts monthly Household Budget Surveys (HBS).
While the HBS 
is currently 
the only source of updated 
information on household 
income and
expenditures 
in the country, and is widely used for poverty estimates, it suffers from a number of
methodological flaws. Because the main objective of the HBS is not to measure poverty and inequality,
the information it collects is incomplete and insufficient for constructing a full consumption aggregate,
among other deficiencies. Over the last 4 years, the HBS proved ineffective 
in monitoring poverty
developments.

In order to ensure long-term capacity to monitor poverty within Bulgaria, the Bank and the
government are collaborating to institutionalize poverty monitoring capacity through the implementation
of regular Living Standards Measurement Surveys (LSMS) and improvements to the fiBS methodology.
A new IDF Grant for Poverly Monitoring, Evaluation and Policy Design (FY02) to support these
activities was signed by the Government in December 2001. A central focus of the grant is be to create
capacity within the NSI, MOLSP and other relevant government bodies for policy assessment of the
incidence of government programs and their effects on income distribution, assets and living standards.

Steps have been taken to reduce poverty, integrate ethlnic minorities into mainstream Bulgarian
society, and address the large range of problems poor and vulnerable children face. In 1999 the
Government signed a Framework Agreement on the Integration of Roma in Bulgarian society and
established a National Council on Ethnic and Demographic Issues. It implemented a Regional Initiatives
Fund (RIF) project with assistance from the Bank, UNDP, and USAID which pioneers community-driven
development in the poorest municipalities and the development of active labor market programs. A large
share of the beneficiaries of this program were ethnic minorities. Despite this progress, a significant
agenda remains to improve integration of minorities within society.

In November 2000, thte Government announced an important Strategy on Child Welfare. Its
implementation, which targets government institutions, ethnic minorities, parents as well as the children

7As measured by the proportion of children under 2 immunized against DPT.

CAS Annex C
Page 5 of 5

themselves has gained support from the EC, the UK, the Government of Japan and the World Bank, Its
goal 
is to 
improve 
the welf'are of street children (60 to 80 percent of which are Roma) and
institutionalized children, through de-institutionalization, the protection of children's rights by developing
new institutions and policies, social integration of children in high-risk communities, the prevention of
child abandonment, and services to help vulnerable children grow into responsible citizens. A key feature
of the strategy is the extensive involvement of the communities in the different programs including
attracting ethnic community staff in the social services provision programs. The new government has
given its full support to the strategy and has requested support from the Bank and other donors for its
implementation through a Social Investment Employment Promotion (SIEP) Project.

CAS Annex D
Page I of 4

Bulgaria

CAS Consultation - Main Findings

The process

As the drafting of the CAS advanced in early 2001, members of the Country Team met a variety
of local officials, representatives of NGOs, members of the private sector, business associations, civic
groups, the general public, as well as representatives of the international donor community stationed in
Bulgaria, in order to discuss a wide range of issues related to the country's development challenges and
the proposed Country Assistance Strategy (CAS). Nine "town meetings" were held throughout Bulgaria, 8
which were attended by over five hundred participants. Additional consultations on strategy were held
with the EC in Brussels, 
in order to coordinate assistance to be provided for advancing Bulgaria's
compliance with the acquis communautairs requirements. 
In order to enrich the feedback from the
public at large, the Bank created the Bulgaria CAS website, which proved to be a useful tool for
disseminating the CAS, as it has been visited by more than 2,500 interested individuals and organizations.

Following the in-country consultations with stake holders, the Bank shared a revised draft of the
CAS with the newly formed Government in July 2001 and had discussions with the new decision makers
about the country's development challenges and structural reform priorities. These discussions were led
by the Country Director and involved the highest Government officials. Comments received from the
Government reflected full agreement with the Bank on what are the highest priority country issues at this
time and how they might be tackled over the medium-term. Comments also shed light on how the
Government saw the Bank's comparative advantage for supporting urgent reform measures and public
sector programs that best complement private sector interventions and provide for effective social sector
services.

Comments on which there is lull agreement and/or are reflected in the CAS

Comments with which the Bank is in full agreement and/or which are reflected in the CAS were
raised in a number of areas as follows:

Decentralization/munic ipalfinance

* Municipalities neecl to find a viable path between available levels of funding from the central
government and local financial resources on the one hand, and the cost of functional roles and
responsibilities assigned to local governments. There is a desire by local administrations to
secure stronger and more direct relations with the Bank, in order to work on issues of
funding, administration, staff motivation, and municipal development plans. The Bank was
also encouraged to build up a working relationship with the National Association of
Municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria (NAMRB). Greater involvement of the municipal
governments, local stake holders and NGOs has been suggested for more efficient monitoring
of projects and their funding.

* Municipalities seek alternative sources of financing to complement scarce domestic/local
funding of their programs. Of particular concern was how to access IFC finance; how to
apply for project support from the Global Environment Fund - especially for urgent clean-up
of hazardous waste: and how to secure Social Investment Fund.

8 Including the towns of Rousse, Veliko, Tumovo, Sandanski, Blagoevgrad, Varna, Dobrich, Vidin and Plovdiv.

CAS Annex D
Page 2 of 4

Challenge of high unemploynment

High levels of unemployment are a cause for serious concern. Job creation, especially for people
with lower level of education or limited skills, has been a prevalent concern in town meetings.
UNDP supported the idea of focusing on the implementation of cost-effective and active labor
market programs, in order to create temporary jobs and improve the country's human capital
stock. The "Beautiful Bulgaria" program, an ongoing UNDP supported labor-intensive project in
secondary cities, has been suggested as an effective model for combating unemployment.
However, it was concluded that further research was necessary to locate areas of insufficient
labor supply and to design training programs.

HIV/AIiDS Prevention and Weak Social Safety Net

* UNDP suggested -
in r esponse to a Bank initiative - to collaborate with the Bank on HIV/AIDS
issues in Bulgaria, so as to help build capacity for increasing awareness and stepped up
prevention.

* There was a sentiment that more should be done with Bank assistance to strengthen the social
safety net, including more attention to issues related to the welfare of pensioners and children.

* Pensioners need to be assured of adequate pension levels, equitable financing schemes for same,
and adequate social services need to be targeted for them.

* Both government programs and related Bank assistance in the above areas need to be based on
adequate outreach efforts, so as to ensure that the rural poor receives sufficient social assistance
to minimize poverty pockets of high intensity.

Support for Small and medium Sized Enterprises (SMEs)

* There is a perception that the Bank's assistance did not reach the regions, and many SMEs were
denied access to financing, because there was too much red tape. FIAS recommendations for
removing administrative barriers provide for a comprehensive reform program. Bulgarian banks
on their own were reOuctant to extend credit to SMEs, and the Bank should play a role in
improving access to credit through financing schemes that could support SMEs as well as the
start-up of new business.

* The UNDP encouraged the Bank to assist in setting up business centers/business incubators,
providing advice to SMEs as well as micro-enterprises, and helping formulate a nation wide
credit/leasing policy and the related legislation and institutional arrangements.

Agriculture

* Fragmentation of land and property rights were brought up by several palticipants in town
meetings as issues requiring attention and an adequate policy response. There was concern that
modernization of agriculture would, in the absence of policy measures in these areas, not be
effective.

* The Bank was also encouraged to provide technical assistance for the formation of farmers
associations, in order to address issues in irrigation and to improve management/operation of
assets.

CAS Annex D
Page 3 of 4

* As for SMEs, credit lines from the Bank were also recommended for agriculture and food
processing industries.

Environment and Water Treatment

* Two main topics came up during consultations; first, the need for cleaning up coastal areas and
rivers, and, second, given that Bulgaria lies in a seismic zone and that Turkcey experienced a
major earthquake recently, the need for preventive measures and the strengthening of buildings
and large structures. Bank assistance would be welcome in both areas.

Private Sector Development

* Participants stressed the need for restructuring district heating companies, coal mines and the
railways.

Comments On Which Agreenment Could Not Be Reached With Stake Holders

Comments received in the areas below could not be reconciled with the Bank's assessment of the
issues involved. Reasons are shown below.

Social Sector Services cnd Emigration

* The Bank's evaluation in the CAS of the outcomes of education and health reforms was termed as
too "harsh". In respect of education, participants disagreed with the Bank view that higher class
size would lower costs without compromising quality. As regards the health sector, people who
were laid off from the pre-hospital service assistance areas needed to be retrained and integrated
into the health sector and medical technology needed to be improved to bring it up to par with EU
member countries.

* Efficiency concerns cannot be left out from sector evaluations, given Bulgaria's resource
constraints under a fiscally viable spending envelope over the medium-term. Therefore,
student/teacher ratios cannot be ignored, and costly technology cannot be recommended for
widespread adoption without first reviewing the cost effectiveness of proposed investments in
technology.

Infrastructure

* 

It was a frequent comiment that infrastructure projects were not being supported by the Bank
sufficiently, yet Bulgaria needed further substantial investments in these areas. Representatives
of coastal municipalities viewed marine transportation as needing more investment, in addition to
the more common infrastructure areas of land transport and water supply.

* The Bank took the lead in assisting Bulgaria both through lending and non-lending services to put
in place a policy environment that ensures efficient use of resources for infrastructure investment
and attracts private investors. 
In the framework of donor coordination, the Bank indicated its
approach to other donors, thus encouraging a division of labor that allowed EBRD and EIB to
follow their institutional mandates and lend for infrastructure investments.

CAS Annex D
Page 4 of 4

Private Sector Development

* To manage assets efficiently after privatization, some participants suggested that a specialized
agency should be estab lished for the purpose.

* To promote post-privatization efficiency and shareholders' rights, the Bank rec;ommends that the
quality of the outcome of privatization must be safeguarded by insisting on adequate procedures
that can ensure competition and involvement of bona fide strategic investors who can provide
technical and management know-how.

