d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

Report No: 24621-VN

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

VIETNAM

September 16, 2002

Vietnam Country Management Unit
East Asia and the Pacific Region

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Currency Equivalents
Currency Unit = Dong (D)
US$1.00 = D15,260 (July 2, 2002)

Fiscal Year
January I - December 31

CAS Discussions
Full CAS (IDA/R98-135[IFC/R98-199] discussed on September 22, 1998)
CAS Progress Report (IDA/R2000-66[IFC/R2000-76] discussed on May 30, 2000)
CAS Progress Report (IDA/R2001-0160 discussed on October 25, 2001)

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

ADB 
ASEAN 
CAE 
CDF 
CFAA 
CPAR 
CPIA 
CPRGS 
EFA 
GMS 
GSO 
HCMC 
HIPC 
JBIC 
JGDGF 
LNA 
NCFAW 
MARD 
MDGs 
MOLISA 
MPDF 
MPI 
MTEF 
M&E 
ODA 
OED 
PAR 
PER 
PHRD 
PPA 
PRGF 
PRSC 
PRSTF 
QAG 
SEDS 
SOE 
SME 
SWAp 
VDIC 
VLSS 
WBI 

Asian Development Bank
Association of South East Asian Nations
Country Assistance Evaluation
Comprehensive Development Framework
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy
Education for All
Greater Mekong Sub-region
Government Statistics Office
Ho Chi Minh City
Highly-Indebted Poor Country
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
Joint-Government Donor Gender Framework
Legal Needs Assessment
National Commission for the Advancement of Women
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Millennium Development Goals
Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs
Mekong Project Development Facility
Ministry of Planning and Investment
Medium-term Expenditure Framework
Monitoring and Evaluation
Official Development Assistance
Operations Evaluation Department
Public Administration Reform
Public Expenditure Review
Policy and Human Resource Development
Participatory Poverty Assessment
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategies Trust Fund
Quality Assurance Group
Socio-Economic Development Strategy
State Owned Enterprise
Small and Medium Enterprise
Sector Wide Approach
Vietnam Development Information Center
Vietnam Living Standards Surveys
World Bank Institute

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Task Team Leader: 

IDA 
Jemal-ud-din Kassum 
Andrew Steer 
Nisha Agrawal 

-

Tl(c 

-_

Ass 
3aa
Ad 
Javed ua; 
DceXas K 

alj

VIETNAM: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................

I. SOCIAL, ECONONIC AND POLITICAL CONTEXT 
............................ 
A. Social and Economic Developments .
................................................................ 
B. Political Developments ................................................................. 
C. Medium-term Economic Outlook ....................................... 
........................... 
D. External Debt Sustainability ...................... 
........................................... 

II. VIETNAM'S COMPREHENSIVE POVERTY REDUCTION AND
GROWTH STRATEGY ................................................................. 

i

1
1
4
5
5

6

III. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LAST CAS .............................................................. 
A. What Worked Well ................................................................. 
B. What Worked Less Well ................................................................ 
C. OED and QAG Reviews ................................................................. 
D. OEG's IFC Country Impact Review .....................................................

9
9
10
10
1
1........... 

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM ................................................................ 
A. Partnerships and Donor Coordination ................................................................ 
B. Bank Group Activities ................................................................ 
C. Thematic Presentation of the Program ................................................................ 
1. Supporting the Transition Towards a Market-oriented Economy ........... 
............. 
2. Enhancing Equitable, Socially Inclusive and Sustainable Development ......... 
..... 

3. Promoting Good Governance ......................................................................... 

D. Sectoral Issues in the Program ................................................................ 
E. Role of IFC and MIGA ................................................................. 
F. Portfolio Management and Fiduciary Issues .............................................................. 
G. Core Monitoring and Evaluation .............................. 
................................... 
H. Lending Scenarios and Triggers .............................. 
................................... 

V. MANAGING RISKS ................................................................ 

12
12
14
17
17
20

25

26
26
29
31
32

35

TEXT FIGURES

Figure 1 Macroeconomic Indicators ........................... 
...................................... 
Figure 2 Vietnam's Policy and Institutional Indicators .................................. 
................... 

2
3

TEXT TABLES

Table 1 Vietnam Development Goals in the CPRGS 
Table 2 
Core Diagnostic Economic and Sector Work .15
Table 3 
IDA Lending Program (FYE03-FY06). 
Table 4 
Bank Portfolio Indicators .30
Table 5 Core CAS Monitoring Benchmarks .32
Table 6 
Size of Overall Bank Program and Lending Scenarios .33
Table 7 
Triggers for High case Lending .34

.8

TEXT BOXES

16

Box 1 
Box 2 
Box 3 
Box 4 

Strengths of the CPRGS and Challenges Facing its Implementation ................. 
Core Labor Standards in Vietnam ................................................................ 
Vietnam's Country Gender Assessment and World Bank Interventions ............ 
Key Sectoral Issues for the CAS ................................................................ 
.

7
20
23
27

Annex A - Economic Data and Policies

Annex Al: Vietnam at a glance
Annex A2: Vietnam: Key Economic Indicators - Change from the last CAS
Annex A3: Vietnam: Key Economic Indicators, 1997-2005
Annex A4: Vietnam: Key Exposure Indicators, 1997-2005
Annex A5: Vietnam: Social Indicators
Annex A6: A Chronology of Structural Reform, 1998-2002

Annex B - World Bank Group - Current Portfolio

Annex BI: IDA Credits in the Operations Portfolio
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B4: Vietnam - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002

Annex C - AAA and Partnerships

Annex C1: Vietnam: Summary of Non-Lending Services
Annex C2: The CDF Matrix for Vietnam
Annex C3: Vietnam: Trust Funds, GEF and Co-financing operations

Annex D - Putting it Together

Annex Dl: The Program Matrix
Annex D2: CAS Summary of Development Priorities

VIETNAM

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Executive Summary

i. 
Social, Economic and Political Context. Vietnam's economy doubled in size during the
1 990s, and the rate of poverty was halved from around 70 percent to 35 percent. Across a broad
front there were widespread and visible improvements in the lives of Vietnamese citizens. The East
Asian crisis threatened this progress towards the end of the decade, and exposed a number of serious
structural weaknesses in the economy. The Authorities responded by carefully managing the macro-
economy, and beginning a lengthy and deliberate process to design and build political consensus for
a major structural reform program. While the impacts of the accelerated reform momentum are only
beginning, signs are encouraging, especially in the private sector, where the number and
employment of registered domestic enterprises has doubled since early 2000.

ii. 
The period of the last CAS (FY99-02) has therefore been challenging but productive. Growth
has been maintained at reasonable levels (among the highest in the region), and poverty has
continued to decline, albeit at more modest rates, even during the crisis period. While
implementation of the reform program is now well underway, it will take at least another three-to-
five years of implementation before Vietnam's policy and institutional environment catches up with
that of the highest-performing IDA countries.

iii. 
The Ninth Party Congress, held in March 2001, endorsed a ten-year Socio-Economic
Development Strategy for 2001-2010. This lays out a path of transition towards a "market economy
with socialist orientation". It commits Vietnam to full openness to the global economy over the
coming decade, and the creation of a level playing field between state and private sectors. It
emphasizes that the transition should be "pro-poor", and notes that this will require heavier
investment in rural and lagging regions, and a more gradual reform implementation than is often
recommended by international advisors. It gives strong emphasis to poverty reduction and social
equity, and to a more modem system of governance.

iv. 
Vietnam's CPRGS -- and World Bank Group Support. The Government's
Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (CPRGS, as the PRSP in Vietnam is
called), translates the vision laid out in Vietnam's Ten-Year Strategy into concrete public actions. It
uses localized Millennium Development Goals to develop a system of indicators to monitor and
evaluate progress in attaining its goals and targets. The CPRGS sets out three broad objectives,
which in turn are the organizing principles of the CAS:

(i) High growth through a transition to a market economy;
(ii) An equitable, socially inclusive, and sustainable pattern of growth; and
(iii) Adoption of a modem public administration, legal and governance system.

v. 
The Bank Group will bring to bear all of its instruments of assistance to support these
themes, including analytical and advisory activities, IDA project support, IFC, Mekong Project

Development Facility (MPDF) and MIGA activities, a series of annual Poverty Reduction Support
Credits (PRSCs), and partnerships and ODA coordination. In each of the areas in which the Bank
Group plans support, agreements have been reached with Government and other donors to ensure
that duplication is avoided, synergy maximized and selectivity maintained. It is expected that annual
CPRGS monitoring reports would help guide discussions at Consultative Group meetings, and
would also provide an essential input to CAS Progress reports to the Bank's Executive Board.

vi. 
Support for Theme 1: Vietnam's transition to a market-economy. Support for this theme
will continue to be a central focus of the Bank Group's activities, with a shift in focus from "design"
to "implementation" of the policy reform agenda. The planned work will focus on financial sector
development; state enterprise reform; support for the emerging domestic private sector; corporate
governance; and private participation in infrastructure. IFC, MPDF and MIGA will expand their
work to improve the climate for f6reign and domestic investment. Virtually all IDA credits will
support policy, institutional and infrastructure support for Vietnam's ongoing transition, with annual
PRSCs playing an especially important role.

vii. 
Support for Theme 2: Enhancing Equitable, Inclusive and Sustainable Development.
The CPRGS lays out a six-fold agenda to address future challenges, and this will be supported by the
Bank Group. Priorities are: (i) narrowing the development gap of disadvantaged and lagging areas;
(ii) raising the living standards of ethnic minorities; (iii) realizing gender equality and the
advancement of women; (iv) making basic social services accessible and affordable for the poor; (v)
mitigating the impact of natural disasters and other shocks; and (vi) enhancing environmental
sustainability. These concerns will be thrust throughout the Bank Group portfolio. In addition, some
targeted activities - such as a major Natural Disaster Management project - will be initiated.

viii. 
Support for Theme 3: Promoting Good Governance. Within this broad field, the Bank
Group will give focus its support to improving public financial management, information and
transparency, and to legal development. Major technical assistance will be provided in each of these
areas, and IDA projects will be provided in Public Financial Management, e-Governance, and, if
requested, Legal Development. Partnerships are key to making progress in the area of governance.
For example, in public administration and civil service reform, the Bank would expect to support the
coordinated effort of ADB, UNDP, and a number of bilateral donors, while in public financial
management the Bank would play the leading role among donors. The Bank Group will continue to
expand its efforts to help address corruption in Vietnam, directly within the Bank Group's own
portfolio, and through support to the Government for addressing the issue systematically.

ix. 
Partnerships and a New Way of Doing Business. Since Vietnam began the
Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) pilot program in 1999, the Bank Group has sought
to model a new way of doing business. A number of independent assessments are finding highly
positive results, although of course there have also been start-up costs, and the real gains are only
beginning. There is now a systematic dialog underway between the government, donors, and
(increasingly) NGOs in many sectors, as well as the "umbrella" framework provided by the
CPRGS. This enables more coherence of programs, better use of resources, and mutual assistance in
supporting Vietnam's goals. The Consultative Group, which the Bank co-chairs with the
Government, plays an important role in this regard, and efforts will be maintained to ensure that it

iii

remains relevant and useful. The Bank is also currently working with other major lending
institutions (ADB and JBIC) and the Govermment to harmonize procedures.

x. 
The Scale of Bank Group Activities in Vietnam. The overall lending program is presented
below. The scale of the program is differentiated according to the pace of progress on the
Government's policy and institutional agenda, and on progress in project preparation and
implementation. The IDA program ranges from less than $300 million in the Low case to about
$760 million in the High case, with a Base case of $580 million per year. The IFC and MIGA
programs are also expected to grow significantly in the coming years in support of, and in response
to, the improving investment climate.

Size of Overall Bank Program and Lending Scenarios

Lending Scenarios 

Proposed Annual IDA Lending 
(Sm) 

Average
Lending

)

Low case: Limited implementation of the 
CPRGS; no progress on portfolio management.
Base case: Steady (rather than rapid) 
implementation of the CPRGS; modest
progress on project preparation and
implementation

High case: Firm implementation of the 
CPRGS; good progress on project preparation

and implementation.

FY03 
270 

________ 
________($m 

FY04 
370 

FY05 
250 

FY06 
280 

FY03-06
293

625 

570 

550 

580 

581

775 

740 

750 

780 

761

xi. 
In FY01 and 02, lending levels to Vietnam, at $620 million and $593 million, respectively,
were only slightly above the Base case levels, despite the fact that the policy environment had
improved to the High case. This is because the Government and the Bank agreed that high standards
should be demanded of each project, and there was inadequate progress (on both sides) in preparing
high quality projects according to a tight schedule.

xii. 
The Bank Portfolio. IDA lending resumed in FY94, and today Vietnam has become the
largest IDA-only borrower. Portfolio performance has been highly satisfactory on outcomes, but
less so on elapsed time and disbursement. Portfolio management over the next few years will focus
on improving the pace of implementation while retaining sound portfolio quality. The recently
completed Public Expenditure Review (PER), Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA) and the Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR), have led to important initiatives
for change.

xiii. Managing Risks. Inadequate progress on governance issues, and inadequate fiduciary

controls - especially for decentralized projects -- are key risks which the Bank will monitor and

address.

iv

xiv. 

Suggested Items for Board Discussion.

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

Does the CAS adequately support the Government's CPRGS?
Is the planned series of annual PRSCs appropriate?
Is the Bank's planned engagement in governance issues appropriate?

Memorandum of the President of the
International Development Association and
The International Finance Corporation
To the Executive Directors
On a Country Assistance Strategy
For the Socialist Republic of Vietnam

1. 
Vietnam's last full Country Assistance Strategy, covering FY99-02, was discussed at the
Board in September 1998. Progress reports were discussed by the Board in May 2000 and
October 2001. A full CAS was planned for Board discussion in the last quarter of CY2001, but
held back to await the completion of the Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth
Strategy (CPRGS, as the PRSP is called in Vietnam), in order to enable alignment of the Bank
Group program to Vietnam's poverty reduction strategy. The CPRGS was discussed at the Board
on July 2, 2002 (Report Number 24271), and this CAS document incorporates guidance provided
by the Board on that occasion.

I. SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL CONTEXT

A. Social and Economic Developments

2. 
Vietnam's successes in the 1990s are well known. The real economy doubled in size
during the decade, while the rate of poverty was halved from 70 percent to around 35 percent.
Savings rates rose six-fold to around 25 percent of GDP, exports rose by an average of 25
percent per year, and Vietnam moved from a food deficit nation to become the second largest
exporter of rice. Social indicators improved markedly and across a broad front there were
widespread and visible improvements in the lives of Vietnamese citizens.

3. 
The period of the last CAS has been difficult but productive. While not enjoying the
spectacular success of the previous years, Vietnam managed its economy prudently, achieved
solid growth and poverty reduction even during the worst impacts of the East Asian recession,
and began to take crucial steps to address structural impediments to long term high quality
growth.

4. 
Vietnam was highly vulnerable to the crisis in East Asia, since more than two-thirds
of foreign investment inflows and export earnings come from the region. Foreign direct
investment fell from its (unsustainably) high levels of over $2 billion each year (equivalent to 10
percent of GDP) in 1995-1997 to $800 million each year in 1998-2000. Export growth fell from
25 percent per year in 1990-1997 to 2 percent in 1998, (before rebounding to 23% and 25% in
1999 and 2000 respectively). Government reacted to this challenge by adopting a highly cautious
macroeconomic policy to avoid the possibility of a crisis. As this risk diminished, a more
expansionary stance in 1999 and 2000 helped restore demand, especially in rural areas. Figure 1
shows the evolution of key macroeconomic indicators during this period.

2

Figure 1: Macroeconomic Indicators

GDP Growth Rate (%) 
and Inflation (annual average %) 

l

Disbursed FDI & ODA

8.0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~8
/ 
$; i4 
5 
-5.5# 

.

.t ,4js 

; 

,.3 

2,000

1,500

% 

10.0 

6.0 

60 0

4.0 

2.0 

.~1,000 

-

' 

0.0 

-2.0 

-4.0 

-

500- 

-

.

-

:

.

0 

-

a. ss se M7 

195 1999 2000 2001 2002
(e.1) 
(p.1.).

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000/r 

2001/e

| 

_ GDP growth rate% -+-Inflation (annual avg. %)J 

uDisbursed ODA 

Disbursed FDI

% 

35 

Investment and National Savings 

/°% of gm
.4.0 
.

, 

° 

-

is cal Deficit (% of GOP)

*~~~~~~~2 
30~~~~~1

i 

ii 

1. 

20~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

26~~2

2,3"X>P

,1~~~~~~~~~ 

1~~~~.0 --

.

15 

10 

0.0

1997 

1998 

1999 

20001r 

20011e 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000/r 

2001 /a

* investment 

E3 National savings 

l 

Fiscal Deficit before grants 0 Fiscal Deficit after grants

5. 
The slowdown revealed weaknesses, and prompted policy reform. As the crisis shed
light on deep-seated distortions and inefficiencies in the economy, the Authorities began a
lengthy and deliberate process to design and build political consensus for a major structural
reform program. The period 1999-2001 witnessed an energetic (albeit, behind-the-scenes)
process of analytical work, detailed design and broad consultation of reform programs covering
banking and state enterprise reform, trade liberalization, public expenditure management, and
policies for private sector development. This in turn has led to a series of new policy
announcements over the past 18 months, supported by the Bank and the IMF, through a PRSC
and a PRGF respectively. While this agreement took longer to reach than had been hoped, the
extra time taken enabled a degree of ownership and consensus that would not have been possible
had it been prepared more rapidly. Annex A6 provides a detailed chronology of policy changes
in each of the major areas of structural reform over the past four years.

6. 
The policy and institutional environment has begun to improve significantly...
Figure 2, based upon Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) ratings, shows in

3

Figure 2: Vietnam's Policy and Institutional Indicators

A. Improvements in Policy Stance, 1998-2002

1. Macro Balances 
20. Transparency & Accountabllty 
2. Fiscal
IO. Public AdministraUon 
3. External Debt

X

A' 

18. Revenue Mobilization 

17. Budget Management 

16. Property Rights & Govemance 

15. Poverty Analysis 

14. SocialProtection 

4. Development Program

5. Trade & FX

6. Financial Stability

7. Banking Efficiency

8. Private Sector Environment

1 
13. Building HR 
12. Equity of Resource Us 

\~~~~~~~~~~ 

11. Gender 

Markets
ronment

~ 

~ 

|-Vietnam 2001 

-Vietnam 

1998 

Maximum 

|

B. Comparison with Average IDA Countries

el 

20. Transparency & Accountability 
19. Public Administration 

1. Macro Balances 

2 Fiscal
3. Extemal Debt

4

18. Revenue Mobilization 

17. Budget Management 

4, Development Program

5.Trade&FX

16. Property Rights & Govemance 

'i -

----- 

8. 
6- Financial Stability

15. PovertyAnalysis 

-

7. Banking Efficiency

14. Social Protection 

8. Private Sector Environment

t ., 

N%o, 

13. Building HR9. 
12. Equity of Resource use 

Markets
10 Environment

11. Gender. 

q -

_ 

-Vietnam 2001 

-Average IDA 

Maximum

4

stylized form policy progress over the 1998-2002 period, as well as a comparison with the
average for IDA countries. The figures show strong macro management throughout the period.
Structural policies have improved, but because most reforms are only now beginning to be
implemented, Vietnam still scores only average, and has a very large unfinished implementation
agenda. Policies for social inclusion are relatively strong, but the capacity to implement these
good policies remains variable. Finally, governance indicators remain rather weak, and have only
recently received a priority position on the Government's agenda.

7. 
... Prompting a surge in domestic private sector activity. While the impacts of the
accelerated reform momentum are only beginning, there are already some encouraging signs,
especially in the response of the private sector. Since the new Enterprise Law came into effect in
January 2000, the number of domestic enterprises has more than doubled - from less than 30,000
to more than 60,000. Employment in formal-sector SMEs also appears to have doubled,
domestic private investment has risen by 3 percent of GDP, and the share of formal credit going
to the non-state sector has risen to an all-time high of over 60 percent. The response of the
foreign private sector has been slower, but inflows in 2002 are expected to be well over $1
billion, and may exceed ODA inflows for the first time since 1997 (Figure 1 above).

8. 
Improvements in living standards continued - even during the recession. New data -
derived from the participatory consultations with poor communities associated with the CPRGS
preparation - show a continuation of the improvements in living standards during the 1998-2002
period, contrary to earlier expectations. This is encouraging since it implies that even the much
lower growth rates of 4 to 5 percent are reaching the poor. An exception was found in some inner
city areas, where unregistered migrants reported greater difficulties than in 1998. A new
nationwide household survey is being conducted in 2002 which will provide quantitative
estimates of the gains in poverty reduction of the last three years.

B. Political Developments

9. 
A New Vision for 2010. The Ninth Party Congress, held in March 2001, endorsed a ten-
year Socio-Economic Development Strategy covering the 2001-2010 period. This lays out a path
of transition towards a "market economy with socialist orientation". It commits Vietnam to full
openness to the global economy over the coming decade, and the creation of a level playing field
between state and private sectors. It emphasizes that the transition should be "pro-poor", and
notes that this will require heavier investment in rural and lagging regions, and a more gradual
reform implementation than is often recommended by the international community. It gives
strong emphasis to poverty reduction and social equity, and a more modern system of
governance.

10. 
New Political Leadership. The Congress also elected new leadership. An indication of
the thinking of the new leadership was given at a special meeting of the Central Committee of
the Party in March 2002 on the future role of the private sector. The communique endorsed the
private sector more fully than ever before, noting that attitudes towards private enterprise and
profit need to be changed, SMEs need to be proactively given access to credit, land, information
and other services, and noting the role of the Government in promoting a more pro-private sector
environment. In Vietnam's political cycle, National Assembly elections occur a year after the

5

Congress and these were held on May 19, 2002. A number of important changes in the cabinet
are being made in the summer of 2002, and the new leadership continues to be committed to
reform across a broad front in the coming years.

C. Medium-term Economic Outlook

11. 
The economic outlook for Vietnam continues to improve. The adoption and
implementation of a phased program of specific reform measures in early 2001 -- comprising
trade liberalization, private sector development, banking and enterprise reform, and public
expenditure management, together with the Government's announcement of a master-plan on
Public Administration Reform for 2001-2005 and a comprehensive Legal Needs Assessment--
has improved business sentiment and put Vietnam on a healthier medium-term growth trajectory.

12. 
The recent slowdown in key trading partners has posed short term difficulties.
Exports grew by only 4 percent in 2001 and have not yet recovered in 2002. While agricultural
export volumes rose by 18 percent in 2001, agricultural export prices fell by 23 percent. The
challenge is to continue implementing the ambitious reform agenda expeditiously to sustain
investor confidence and promote faster growth and poverty reduction. From 2003 onwards,
Vietnam is expected to reap the full benefits of the reforms that are being implemented, with
annual growth expected to reach or exceed 7 percent, supported by annual export growth rates of
10-15 percent.

13. 
Fiscal policy is expected to remain prudent, with a modest fiscal deficit of around 2.5
percent before on-lending. This will permit a modest increase budgetary spending to enable firm
progress on the structural reform agenda, and a good supply response. Under the IMF supported
program, monetary policy is expected to remain sound to keep inflation in check. The current
account is expected to move from a small surplus to a slight deficit, as imports of capital goods
increase, reflecting stronger investment growth. This deficit will be largely financed by inflows
of FDI and concessional funds. This scenario is, of course, contingent on continued firm
implementation of the three-year reform agenda laid out in the CPRGS.

D. External Debt Sustainability

14. 
Debt management continues to improve. In 1998, a Brady-style debt reduction
agreement with its commercial bank creditors was completed, and in 2000, Vietnam completed a
rescheduling of its debt to the Russian Federation within the framework of the Paris Club -- the
last in a series of agreements designed to make the external debt sustainable. Accordingly,
Vietnam is no longer a HIPC country. It is current in all its debt service obligations, and the
projected debt service burden is sustainable. In 2001, debt service was equal to around 11
percent of exports of goods and services, and 7 percent of GDP, and could fall in the medium-
term depending on developments in commercial borrowing. Sensitivity analysis suggests that
even a significant drop in the projected export growth rate will not create major debt servicing
difficulties. Vietnam's stock of outstanding external debt totaled US$ 14.4 billion in 2001,
equivalent to 45 percent of GDP and 94 percent of export earnings. About four-fifths of this debt
is on concessional terms. Most of the remaining debt consists of those loans that accompany
foreign investment flows into the country.

6

15. 
Vietnam's sovereign risk ratings continue to improve. Assessments provided by
sources such as International Country Risk Guide, Euromoney, Moody's Investor Services, and
the Country Risk Classification of the OECD have shown systematic improvement over the past
three years. In the past few months new ratings have been assigned by Moody's, Standard &
Poors, and Fitch. Vietnam now stands in the same category as countries such as Brazil, Bulgaria,
Peru, and Russia. The ratings of Vietnam by various foreign rating agencies confirm an
improved perception of the investment climate.

IN. VItETNAM'S COMPREHENSIVE POVERTY REDUCTW[¢N AND- GROWTH
STRATEGY

16. 
The Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (CPRGS) seeks to translate
the vision laid out in Vietnam's ten-year Socio-Economic Development Strategy (SEDS) into
concrete measures and programs. The preparation of the CPRGS began in June 2001, with the
Ministry of Planning and Investment taking the lead in coordinating the inputs from a 56
member team from 18 different line ministries. It has been prepared in a highly participatory
way, based on consultations with poor people, with local government officials from all 61
provinces, mass organizations, NGOs, and the donor community.

17. 
The starting point of the C]PRGS is the recognition that, despite the gains of the last
decade, poverty remains widespread and deep. Almost thirty million people (around a third
of the population) still live in poverty, and Vietnam's per capita income (estimated at $410 in
2001) remains very low. Currently, around 25 million people, accounting for 60 percent of the
labor force, are underemployed in rural areas. And each year in the coming decade over a
million people will be added to the workforce. Further, many of the gains of the last decade
remain fragile, with millions still vulnerable to falling back into poverty. Sickness, death of a
family member, and natural calamities (flooding, loss of crop or livestock) remain ever present
threats. Ethnic minorities, women and unregistered migrants to urban areas remain especially
disadvantaged. Poverty continued to be largely a rural phenomenon, and the concern is that the
driving forces of the gains to date-increases in agricultural productivity and the growth of the
small services sector-cannot be expected to continue to deliver such impressive gains in the
future. Rapid growth of off-farm employment in rural and urban areas is essential.

18. 
Th1ree themes underpin the CPRGS and CAS. The CPRGS sets out three broad
objectives to drive the poverty strategy. And these in turn are the themes that will guide the CAS.

1. High growth throughn a transition to a manrket economy. This requires the firm
implementation of the structural reform agenda laid out by the Government.

2.. An equitable, socially inclusive, and sustainable pattern of growth. This requires
implementing appropriate sectoral and social policies and programs.

3. Adoption a modern public administration, Regal and governmance system. This in turn
will facilitate the design and implementation of the policies and programs necessary for
attaining the first two goals.

7

19. 
Assessment of the CPRGS. The CPRGS was the centerpiece of the mid-year
Consultative Group Meeting in May 2002. Donors, the private sector and NGOs all warmly
welcomed the Strategy as a major step forward, praising both its content and the process
involved in its preparation. Many donors stated their intention to align their own programs to the
CPRGS. The CPRGS was discussed at the Board of the World Bank on July 2, 2002 together
with the Joint Bank-Fund Staff Assessment (JSA). Box 1 lays out both the impressive strengths
of the CPRGS, and the constraints that Vietnam will need to overcome in its implementation.
The program laid out in the CAS, especially the advisory and technical assistance components,
are designed to assist in addressing these constraints. Many others donors have also indicated a
strong willingness to invest in capacity building to facilitate implementation. As an example, a
multi-donor Poverty Reduction Trust Fund will be used for building the capacity of the CPRGS
team and NGO involvement in implementation and monitoring and evaluation. And Denmark
will support the inter-ministerial working unit and the CPRGS secretariat.

Box 1: Strengths of the CPRGS and Challenges Facing its Implementation
The CPRGS has several strengths, both in substance and in the process guiding its preparation.
Irportant strengths include: (i) the active participation by-a wide range of stakeholders in te drafting
process; (ii) a ro6bust and comprehensive analysis of poverty which makes balanced use of quantitative
and qualitative evidence; (iii) the articulation of a growth-based strategy for poverty redu'ction with
policies covering macroeconomic, structural, and. sectoral areas; (iv) the attention given to improving
governance; (v) the identification of outcome targets addressing the national challenges and the
government's international commitments to the Millennium Development Goals (MDG); and (vi) an
attempt to prioritize public actions and to assess their resource implications.

The implementation of the CPRGS presents several challenges. First, the proposed establishment
of the inter-ministerial working unit and CPRGS secretariat is urgently needed to provide a strong
coordination function. Second, attention must be given-to involving all stakeholders in' the
implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of the strategy, including greater public access to data. Third,
there is a need to develop.concrete action plans detailing.the timing and costs of activities; this is:
particularly pressing for some of the proposed measures to improve governance. Fourth, sectoral
medium-tern expenditure framework. Fifth, aligning resource allocation decisions at the national and
provincial levels-to the desired outcomes will be important to place the proposed:i-ntetrventions in the
budget framework. Sixth, more work is needed to fully assess the. poverty.and social impact of the reform
strategy and the adequacy of safety nets.

programs need to'be more sharply prioritized and set withiiresource constraints and a'w'el'ldefined.

Source: Joint Staff AssessmentVof the CPRGS (page 3).

20. 
Localized Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). An important feature of the
CPRGS has been the use of localized MDGs to develop a system of indicators to monitor and
evaluate progress in implementation of the Strategy (Table 1). The Bank Group will work in
partnership with the Government and with donors and NGOs to help Vietnam attain these goals
and targets.

8
Table 1: Vietnam Develo ment Goals in the CPRGS

Goal 1: 'Reduce the percentageof poornd ungy h,ou,seholds 

''''-,.-'.:

Target 1: Reduce by 40% the proportion of people living below the international poverty line between 2001 and 2010
Target 2: Reduce by 75% the number of people living under the international food poverty line by 2010

Goal 2:'-Universalize educitio'n and improve education qual 

-=

Target 1: Increase the net enrolment in primary school to 97% in 2005 and to 99% in 2010
Target 2: Increase net enrolment rate in junior secondary school to 80% in 2005 and 90% by 2010
Target 3: Eliminate the gender gap in primary and secondary education by 2005, and the gap with ethnic minorities in 2010
Target 4: Increase literacy to 95% of under-40-year-old women by 2005 and 100% by 2010
Target 5: By 2010 have improved the quality of education and increase full-day schooling at primary level (exact target
depends on funding).

'Goa 3: Ensure gender equality-and women empowerment

Target 1: Increase the number of women in elective bodies at all levels
Target 2: Increase the participation of women in agencies and sectors [includes ministries, central agencies and
enterprises] at all levels by 3-5% in the next 10 years
Target 3: Ensure that the names of both husband and wife appears on the land-use right certificates by 2005
Target 4: Reduce the vulnerability of women to domestic violence

GoMa 

: Reduce child mortality, child maPnturitrMon and reduce the birth rate

Target 1: Reduce the infant mortality rate to 30 per 1000 live births by 2005 and 25 by 2010 and at a more rapid rate in
disadvantaged regions (see below)
Target 2: Reduce the under-5 mortality rate to 36 per 1000 live births by 2005 and 32 by 2010
Target 3: Reduce under five malnutrition to 25% by 2005 and 20% by 2010

GoaD 5: Improve maternal health

Target 1: Reduce the maternal mortality rate to 80 per 100,000 live births by 2005 and 70 by 2010 with particular attention
to disadvantaged areas

Goal 6: Reduce HIM/AIDS Infection and eradlicate other major diseases

Target 1: Slow the increase in the spread of HIV/AIDs by 2005 and halve the rate of increase by 2010

Goal 7: Ensure environmrenal sustainabiIi.,,

Target 1: Extend forest cover to 43% by 2010 (from 33% in 1999)
Target 2: Ensure that 60% of urban population has access to clean and safe water by 2005 and 85% in 2010. This should
be the case for 80% of urban people in 2005
Target 3: Ensure there are no slums and temporary houses in all towns and cities by 2010
Target 4: Ensure that all waste-water in towns and cities is treated by 2010
Target 5: Ensure that all solid waste is collected and disposed of safely in all towns and cities by 2010
Target 6: Air and water pollution must attain national standards by 2005

Goal 8: Reducing vulnerability

Target 1: Increase the average income of the lowest expenditure quintile to 140% of that in 2000 and 190% of that in 2010
Target 2: Reduce by half the rate of poor people falling back into poverty due to natural disasters and other risks by 2010

Goal 9: ImprovIng governance foo poverVy readcmion

Target 1: Effectively implement the Grass-roots Democracy Decree
Target 2: Ensure budget transparency
Target 3: Implement legal reform agenda

GoaD 10: Reducing ethnic inequal,.y

Target 1: Preserve and develop the reading and writing ability of ethnic languages
Target 2: Ensure entitlement of individual and collective land-use rights in ethnic minority and mountainous areas
Target 3: Increase the proportion of ethnic minority people in authority bodies at various levels

Goal d : Ensuring pvo=pqoo 

ini fastcouctlure deveolpment n

Target 1: Provide basic infrastructure to 80% of poor communes by 2005 and 100% by 2010
Target 2: Expand the national transmission grid to 900 poor commune centres by 2005

Source: Govt of Vietnam (2002). Comprehensive Poverty Reduction & Growth Strategy

9

III. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LAST CAS

21. 
Broadly satisfactory implementation of the last CAS. The last CAS, prepared when
the East Asian crisis was seriously threatening Vietnam, was built around the two themes of
restoring growth, and improving its quality. Good progress has been achieved on both counts,
although the pace of reform might have been quicker. Vietnam was decisive in restoring
macroeconomic stability during the crisis, and deliberate, rather than decisive, in addressing the
structural problems in the economy. The CAS also laid out a number of new directions for the
Bank, including a greater emphasis on poverty reduction and rural development. These have
been successfull-y achieved with, for example, the share of Bank resourccs allocated to rural
development rising from 27% in FY94-FY98 to 45% in FY99-FY02.

A. What Worked Well

* The Comprehensive Development Framework (CDP). The CDF pilot has significantly
changed the way the Bank Group is doing business in Vietnam. Most other donors and the
Government have been part of this move, and a number of independent assessments are
finding positive results. For example, 97% of respondents in a recent OED survey said there
had been significant improvement in the effectiveness of development partner relationships.
The participatory preparation of the CPRGS has marked an important culmination of the first
phase of the CDF pilot.

* Broad Commitment to the Reform Agenda. Vietnam has followed a reform strategy
different from some other countries during the Asian crisis. Rather than move quickly to the
announcement of a package of measures, it adopted a more gradual strategy of inclusion of
many stakeholders in the diagnosis and design of new policies. This approach, while
delaying the start of implementation, had the advantage of building a broad and strong
constituency for the task ahead. There is already evidence that this is paying off in the
implementation phase. The Bank and the IMF, which have enjoyed very productive
"enhanced collaboration" during this period, provided analytical and advisory support to this
process.

* Deeper focus on Poverty and Social Issues. The understanding of poverty in Vietnam has
improved remarkably over the past four years, and has changed from a targeted approach to
one where growth and structural reforms lie at the heart of the solution. Diagnostic work has
been undertaken drawing on quantitative information from the Vietnam Living Standards
Surveys (VLSS) and qualitative data from participatory poverty assessments (PPAs)
undertaken in partnership with several international and local NGOs. This diagnostic work
formed the basis for Vietnam's I-PRSP and its CPRGS.

* 

Introduction of Community-driven Development. Two new community-based projects
(Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction (FY02) and Community Based Rural Infrastructure
(FY01)) have been initiated that are using participatory techniques to decide on the use of
funds and are introducing transparency and accountability at local levels to support
initiatives, such as the Grassroots Democracy Decree, that aim to improve local governance.
A review of this approach will be undertaken in FY03, and this move towards

10

decentralization will be continued through several projects currently under preparation --
including Urban Upgrading (FY04), Rural Energy II (FY04), Rural Water and Sanitation
(FY05), and Poor Communes Infrastructure and Livelihoods (FY06). This will be
complemented by work to improve financial management and address fiduciary risks at the
local level.

B. What Worked Less Wefl

o Pace of Policy Reforms. While the slow and deliberate consensus approach to decision-
making in Vietnam has the advantage of creating a home-grown, fully-owned agenda for
reforms, it has implied delay in the pace of reforms. The Bank Group underestimated how
long it would take the Government to build consensus around a medium-term program of
reforms. As a result, for the first two years of the last CAS (FY99-00), the Bank provided
below Base-case lending (with new commitments of around $300 million each year), and the
IFC conducted relatively little new business. It was only in the last two years of the CAS
(FYO1-02) that the policy environment improved enough to justify policy-based lending.

o Pace of Governance Reforms. The Government has also been slow to prepare and adopt a
program of reforms for good governance. Here again, as in structural policy reforms, there is
a tradeoff between pace and ownership. The Govemment has now prepared a comprehensive
Legal Needs Assessment (LNA) and has adopted a Master Program for Public
Administration Reform (PAR) for 2001-2010. In some areas, such as improved transparency
and management of public finances, real progress has already been made, but in other areas -
such as civil service reform and anti-corruption - plans still need to be acted upon.

O Affordability of Basic Social Services. Despite very good progress in poverty reduction and
social development, the poor still have inadequate access to key social services, due to high
cost recovery. During the consultations of the CPRGS with poor communities, the cost of
primary education and of curative health care were found to be particularly burdensome for
the poor. The Government has now made a strong commitment in the CPRGS to address this
issue and to find alternative ways of financing these services, including through better
targeting of exemptions to the poor, that will reduce the burden on the poor. This is a priority
for the Bank in the coming CAS period.

o Preparation and Implementation of Projects. The capacity to prepare and implement
projects in Vietnam was overestimated in the last CAS. As a result, even though the
improved policy environment now warrants "High case" support, it has proved difficult to
prepare adequate high quality credits on a tight time-schedule, so lending has remained
between the Base and High cases. A joint World Bank/ADB/JBIC review of the reasons for
the delays has been completed and an action plan is now under implementation.

C. OED and QAG Reviews

22. 
Satisfactory Project OJ)utcomes. The Operations Evaluation Department (OED) has
evaluated the outcome of five of the eight projects that have closed since the Bank resumed
lending to Vietnam in FY94. The development outcomes for all these projects have been rated

11

satisfactory, and the recipient's and the Bank's performance have all been rated satisfactory or
above. In addition, the Quality Assurance Group (QAG) has reviewed the quality of 17 of the
Bank's products in Vietnam and has rated all of them as satisfactory or above.

23. 
A Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) by OED assessed IDA's assistance to
Vietnam from FY88 to FY01 and concluded that the Bank's overall assistance had been very
beneficial.' It noted in particular the strong emphasis on poverty reduction and on partnerships:

"In many respects, the Bank's program in Vietnam follows corporate objectives closely.
In particular, the assistance strateV has from the outset focused consistently on poverty
alleviation. The early sector work analyzing poverty fed into the selection ofprojects as
well as their design. In this sense, the assistance program has unusually strong synergies
between lending and non-lending. In addition, partnerships and wide collaboration have
been strong elements of the Bank's assistance, particularly in non-lending services."
(Box 4.1, page 23)

24. 
Successes have been most prominent in addressing infrastructure and poverty
issues, the last being partly due to the high quality of Analytic and Advisory Activities. OED
also found that joint Bank and IFC effort has helped improve the dialogue among the local and
foreign business communities, the Government and donors, including through the IFC-facilitated
Business Forum in the Consultative Group (CG) process. The CAE also recommended that more
attention be paid to the following:

* 

* Reaching agreement with the Government on criteria to be used for targeting the poor in
infrastructure and rural projects;
focusing more on strengthening maintenance capacity of investments in transport
infrastructure;
* being more selective and focused in investments in rural development; and
* 
continuing the recent progress being made on institutional and structural reforms.

25. 
The Bank agrees with these recommendations and has adopted them in the design of
this CAS. For example, considerable AAA work is planned that will help build capacity in the
Government to improve their targeting mechanisms using data from the VLSS and the
Household Census. The Bank believes that the subject of operations and maintenance of roads is
critical and this will be addressed in the Road Network Improvement Project (FY03) which, inter
alia, will help set up a national road maintenance fund. On the rural sector, the Bank will focus
its rural support as strategically as possible, but this may not necessarily mean that the number of
sub-sectors will shrink. Rural development is still a high priority issue and the active portfolio
addresses urgent challenges in the fields of water resources, rural infrastructure, rural finance,
and forest management.

D. OEG's IFC Country Impact Review

26. 
In parallel with the CAE, the Operations Evaluation Group (OEG) of the IFC
undertook a Country Impact Review of the IFC's program and made a range of

lSee, Vietnam Country Assistance Evaluation, November, 2001, Report Number 23288.

12

recommendations. 2 In particular, regarding IFC's role in poor business environments, the
Review suggested that a balance be struck between reducing IFC's potential losses and the need
to retain an active country presence to facilitate re-entry when the climate improves. The Review
identified the importance of incorporating the impact of financial sector distortions resulting,
inter alia, from the dominance of state-owned banks into project design and structuring. With
respect to advisory/TA work, it argued for ensuring strong client demand/political will for
advisory efforts. In terms of lessons for investment operations, the study recommended avoiding
SOE involvement and investments in heavily distorted sectors.

27. 
The IIFC team agrees with these recommendations, and the proposed program and
strategic priorities reflect the lessons of experience outlined in the Review. In particular, IFC is
maintaining a level of presence that is allowing a quick response to changes in Vietnam's private
sector development needs. Financial sector development, including reducing the dominance of
state-owned financial institutions, by supporting private financial sector entities has become an
important priority for IFC. In the area of advisory services, the test of Government commitment
at all levels is being applied rigorously: IFC has closed its privatization projects in Haiphong and
Dak Lak provinces as Government commitment was not fully forthcoming.

IV. WOIRLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM

28. 
Bank Group I[nstruments. In preparing the CAS, the Bank Group is seeking to exploit
maximum synergies from the different instruments at its disposal. These include:

o 

o Partnerships and Donor Coordination (Section A below; details in Annex C2);
o Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) (details in Annex Cl);
IDA Credits for Investment Projects;
o A series of four annual Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs);
o Sector Wide Approaches (SWAps) in two sectors;
o Management of Trust Funds (see Annex C3);
IFC, MPDF and MIGA Program (see Section E below);

o 

A. Partnerships and Donor Coordination

29. 
A New Way of Doing Business. Over the past four years the Government and
international community have sought to model a new way of doing business in Vietnam (see
above para 21). While we already regard this as successful, most of the benefits still lie ahead.
The CPRGS provides an important framework for operating together, and the 20 Government-
Donor-NGO working groups will continue to support the design and implementation of the
Government's plans in each sector. The emphasis on partnerships has implications for the Bank
Group's work program. While the benefits of the new approach greatly outweigh the costs, the
new approach needs to be managed thoughtfully, so that this continues to be the case:

o 

JointAnalytical and Advisory Work. Most of the Bank's Analytical and Advisory
Activities (AAA) is now done in partnership with Government; other donors and NGOs.
This had led to impressive "ownership" and impact. Examples include: 'Attacking

2 See, Vietnam - IFC Country Impact Review, October 5, 2001, CODE 2001/0089.

13

Poverty' (Poverty Working Group,1999); the 200 1Vietnam Development Report (World
Bank, ADB and UNDP, 2001); and 'Growing Healthy: A Report on the Health Sector'
(World Bank, Sweden, Australia, Netherlands and Ministry of Health, 2001). The Bank
will continue to do most major reports in partnership with others.

Trust Funds. Bilateral donors are increasingly seeking to place trust funds under the
Bank Group's management, and to second staff. This has deeply enriched effectiveness in
work on poverty reduction, public expenditure management, state enterprise reform,
banking reform, and other areas. The Bank Group will continue to work in partnership in
this manner, while at the same time ensuring that focus and selectivity are maintained.
(For details, see the Trust Funds Table in Annex C3).

* Selective Engagement. Under the CDF approach, partners seek to allocate tasks based
upon a commonly agreed framework, and comparative advantage. This is allowing
increased impact and focus within each sector. As examples: in education, the Bank
focuses on primary and tertiary education, while ADB takes the lead in secondary
education and vocational training; in the financial sector, the Bank focuses on banking
reform, while ADB takes the lead on the non-bank financial sector; on governance issues,
the Bank focuses on public financial management and (in partnership with UNDP) legal
reform, while in public administration reform the Bank looks to UNDP and ADB to play
a coordinating role.

* In-Country Consultative Group Meetings. Over the past four years, the Bank, as co-
chair with the Government, has sought to improve the effectiveness of the Consultative
Group process. Changes have included moving the location to Vietnam, introduction of
informal "mid-year" stocktaking meetings outside of Hanoi, establishment of associated
events, such as the Vietnam Business Forum, expanding participation of private sector
and civil society, more dialogue, fewer prepared statements etc. The new approach has
been generally very positively assessed by both Government and donors. It is important
that the effectiveness of the CG process be continually assessed so that it continues to
provide real value added in a rapidly changing environment.

30. Harmonization. The Bank is currently piloting a new initiative to harmonize procedures
with Government and donors. In May 2002, the World Bank agreed with the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) and the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) to identify harmonization
opportunities in procurement, financial management, environmental and social safeguards, and
portfolio management. The three institutions will report on progress at the next CG meeting. The
harmonization work is being undertaken with the strong support of the Government, and in close
cooperation with a group of bilateral donors who are working towards harmonization of
procedures and terminologies among grant providers. The Bank will continue to ensure that
cross-learning takes place and that the two harmonization strands are woven together to
constitute a comprehensive program of action that is most appropriate for the needs of Vietnam.

B. Bank Group Activities

14

31. 
Analytical and Advisoiry Activities (AAA) and Knowledge Sharing. The recent CAE
by OED concluded that in Vietnam, the Bank Group's program of AAA and knowledge sharing
had particularly high returns. For the coming CAS, an expanded programn is planned, in
partnerships with others on several cross-sectoral and sectoral themes, as described in Section C
below. This will provide the analytical underpinning for the Bank's policy advisory services and
lending program.

32. 
The Vietnam Development Information Centeir (VIIJIC). Established in 2000, and co-
financed by Australia, Canada, Dernmark, Japan, UTNDP, and the World Bank , the VDIC
provides a one-stop shop for current development informnation on Vietnam. Since the opening of
the VDIC, 3500 people have participated in distance learning events-many of them offered in
partnership with the World Bank Institute (WBI)--on topics as diverse as SME Capacity Building
(in partnership with JBIC), Insurance Supervision (WBI), and Prevention of Mother-Child
Transmission of HIV(in partnership with INAIDS). The Bank will also continue to invest in
translating all Vietnamn reports, and a good number of Regional and global Bank publications
into Vietnamese. Reports that have been translated and disseminated widely in Vietnamese
include all World Development Reports since 1998; Engendering Development, Greening
Industry, Curbing Corruption, Confronting AIDS, and many others.

33. 
Capacity Building and the Woirld Bank Institute Progiram. During this CAS period,
the Bank's AAA activities will involve working closely with WBI to build capacity and share
knowledge in key areas of emphasis. For example, under the "Attacking Poverty" Program of
the WBI, several distance learning events--jointly with the Global Distance Learning Network
(GDLN)--as well as face-to-face training programs are being planned to facilitate a sharing of
knowledge on the design, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation of PRSPs within the
East Asian Countries. WBI would also support capacity building and curricula development at
the Ho Chi Minh Political Academy, which provides training to senior officials and
policymakers from the Government and the Party.

34. 
Coire Diagnostic Analyses. The Bank has recently completed the set of core diagnostic
economic and sector work, and will complete another cycle during this CAS (Table 2). A
Household Survey is being undertaken in FY03, which is likely to produce high quality data, and
a new Poverty Assessment is planned for FY04 based on this data. Annual Vietnam
Development Reports are planned on topics such as pro-poor growth, regional growth strategies,
and employment and labor policies (FY03, FY05 and FY06); and a Public Financial
Management and Fiduciary Review (FY04) will be undertaken that will combine elements of a
PER, CFAA, and CPAR. In addition, a Financial Sector Assessment and a Private Sector
Assessment are planned for FY03.

15

Table 2: Core Diagnostic Economic and Sector Work

Type 

Poverty Assessment (PA) 
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) 
Public Expenditure Review (PER) 
Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR) 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) 

Most Recent 
Next Planned
Completion Date Completion Date
FY00 
FY04
FY02 
FY03
FY01 
FY04
FY02 
FY04
FY02 
FY04

35. 
Lending Program. Vietnam's Base case IDA allocation is SDR 1.37 billion for the
FY03-05 period, the second largest in the world, after India's SDR 2.0 billion. (Third is Ethiopia
with SDR 1.22 billion, and fourth is Bangladesh with SDR 1.19 billion). The proposed High case
is around 30 percent above the Base case. This translates into annual lending of $575 million in
the Base case, and would make Vietnam eligible to receive up to $760 million in the High case.

36. 
The planned lending program (Table 3) supports the priorities laid out in the CPRGS. It
has been designed after extensive consultations with the Government, donors and NGOs. A
three-day retreat to design the CAS was held in April 2002 to which key partners from the
Government, donors (including ADB, UNDP, Japan and several other bilateral donors) and
NGOs were invited. In addition, sector-by-sector consultations were held, led by the
Government, to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the Bank and the ADB. In addition to the
traditional investment projects, the CAS envisages non-project support in the form of annual
PRSCs and, in the outer years, in the form of SWAps for rural transport and education (see
below).

37. 
Poverty Reduction Support Credits. Annual PRSC lending is planned throughout the
CAS period. This would enable the Bank to formally support the implementation of Vietnam's
agenda of policy and institutional reforms laid out in the CPRGS. The series would build upon
the experience of the first PRSC -- a two-tranche $250 million credit that supports
implementation of reforms in trade, banking, state-enterprises, private sector and public
expenditure management. The first tranche of $100 million was disbursed in October 2001 and
the second tranche is expected to be disbursed in the last quarter of CY2002; This PRSC was co-
financed by the UK, Netherlands, Denmark and Sweden, and is complemented by the IMF's
PRGF and ADB's Enterprise Reform loan. Future PRSCs would be single-tranche operations of
around $100-200 million a year, with the size of the credit linked to the pace of implementation
of the program agreed upon in advance. It is expected that under Base case performance, the
size would be around $ 100 million, and $200 million under High case performance. Under the
High case, therefore, PRSCs would account for around 25% of IDA commitments. The content
of the PRSCs would be guided by the CPRGS. The second PRSC is expected to support further
progress in the structural issues covered by PRSC I, while also supporting reform in public
administration and the legal system, and in improved targeting of social programs for the poor.
Future PRSCs would also support policy reforms associated with human development, land
policy, agricultural policy, and energy.

16

Table 3: IDA Lending Program
(FY03-FY06)*

Fiscal Year 

Project 

FY03 
FY03 

FY03 
FY03 
FY03 

FY03 
FY03 

FY04 
FY04 

FY04 
FY04 

FY04 
FY04 

FY05 
FY05 

FY05 
FY05 
FY05 

FY05 
FY05 

FY06 
FY06 

FY06 
FY06 

FY06 
FY06 

Primary Education for Disadvantaged Children Project 
Water Resources Assistance Project 
Sub-Total (Low case scenario) 
Road Network Improvement Project 
Phu My II Power Project (IDA Partial Risk Guarantee) 
PRSC 11 
Sub-Total (Base case scenario) 
Public Finance Management Project 
PRSC 11 (total of $200m) 
Total (High case scenario) excl. Guarantee 
incl. Guarantee 
Urban Upgrading Project 
Rural Energy 1I Project 
Sub-Total (Low case scenario) 
Urban Water Supply Development Project 
PRSC III 
Sub-Total (Base case scenario) 
Forest Sector Development Project 
PRSC III (total of $200m) 
Total (High case scenario) 
Rural Water and Sanitation Infrastructure and Health Improvement Project (FY04 Standby) 
Natural Disaster Mitigation Project (FY04 Standby) 
Sub-Total (Low case scenario) 
Higher Education II - Teaching and Research Innovation Project 
Curative Care for the Poor Project 
PRSC IV 
Sub-Total (Base case scenario) 
Rural Transport III Project (SWAp) 
PRSC IV (total of $200m) 
Total (High case scenario) 
Poor Communes Infrastructure and Livelihoods Project (FY05 Standby) 
E-Government Systems Development and Capacity Building Project (FY05 Standby) 
Sub-Total (Low case scenario) 
Mekong Region Infrastructure Development Project 
PRSC V 
Sub-Total (Base case scenario) 
"Education for All" Project (SWAp) 
PRSC V (total of $200m) 
Total (High case scenario) 

Amount
(US$ million)
150
120
270
180
75
100
625
50
100
700
775
150
220
370
100
100
570
70
100
740
100
150
250
100
100
100
550
100
100
750
200
80
280
200
100
580
100
100
780

* The FY06 IDA program is indicative only, and may alternatively include support for Early Childhood
Development, and a Rural Finance III project.

17

38. 
Toward Sector-Wide Approaches (SWAps). The CAS proposes that two projects -
Rural Roads III (FY05), and Education for All (FY06) - take the form of sectoral budget
support. This will require significant progress in the preparation of Medium Term Expenditure
programs in those sectors. It will also require improved transparency and financial management.
The work program to move in this direction is currently under discussion with the Government.

C. Thematic Presentation of the Program

39. 
The Bank Group plans to support the three themes of the CPRGS as described in Section
I. While some activities would support the three themes directly--such as the Bank's TA support
for banking, SOE and legal reform, and the series of PRSCs -- others would support the three
themes through sectoral AAA, projects, and other instruments. In addition, the Bank Group
program would also aim to address the key sectoral issues laid out in Section D below.

Theme 1: Supporting the Transition Towards a Market-oriented Economy

40. 
From Design to Implementation. During this CAS period, the Bank Group will
continue to support Vietnam's transition to a market-economy, with a shift in focus from
"design" to "implementation" of the reform agenda. There are five strands to the planned work:

* Financial sector development;
* State enterprise reform;
* Support for the domestic private sector;
* Corporate governance and corporate social responsibility;
• 
Promoting open trade.

41. 
Financial Sector Development. The establishment of a sound market-based financial
intermediation system in Vietnam remains perhaps the most difficult technical challenge facing
Vietnam's policymakers, and an important part of the Bank Group's activities. These include:

* Banking reform would continue to be a high priority. Trust Funds for technical assistance
(ASEM, PHRD, Danish, Dutch) amounting to $3.5 million are currently being managed
by IDA, and another $4 million is expected in the near future. These would cover
auditing and restructuring of the state-owned commercial and joint stock banks, as well
as the introduction of modern regulatory and supervisory systems. An international
advisor on banking reform is expected to be seconded to the Hanoi office.

* Capacity-building for lending to the emerging private sector will be provided by the
Mekong Project Development Facility's (MPDF's) Bank Training Center, which will be
working in close partnership with the recent $200 million Rural Finance II Project
(FY02) financed by the Bank.

* 

IFC's medium-term priorities in support of Vietnam's financial sector development will
be: (i) diversification of the financial system, through introduction of new types of
institutions and instruments; and (ii) transformation of existing financial institutions, to
better meet the challenges of a more open and competitive financial system. IFC's

18

activities will support the existing private banking sector through direct financing of one
or two non-state banks and provision of technical assistance in conjunction with MPDF's
training to local banks and securities companies.

* 

IFC also plans to support the leasing and insurance sector. A recently approved
investment in a merchant bank and associated fund - Dragon Capital/VEIL - will provide
essential corporate finance services and invest equity in growth companies. To respond to
the growing needs in local currency financing, IFC is exploring the opportunities of
providing credit enhancement to local corporates to facilitate their access to such funds.

* Bank support to the financial sector will be coordinated closely with ADB. A Financial
Sector Assessment will be completed jointly with ADB in FY03. ADB is supporting the
non-bank financial sector, and the Bank will thus focus on banking. On micro-finance,
ADB is currently assisting the State Bank of Vietnam on a legal framework for viable
micro-finance institutions. The Bank will wait until this work is completed before
examining whether further support is needed.

42. 
State Enterprise Reform. The Bank will provide support for both systemic policy and
regulatory issues affecting all SOEs, and more specific assistance to certain sectors. A full-time
SOE specialist (financed by DFID) is based in the Hanoi office for the next three years. Planned
activities include:

* The Bank will continue the technical support, associated with the current PRSC, for
accelerating equitization, liquidation and outright sale of SOEs, amending the legal
framework to improve effectiveness and transparency of equitizations, making reliable
information on SOE performance available annually, carrying out diagnostic audits, and
expanding social safety nets for SOE workers displaced by reform.

* For a selected number of large SOEs, including the "General Corporations", the Bank
will provide more hands-on support for restructuring (financed by trust funds).

* For public utilities (especially power and water), the Bank will provide support to those
companies willing and able to move towards modem market-based approaches. As an
example, the planmed Urban Water Supply project (FY04) would establish competitive
funds for high-performing water companies and for those willing to contract out
management to the private sector. In power, the Bank will be supporting equitization, and
the formation of local-level joint stock companies.

* 

In key sectors, where the lack of reform has incurred high development costs, the Bank
will engage selectively. As an example, under the High case scenario, Vietnam would be
eligible to receive support through the Forest Sector Development Project (FY04) for the
reform of State Forest Enterprises, covering 6 million hectares. The Bank may also offer
some technical assistance (financed by Trust Funds) to the Railway sector and the Coal
industry but only if prospects for reform improve.

19

IFC remains willing to support, through finance and advice, SOEs undergoing
privatization.

43. 
Support for the Dcmestic Private Sector. In Vietnam, the domestic formal private
sector is essentially the Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) sector. Its performance over the
coming decade--during which time employment in these enterprises will need to rise from 1
million to over 5 million--will be the critical success factor for Vietnam. With recent
improvements in the policy environment, rapid growth in SMEs can be expected. The Bank
Group will seek to help its healthy growth, and seek to improve the overall business
environment.

* The Mekong Project Development Facility (MPDF) leads the Bank Group's work in
SME development. Through its direct TA support to individual companies, and its
growing support for the enabling environment (through its business education, bank
training center, work with business associations etc), it is the most significant source of
direct support from any ODA source. Operational links between MPDF and IFC are
being strengthened, especially in the financial sector.

* Loan and Equity Funds for SMEs will be provided through venture capital funds and
other financial institutions supported through IFC and MPDF, and through IDA's Rural
Finance project (FY02). IFC established Vietnam's first leasing company in 1997, which
has since provided over $35 million of financing to about 250 SMEs. Indirect financial
support to SMEs is continuing through intermediaries such as Dragon Capital/VEIL and
through investments in private banks. IFC could explore opportunities to support
microfinance institutions, but this would depend on an improved regulatory framework.

* Procurement under Bank credits will play an important role in fostering SME
development. Examples include power, rural roads, community-based infrastructure and
water, where the size of contracts is being designed so as to enable smaller companies to
bid, and the award of contracts is being monitored. In the water and construction sectors,
the Bank plans to have a formal partnership with MPDF, whereby the latter will provide
specific capacity-building programs to assist eligible bidders.

* Analytical support and dialog on private sector issues will be a major ongoing part of
the Bank Group's activities. A Private Sector Assessment, being undertaken jointly by
the Bank, IFC and MPDF, will be completed in FY03, and ongoing support to the
Vietnam Business Forum, and its associated working groups, will be continued.

44. 
Corporate Governance. Vietnam's transition calls for more modem forms of corporate
governance. To date, this has not received a coherent program of support from the international
community, but this is expected to change in the coming months. Building upon the findings of
the recently completed Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and other work,
planned Bank Group activities include support for accounting and auditing standards (through
IDF and other sources), and capacity building to business associations through MPDF. A joint
Bank Group work program in corporate governance is planned to begin in FY04, when a major
"Fiduciary Review" will be completed. In addition, IFC is planning to provide TA in the areas

20

of corporate governance practices of securities companies and institutional investors, regulatory
capacity to supervise institutional investors, and training for company directors. This work will
complement and build on work done by the ADB.

45. 
Corporate Social Responsibility. The Bank Group is initiating work in this area that
will aim to improve companies' economic, social and environmental practices in ways that are
good for both business and society. The work will initially focus on the issue of labor standards
before broadening to other areas of corporate responsibility. It will involve pilot demonstration
projects; a symposium on corporate responsibility with businesses, government, and donors; and
the documentation of best practices in Vietnam. On labor standards, the project would provide
assistance to and highlight companies that have adopted sound labor policies, consistent with
Vietnam's labor law and core labor standards (Box 2), and as a result are able to raise market
access and profitability.

Box 2: Core Labor Standards in Vietnam

The Government of Vietnam has ratified three of the eight core ILO conventions: C 100 on equal pay for
men and women; CI I on non discrimination in employment; and C 182 prohibiting the worst forms of
child labor. Ratification of C138 establishing minimum age for employment is expected imminently. The
ILO is cuirrently working with the Government on the forced labor conventions as well. The Government
of Vietnam has ratified an additional 12 ILO Conventions covering issues such as labor inspection,
occupational safety and health, and a number of industry specific labor provisions. There is also interest
in Conventions on tripartite dialogue; maternity protection; occupational safety and health in agriculture;
and labor administration.

The legal infrastructure for the core labor standards is quite strong in Vietnam. Due to the constraints in
terms of training, organization, and funding, however, enforcement%of the Labor Law is still limited. The
Trade Union movement should be further strengthened in order to give better protection to workers'
rights. Several donors, including USAID, are now working with the'Governiment to provide TA in this
area.

46. 
Promoting Open Trade. Vietnam's recent decisions to integrate with the world
economy and to join the WTO in the coming five years have been supported by a good deal of
TA work from the Bank. Other donors--notably the EU, the US and Switzerland--have now
provided generous programs to address the detailed legal and regulatory next steps. The Bank,
therefore, expects to focus its work more on issues such as the social and economic impacts of
alternative globalization paths.

Theme 2: Enhancing Equitable, Socially Inclusive and Sustainable Development

47. 
Implementing Good Policies. Vietnam already has a policy framework that is more
favorable to social inclusion and equity than most countries. But implementation remains a
problem, and there are serious challenges ahead. Over the past years, there has been an
impressive change in the willingness of the Authorities to discuss and confront issues that were

21

considered sensitive. This is reflected in the CPRGS which lays out a six-fold agenda that will be
supported by the Bank Group:

48. 
(i) Narrowing the development gap of disadvantaged and lagging areas. Around 85
percent of the poor live in rural areas, where per capita consumption is half that in urban areas,
and the rural-urban gap is widening. This has been of concern to the Government, and led to a
significant redirection of IDA resources under the last CAS. The planned program will reinforce
this shift in direction, with the bulk of Bank Group resources being targeted to rural and
disadvantaged areas.

* Understanding the Nature and Causes of Poverty. The AAA program will seek to
deepen understanding poverty in different regions of Vietnam. This will include support
for poverty strategies in the seven geographic regions of Vietnam, a major new Poverty
Assessment in FY04, and an update in FY06. These activities, together with the ongoing
support for the implementation of the first CPRGS, and preparation of the second would
be undertaken in partnership with the Poverty Task Force, a coalition of Government-
donors-NGOs working together to find solutions to poverty in Vietnam.

* Services for Lagging Regions. The Bank will continue to invest heavily to improve
access to markets and social services for lagging areas, focusing on three regions: the
Northern Mountains (the poorest region), the Mekong Delta (the least successful region
over the past decade), and the North Central Coast. The Road Network Improvement
Project (FY03) will improve the national road system in the northern region, while the
Mekong Region Infrastructure Project (FY06) would provide multi-modal transport
infrastructure in the southern-most region, and would be prepared in partnership with
JBIC and AUSAID. Expanding access to energy in rural areas underpins the Rural
Energy II Project (FY04). This operation will create new, decentralized institutional
models to rehabilitate about 900-1000 rural commune distribution systems. In addition,
under the High case Scenario, the Rural Transport III Project would adopt a Sector Wide
Approach (SWAp) (FY05) to support the Government's program of increasing access of
the rural communities in underprivileged provinces.

* Community Based Infrastructure and Livelihood Projects. The two new community-
based projects (Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction (FY02) and Community Based
Rural Infrastructure (FY01)) are introducing a new approach in Vietnam, and will be
supervised intensively. A follow-up Poor Communes Infrastructure and Livelihoods
Project (FY06) will continue to provide targeted assistance to the poorest communes. A
study will be undertaken in FY03 to review the experience of such decentralized,
participatory community-based projects in Vietnam. During FY03, TA will be provided,
financed by New Zealand and DFID-UK, to the Ministry of Planning and Investrnent
(MPI), the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) and the Ministry of
Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs (MOLISA) on how to improve the targeting
mechanisms used to identify poor communes in Vietnam.

* Addressing the Needs of the Urban Poor. While the most dramatic inequities are
between urban and rural areas, within cities there are also pockets of deep poverty,

22

especially associated with migrants and unregistered residents. The Urban Upgrading
project (FY04) will introduce, for the first time at a significant scale, a community driven
approach to urban slum areas, in four important cities (HCMC, Haiphong, Can Tho, and
Nam Dinh). Basic services will be provided to all poor people, including unregistered
migrants. AAA will focus on labor polices, and in particular at labor migration and
household registration polices, to ensure that poor people have labor mobility and are
able to move to better-paying jobs.

49. 
(ii) Raising the living standards of ethnic minorities. Poverty among ethnic minorities
remains very high, and is falling less rapidly than among the majority Kinh population. The
Bank will provide assistance in the effort to address this issue through projects and advisory
services. Two community-based projects that seek to help address the imbalance in two of the
poorest regions will be implemented during this CAS period. And several other projects will
also have significant impacts on the lives of ethnic minorities. The Primary Education for
Disadvantaged Children Project (FY03) will provide assistance to more than one million ethnic
minority children in disadvantaged areas, while the Education for All Project (FY06) could
provide support for pre-primary education for ethnic minorities to improve their learning
attainment. Also, in the High case, the Forest Sector Development Project (FY04) will improve
re-forestation and land management in upland areas which are inhabited largely by ethnic
minorities and will help improve their livelihoods.

50. 
(iii) Realizing gender equality and the advancement of women. Vietnam's Prime
Minister has recently approved the 10 Year Strategy for the Advancement of Women for the
period 2001-2010, and the National Commission for the Advancement of Women (NCFAW)
has prepared a Five Year Plan of Action for 2001-2005 (Box 3). These exercises have been
supported by the Bank and other donors, and will form the basis of the Bank's "Country Gender
Assessment" (FY03) in line with the new strategy for strategic mainstreaming of gender issues
in a country program. A follow up CGA will be prepared in FY05 when Vietnam prepares its
next five year plan for the advancement of women.

51. 
On the lending side, the Bank will identify priority projects that are likely to have a high
impact on gender equality to receive both special attention and special support through a
"Gender Mainstreaming Fund" (FY03-06) through which funds will be provided annually. For
example, in the proposed pipeline for FY03-04, three projects--Primary Education for
Disadvantaged Children, Urban Upgrading, and PRSC II--are considered to be projects
deserving special focus and resources for mainstreaming gender issues.

52. 
(iv) Making basic social services accessible and affordable for the poor. Vietnam's
policy of "socialization" in which all citizens pay in part for services received, has
unintentionally severely restricted access of the poor. The CPRGS recognizes this as a problem,
and a series of Bank activities will seek to help the Government in its poverty targeting.

53. 
Education. The Bank has so far supported primary education and tertiary education,
while ADB has provided assistance for secondary education and vocational training and this
division of labor is expected to continue. The Primary Education for Disadvantaged Children
Project (FY03) will reduce the number of educationally disadvantaged children by providing

23

assistance to disabled children, ethnic minority children, poor and street children, and other
vulnerable children such as drop-outs and non-attendees. Vietnam is committed to putting every
child in school and is one of 18 countries that is eligible for financial support from the Education
for All (EFA) Fast Track Initiative, which stems from the Dakar Conference on EFA. Under the
High case, Vietnam would be eligible for support through an Education for All Project (SWAp)
(FY06), which would provide broad programmatic lending in support of the Government's EFA
goals, with specific focus on disadvantaged children. This support could be used to fund several
different programs, including a move to full day schooling and other measures to improve the
quality of education; pre-school readiness, especially for ethnic minority children; and
scholarships and other targeted measures to reduce the burden of primary education on the poor.
In education, IFC has recently approved an investment in RMIT International University
Vietnam in Ho Chi Minh City, with ADB as a co-financier. IFC will continue to explore
opportunities to promote the development of private education in Vietnam.

Box 3: Vietnam's Country Gender Assessment aind World Bank interventions

Vietnam has strong institutions-including the National Committee for the Advancement of Women
(NCFAW) and the Women's Union-to promote gender equality. It also has a significant body of recent
work on the gender profile of the country, the institutional and policy context, and suggested policy and
institutional interventions. These are contained within four documents, all of which are entirely country
owned:

* The Situation Analysis and Policy Recommendations to promote the Advancement of Women and
Gender Equality in Vietnam;
* The National Strategy for the Advancemrent of Women in Vietnam by the Year 2010;
* The second National Plan of Action for the Advancement of Women 2001-2005 (POA2);
* The Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (CPRGS - the PRSP);

In addition, the Joint-Government Donor Gender Framnework (JGDGF) is the product of a partnership
between Government and donors and provides the framework for how donors' programs can help towards
the attainment of the goals and targets for gender equality laid out in Government documents.

Rather.than duplicate.workthat isalready existing and which has a high degree of country ownership,
these documents form the core of the Country Gender Assessment. Gender will continue to be an
inportant focus of the Bank in Vietnam. Recent and planned interventions include:

* 

Jointly with other donors, assistance to NCFAW in conducting the situation analysis and preparing
the 10 Year Strategy and the 5 Year POA2;
* 
Jointly with other donors, assistance to NCFAW in drafting the JGDGF;'
. Assistance to NCFAW to establish a task force for providing inputs to the CPRGS;

.
' 

-Organized conference to bring together the gender machinery of 6. PRSP couritries of East Asia 'to
strategize on mainstreaming gender into the PRSP;

Research on gender-based violence.(1999) and on Equality of Op'portunity under Vietnamese law and
`''ifsimplementation(2001/02);
*,' Pilot-on changing land-use rights certificates to show names of both husband and wife (2002);
* Detailed gender assessment of rural portfolio (2001);

' T.raining of provincial authorities on mainstreaming gender in the CPRGS at local levels (FY03);
FBund td mainstream:gender-in-to.the:Bank s.program (FY03); 
:Tackling gender issues in future,PRSCs (FY03-05).

.

. . x . . .c .wA , ..' | ' " ;~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-~

24

54. Health. Several cross-sectoral initiatives are planned to help Vietnam attain its
healthcare goals. The Curative Care for the Poor Project (FY05) would finance the significant
expansion of public expenditure for health services provided at the provincial level to enable
these provinces to provide better curative health care services to the poor. A study examining
options for improving health care for the poor (FY03) would provide input into the design of the
project. In addition, the Urban Water Supply Project (FY04) and the Rural Water and Health
Improvement Project (FY05) would improve the health status, productivity, and quality of life
of poor communities in under-served urban and rural areas. This project is being prepared with a
view to scaling up in the future. An Early Childhood Development (ECD) study is planned in
FY04, which could be followed by a project in the future, to better understand the nature, causes
and solutions to the problem of malnutrition highlighted in the CPRGS. While Vietnam is a
positive outlier on most social indicators, on malnutrition rates it performs worse than
comparator countries. In this area, the Bank will work closely with Save the Children Fund
(SCF) Alliance that has piloted many interesting approaches to ECD, especially in the area of
malnutrition, in Vietnam. In the area of HIV/AIDS, the Bank will continue to work in
partnership with other donors and NGOs to help the Government find an appropriate solution for
dealing with the growing AIDS problem in Vietnam. IFC has recently approved its first health
sector project in Vietnam--a modem 199 bed tertiary hospital in Ho Chi Minh City. This facility
will be an important model for the development of private hospitals in Vietnam, as there are very
few private (local and foreign-owned) hospitals in the country at present. ADB is a co-financier
in this project.

55. 
(v) Mitigating the impacts of natural disasters and other shocks. Vietnam is
systematically and severely impacted by natural disasters (mainly in the form of typhoons and
flooding), and these are a major cause of families falling back into poverty. A project for
Natural Disaster Mitigation (FY05) would help Vietnam put in place an effective capacity to deal
with natural disasters-with their prevention and mitigation-and to build a response mechanism
that would provide financial support for rehabilitation and restoration of livelihoods of disaster
victims. Health shocks and the high cost of curative health care for the poor are another factor
that push people into poverty or make escape from poverty difficult. The Curative Care for the
Poor Project (FY05) would address the issue of the affordability of curative health care for the
poor. Finally, given the high and growing rates of traffic accidents and the consequent high
disability and fatality rates in Vietnam, the Bank is planning to undertake a major piece of ESW
on road safety issues (FY03), and to include a major component to promote road safety in the
Road Network Improvement Project (FY03).

56. 
(vi) Enhancing environmental sustainability. The Bank's support for the environment
will include a broad range of initiatives, usually in partnership with other donors and NGOs.
First, it will support improvements in natural resource management through the Water Resources
Assistance Project (FY03) and through a series of GEF grants. Under the High case, Vietnam
would also be eligible for support through the Forest Sector Development Project (FY04).
Second, the Bank will aim to help the Government attain the Vietnam Development Goals laid
out in Table 1 for improved Urban Water Supply (FY04) and Rural Water and Sanitation (FY05)
and for better services to poor urban areas through the Urban Upgrading Project (FY04). Third,
the Bank will work with the Government to increase environmental information and awareness
(which is part of a broader theme of "transparency"). Specifically, the Vietnam Environment

25

Monitor Series launched in 2002 will be continued annually, jointly with the Government.
Fourth, the Bank will provide financial support through an IDF for capacity building for
environment management.

Theme 3: Promoting Good Governance

57. 
As discussed earlier, Vietnam is still catching up in the area of modem governance
(Figure 2). In the coming CAS period, the Bank will make a concerted effort to support the
Government's agenda for good governance, as laid out in the CPRGS, in five broad areas:

58. 
Improving information, transparency, and public financial management. This
remains a very high priority for the Government and the Bank Group. The recent completion of
the PER (FY01), CFAA (FY02), and CPAR (FY02) are feeding into the preparation of a Public
Finance Management Project (FY03). A new Public Financial Management and Fiduciary
Review (FY04) will be undertaken jointly with the Government and other donors. Analytical
and technical assistance work for public financial management is also being funded by a multi-
donor Trust Fund, supported by DFID (UK), Sweden, Netherlands, Norway and Denmark. A
Medium-term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) will also be prepared in the education and health
sectors in FY03 and in the agricultural and transport sectors in FY04. These exercises will be
valuable inputs in the preparation of sector-wide assistance, and in the preparation of the next
CPRGS (FY05/06).

59. 
Legal System Development. In view of the growing recognition that Vietnam's legal
system does not meet the needs of a modernizing economy, the Government has just completed a
comprehensive. Legal Needs Assessment (LNA), with strong support from the international
community. The Bank will continue providing assistance to the Government--jointly with
UNDP and other donors-in the legal area during this CAS period. Initial support for the
systemic reform of the legal system will take the form of providing advice and funding
(including through an IDF) in connection with the implementation of the LNA, including
management and donor coordination. In addition to substantial non-lending services, the Bank
has informed the Government that it would be willing to provide a Legal Development project
should there be interest in borrowing for this purpose. In addition, as in the past, the Bank will
continue to be active in providing technical assistance and advice in the design of key laws
required to move Vietnam towards a more efficient and market-driven economy. Recently, for
example, the Bank has provided TA and advice on the Electricity Law, the Gas Law, the Mining
Law, the Land Law, the Water Law, the Statistical Law, and the NGO Law.

60. 
Public Administration Reform. In September 2001, the Prime Minister approved a new
Public Administration Reform (PAR) Master Program for 2001-2010. The Program is built
around: (i) organizational restructuring; (ii) human resources reform, including personnel
management and salary reform; (iii) institutional development, including modernization of the
public administration system; and (iv) public financial management reform. The Bank will
continue to focus on the fourth pillar, while being actively engaged with the other donors (ADB,
UNDP and several bilaterals) who are more heavily engaged in the other three. A PAR specialist
has been recruited to the Hanoi Office, and an active program of mainstreaming administration
reform throughout the Bank portfolio. Most of the projects in the proposed program--in

26

education, health, transport, energy--would support PAR in the sectors in which they operate. In
addition, a special focus will be given to building capacity for decentralized project design and
implementation in both rural and urban areas.

61. 
ICT and e-Government. The Government has requested the Bank to provide analytical
and advisory support for its Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) strategy, and a
report will be completed shortly. This is expected to be followed by an "e-Government" project
in FY05 or FY06. This would help to modernize the regulatory environment for e-commerce
and e-procurement and would lead to improved transparency and accountability in the
functioning of governmcnt systems. In the meantime, analytical work will also be undertaken on
e-education to feed into the Higher Education II Project (FY05). IFC will complement Bank
activities in this area with support to private projects in ICT-related services. IFC has recently
approved an investment in a Vietnam-based software firm, primarily focused on providing
outsourcing services to the global semi-conductor industry.

62. 
Fighting Corruption. Vietnam rates poorly on international surveys of perceived corrupt
practices. Progress in each of the governance areas discussed above will help create a less
corrupt environment, as will the recent reduction in the number of licenses required for private
activity. However, because of the lack of a clear strategy for tackling corruption more
specifically, donor assistance for a more targeted approach has been limited. The Government
recognizes the need for a more explicit strategy and, with the support of Sweden, is now
planning to undertake diagnostic work on the nature and causes of corruption in Vietnam, using
the WBI methodology. This will lay the groundwork for further support for designing and
implementing an anti-corruption strategy. The problem of corruption is now discussed regularly
at Consultative Group meetings by both donors and Government, and the Bank Group is seeking
to engage the Vietnam Business Forum in efforts to find solutions. 
In the meantime, the Bank
will continue to take active measures to improve the financial management of its own portfolio
(see Section F below).

D. Sectoral Issues in the Program

63. While organized around the three cross sectoral themes described above, the Bank Group
program will continue to operate at the sectoral level, and will continue to promote rural and
urban development, and investment in human resources and physical infrastructure. Box 4
describes the key issues to be addressed in each of these areas.

E. Role of IFC and MIGA

64. 
IFC. Since 1992, IFC has approved 30 investments, totaling $605 million in direct and
syndicated financing, which in turn have supported projects worth $1.6 billion in private
investment. IFC has undertaken 26 formal advisory projects totaling $3.2 million in technical
assistance funding, and established the Mekong Project Development Facility (MPDF), a $25
million donor-funded initiative supporting SMEs, managed by IFC.

Box 4: Key Sectoral Issues for the CAS

27

Rural Development: This CAS will continue the shift started by the Bank towards putting more
investments into rural areas and continuing the transformation of Vietnam's rural economy. Currently,
85% of the poor live in rural areas and about 80% of the poor work in agriculture. Vietnam made huge
progress in rural poverty reduction in the 1990s as a result of de-collectivization of land, market
liberalization and an initial round of SOE reform, but how to continue progress in rural poverty
reduction? The Bank is supporting the Government's five pillar strategy for the continuing
transformation of the rural economy: (i) intensifying agricultural production; (ii) diversifying agricultural
production; (iii) expanding off-farm employment in rural and urban areas; (iv) ensuring that the benefits
of rural growth are shared equitably; and (v) improving the sustainable management of natural resources.

Urban Development: The urban population is projected to increase from about a quarter to a third of the
population by 2010 (i.e. from 19 million to 30 million). This growth stems not just from the increase in
the existing urban population but from the rural-urban migration that is likely to happen as people move
to better-paying jobs in urban areas. The Government's urban development policy seeks to address this
phenomenon. The urban development strategy, however, has a serious deficiency in that it does not
articulate a clear human settlements policy to indicate how it would prefer to accommodate the additional
11 million urban inhabitants expected to arrive within a decade. Proposals range from relocating people
in new economic zones, small cities, new cities, or satellite towns to'holding them in rural towns thiough
aggressive rural industrialization. Meanwhile, in the absence of any agreed policy, the big cities continue
to grow. The program laid out in the CAS will aim to assist the Government to deal with the deficiencies
in basic service provision that already exist. At;the same time, for the longer term, the Bank will also aimn
to help the Government plan for the coming urban expansion.

Infrastructure: Investmnent in infrastructure still has a very high return in Vietnam, as inadequate service
levels and bottlenecks remain a serious constraint on development and competitiveness. Despite
abundant natural -resources mi gas, hydro and coal, per capita commercial energy consumption (144 kgoe)
remains one of the lowest in ;the world. The transport system-despite substantial improvements in the
last five years-is overstretched, adding to costs and preventing many upland and rural areas: from sharing
in the benefits of Vietnam's growth. And water supply and sanitation facilities will require huge
investments to keep up with the accelerating urban population growth and industrial demand. As in the
last CAS, the Bank Group's involvement in support for infrastructure will be guided by three concerns.
First, there will be;additional emphasis on improving access to services among poor comrmunities and in
rural and remote areas. Second, in view ofthe hu'ge inve'stment-needs, high priority will be given to
mobilizing private sector involve'ment. Third, strong emphasis will be given to ensuring improved
management and maintenance of investments. There is considerable potential for an increased scope of'
IFC's activities in' all of the infrastructure sectors, based on the country's large infrastructure needs, the
still limited private sector participation, and IFC's considerable global experience with private
participation in infrastructure (PPI) projects. However, for.this to happen, the regulatory, environment for
PPI will have'to improve.

Human Developmeint: In the past, Vietnam has made significant progress towards attaining the MDGs in
health and'educationldue to generally favorable conditionsin the socio-economic,'institutional,'
demographic, public finance and political governance context. The future, however, is expected to face
the following cross.cutting challenges in health and education: (i) rapid decentralization in public
provision of health and education, leading to greater inequ,alities in service delivery. across p,r6oy,inces; (ii)
low levels of public financing for health and education, leading to greater burdens being pla,ced on poor
people for the fina,ncin,g-of basic social services; and (iii) inicreased pressure on .health'an,deducation--
provider nevworks to moderni,ze due to globalization and-a market-oriented economy, and ,agreater role
for tie private sect6r.: .The Bank Group aims.to use the various instruments at its disposal to- help Vietnam'
face these challenges. 
.
..
' 
'

28

65. 
Progress in addressing constraints to private investment was slow during the early period
of the last CAS, and as a result IFC was unable to approve any investments during FY99, and
approved only $8 million in FY00 and $7.5 million in FY01. In lieu of investments, IFC focused
more on advisory activities--on development of the private sector through the former Private
Sector Forum (now the Vietnam Business Forum), and through MPDF. MPDF has financed 72
SME projects raising about $50 million in financing and has undertaken 15 technical assistance
projects. MPDF has also been active in diagnostic work on the business environment for private
enterprises in Vietnam and in the areas of training for local banks and managers, and building
local consulting capacity.

66. 
In addition to trends in the business environment, the following factors have influenced
the choice of IFC's strategic priorities: (i) Synergies with the Bank--IFC's strategic priorities
will support the Bank Group CAS objectives by leveraging on IFC's transaction expertise and
experience; (ii) IFC's comparative advantages vis a vis donor agencies and private financiers.
In the current improving--but still largely untested--business environment in Vietnam, IFC is
uniquely positioned to mitigate regulatory risks in sectors that are being opened to private
investment, where the regulatory framework is still evolving, and where public ownership is
likely to remain significant for some time in the future. Investment sponsors and partners value
IFC for the value-added of its appraisals, its honest broker role and its problem solving abilities
in this still difficult, complex and high-risk business environment. IFC-led private sector
initiatives, such as the MPDF and the Business Forum, have enhanced IFC's credibility
regarding private sector development in Vietnam and have provided a framework for
coordinating donors' efforts in this area. IFC will continue to actively pursue opportunities to
work together with donor agencies and private partners to leverage its resources and build on
their respective strengths and expertise in Vietnam; and (iii) Lessons of experience--IFC's
strategic priorities reflect the lessons of experience as outlined in OEG's IFC Country Impact
Review.

67. 
As discussed above, IFC's priorities in this CAS are aimed at assisting the transition to a
more market based economy, and include: (i) improvements in the environment for private
businesses, primarily through the Vietnam Business Forum; (ii) growth of SMEs, through
MPDF, support to financial intermediaries focusing on SMEs, and some direct interventions; (iii)
development of the financial sector, including diversification of the financial system, through
introduction of new types of institutions and instruments, and transformation of existing financial
institutions; and (iv) improved productivity in sectors where Vietnam has a comparative
advantage, through provision of support to private projects in sectors such as labor-intensive
manufacturing, agribusiness, and ICT-related services. In addition, there is the potential for an
increased scope of IFC's activities in all of the infrastructure sectors, based on the country's
large infrastructure needs, the still limited private sector participation, and IFC's considerable
global experience with private participation in infrastructure (PPI) projects. Effective demand
for IFC's services in this area, however, remains limited as regulatory, market, and ownership
reforms to support private participation in infrastructure have been slow. Certain sectors are
closed to private activities, such as railways and telecoms, while others are dominated by state
monopolies. In the absence of immediate investment opportunities, there would be a role for IFC
to continue to advise on improving the regulatory environment in key social and physical
infrastructure. IFC's strategy will be executed through a mix of investment and advisory

29

products; the speed of implementation will be aligned to progress on the structural and public
management/institutional reform agenda as well as the supply response from the domestic and
foreign private sector.

68. MIGA has provided support on issues related to the involvement and potential role of the
private sector in the power and transmission sectors, and on the development of investment
promotion capacity. MIGA has also delivered an overview of best practices in FDI promotion to
the Government, and designed and carried out a TA program for Vietnam's investment
promotion. MIGA is presently exploring collaboration with ASEAN to support tailored
investment promotion capacity building programs for the newest ASEAN4 countries (including
Vietnam) to help narrow the development gap between them and the other ASEAN members.

69. 
As of February 28, 2002, MIGA's gross exposure for Vietnam was $20 million (see
Annex B4). This is for two projects -- one guaranteed in FY01 (a telecoms project), and another
guaranteed in FY99 (in the power sector). MIGA also expects to underwrite a power project (up
to US$100 million) in FY03.

F. Portfolio Management and Fiduciary Issues

70. 
The Growing IDA Portfolio. IDA resumed lending to Vietnam in FY94, and today
Vietnam has become the largest IDA-only borrower. As of end FY02, a total of 35 credits,
amounting to US$3.8 billion have been approved. 3 The active portfolio comprises 27 credits
amounting to US$ 2.8 billion, with an undisbursed balance of US$ 2.1 billion (Table 4). The
portfolio is still in its growth phase with the active portfolio expected to stabilize around 32
projects by FY04-05.

71. 
Satisfactory Outcomes, but Slow. Portfolio performance has been satisfactory on
outcomes, but less so on elapsed time and disbursement. All of the eight projects2 closed so far
were rated satisfactory at exit, all projects reviewed by the Operations Evaluation Department
have also been rated fully satisfactory, and QAG ratings have generally been sound. However,
the pace at which projects are prepared, and the pace of implementation has been below
expectations. An important effort to address these problems is now underway -- with some early
positive signs emerging -- and lessons from past implementation experience are being
incorporated in the new generation of projects.

72. 
Improving Portfolio Performance. Portfolio management over the next few years will
focus on improving the pace of implementation while retaining sound portfolio quality. An
analysis of the on-going portfolio shows that a slow start (i.e., effectiveness delay) is one of the
principal causes for a late finish. In addition, poor monitoring, weak project management and
prolonged procurement processes add to the delays. A program to address many of these
concerns is now underway. Based upon earlier diagnostic work (especially the first
IDA/ADB/JBIC joint portfolio review in FY00), the Government has recently revised ODA

3 This does not include an Irrigation project for $60 million approved in 1979.

30

procedures 4 , and strengthened Project Management Units' (PMUs) management guidelines, and
is introducing an M&E system.

Table 4: Bank Portfolio Indicators
(Amounts are in US$ Million)

_ FY98 

FY99 

FY00 

FY01 

FY02

Active Portfolio 
No of Projects 
Net Commitments 
Undisbursed Balance' 

Portfolio Riskiness 
No of Projects at risk 

% of total projects (by number) 
Commitments at risk 
% of total Commitments 

Development Impact

No. of closed projects 
No. with satisfactory outcome 
% with satisfactory outcome 

Disbursement Performance
Total Disbursed (million US$) 
Of which Adjustment lending 
Disbursement rate (Investment 
lending)
Disbursement rate, incl. 
adjustment lending 

I

18 
1,836 
1,197 

5 

28% 
694 
38% 

1 
1 
100% 

238 
35 
19% 

22% 

21 
2,110 
1,306 

_

1 

5% 
49 
2% 

1 
1 
100% 

207 

-

17% 

17% 

_

22 
2,119 
1,416 

25 
2,583 
.1,776 

-
-
-
-

2 

2 
100% 

156 

12% 

12% 

2 
8% 
140 

5% 

-

n.a. 

-

160 

12% 

12% 

27
2,814
2,130

3
11%
96

3%

3

3
100%

331
101
15%

19%

73. 
Portfolio Action Plan. Specific to the Bank portfolio, there is an agreed action plan that
would focus on fixing the current stock of 27 projects. This would entail: (i) restructuring stalled
older projects; (ii) reviewing and rescheduling 2-3 year old projects with excessively slow start-
up periods; and (iii) monitoring progress closely in on-going remedial action plans. The Bank is
also seeking to reach agreement with the Government on harmonizing steps in Bank processing
with the Government's steps under the new Decree 17. In addition to the project specific issues,
concerted actions which benefit the entire portfolio are also beginning to yield results. Measures
include intensified portfolio monitoring and reporting, and increased realism which could
provide early warning so corrective measures can be taken quickly. Sustaining these gains and
moving to a higher level of performance will require some structural issues relating to SOE
reform, construction industry development, and Public Administration Reform to be addressed.

4 Some examples include: Decree 17 (Management and Use of ODA funds), Decree 52 (Public Investment

Procedures), Decree 88 (Public Procurement Procedures), Decree 22 (Resettlement).
5 Includes adjustment lending.

31

74. 
Fiduciary Issues. The recently-completed PER, CFAA and CPAR, have each led to
important initiatives for change (including the upcoming FY03 Public Financial Management
project, the IDF for accounting and auditing development, and an action plan for public
procurement development). But while Vietnam has come a long way in a brief time, the journey
towards international standards has only begun, and the Bank Group is making dialog and
capacity building in these areas an important part of its work. Corruption is a significant and
growing problem in Vietnam, and poses risks for the Bank and for Vietnam's development.
Coupled with the move away from the traditional large infrastructure projects to projects in
social sectors operating in decentralized environments, this could significantly increase fiduciary
risks. The Bank proposes to address these issues by analyzing the associated risks in the existing
portfolio, new projects, and in the overall environment for implementation of ODA projects.

75. 
On-going Portfolio. The trend away from procurement of large ICB transactions to
several small transactions that are not subject to prior review has increased the Bank's reliance
on ex-post reviews. The Bank has recently completed a procurement ex-post review of selected
projects, and will conduct this exercise annually. An Independent Procurement Review will also
be conducted in FY03, as will a "Quality Review" of the private sector audit firms in Vietnam
(to assess and certify their ability to conduct audits of Bank-financed projects).

76. 
New Projects. Based on the findings of the CPPR completed in November 2001, the
Bank has developed a "readiness filter", which also includes an increased focus on the
implementation arrangements and the fiduciary functions. Thus, all new projects are now
subject to strengthened criteria which not only help improve the quality at entry but also help
reduce some of the elements of fiduciary risk. From now on, projects are expected to have
accounting and reporting systems (and PMU staff) in place prior to Board approval. The Bank
will also be paying close attention to the fiduciary arrangements for the future SWAps that are
planned in this CAS.

77. 
The Overall Imp.'ementation Environment. The implementation of the recommendations
of the recent CPAR and the CFAA is expected to improve the overall environment over the next
few years. However, limited capacity, which is further strained by the decentralized
implementation environment, is a major issue. The Government has recently initiated a
systematic dialog with donors, PMUs, and other stakeholders to discuss training needs, delivery
mechanisms and financing arrangements. Linked to this is the initiative on harnonization,
which, as discussed above, will aim to harmonize the policies and procedures of the ADB, JBIC
and the Bank.

G. Core Monitoring and Evaluation

78. Measuring Development Effectiveness. The work program in this CAS has been
designed to help Vietnam attain the localized MDGs against which progress will be measured in
the CPRGS (Table 1). The success of the Government's poverty strategy as well as the
effectiveness of the Bank Group support for that strategy can thus be judged ultimately by
Vietnam's progress towards achieving the localized MDGs. Progress in attaining the goals,
targets, and annual indicators laid out in the CPRGS will be monitored carefully by the
Government, with the assistance of donors and NGOs, and reported in annual CPRGS Progress

32

Reports that will become the main framework for discussion between the Government and
donors.

79. Measuring the Impact of the CAS. Bank Group instruments have been aligned to the
CPRGS and reflect comparative advantage and agreement with Government and other donors
(see Program matrix in Annex DI). Out of the 11 Vietnam Development Goals (VDGs) and 32
Targets laid out in Table 1, the Bank's instruments are aligned most closely to the 5 VDGs and
the 10 Targets presented in Table 5, and these will therefore be monitored most closely. The
Bank's contribution to the attainment of these goals and targets will be measured through the
successful implementation of its own instruments and through its successful engagement in
partnerships with other donors to help attain these goals and targets.

Table 5: Core CAS Monitoring Benchmarks

CPRGS/CAS Goal 
1. Reduce the percentage of 
poor and hungry households 
2. Universalize education and 
improve education quality 

3. Ensure environmental 
sustainabilityv 
4. Improving governance for 
poverty reduction 
5. Ensuring pro-poor 
infrastructure development 

CPRGS Target/CAS Progress Benchmark
* Proportion of people living below the international poverty line
.
Proportion of people living below the food poverty line
* Net primary school enrollment rate
.
Gender gap and ethnicity gap in net primary enrollment rates

* Proportion of children in full-day schooling at primary level

* Proportion of rural and urban population with access to clean water
and sanitation
Increased budget transparency at all levels
Implementation of the legal reform agenda
.
Proportion of communes with basic infrastructure
* Number of communes connected to the national electricity

* 
* 

transmission grid

80. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) of the CPRGS. The Bank is actively supporting
the design of a M&E system for measuring progress. As part of this effort, the Government has
just initiated a biannual Vietnam Household Living Standards Survey (VHLSS), starting in 2002,
so that disaggregated statistics on poverty and social indicators can be collected and
disseminated on a regular basis. The Bank, jointly with UNDP, DFID-UK, and Sweden, has
been providing technical and financial assistance to the Government Statistics Office (GSO) for
almost a decade now on how to collect quality household survey data. It is expected that the
VHLSS will produce timely and high quality statistics that will enable the Government to
monitor progress in poverty reduction and on a number of the indicators presented in Table 1 and
Table 5. This will be supplemented with participatory and other research to monitor non-
quantifiable dimensions of poverty and welfare, such as issues of voice and empowerment, and
improved governance.

H. Lending Scenarios and Triggers.

81. 
Size of the Lending Program. The overall Bank program is presented in Table 6. The
scale of the program is differentiated according to the pace of progress on the policy and
institutional agenda, and on project preparation and implementation. The program ranges from
less than $290 million in the Low case to about $760 million in the High case, with a Base case

33

of $580 million per year, consistent with the present IDA allocation. Higher levels of resources
are appropriate in the presence of improvements in policies and institutional development for
two reasons. First, some of the Government's planned reforms - banking and enterprise
restructuring, trade opening, public administration reform, legal development etc - will have
costs associated with them. Second, some of the proposed investments -
including those
supporting investment in water, energy, rural and urban development -- will be truly effective
only in the presence of the policy and institutional changes proposed by the Government. More
generally, there is strong evidence that the value and effectiveness of ODA rises sharply as the
kinds of policy and institutional changes proposed in the CPRGS are implemented.

Table 6: Size of Overall Bank Program and Lending Scenarios

Lending Scenarios 

Low Case: Limited implementation of 
the CPRGS; no progress on portfolio
management.
Base case: Steady (rather than rapid) 
implementation of the CPRGS; modest
progress on project preparation and
implementation
High case: Firm implementation of the 
CPRGS; good progress on project
preparation and implementation.

Proposed Annual IDA Lending 
($m) 

FY03 
270 

FY04 
370 

FY05 
250 

FY06 
280 

Average
Lending
($m)
FY03-06
293

625 

570 

550 

580 

581

775 

740 

750 

780 

761

82. 
High levels of support will also require practical improvements in project preparation. In
FY01 and FY02, lending levels to Vietnam, at $620 million and $593 million, respectively, were
only slightly above the Base case levels, despite the fact that the policy environment had
improved to the High case. This is because the Government and the Bank agreed that high
standards should be demanded of each project, and there was inadequate progress (on both sides)
in preparing high quality projects according to a tight schedule.

83. 
Support under the Base and Low Cases. Vietnam remains eligible for Base case
lending levels if it continues its satisfactory macroeconomic performance, as evidenced, for
example, by an IMF PRGF Program, and implements the policy and institutional reform agenda
laid out in the CPRGS at a steady (rather than rapid) pace. The pace of progress would be
monitored in each of the areas laid out in Table 7 below. Base case lending also requires some
progress on project preparation and implementation. It is expected that Low case lending would
likely be caused less by policy reversal, which the Bank Group regards as unlikely, but more by
administrative constraints in preparing and implementing high quality projects. Under current
Vietnamese patterns of decision-making, projects still take longer than average to prepare and
are less certain to be delivered on time than in other countries in the Region. Thus the Base and
High cases include projects that because of policy or institutional requirements may take longer
to bring to the Board than is currently expected.

34

Table 7: "Triggers" for High Case Lending

Policy and Institutional Progress 

|Monitoring Mechanisms and Indicators

Transition to a Market Economy

* 

Improved investment climate through firm 
implementation of the 3 year program 
(2002-2004) of structural reform (in the 
five areas of trade liberalization, private
sector development, banking reform, state
enterprise reform, and public expenditure
management) laid out in the Letter of
Development Policy (attached to PRSC I);

--Monitoring of pace of implementation of reform
program through annual JSA of CPRGS Progress
Report and annual CAS Progress Report

Equitable, Socially Inclusive and Sustainable Development

--Specific benchmarks to be developed in the
context of annual PRSCs which will be presented
to the Board for approval

* Design and implement programs to 
increase access of urban residents, 
including unregistered migrants, to public 
services;
* Design and implement changes to reduce
burden on the poor of out-of-pocket
expenses for primary education and health
care

Good Governance

* Greater alignment of public expenditures 
(recurrent and investment) and budgetary 
processes to the priorities laid out in the 
CPRGS 
Increased transparency of the budget and 
"off-budget" accounts; and increased 
public access to audit reports 

* 

--Preparation and adoption of annual budgets
aligned to CPRGS and Medium-term Expenditure
Frameworks (MTEFs) for the overall budget as
well as for individual sectors
--Preparation of a sound Public Investment
Program (PIP)
--Public access to audit reports by State Audit of
Vietnam

Portfolio Management

* Continued strong indicators of project 
quality to ensure they meet development
objectives
Reduced project preparation time and 
increased pace of implementation of 
projects

.

--Commitments at risk

--Time elapsed between appraisal and Board
--Disbursements

84. 
Support under the High Case. 
In the preparation of the CAS, detailed discussions
have been held with the Authorities as to the policy and portfolio indicators that would warrant
High case support. These are presented in Table 7. Indicators have been chosen so as to be
monitorable, and indicative of the measures that will be required to help Vietnam reach its
development targets laid out in Table 5. Vietnam would therefore remain at Base case lending
levels until the triggers laid out in Table 7 have been met.

85. 
For some of the triggers in Table 7, a timed action plan has already been agreed with the
Government, as laid out, for example, in the Letter of Development Policy for PRSC1, which

35

presents a matrix of agreed actions through 2004. This covers structural reforms in banking and
SOE reform, private sector development, trade policy, and public expenditure management. In
other areas, the Government has laid out the principles and the direction of reform in the
CPRGS, but has not yet specified the timing. The triggers reflect the desired direction of reform
and it is proposed that specific, time-bound, benchmarks in these areas will be developed through
on-going policy dialogue and AAA in the context of annual PRSCs, which would support a
medium-term program of reform in these (and other) areas. The size of the annual PRSC support
($100-200 million) would provide an indication of the pace of progress in these areas. Progress
in most of the areas listed in Table 7 can be measured through trends in annual budgetary
allocations and bi-annual households surveys, and would be reported in annual CPRGS Progress
Reports as well as CAS Progress Reports.

86. 

There are four sets of risks that the Bank Group needs to monitor and seek to manage:

V. MANAGING RISKS

Reform Slippage: The first risk is that the emerging success of the domestic private
sector may lead to income disparities over the coming years that in turn cause a
rethinking of the development path, and a halt to the implementation of the reform
program. While there are real possibilities of a slowdown in implementation, the Bank
regards the prospects of a halt or reversal to be small. Vietnam now has obligations to
open its economy according to a strict timetable, which locks itself into full integration
into the world economy in the coming six years. The proposed Bank Group program is
calibrated so that any slowdown in reform would be associated with a smaller Base or
Low case program.

* Failure to Address Governance Issues: More serious in the Bank's judgment is the risk
that the required reforms in public administration, legal development and corporate
governance would not take place. Thus, as the private sector grows in the coming years,
uncompetitive and corrupt entanglement between private enterprises and Government
officials could develop. This "Indonesia-style" risk, whereby a decade from now
unhealthy patterns of behavior could have become entrenched, and future development
threatened, is the most serious risk facing Vietnam. The Bank has placed this risk
frontally on the agenda in Consultative Group meetings, and in its own dialog with the
Government and the Party. Together with other key multilateral agencies - the UNDP
and ADB - the Bank is also helping to catalyze international support for governance

issues.

* Decentralized Project Implementation and Inadequate Fiduciary Controls: A
growing share of Bank lending is being implemented by local levels of government and
by communities. The average size of contracts is declining as the Bank seeks to promote
opportunities for domestic private firms to win contracts. This runs the risk of inadequate
financial oversight and the possibility of malfeasance. The Bank is building up its
financial and procurement management capacity in the Hanoi office, and seeking to draw
from best practice experiences from other countries that have supported decentralized and

36

community-based projects. Next year, the Bank will be conducting a major review of
decentralized projects in Vietnam, with a special focus on financial controls.

Ethnic Minority Issues: Disputes in the Central Highlands and elsewhere are causing
concern that not enough is being done to protect the rights of some ethnic minorities.
The Bank will ensure that all social guidelines are applied in IDA-funded projects, and
will assist the Government in strengthening its own safeguards. As co-Chair of the
Consultative Group process, the Bank also regularly reminds the Government that such
issues could undermine Vietnam's highly positive reputation for poverty reduction, and
could potentially impact development assistance flows.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter Woicke

By:
Shengman Zhang 

Washington, DC
September 16, 2002

Vietnam at a glance 

CAS- Annex AI
Page I of 2

10/3102

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

2001
Populafton, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (AHas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 
Average annual growth, 1 99-01
Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1995-01) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Ufe expectancy at birth (years) 
Intant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of populaton age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population) 
Male 
Female 
KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981 

GDP (US$ bililons) 
Gross domestic investmentUGDP 
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross natonal savings/GDP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debVGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debVGDP
Present value of debUexports

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GDPpercapfta 
Exports of goods and services 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumpbon 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

(average annual growth) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic nvestment 
Imports of goods and services 

East
Asia & 
Pacific 

1,853 
1.060 
1,964 

Low-
Income 

2,459 
420
1,030

Vietnam 

79.5 
410 
32.6 

Development diamond-

Life expectancy

1.4 
1.7 

37
23 
69 
25 
34 
36 
7 
114 
116 
110 

1991 
9.6 
15.0 
32.6 
16.5 
16.9 
-2.0 
0.3 
243.4 
6.4 

1.1 
1.4 

35 
69 
35 
13 
75 
14 
119 
121 
121 

2000 
31.3 
24.7 
50.3 
23.1 
26.2 
1.5 
0.9 
48.4 
6.2 

1.9 
24 

32
59
77

.

76
38
96 
102 
86

2001

26.1 
52.3
24.0
27.6
1.5 
0.9 
50.0 
6.9

GNI
GNI 
per 
capita 

Gross
I primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

vietnam
Low-income group

Economic ratios'
E 
c

Trade

DoUmesc
savings c- 
svn

Investment

.. 

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

2001-05

4.9 
2.5 

7.6 
5.9 
22.8 

5.5 
8.2 
14.8 

4.8 
1.1 
13.8 

6.2 
3.5 
11.5

Indebtedness

v 

7etnam
Low-income group

1981 

1991 

39.5 
23.8 
19.8 
36.7 
77.1 
6.3 
31.1 

1981-91 
4.3 

1991-01 
4.8 
12.1 

A

.. 

.. 

7.6 
11.9 
13.2 
19.0 
30.8 

2000 

24.3 
36.6 

.. 

39.1 
68.5 
6.4 
49.0 

2000 
4.0 
10.1 

2.9 
.

4.1 
26.9 

2001 

24.0 
36.7 

.. 

39.3 

.

.. 

50.5

2001 
3.5 
8.4 

3.5 

2.8 
8.3

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)
so

20
10

10 

20l

Be S 

ew9 

7 

oo 

o0

- GDI 

e- GW

Growth of exports and Imports (%)
50

40

2

go 

9.r 7 
sBe 
Exports 

-

og 

0

oo 
iports

Note: 2001 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

CAS- Annex Al
Page 2 of 2

Vietnam

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inftion I(%)

(% change) 
Consumer pdces 
Implicit GDP deflator 
Govewrnment finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 

25

.. 
.. 

82.7 
72.5 

-1.7 
5.3 

-0.8 

20

15

s

0 

I 

I

.
.. 
.

13.5 

21.1 

21.7 

-s 

96 

97 
GDP deflator 

se 

99

Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

0.0 

4.8 
-2.8 

4.3 
-3.5

-

0 CPI

.. 

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1981 

1991 
2,042 

2000 
14,448 

2001 
15,000 

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)
tsoro

Total exports (fob) 

Rice 
Fuel 
Manufactures 

225 
581 

667 
3,548 

14000.

12,000
10,00D

Total imports (c.) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

2,377 
82 
485 
714 

14,259 
.4.0

14,500 

s,10i

2000

0

Export price index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995-100) 
Terms of trade (1995-100) 

.. 

97 

go 

so 

oo 
*l rrVorts

o1

.. 

.. 

.. 

* Expons 

.

._._.

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 
Exports of goods and services 

1981 

1991 
2,491 

2000 
17.098 

2001 
17,682 

Current account balance to GOP(%)
a

Imports of goods and services 

2,377 

17 418 

17,863 

4

Resource balance 
Net income 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

*720 

114 

-237 

-180 

2

-72 

-339 

-597 

-764 

-2 -9 

1

1 7 
-775 
534 
241 

35 
-190 
472 
-282 

1341 
573 
-478 
-95 

1368 
563 
325 
-888 

-4

5 
o -.
-12

Memo:

Reserves Including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, loca4lUS$) 

..

0.6 

7,979.2 

14,170.0 14,793.0

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

(US$ rnillicns) 

ComposItlon of 2000 debt (USS mill.)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

26 
0 
19 

23,395 
0 
58 

13,900 
0 
1,113 

14,400
0
1,762 

G:925 

: 316

Total debt servioe 
IBRD 
IDA 
Composiion of net resource flows 
Official grants 
Offcial creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct Investment 

0 
0 
0 

161 
0 
1 

1,784 
0 
9 

1,989
0
9 

D ,4

F: 4,595

126 
-44 
50 

120 
973
-717
800 

120

19 
0 

1,000

Portfolio equity 

.. 

10 

.. 

.. 

E: 5,104

World Bank program

Commitments 
Disbursements 
Princpal repayments 
Netflows 

0 
17 
0 
17 

0 
0 
1 

260 
174 
2 
173 

649 
230 
. 2 
228

A - IsRD 
B -IDA 
C - IMF 

E - EIlatera
F - Private
G -Short-term

D -Other multilateral 

-1 

Interest payments 
Nettransfers 

0 
17 

0 
-1 

8 
165 

9
219

Development Economics/EASPR 

10/302

Vietnam
Key Economic & Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS

CAS - Annex A2

Page I of I

Economy (CY) 
Growth rates (real %)
GDP 
Exports 
Imports 

Inflation (annual averaae rate-- %) 

National accounts (% GDP)
Current account balance * 
Gross investment 

Public finance (% GDP)
Fiscal balance 

Intemational reserves 
(as weeks of imports)

Forecast in Last CAS 

Act. 

Est. 

Current CAS Forecast

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005

4.5 
7.0 
4.8 

8.0 

-6.6 
23.6 

-0.6 

10.5 

4.0 
5.8 
4.6 

6.0 

-6.6 
22.0 

-1.5 

10.5 

4.0 
5.5 
4.4 

6.0 

-6.1 
22.0 

-1.9 

9.8 

5.0 
6.1 
5.2 

5.0 

-6.3 
23.0 

-1.5 

9.5 

4.0 
2.4 
-1.1 

7.8 

-4.9 
25.8 

-0.5 

6.8 

4.5 
23.2 
1.1 

4.3 

4.1 
23.0 

-2.6 

9.1 

5.5 
25.2 
34.7 

-1.6 

1.5 
24.7 

-2.8 

9.1 

4.8 
4.0 
3.2 

-0.4 

1.5 
26.1 

-2.9 

11.0 

5.2 
5.0 
8.0 

4.0 

-1.5 
26.6 

-3.2 

11.2 

7.0 
10.0 
15.0 

4.0 

-3.1 
28.4 

-2.5 

11.3 

7.0 
15.0 
20.0 

4.0 

-3.6 
28.7 

-2.5 

11.4 

7.0
15.0
20.0

4.0

-3.7
29.3

-2.3

11.4

Program (Bank's FY) ** 
Lending ($ million) 
Gross disbursements ($ million) 

FY1999 
403 
215 

FY2000 FY2001 
650 
630 
195 
215 

FY2002 FY1998 
640 
395 
245 
238 

FY1999 FY2000 
308 
286 
207 
156 

FY2001 
629 
160 

FY2002 
594 
331 

FY2003 FY2004 FY2005
625 
570 
550
371 
412 
457

Note: 

* excluding grants.
** Figures refer to the base case.
Source: Vietnam authorities and World Bank Staff estimates.

CAS - Annex A3

Page I of 2

VIETNAM: KEY ECONOMIC DICATORS, 1997-2005

1997 

Act. 
1998 

1999 

Rev. 
2000 

Est. 
2001 

2002 

Projected
2003 

2004 

2005

Growth Rates (%)
Real GDP 
Real GDY 
RealGDPpercapita 
Consumer price index (annual avg.) 
Consumer price index (Dec. to Dec.) 

Debt Service
Debt service (US$ million) 
Debt service/XGS(%) 
Debt service/GDP(%) 

Ratios to GDP (current prices) (%)
Investment 
National savings 
Domestic savings 
Public investment 
Private investment 
Ratio of public/private investment 

Govemment revenues (inc. grants) (% 
Govemment expenditures (inc. int.) 
Overall deficit (cash basis) (%) 

Other Items
Export growth rates (nominal) (%) 
Exports/GDP (%) 
Export growth rates (real) (%) 
Import growth rates (nominal) (%) 
Imports/GDP (%) 
Importgrowthrates(real)(%) 
Current account balance (US$ million)
- before official transfers 
percentofGDP(%) 
-afterofficial transfers 
* percent of GDP (%) 
Gross reserves in weeks of
imports 

-

8.2 
9.8 
7.8 
3.2 
3.6 

4.0 
6.3 
4.3 
7.3 
9.2 

1341 
11.5 
5.4 

1647 
13.8 
6.4 

29.8 
22.6 
21.5 
6.2 
23.6 
0.26 

20.8 
22.2 
-1.4 

24.8 
36.7 
13.3 
4.1 
41.9 
5.3 

25.8 
21.0 
13.8 
5.7 
20.1 
0.58 

20.2 
20.7 
-0.5 

2.4 
36.2 
4.3 
-0.9 
40.0 
5.3 

-1,798 
-7.2 
-1,623 
-6.5 

-1,255 
-4.6 
-1,057 
-4.1 

4.5 
2.1 
0.2 
4.1 
0.1 

1936 
13.8 
7.1 

23.0 
27.1 
21.9 
6.7 
16.3 
0.36 

19.8 
22.4 
-2.6 

23.2 
42.2 
22.6 
1.1 
38.3 
1.0 

1,153 
4.1 
1,283 
4.7 

7.9 

6.8 

9.1 

5.5 
10.3 
8.2 
-1.7 
-1.0 

4.8 
0.8 
1.1 
-0.8 
0.5 

5.2 
3.8 
1.9 
4.0 

..

7.0 
6.2 
4.3 
4.0 

7.0 
7.7 
5.7 
4.0 

7.0
6.7
4.7
4.0

1784 
10.4 
6.2 

1989 
11.2 
6.9 

1946 
10.5 
6.3 

1858 
9.1 
5.5 

1920 
8.1 
5.2 

2087
7.4
5.2

24.7 
26.4 
23.1 
7.6 
17.1 
0.37 

21.1 
23.9 
-2.8 

25.2 
50.3 
14.8 
34.7 
49.0 
26.9 

432 
1.5 
572 
2.0 

9.1 

26.1 
27.4 
24.0 
8.2 
17.9 
0.34 

21.7 
24.6 
-2.9 

4.0 
52.3 
13.8 
3.1 
50.5 
8.3 

423 
1.5 
563 
2.0 

26.6 
25.1 
23.2 
7.7 
18.9 
0.38 

20.8 
24.0 
-3.2 

5.0 
51.3 
4.1 
8.0 
50.9 
6.8 

-458 
-1.5 
-318 
-1.0 

28.4 
25.3 
23.3 
7.0 
21.4 
0.34 

21.0 
23.5 
-2.5 

10.0 
51.7 
9.1 
15.0 
53.8 
11.2 

28.7 
25.1 
22.6 
7.0 
21.7 
0.34 

21.0 
23.5 
-2.5 

15.0 
54.6 
14.4 
20.0 
59.3 
16.1 

29.3
25.7
23.2
7.0
22.3
0.34

21.2
23.5
-2.3

15.0
57.8
16.0
20.0
65.3
15.1

-1,043 
-3.1 
-898 
-2.7 

-1,315 
-3.6 
-1,170 
-3.2. 

-1,493
-3.7
-1,348
-3.4

11.0 

11.2 

11.3 

11.4 

11.4

Note: Figures are rounded.
Source:
Actual data: Vietnamese authorities and Bank and Fund staff estimates. Estimates and projections: World Bank.

CAS - Annex A3

Page 2 of 2

VIETNAM: BALANCE OF PAYMENTS, 1997-2005
(US$ Billion)

Act. 
1997 
1998 

Rev 
1999 

PreL. 
2000 

Est 
2001 

Projected
2003 
2004 

2002 

2005

Exports (fob) 

9.1 

9.4 

11.5 

14.4 

15.0 

15.8 

17.4 

20.0 

23.0

Imports (fob) 

10.4 

10.3 

10.5 

14.1 

14.5 

15.7 

18.1 

21.7 

26.0

Trade Balance 

-1.3 

-1.0 

1.1 

0.4 

0.5 

0.1 

-0.7 

-1.7 

-3.0

Non-Factor Services 

-0.6 

-0.5 

-0.5 

-0.7 

-0.7 

-1.0 

-0.9 

-0.3 

0.7

Services (Net) 
of which:
- Interest 

-0.6 

-0.7 

-0.4 

-0.6 

-0.8 

-0.9 

-0.9 

-0.7 

-0.7

0.5 

0.6 

0.5 

0.5 

0.6 

0.6 

0.6 

0.6 

0.6

Transfers (Net) 
of which:
- Official Transfers 
- Private Transfers (net) 

0.9 

1.1 

1.2 

1.5 

1.5 

1.5 

1.6 

1.6 

1.7

0.2 
0.7 

0.2 
1.0 

0.1 
1.1 

0.1 
1.3 

0.1 
1.4 

0.1 
1.4 

0.1 
1.4 

0.1 
1.5 

0.1
1.5

Current Account Balance (exc. Grants) 

-1.8 

-1.3 

1.2 

0.4 

0.4 

-0.5 

-1.0 

-1.3 

-1.5

Capital Account 
Medium and Long-Term 
- Disbursements 
of which:
* IDA 
* Existing and New ODA 
- Amortizations/Principals 

1.7 
0.2 
1.0 

0.6 
0.1 
1.1 

-0.3 
-0.4 
0.9 

-0.7 
0.2 
1.4 

0.3 
0.2 
1.5 

1.1 
0.3 
1.6 

1.6 
0.5 
1.8 

1.8 
0.5 
1.8 

2.0
0.4
1.8

0.2 
0.4 
0.8 

0.3 
0.5 
1.1 

0.2 
0.8 
1.4 

0.2 
1.2 
1.2 

0.2 
1.2 
1.3 

0.4 
1.2 
1.3 

0.3 
1.3 
1.3 

0.3 
1.3 
1.3 

0.3
1.3
1.4

Short-Term 

-0.5 

-0.3 

-0.6 

-1.7 

-0.9 

-0.8 

-0.5 

-0.2 

0.0

Direct Investment 

2.0 

0.8 

0.7 

0.8 

1.0 

1.7 

1.5 

1.5 

1.7

ErroTs and Omissions 

-0.1 

0.0 

-0.2 

0.3 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0

Overall Balance 

0.0 

-0.5 

0.8 

0.1 

0.8 

0.8 

0.7 

0.6 

0.7

Financing 
Change in Foreign Reserves 
IMF (Net) 
Arrears 
Rescheduling 

0.0 
-0.3 
-0.1 
0.3 
0.0 

0.5 
0.1 
-0.1 
0.1 
0.4 

-0.8 
-1.3 
0.0 
0.5 
0.0 

-0.1 
-0.1 
0.0 
-9.7 
9.7 

-0.8 
-0.9 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 

-0.8 
-0.9 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

-0.7 
-0.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

-0.6 
-0.6 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

-0.7
-0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0

Note: Figures are rounded.
Source:
Actual data: Vietnamese authorities and Bank and Fund staffestimates. Estimates and projections: World Bank.

CAS - Annex A4

Page 1 of I

VIETNAM: KEY EXPOSURE INDICATORS, 1997-2005

(US$ Billion) a!
Prel. 
2000 

1999 

Act. 
1998 

b/ 

b/

1997 
b/ 

Est. 
2001 

2002 

Projected c/
2003 
2004 

2005

Total debt outstandlng 
and disbursed (TDOD) (US$ billion)
Public 
Multilateral 

Bilateral 
Concessional c/ 
Non-concessional dl 

Foreign direct investment 

10.1 

10.8 

11.1 

6.6 
1.3 

5.3 
3.3 

1.9 

3.5 

7.3 
2.0 

5.3 
3.7 
1.7 

3.5 

7.8 
2.3 

5.5 
4.0 
1.5 

3.4 

13.9 

10.8 
2.6 

8.2 
6.7 
1.5 

14.4 

11.5 
2.9 

8.6 
7.5 
1.1 

14.9 

12.2 
3.3 

9.0 
8.2 
0.7 

16.1 

13.5 
3.7 

9.8 
9.2 
0.6 

16.9 

14.3 
4.1 

10.2 
9.8 
0.4 

3.1 

2.9 

2.7 

2.6 

2.6 

18.8

16.1
4.6

11.5
11.2
0.3

2.7

Key Debt Service Indicators (%)

Debtservice/XGNFS 
Debt service/GDP 

11.5 
5.4 

13.8 
6.4 

13.8 
7.0 

10.4 
6.2 

11.2 
6.9 

10.5 
6.3 

9.1 
5.5 

8.1 
5.2 

7.4
5.2

Note: Figures are rounded..
a. Includes future disbursements.
b. Convertible debt only.
c. For 2000 onwards, includes the rescheduled of non-convertible Russian debt.
d. Suppliers credit, financial institutions, export credits, and other private creditors.
Source: World Bank staff estimates, based on informnation provided by the Govemment.

Vietnam Social Indicators

CAS- Annex A5
Page l of 2

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY

(% of population)

Nabonal headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100)

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini Index 

Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS

Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 

Access to an Improved water source

(% of population)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Latest single year 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1994-00 

Same regionlincome group
East
Asia & 
Pacific 

Low-
income

48.0 
2.3 
18.8 
5.7 

58.9 
1.8 
19.6 
4.2 

78.5 
1.5 
24.0 
2.2 

1,855.2 
1.1 
35.2 
2.1 

2,459.8
2.0
31.9
3.6

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

95 

.. 

.. 

19 

42 
52 

390 
120 

1,060 
135 

410
140

36.1

8.0
44.5

0.8 
2:8 

2.0 
2.9 

1.2
3.4

97 
100 
95 

56 
81 
50 

93 
93 
37 

91
91
91

75 
93 
66 

85 
85 
10

76
88
70

57
57

Life expectancy at birth

(years)

Total 
Male 
Female 

Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

CAS- Annex A5
Page 2 of 2

56 
54 
58 

73 
157 

320 
256 

.. 

.. 

63 
61 
65 

49 
105 

262 
204 

.. 

100 

69 
67 
72 

27 
34 

206 
141 

95

77 

69 
67 
71 

35 
45 

183 
132 

..

59
58
60

76
115

294
261

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age populaton and reported enrollment data.

2002 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

CAS - Annex A6

Page I of 5

A Chronology of Structural Reform, 1998-2002

Box 1: Integrating into the World Economy, 1998 - June 2002

1998

* Lowered the maximum import tariff to 50 percent (exceptions remain for six groups) and reducing the number of tariff-rates
to 15;
* Liberalized trading rights of domestic firms by allowing therm to export and import goods directly, without a license, though
residual restrictions.remain for importers;
* Allowed private firms to import fertilizer;

1999

* Allocated rice export quotas to non-state firms for the first time (by listing 5 private firms and 4 joint-ventures among the 47
authorized primary rice exporters) and allowed foreign firms to buy rice directly from farmers for export purposes;
* Auctioned 20 percent of garment export quotas;
* Encouraged trading activities by reducing the foreign exchange surrender requirement from 80 percent to 50 percent of
foreign exchange earnings;

* 

2000
* Removed quantitative import restrictions on 8 out of remaining 19.groups of products i.e. including fertilizer, liquid soda,
ceramic goods, plastic packaging, DOP plasticizer, ceramic sanitary ware, electricfans, and bicycle;
Signed a bilateral trade agreement with the US in July paving the way for MFN access of Vietnanese exports to the US
market, gradual opening up of Vietnam's economy, for goods and services as well as investments;
* Approved a roadmap for AFTA tariff reduction during 2001-2006 wherein most tariff lines will have their tariff reduced to
20% by early 2003 and to 5% by early 2006;
2001
* Enhanced the scope for long-term planning among traders by drawing up export and import plans for the period 2001-2005,
instead of the hitherto one year schemes;
* Removed QRs multilaterally on all tariff lines of the following groups of products: liquor, clinker, paper, floor tiles,
construction glass, some types of steel, and vegetable oil;
* Reduced the foreign exchange surrender requirement from 50 to 40 percent;
* Abolished the quota allocation for rice exports and fertilizer imports;
* Moved 713 tariff lines from the Temporary Exclusion List (TEL) to the Inclusion List (IL);
* Permitted all legal entities (companies and individuals) to export most goods without having to acquire a special license by
revising the implementing decree of the Trade law;
* Established an export support credit sourced from the State Development Assistance Fund,.to. promote exports;
* Reduced the number of items that FlEs have to export from 24 to 14, including such items as tiles, ceramics, footwear,
electric fans, plastic products, and common paints;
* Permitted FIEs to engage in exports of coffee, minerals, certain wood products, and certain textiles and garments;

2002
• 

Detailed a list of goods and tax rates for implementing the Agreement on: the Common Effect Preferential Tariffs (CEPT)
Scheme of ASEAN countries for the year 2002. Based on the schedule, 481 items were moved in to Inclusion list with tariff
lower than 20%. To date there are 5558 lines in the Inclusion List, 770 in the Temporary Exclusion List, 53 in the Senisitive
Agricultural List and 139 in General Exclusion List;
* A Govemment negotiation team has started working sessions on WTO accession in Geneva (April 2002)

CAS - Annex A6

Page 2 of 5

Box 2: Improving the Climate for Enterprise, 1998 - June 2002

1998

* 
* 

Issued a new Decree on foreign investment providing additional incentives to foreign investors;
Initiated the private sector donor dialogue under the auspices of the Consultative Group of donors in order to better understand the
constraints faced by the private sector, especially foreign investors;
* Amfended the Law on Promotion of Domestic Investment, allowing domestic and foreign organizations, and individuals, to buy
shares and contribute capital to domestic enterprises,- including equitized SOEs, and provided additional incentives for new
domestic investment;

1999

* Approved the Enterprise Law and issued decrees to implement it, eliminating a number of discretionary restrictions on the
establishment of private business;
* Provided regulations on secured transactions, enabling mortgages of land-use rights and houses, and collateralized lending on the
back of assets ranging from materials, machines, and production equipment to bonds, shares, and property rights,
* Revised the Land Law to convert, transfer, lease, provide as collateral and capital contribution of land use-rights to banks or to
joint-ventures;

2000

* 

Implemented the Enterprise Law and revoked unnecessary business licensing restrictions in 145 industries, trades and services to
ease private entry;
* Revised the Foreign Investment Law to create more favorable conditions for foreign investors: Improving access to foreign
exchange, allowing mortgaging of land by foreign bank branches in Vietnam, permitting automatic registration for export-oriented
foreign investment, and making provisions for the Government to issue guarantees for large infrastructure projects;
Amended the 1993 Law on Petroleum, making the investment and:regulatory environment for foreign investment in the oil and gas
sector more attractive;
* Established the first stock exchange center in Ho Chi Minh City, which is dealing in treasury bonds and shares of listed companies;

• 

2001

* 

* 

Increased openness and information by establishing an Enterprise Information Center under MPI on enterprises registered under the
Enterprise Law;
* Approved two BOT projects in the energy sector: Phu My 2.2 power plant with an EdF led consortium of TEPCO and GEC (US$
400 million) and Phu My 3 combined cycle power project with BP (US$450 million), thereby creating precedents for more BOTs in
infrastructure;
Provided detailed guidelines and listed all necessary documentations for foreign invested enterprises to mortgage land-use rights
and assets attached thereto to Vietnamese credit institutions and joint-venture banks;
* Allowed overseas Vietnamese to hold land-use rights, and decentralized control and monitoring of land-use rights to enhance the
functioning of the real estate market;
* 
Phased out the dual pricing policy for overseas Vietnamese in aviation fares, electricity, and visa fees;
* Unified train fares for foreigners, overseas Vietnamese, and Vietnamese nationals as of January 2002;
* Amended Decree 17 dated March 24, 1999 to improve transparency and legalize the real estate market, by providing official
regulations for sale, lease, mortgage and transfer'of land-use-rights;
Given overseas Vietnamese the right to own and dispose of property in Vietnam, provided they have invested in, or otherwise
contributed to the economy, or have been invited by the Government to take up residence and work in Vietnam;
* Recognized the importance of SMEs by updating the decree to support the development and continued growth of these enterprises
by specifying regulations and support mechanisms;

• 

2002
* Amended the constitution of Vietnam to provide the private sector status equal to that of the state sector;
* 
Introduced a website (www.business.gov.vn) - the first ever e-government site in Vietnam - on business registration, providing
information on procedures for registration and providing downloadable application forms;
* Proposed to eliminate 16 business licenses in the- following sectors: transport, trade, healthcare, telecommunications, industry,'
environment, and culture; and modify 13 current licenses into conditions to be fulfilled in the following sectors: internet provision,
advertisement, culture, healthcare and mnedicine (the decision is pending prime ministerial approval);
Set up the website: "Investment Information and Opportunities in Vietnam" (www.khoahoc.vnn.vn/mpi website) under MPI in
partnership with MIGA, to provide timely and clear information to domestic and foreign investors. The site also includes an online

* 

investment application facility;

* Allowed foreign portfolio investors to remit dividends from investments in the domestic securities markets.

CAS - Annex A6

Page 3 of 5

Box 3: Reforming State-Owned Enterprises, 1998 - June 2002

1998
Issued Decree 44 to simplify the process of equitization and allow limited foreign shareholding in equitized
* 
SOEs;
Issued Directive 20 to adopt a wider menu of reform options for SOEs, e.g. outright sale, transfer to employees
competitive bidding, for purchasing SOEs on SOE shares, leases, management contract etc.;
* Announced annual targets for equitizations for 1998 - 2000;
* Equitized 52 SOEs;

* 

1999

* Completed classification of SOEs into three groups: profitable, temporary loss-makers and permanent loss-
makers;
Issued decrees and regulations for outright sale, transfer to employees, and lease of small SOEs, without
* 
requiring conversion of SOEs into joint-stock companies as required for equitization;
* Selected 100 large troubled SOEs for independent diagnostic audits (i.e. operational reviews);
* Equitized 151 SOEs;

2000
* Selected three general corporations (Seaprodex, Vinatex, and Vinacafe) for developing specific action
restructuring plans;
* Expanded authority of provinces to decide on divestiture of SOEs with capital of up to five billion VND instead
of I billion permitted before;
* Established an Assistance Fund for Restructuring and Equitizing SOEs to finance severance payments, early
pension payments and retraining for redundant workers, to minimize the negative social impact of SOE reforms
on workers;
* Adopted a comprehensive five-year SOE-reform plan with annual target for the first three years.
* Equitized 185 SOEs;

2001
Established a quarterly monitoring system for 200 large highly-indebted SOEs, revised a decision to clarify
reporting requirements and introduced sanctions against late reporting;
Issued government's instruction for a moratorium on establishing new SOEs by local People Committees and
* 
line ministries until further notice (Official Dispatch 574/CP of June 25, 2001);
* Established the Financial Investment Company under the Enterprise Law, to represent the interests of the State
as owner and co-owner of SOEs and issued decree 63 on transforming SOEs into one-member limited liability
companies -- steps towards disentangling the complex ties between Government and SOEs;
* Equitized a total of 194 SOEs;

2002
* Planning to allow managers of equitized enterpnses to purchase shares in excess of the number of shares
subscribed by employees, requiring 30 days public notice prior to announcement-of eqqitization, and clarifying
potential conflicts between the SOE Law and the Enterprise Law (Decree expected to be issued by end-June
2002);
* Equitized a total of 87 enterprises as of end-May;

CAS - Annex A6

Page 4 of 5

Box 4: Strengthening the Banking System, 1998 - June 2002

1998

Established a Bank Restructuring Committee and initiated restructuring of non-state Joint-Stock Banks (JSBs) in HCM City;
Issued regulations for intervening in troubled banks including conditions for "Special Control Regime" of the central bank;

1999

* 
SBV completed financial assessment of all JSBs
* Closed and merged 4 JSBs in HCM City;
* 
Issued prudential regulations for banking operations, financial ratios for safe operation of credit institutions; authority of banking
inspectors; deposit insurance and collateral;

Issued new regulations for operations of banks in respect of calculating provisions against their non-performing loans.on a quarterly
basis;
Assigned full responsibility and accountability for all aspects of the credit cycle to banks; requiring loan officers in commercial banks
to check not only the capacity of the borrower to repay a loan but also to check the feasibility and viability of the project that is to be
financed;
Allowed lending on an unsecured basis to SOEs and foreign invested enterprises;
Replaced fully administered interest rates on dollar and dong loans by a more flexible interest-rate system under which the dollar rate
is anchored in SIBOR, while the dong rate is allowed to vary around a SBV base rate subject to a ceiling rate;
Issued regulations for the organization of SBV's supervision of the banking sector -- the State Bank Inspectorate;
Supplemented the existing legislation for foreign banks with detailed provisions concerning the organization and operations of SOCBs
and JSBs, broadening the range of non-core activities;
Clarified provisions for registering secured transactions;

2000
* 

2001

Provided guidelines for the realization, either through sale or seizure of secured property, for recovery of debts by credit institutions;
Simplified procedures goveming deferred L/Cs, by cutting the number of requirements from six to two - effective June 10, 2001;
Adopted a detailed restructuring plan for the four large SOCBs including annual milestones (i.e. actions and targets) that need to be
achieved to obtain phased re-capitalization funds from Govermment;
Broadened the scope for financial leasing and improved regulations to create a more attractive operating environment for domestic
and foreign leasing companies;
Freed interest rates on foreign currency lending by banks in Vietnam and off-shore banks;
Issued guidelines for the implementation of the Ordinance on Commercial Paper. from 1999, including on the form and language of,
and conditions for guaranteeing and pledging commercial paper, and the respective obligations of the different parties to such
commercial transactions;
Increased autonomy of commercial banks by allowing them to set up intemal systems for clearing payment transactions without State
Bank involvement, but with State Bank permission;
Provided a framework for cross-border payment transactions, recognizing, for the first time, that international practices can be used to
govern cross-border transactions if Vietnamese law does not require otherwise;
Allowed all joint-venture and foreign banks operating in Vietnam to take collateral in: the form of land from local clients, i.e. in the
form of land use rights and land certificates;
Allowed joint-venture banks to receive hard-currency deposits from Vietnamese clients;

2002
* Established a National Register Agency for Secured Transaction under the Ministry of Justice to facilitate transactions by credit
institutions and entitling third parties to access information related to secured transactions. The registry opened for business March, 12
2002;
* Enhanced the process for resolution of bad loans by allowing domestic commercial banks and credit organizations to sell collateral
backing loans directly in the market at market determined prices instead of going through state-owned agencies;
* Brought banking regulations closer to intemational accounting normns, by stating that should customers fail to repay an installment the
entire loan can be accelerated and classified as overdue, and giving banks more discretion in setting interest rates on overdue debt;
Perrmiitted banks to make decisions on the terms of any given loan, including domestic banks' lending to foreign borrowers in
Vietnam, such as maturity and interest rate, and generally devise new forms of lending provided they are not forbidden by. law,
including, for the first time, the possibility of overdraft lending;
Revoked the license of one JSB that had previously been under special supervision by SBV;
Removed the interest rate ceilings on VND, giving banks the freedom to quote appropriate rates that reflect the credit risk of their
lending.

* 

CAS - Annex A6
Page 5 of 5

Box 5: Managing Public Resources Better, 1998 - June 2002

1998
• 
Published 1997 final accounts and the 1999 budget plan in the form of a freely available booklet,
Provided fiscal information to international organizations and donors in a GFS-consistent format as well as to
all relevant Government agencies;

• 

1999
• 
Improved fiscal management by requiring improved accounting of foreign grants and clarification of roles in
management of external debt and in debt monitoring;
* Clarified processes for managing fees, charges and revenues raised and spent by spending agencies;

2000
* Published the Public Expenditure Review - Managing Public Resources Better;
Issued a regulation on commune budget management and a simplified budget classification to provide a
* 
framework for improved accounting, reporting and management of budgets and other financial activities at
comnmune level;
Initiated a pilot of block grant budgeting for administrative agencies in Ho Chi Minh City to permit more
autonomy and encourage efficient use of resources and appropriate re-allocation where needed;
2001

* 

* 

* Developed a detailed public expenditure management improvement action plan with a timetable for the next
three years;
* Established an inter-agency working group to coordinate inplementation of PER-2000 recommendations;
Completed provincial PERs for Ho Chi Minh City and Quang Binh;
Issued revised regulations on fiscal transparency to allow more budgetary inforination to be made public and to
enforce implementation by lower level of government;
Initiated a pilot development of the medium term expenditure framework for education sector;
Adopted a decision to expand Ho Chi Minh City's block grant budgeting pilot to other provinces and central
agencies;
Passed an amendmrent to the Constitiftion to provide a full autonomy to Provincial People's Council to approve
and allocate its budget;

* 

* 

-

2002

• 

* 

Posted, for the first time, budgetary informnation on MOF's website;
Issued a Decree on the new financial management mechanism for public service delivery agencies to provide
more autonomy, flexibility and certainty to these agencies in managing their financial resources.

WB18776
M:\VIETNAM\CAS Full FY03\Annexes\Annex A6 - A Chronology of Structural Reforms.doc
July 25, 2002 5:04 PM

Status of Bank Group Operations in Vietnam
IDA Credits in the Operations Portfolio

(as of June 30, 2002)

CAS - Annex B I

Page I of I

Credit 
Fiscal 
No. 
Year Borrower Purpose 
Nine credits closed
84500 
1979 Govt 
Irrigation 
25610 
1994 Govt Agriculture Rehabilitation 
26570 
1994 Govt 
Structural Adjustment Credit 
28200 
1996 
EVN Power Development 
30300 
1998 Govt Debt Reduction 
27240 
1996 
EVN Power Sector Rehabilitation 
25490 
1994 Govt HighwayRehabilitation 
28550 
1996 Govt Rural Finance 
29290 
1997 Govt Rural Transport 
Sub-Total 

Current Projects
25480 
1994 Govt Primary Education 
27110 
1995 Govt 
Irrigation Rehabilitation 
27850 
1996 Govt Banking Modemization 
28070 
1996 Govt Family Health and Population 
28080 
1996 Govt National Health 
CN0130 
1997 Govt Highway Rehabilitation 11 
CN0260 
1997 Govt WaterSupply 
29960 
1998 Govt ForestProtection 
30000 
t998 Govt 
Inland Waterways 
30340 
1998 
EVN Power Transmission and Distribution 
30990 
1998 Govt Agricultural Diversification 
31250 
1999 Govt Urban Transport 
31260 
1999 Govt Higher Education 
31980 
1999 Govt MekongDeltaWater 
32110 
1999 Govt 3 Cities Sanitation 
32920 
2000 Govt Coastal WetlandsfProtection 
33060 
2000 Govt Rural Transport 11 
3358 
2000 
EVN Rural Energy 
3448 
2001 Govt Mekong Transport 
34750 
2001 Govt HCMC Environmental Sanitation 
3511 
2001 Govt Poverty Reduction Support Credit 
3532 
2001 Govt Community Based Rural Infrastructure 
3572 
2002 Govt Northem Mountains Pov. Reduction 
3594 
2002 Govt Primary Teachers Training 
3631 
2002 Govt Regional Blood Transfusion 
3648 
2002 Govt Rural Finance 11 
3680 
2002 
EVN Energy Efficiency and Equitization 

Original Amount 
in US$ million 
Cancel- 
lations 

IDA 

IBRD 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

60.00 
96.00 
150.00 
180.00 
35.00 
165.00 
158.50 
122.00 
55.00 
1021.50 

70.00 
100.00 
49.00 
50.00 
101.20 
195.60 
98.61 
21.51 
73.00 
199.00 
66.85 
42.74 
83.30 
101.80 
80.50 
31.80 
103.90 
150.00 
110.00 
166.30 
250.00 
102.80 
110.20 
19.84 
38.20 
200.00 
225.00 

0.30 
1.80 
0.00 
1.40 
0.00 
10.50 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
14.00 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
26.80 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Difference
between 
actual and 
expected
Undis- 
disburse- Development 
bursed ments (%) W objectives 

Last ARPP
supervision ratings b/

Implementation
progress

S
S
S

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
U
S
S
S
U
S
S
S
S

-

S
S

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
11.70 
0.00 
0.00 
11.70

3.30 
19.40 
30.90 
13.50 
49.70 
50.80 
30.50 
18.00 
58.80 
165.80 
39.50 
33.50 
68.30 
90.30 
73.20 
28.80 
74.40 
117.80 
110.00 
165.10 
156.80 
105.40 
116.50 
20.70 
40.80 
212.30 
235.80 

S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

-

S 
S 

10.00 
0.00 
0.00 

9.72 
1.65 
77.36 
29.06 
58.99 
34.71 
11.59 
3.83 
-1.62 
69.94 
-5.97 
-17.60 
8.58 
57.87 
22.27 
41.59 
28.24 
58.87 
28.34 
1.02 
-0.26 
0.34 
0.00 
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Total - Current Projects 

2841.15 

26.80 

2129.90

Grand Total - All Projects 
(Closed and Current)

3862.65

Total disbursed 
of which repaid 
Total undisbursed 

Active Loans Closed Loans 
644.90 
954.18 
0.00 
12.24 
2129.90 
11.70 

Total
1599.08
12.24
2141.60

Nore: IDI 
disb-- 
w dI= pjwd io SAP wio- .c.I ibwe 
o o dam
b. Fo.owicg tbe FY94 AwARo Peview ofFonf.ho Pertfrte (ARPP),. Itebasod sylte. w 
c Di3bene-e t ir estt2e to cdGtie beyed otesing dter

Soeecc: wo.rd H-k.

iedoee 

(HS-b5iy satisfetoy, Ssefcti.ty, Ueaifeoy, HU-bighty tesifaclty).

CAS- Annex H2
Page I of I

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of End FY02

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number-of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a' c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (US$ million) 
Number of Projects Under Supervision during FY 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002

20 
2.6 

5.0 
2.4 

5.0 
2.4 
17.3 

yes 
1.243 
22 
56500 

21 
3.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
12.0 

yes 
1.489 
24 
62042 

25 
3.4 

8.0 
5.5 
.8.0 

5.5 
11.9 

yes 
1.36 
25 
54400 

27
3.5

7.4
2.6

11.1
3.4
14.5

yes
2.046
28
73071

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 

Last Five FYs

6 
650.5 
0.0 
0.0 

4
440.5
0.0
0.0

a. At the end of the fiscal year.
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes ail active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS - Annex B3

Page I of I

Vietnam
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio

As of June 2002
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

| 

Disbursed

Equity 

Quasi 

Loan 
19.2 
22.6 
7.22 
0 
3.08 
16.8 
0.14 
0 
0 
68.97 

0 
0 
0 
0.75 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.75 

Partic
15.24
44.94
1.69
0
0.54
16.8
0
0
0
79.21

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

FY Approval 
1995/97 
1996 
1996 
1996 
1996 
1997 
1998 
2002 
2002 
Total Portfolio: 

Company 
Nghi Son Cement 
Morn.Star Cement 
SMH Glass Co. 
VILC 
Vimaflour 
NATL 
MFL Vinh Phat 
F-V Hospital 
VEIL 

Loan 

Equity 

Quasi 

19.2 
22.6 
7.22 
0 
3.08 
16.8 
0.3 
8 
0 
77.2 

0 
0 
0 
0.75 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.75 

Partic 
15.24 
44.94 
1.69 
0 
0.54 
16.8 
0 
0 
0 
79.21 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12 
12 

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan 

Equity 

Quasi 

Partic

2000 
Interflour 
2001 
RMIT Vietnam 
2002 
Dragon Capital 
2002 
F-V Hospital 
2002 
Global Cybersoft 
Total Pending Commitment: 

8 
7.5 
0 
1.5 
0 
17 

0 
0 
0 
0 
1.25 
1.25 

0 
0 
2 
0.5 
0 
2.5 

5
0
0
0
0
5

Vietnam - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002

CAS - Annex B4
Page 1 of I

IFC approvals (US$m) 

B3
Collective Inv Vehicle 
Education Services 
Finance and Insurance 
Food and Beverages 
Health Care 
Information Technology 
Textiles, Apparel & Le 
Total 

Investment instrument(%)
Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other
Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 Est

0.00 

8.00 

7.50 

31.25

100

100

100 

100 

100 

100 

0 

0 
0 

0 

38

11

32
9
10
100

30
14
56

0 

100 

100 

100

36.00 

36.00 

20.00 

20.00

CAS - Annex C1
Page I of I

Vietnam--Summary of Non-Lending Services

Product 

Theme 1: Transition to a Market Economy
(1) Cross Sectoral Work on Economic Growth 
and Poverty Reduction
(2) Financial and Corporate Development 
(3) Rural Developmnent 
(4) Urban Development 

Theme 2: Social Inclusion, Equitable and
Sustainable Development
(5) Poverty and Vulnerability 
(6) Access to Services 
(7) Environmental Sustainability 

Theme 3: Promoting Good Governance
(8) Public Financial Management 
(9) Decentralization and Participation 
(10) Legal Reform 
(11) Public Administration Reform 
(12) ICT 

Other
(13) Partnerships and Aid Coordination 
(14) Fiduciary Reviews (CFAA, CPAR) 
(15) Country Assistance Strategy 

FY02 
(US$000) 

FY03
(US$000)

275 

380 
135 
15 

205 
240 
60 

120 

150 

105 
60 
230 

260

350
75
80

205
170
50

150
100
115
100
60

150
100
40

Total 

1975 

2005

CAS - Annex C2

Pagel of I

The CDF Matrix for Vietnam

- - -

. .

-:- 

.-

.

; 

-. .- 

*.The Pillars of Development in Vietnam 

* 

-

-

-

BulIdinri Mldelrf 

. ,. Creating.a Supporive Climate fr 

-

, Enhancing Human Capacity 

,Pmviding Efftclent Infiastructure Services 

Improving 
Environ. 

Transformingtthe Rural

.Governance 

-

' 

Enterprlse- 
. , . . . ,. .,, 
, 
,, 

-. 

--
.

, -

Economy

-

-

:. 

. -

.

.

~~~~~~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Quallty 

-

.

Public 
Administration 
Reform 

Legal 
Sector 
Reform 

Financial 
System 

Social 
Safety Net 
and Social 
Programs 

Private 
Sector 
Dev/t 

Education 

Health and 
Population 

Cultural 
Issues 

Water and 
Sanitation 

Power 

Transport 
& 
Communication 

Urban 
Devt 

Environment 

Agriculture/ 
Rural Dev't
(except
forstry)

Forestry

| .

.

ADB 

ADB 
UNDP 
WB 

ADS 
EC 
IMF 
UNDP 
WB 

UNDP 
WB 

EC 
ADB 
ADB 
UNDP 
EC 
EC 
UNIDO 
UNESCO UNFPA 
WB (IFC) UNICEF UNICEF 
WB 
WB 
WHO 

UNESCO ADB 
ADB 
UNICEF WB 
WB 

ADS 
WB 

ADS 
UNDP 
WB 

ADB 
EC 
UNDP 
UNEP 
WS 

ADS 
EC 
FAO 
IFAD 
UNCDF 
UNOP
WB

AD8
EC
FAO
UNOP
WB

r- MultiP EC 
lateral 

UNDP 
WB 

Australia 
Canada 
Denmark 
Finland 
Germany 

Australia 
Australia 
France 
Austraia Australia 
Ausb-Aia 
Canada 
Canada 
Japan 
Ausiria Belgium Austria 
Denmark Denmark Netherlands Canada Canada Belgium 
France 
France 
UK 
Derunark Czech RP Canada 
Sweden Germany 
Germany Denmark 
Czech Rep. 

Finland 
Australia 
Japan Australia 
France 
Denmark Sweden Canada 
Netherlands Finland 
Norwy Denmark 
Sweden France 
Belgium France 
Italy 
France Japan 

Australia 
Canada 
Belgium Denmark 
Denmark Germany 
Finland 
Netherlands 
France 
Norway 

Australia 
Auslria 
Belgium 
Canada 
Denmark 

Finland
Germany
Japan
Netherlands
Sweden

Bliateral 

.

Netherlands 
Norway 
Sweden 
Switzedand 
UK 

Japan 

Japan 
Nethedands 
Norway 
Sweden 
Swtzedand 
UK 
USA 

Japam 
France 
New Zeal. Gem any 
Sweden 
Japan 
Switerand 
Korea 
UK 
New 
Zealand 
Norway 

France 
Gemiany 
llaly 
Japan 
Korea 
Luxembourg 
Nethedands 

Japan 
Ineland Spain 
Netherlands Korea UK 
UK 

Japan 
Sweden 
Swlitzerland Switzedand 
US 

Fnland 
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Nethedands
New Zealand

Switzerland

. e 

Spain 
New Zealand 
Sweden Spain 

Norway
Spain

X 

.

Switzedand Sweden 
UK 
UK 
USA 

Sweden
Switzedand
Thailand
UK
ActionAid 
CECA 
CIDSE 
CRS 
GRET 
Oxram B
Oxfam GB
Oamrn HK
SC-I
-SNV
WVI

Asia Found. 
Ford Foundalion 
KAS 
Oxfam GB 
Oxfam HK 

Asia 
Found. 
FES 
KAS 

ActionAid 
Oufam a 

ActionAid 
Oxfam GB 
SC-UK 

Asia Found CARE 
CECI 
CDSE 
CRS 
Danish Red 
EED 
Cross 
EFD 
DKT 
Ford 
IFRC 
Oxfam GB MCNV 
Oxfam HK 
Oxfan-HK 
SC UK 
Path C 
VSO 
Pathflnder 
Plan 
Pop Council 
SC-UK 
SC-us
WPF

Ford 

AconAid 
CIDSE 
FHI 
IDE 
Oxfam 8 
Plan 
WV] 

ENDA 
SC-UK 
Vilies en 
Transiion 

Birdlife Int. 
CODSE 
ENDA 
FFI 
Ford 
Fronfier 
Helvetas 
IUCN 
Oxfam GB 
Ofarn HK 
OulamnO 
VSO
WWF

Fronaier
Helvetas
IUCN
Oxlam GB
WWF

NGOs 

CAS - Annex C3
Page I of 3

Cofinancing Operations in Vietnam

(as of June 2002)

Fiscal
Year 

1996 
1996 
1997 

1998 
1998 
1998 

1999 

2000 

2000 

2001 
2002 
2002 

Purpose 

Family Health and Populadon 
Natonal Health 
Water Supply 

Forest Protection 
Power Transmission and Distribution 
Agricultural DiversIfication 

3 Cities Sanitadon 

Coastal Wetiands/Protection 

Rural Transport II 

Poverty Reduction Support Credit 
Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction 
Primary Teacher Development Project 

Original Amount
In USS miUlon

IDA Co-finandng 

Co-finandCers*

50.00 
101.20 
98.61 

21.51 
199.00 
66.85 

80.50 

31.80 

103.90 

250.00 
110.00 
19.80 

61.00 
9.00 
17.98 

5.16 
17.40 
15.57 

18.70 

11.30 

26.20 

44.10 
10.5 
10.3 

ADB (41) and Germany (20)
Sweden (4.7) and Netherlands (4.3)
Finland (3.89), Denmark (12.76) and Australia (1.33)

Netherlands
Sweden (16.6) and ADB (0.8)
France

Australia (1.2), Denmark (11.7) and Finland (5.8)

Denmark

UK

UK (19.3), Holland (13A), Denmark (9.5) and SIDA (1.9)
UK
UK

Totals 

1133.17 

247.21

*co-floancing amount for each donor In USS millIon In parentheses

VIETNAM - TRUST FUNDS for PROJECT PREPARATION

PHRD & BILATERALS
SORT BY UNIT, BY BOARD FY, BY DONOR

RESP 

PROJECT 

BOARD FY DONOR 

TF # 

GRANT AMT US$

EASRD 
EASRD 
EASRD 
EASRD 
EASRD 
EASRD 
EASPR 
EASPR 
EASEG 
EASHD 
EASRD 
EASTR 
EASRD 
EASEG 
EASUR 
EASUR 
EASRD 
EASHD 

Mekong Delta Water Resources 
Community Based Poverty Reduction (CBRIP) 
CBRIP 
CBRIP - Employment Generaton and Social Safety Net 
Northem Mountains Poverty Reduction 
Northem Mountains Poverty Reduction 
Northem Mountains Poverty Reduction 
Public Finance Management Reform 
Energy Efficiency & Equitization 
Primary Education for Disadvantaged Children 
Water Resources Assistance 
Road Network Improvement Project 
Forest Sector Development 
Rural Energy II 
Urban Upgrading 
Urban Water Supply 
Natural Disasters Mitigaton Project 
Provincial Health Systems Program 

_ 

_ 

TOTAL GRANTS 

__ 

_ 

FY99 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY03 
FY02 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY05 
FY05 

_ > 

PHRD 
Denmark 
UK 
ASEM I 
Denmark 
PHRD 
JSDF 
PHRD 
PHRD 
PHRD 
PHRD 
PHRD 
PHRD 
PHRD 
PHRD 
PHRD 
PHRD 
PHRD 

TF026488 
TF023547 
TF050001 
TF022366 
TF021338 
TF026247 
TF026559 
TF051127 
TF026108 
TF026248 
TF026252 
TF026348 
TF026182 
TF026489 
TF026249 
TF026835 
TF026834 
TF025781 

$582,100
$367,500
$307,000
$496,665
$474,009
$405,000
$1,395,000
$742,880
$771,000
$637,000
$950,000
$448,000
$495,650
$810,000
$841,900
$964,350
$750,400
$336,000

,484

CAS - Annex C3

Page 2 of 3

VIETNAM - TRUST FUNDS for BANK-EXECUTED TECHN ICAL ASSITANCE
SORT BY UNIT, BY BOARD FY, BY DONOR

RESP 

PROJECT 

A. PROJECT SPECIFIC

Board FY DONOR 

TF # 

GRANT AMT US$

EASHD 
EASHD 
EASRD 
EASRD 
EASRD 
EASRD 
EASRD 
EASRD 
EASUR 
EASUR 

Primary Teachers Development 
Improving Education for Disadvantaged Children 
Preparation of Water Resources Assistance 
Forest Sector Development Project 
Forest Sector Development Project 
Forest Sector Development Project 
Forest Sector Development Project 
Forest Sector Development Project 
Urban Upgrading 
Urban Water Supply 

FY02 
FY03 
FY03 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY04 
FY05 
FY04 

DFID 
Australian 
France 
France 
Australian 
Canada 
Canada 
Ireland 
Switzerland 
Australian 

TF023244 
TF038158 
TF038737 
TF041000 
TF040796 
TF040888 
TF038204 
TF041050 
TF026595 
TF040977 

= = 

-

TO _ LC3R_OJSPEC$1,40 
'Donors in nold are consulrant TFs

1,600

B. GENERAL

COCPD 
EASES 
EASES 
EASES 
EASES 
EASES 
EASHD 
EASPR 
EASPR 
EASPR 
EASPR 
EASPR 

Sector Work - Mining 
NA 
National Sectors Strategy for Clean Development Mect NA 
Poverty Environment Nexus Study ESW 
NA 
DUTCH PARTNERSHIP - Lead Phaseout Initiative 
NA 
Vietnam Community Based Forest Ecosystem Manage NA 
Metropolitan Environment Improvement Project 
NA 
Quality Education for All 
NA 
Trade and Poverty (AAA for Reform) 
NA 
Export Study 
NA 
Equity and Budgeting 
NA 
Poverty Analysis & Policy Advice Suppport Program 
NA 
Reform of State-Owned Enterprises 
NA 

EASRD 
BARREN HILLS Afforestaton Projrect 
NA 
EASTR 
Transport and Trade Facilitation 
NA 
EWDEN ESMAP-Electricity Law & Regulations II 
NA 
EWDES 
ESMAP: Policy Dialogue Seminar and New Mining Cod NA 
EWDES 
ESMAP - Policy Dialogue Seminar and New Mining Coi NA 

-_~~ _ __CTAiGEk_ A 
Donors in bold are consuiltant TFs

Germany 
Australian 
Korea 
Netherland 
Norway 
Netherlands 
CIDA 
Australian 
Australian 
UK 
UK 
UK 

Fln!and 
Japan 
UK 
Germany 
UK 

TF038803 
TF040219 
TF040193 
TF023269 
TF024747 
TF050470 
TF029823 
TF040849 
TF040987 
TF023474 
TF022028 
TF050154 

TF040649 
TF038967 
TF023712 
TF050084 
TF028925 

_5,747.954

$703,355
$154,635
$128,000
$27,720
$46,000
$31.640
$32,250
$20,000
$210,000
$48,000

$100,000
$200.000
$20,000
$100,000
$60,000
$250,000
$990,000
$175,000
$135,000
$200,000
$2,834,975
GBP322,400

$48,339
$154,640
$330,000
$70,000
$80,000

-- -r 

~G' - -

QTr_~A r 

s 

-_ 

.a 

-nfefi 

rV ~.~-- 

-s 

-

_ 

_

CAS - Annex C3

Page3 of 3

VIETNAM - TRUST FUNDS for GOVERNMENT-EXECUTED TECHNICAL ASSITANCE
SORT BY SOURCE OF FUNDS

RESP 

PROJECT 

Board FY DONOR 

TF z 

GRANT AMT USS

EASEG 
EASPS 
EACVF 
EACVF 
EASES 
EASES 
EASES 
EAPCO 
EASFS 
EASPS 
EASFS 
EASFS 
EASPR 
EASTR 
EASPS 
EASPR 
EASPR 
EASPR 
EASRD 
EASPS 
EASPS 
EASPS 

Capacity Building for Power and Gas Sector Regulation 
Capacity BuildUng for Privately Financed Projects 
Procurement Ordinance 
Development of Decentralized Implementaton Capacity 
Environmental lnformabon Management 
Stengthening Environmental and Sodal Services 
Metropolitan Environment Improvement Pnoject 
Improvement of Financial Accountability 
Banking Reform, Regulation and Supervision 
Vietnam Diagnostic Audits of State-Owned Enterprises (under the Miyazawa Initiative) 
Banking Reform and Development In Vietnam 
Vietnam Banking Sector Restructurng 
State Owned Commercial Bank Restructuring in Vietnam 
Accelerating Equitization and Commercializaton of SOEs in the Transport Sector 
Vietnam State-Owned Enterprse Reform 
Operation and Monitorng of the Social Safety Net for Redundant Workers 
Banking Reform Program 
Building Capacity for Decentralized Financing 
Evaluation of CBRIP 
Reform of State-Owned Enterprses 
Reform of State-Owned Enterprises: Phase 2 
Pilot Restructuring of Three General Corporatons 

NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 

IDF 
TF027564 
IDF 
TF027563 
IDF 
TF027283 
IDF 
TF027289 
IDF 
TF027361 
IDF 
TF051032 
Netherlands TF050471 
IDF 
TF027408 
PHRD 
TF025709 
PHRD 
TF026343 
ASEM I 
TF020583 
ASEM I 
TF022399 
ASEM I 
TF027944 
ASEM I 
TF022098 
ASEM I 
TF022398 
ASEM II 
TF050280 
ASEM II 
TF050454 
TF050193 
ASEM II 
TF050255 
ASEM II 
Denmark 
TF021418 
Denmark 
TF023493 
UK 
TF050047 

S478,000
$487,000
S430,000
S499,250
$300.000
$235,000
$250,000
$290,600
$1,282,400
S4,000,000
$991,250
$1,518,125
$4688000
S439,000
$1,870,000
$342,000
$694,000
$1,000,000
S419,000
S474.009
$348,431
$6,858,000

TOTrAL _= 

_ 

= 

-

-$23,6i2,064

_ 

_- 

_ _- 5 

VIETNAM - GLOBAL ENViRONMENT FACILITY

SORT BY BOARD FY

RESP 

PROJECT 

Board FY 

TYPE DONOR 

TF # 

GRANT
AMT US$

EASRD 
EASRD 
EASES 
EASEG 
EASEG 
EASES 
EASRD 
EASEG 
EASEG 
EASRD 

HON MUN Manne Protected Area Pilot Project 
HON MUN Marine Protected Area Pilot Project 
Conservation of Pu Luong CuC Phuong Limestone Landscape 
Renewable Energy - Preparation of SEIER 
Energy Efficiency & Equitization 
Chu Yang Sin Nature Reserve 
Bach Ma-Hai Van Green Corridor 
Demand Side Management 
Demand Side Management 
Forest Sector Development Poject 

FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY03 
FY03 
FY04 

Full 
Full 
Medium 
Medium 
Full 

Full 

Denmark TF023886 
$731,840
GEF 
TF023877 
$974,785
GEF 
TF028987 
$749,885
GEF 
TF028286 
$350,000
GEF 
TF051229 $4,500,000
$600,000
$900,000
$216,000
$65,500
$200,000

TF050064 
TF040793 
TF050719 

GEF 
Canada 
GEF 

TOTAL PROJECT SPECIF'CS " 

-

=- 

-- 

-

-

VIETNAM: POLICY MATRIX FOR THE CPRGS AND WORLD BANK PROGRAM OF SUPPORT'
(FY03-FY05)

CAS - Annex Dl
Page I of 19

A. Macroeconomic and Structural Policies to promote economic growth, raise income and
create opportunities for the poor.

Policy areas and Objectives 

Polices, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

.

L. Create legal environment for fair and competitive business

Bank Group Instruments
.

AAA 

Lending

1. Create a fair business 
enviromnent for different 
forms of enterprises and 
increase the transparency of 
regulations and policies 

Remove impediments for registration and start-up of businesses and 
create a level playing field for different forms of enterprises through 
implementation of the Law on Enterprises, continue to revoke or 
modify busmess licenses in the remaining sub-sectors where restrictive 
licensing exists. 
Pronmlgate regulations to implement the Revised Land Law (2002) 
and issue land-use right certificates to all land users (2005). 
Create equal conditions for all types of enterprises to access capital, 
credit, land, technology, profession, information, and current 
preferential systems of the State. 
Develop and improve a legal framework to ensure a stable and 
predictable investmnent environment and to promote openness, and 
transparency of measures and policies to encourage greater 
investment. 
Create more favourable conditions for attractmng foreign investmnent
E.g. gradually remove the dual pricing system inposed by the State on 
state-supplied services for business activities of domestic and foreign- 
invested enterprises. 
Promote direct foreign investment in export production and in social 
sectors.

Unify step by step the legal framework, policy and conditions for

PRSCII (FY03) 

PRSC m (FY04) 
Urban Water 
Supply (FY04) 
PRSC IV 

Private Sector 
Assessment, jointly 
with IFC (FY03) 
Policy notes on 
framework for 
Private Sector 
S 
Development 
(FY05) 
(FY04-06) 
PRSC V (FY06) 
Land-use Rights 
E-Government
Study (FY03-FY04) Systems and
Pilots for private 
Capacity building
sector participation 
(FY06)
in the water sector
(FY03)

Technical
enactment of
Electricity Law
(PPIAF) (FY03)

Other Donors

Mekong Project
Development Facility
(MPDF) provides
technical assistance
and capacity building
for small- and
medium sized private
enterprises.

1 Columns I and 2 of this Annex are reproducedfrom the CPRGS and lay out the Government's objectives and their detailed program ofpolicies and measures
to attain these objectives over the period 2003-2005. Columns 3 and 4 show how the World Bank Group and other donors, respectively, aim to support the
Government in implementing its program.

A. Macroeconomic and Structural Policies to promote economic growth, raise income and
create opportunities for the poor.

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

Bank Group Instruments
Lendng 

Other Donors

CAS - Annex Dl

Page 2 of 19

domestic and foreign-invested enterprises.
Construct and approve the Electricity Law.
Issue implementing regulations of Decree No. 90/CP on promoting
development of small and medium size enterprises (2002-2003).
Promote the activities of the farm economy by implementing Decree
No. 03/CP (2002-2003).
Prepare conditions 
to unify 
the Law 
to Encourage Domestic
Investment and the Foreign Investment Law (2003).
Promulgate the Bankruptcy Law (revised) applied to all types of
enterprises (2003).
Revise and amend some articles of the Labour Law (2002).
Promulgate State Law on Price (2002).
Promulgate State Law on Trade Arbitration (2002-2003).
Implement the Decree No. 132/CP on the development of rural
professions.
Revise and amend selected articles of the Co-operative Law (2003).
Promulgate the Best Company Management Rules and require all
companies listed on the Stock Market and Joint stock banks to
implement them within 18 months; encourage Joint stock companies
to implement these Rules also.
Construct the legal framework to allow for establishing business
associations.

2. Reform state-owned 
enterprises (SOEs) to 
strengthen their efficiency and 
competitiveness. 

Implement a medium term five - year SOE reform program during 
the 2001-2005 period, with annual targets to improve efficiency and 
to curtail losses in this sector. Complete the equitization, transfer to 
employees, sale, contracting out, leases, mergers, divestitures and 
liquidation of around 2,800 SOEs. Of which, comnplete equitization, 
sale and liquidation of, in 2002: 400 SOEs, in 2003: 500 SOEs. 
Promulgate criteria for the classification of SOEs and State 
Corporations into business- oriented SOEs and public-service SOEs 
(2002). 

ASEM grants 
providing technical 
assistance to 
Government 
agencies in 
implementing their 
SOE reform plans 
(FY02) 
SOE reforms in 

PRSCs 

Forestry Sector 
Development 
Project (FY04) 

Restructuring of three
large SOEs
(VINATEX,
VINACAFE and
SEAPRODEX)
(FY03-FY05) funded
by DFID
Diagnostic audits of
SOEs fnanced by

CAS - Annex Dl

Page 3 of 19

Other Donors

Australia, Denmark,
and Japan

ADB is providing TA
for SOE reform

Denmark supports
SOE restructuring
plans in the fisheries
sector

Germany povies

to restructure

SOEs in the
agricultural sector

A. Macroeconomic and Structural Policies to promote economic growth, raise income and
create opportunities for the poor.

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

Issue guidance for transforming SOEs into single owner limited 
liability companies (2002). 

Bank Group Instruments

AAA 
agriculture (FY04) 
Reform road map 

Lending

Promulgate a new decree to replace Decree No. 44/1998/ND-CP on 
SOE equitization. 

for the power sector 
(jointly with ADB) 

(FY04) 
Developing a 
program for the 
equitization of the 
electricity
distribution sector 

SOE reforms in the 
transport sector 
(shipping, ports and
potentially

railways) (FY03-

FY06)

Promulgate the Decree on Social Welfare Fund to extend to workers 
of SOEs (2002). 
Promulgate Decree on the Treatment of Redundant Workers (2002). 

Develop an incentive mechanism to encourage redundant works to 
resign voluntarily during the process of implementing the SOE 

reform po m.support 

reform 
program. 
Develop a pilot plan to restructure several selected Corporations 
(about 3). Then, complete the plan to restructure 3 corporations 
(2002) and start the action plan (2003). 

Promulgate the Decree on SOE Debt Clearance. 

Develop a set of criteria to supervise and evaluate the business
performance and effectiveness of SOEs. Complete the system of
debt control of 200 large SOEs in order to have suitable reform
policies. Develop the system of debt control to all SOEs in order to
have policies to limit risks, clear bad debts, re-arrange or liquidate
ineffective SOEs.

Carry out performance assessment/diagnostic audits of several large
SOEs. Complete the performance assessment/ diagnostic audits of
30 SOEs (2002) and another 30 SOEs (2003) if there is enough
financial support.

Revise and amend Decree No. 103/CP on the sale, transfer,
contracting out, and leasing of SOEs (2002).

Issue regulations requiring all private, limited liability and joint
stock companies to improve their accounting and financial reports
(2002).

Promulgate a new decree on labour, salary and income management

A. Macroeconomic and Structural Policies to promote economic growth, raise income and
create opportunities for the poor.

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

in SOEs (2003), including proper incentive mechanisms.

1I. Create a stable macroeconomic environment

1. Fiscal policy & public expenditure management

Implement appropriate fiscal 
policies to safeguard medium- 
term sustainability 

Strengthen tax system, increase tax base along the lines of developing 
the sources of tax revenue and increasing the efficiency of the tax 
payment system but still remain pro-poor tax policies and system 
Amend somne articles of the Revised State Budget Law (2002). 
Gradualy implemnent the recormendations that are agreed upon in the 
Public Expenditure Review. Increase expenditures for basic social 
services and rural inastucture and bias public expenditure in favor of 
poor provinces. 

CAS - Annex Dl

Page 4 of 19

Bank Group Instruments

AAA 

Lending

Other Donors

PRSCs 

Puiblic Financial 
Managernent and 
Fiduciary Review, 
joint PER, CFAA 
and CPAR (FY04) 
Medium-term 
expenditure 
fiamework (MTEF) 
for health and 
education (FY03- 
04) 

MTEF for 
agriculture and 
agcutue for 
transport (FY04) 

IMF is providing
technical advice on
the tax system. When
reform plans are
developed the World
with finances for
add-ito 
TA and
adware
hrwr
Pilot self-assessment
is proposed to be

~~~~~~funded by

Multidonor Trust
fundedb
Fund

Increase budget transparency 
Inmprove budgetary revenue and the expenditure monitoring system 
to improve the information 
at all levels. 
base for decision-making and Continue to make public infor-mtion on annual budgetary revenues 
target stigCotnetrnk 
ulcmomtoonanabugtrrenesand 
target 
setting. 
and expenditures at various levels in a more scientific and proper 
mnanner. 

2. Monetary policy

Implement prudent 

Introduce monetary and credit controls with an aim to

Public 
Financial Multidonor
Management 
(Netherlands, UK,
Project (FY03) 
Denmark, Sweden
Norway) Trust
Fund to provide
technical assistance
in the area of Public
Financial
Management

A. Macroeconomic and Structural Policies to promote economic growth, raise income and
create opportunities for the poor.

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

Bank Group Instruments
Lending 

Other Donors

CAS - Annex Dl
Page 5 of 19

monetary policy to control 
inflation 

Reform banking sector and 
financial organizations to 
mobilize domestic capital 
resources. 

improving the effectiveness of monitoring monetary policy and meeting
the targeted objectives.
Continue to implement a basic interest rate policy with an aim to
move towards liberalizing interest rates.

Develop and implement the plans for restructuning four state-owned 
commercial banks (SOCBs) in accordance with the overall 
framework for banking sector reform (2002-2004). 
Complete the international accounting standard (IAS)-based 
financial audits for four large SOCBs by independent auditing 
companies (2003); resolve all inadequate issues of auditing (2004). 
Separate preferential and policy-based credit activities from the State- 
owned commercial banks, and let them operate in a competitive 
environment 
Address audit qualifications laid out in the IAS Audit Report on 
2000 accounts (2003). 
Resolve non-performing loans of state-owned commercial banks to 
20% of total debts (2002) and another 30% of non-performing loans
(2003).
Complete the separation of the Bank for the Poor from the Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development of Vietnam and let it act as a
policy-based bank (2003). Increase Bank for the Poor's lending to
disadvantaged areas.
Restructure and reinforce joint stock banks, close or merge weak
banks and ensure that they are in compliance with prudential
regulations. Reduce the numnber of total joint stock banks to 28
(2003).
Implement Decision No. 1627 to reclassify all non-performing loans
in the four SOCBs and to phase-in provisioning within 3 years
(2003-2005) to bring loan loss provisions in line with international
standards and to allow for financial status assessment of SOCBs.

PRSCs 

Financial Sector 
Assessments and 
follow-up (FY03- 
FY06) 
ASEM Grants to 
provide TA for 
implementation of 
restructuring plans 

Germany,
Switzerland,
Denrnark,
Netherlands and
Luxembourg provide
TA to the financial
sector
MPDF has
established a Bank
training center to
improve capacity of
staff in the financial
sector

A. Macroeconomic and Structural Policies to promote economic growth, raise income and
create opportunities for the poor.

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

Bank Group Instruments
Lnding 
AAA 

Other Donors

CAS - Annex D1

Page 6 of 19

Promulgate a decree guiding the implementation of the revised Land
Law to create favourable conditions for transfer, leasing, and
mortgage to borrow loans from banks and to make contribution to
joint ventures.
Provide concrete guidelines on regulations to allow foreign banks
operating in Vietnam to accept land use rights as collateral.
State-owned commercial banks should raise gradually the share of
credit to private small and medium enterprises and enterprises
operating in rural and disadvantage areas.
Allow Postal Savings and the People Credit Funds to receive
deposits and expand their operating scope in order to lend for
production development.

Increase flexibility and transparency of the foreign exchange regime.
Develop inter-bank foreign exchange market.
Build a system and measures to control the foreign capital rotation,
especially short-term capital. Control and limit using foreign
currencies within Vietnam territory.
Reduce gradually the ratio of foreign exchange surrender.

Foreign exchange policies to 
increase competitiveness, 
liberalize the current account 

A. Macroeconomic and Structural Policies to promote economic growth, raise income and
create opportunities for the poor.

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

Bank Group Instruments
AAA 
Lending 

Other Donors

CAS - Annex DI

Page 7 of 19

Trade and Poverty PRSCs 
(FY03) 

Public 
Financial Australia,
Management 
Switzerland and
Project (FY03) 
UNDP provides TA
for extemal debt
management.
Australia, EU,
Finland, New
Zealand, Sweden,
Switzerland, UNDP
S 
rvd
and USA provide
technical assistance
on trade liberalization

3. External debt policies to 
keep debt service burden at a 
serviceable level 

Monitor all debts including debts incurred by government, SOEs, 
and those guaranteed by Government, debts ofjoint venture 
companies (including FDI loans) and private sector debts. 

4. Trade policy: Measures to 
open trade, promote exports 
and international integration, 
and strengthen the country's 
competitiveness,.n 

Promote vigorously economic integration; strictly implement 
commitments in the process of integration. 
Make active preparations to take part in comnutted bilateral and multi- 
laterl co-operation mechanisms. Carry out the bilateral trade agreement 
with the United States, paving the way for accession to the World Trade 
Organization (WTO). 
Implement trade polices for rural, mountainous and island areas;
review the performance of the Law of Trade (2002-2003). Increase
the access to markets of the poor, particularly from rural, remote and
isolated areas.
Continue to remove quota restriction barriers imposed on restricted
import goods, excluding the barriers on petroleum, lubricant, diesel
and sugar....
Strictly implement Decision No. 46/QD-TTg on the export-import
mechanism in the period 2001-2005.
Put all import goods that are currently in the Temporary Exemption
List (TEL) into the Inclusion List (IL) with reduction of minimum
rate import tax to 20% in order to implement CEPT/AFTA
agreements (2003).
Continue to remove QRs imposed on rice exporting enterprises and
on fertilizer imports.
Increase gradually activities to organize quota auctions for garment
exports to create favourable conditions for exporters (including those
from private sector) to access the market Expand the rate of quota
auctions for garment exports to 35% and apply measures to improve
auction procedures (2003).

A. Macroeconomic and Structural Policies to promote economic growth, raise income and
create opportunities for the poor.

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

Bank Group Instruments
Lending 

Other Donors

CAS - Annex Dl

Page 8 of 19

Protect the poor from the 
negative impact of trade 
liberalization 

Study on Trade and
competitiveness
(FY04)

Promulgate the Law of Competition (2003); promulgate the State 
Law on National Treatment and Most Favoured Nation Status 
(2003); promulgate the State Law on self-defense measure in 
international trade business (2002-2003).
Implement the Customs Law (2002) to simplify and rationalize
customs procedures (2002-2005).
Operate effectively the Export Support Fund, the Export Credit
Guarantee Fund (2002-2005).
Publish all trade laws, decrees, decisions, and rules of procedures in
official gazettes.
Undertake a research to examnine the impact of trade policy reforms
on the poor.

III. Public Administration reform; promote grass roots democracy and legal supportfor the poor.

Accelerate the reform of 
pubhc administration, 
providing the poor with 
knowledge of the Law and 
their legal rights and 
obligations, 

Public Financial
Implement Decree No. 136/2001/QD-TTg issued by the Prime 
Public Financial 
Management is one Multi-donor 
Trust
Minister on accelerating public administration reform in four areas: Management and 
pillar of the 
ne 
fund to support work
administrative institutions, management bodies, personnel 
Fiduciary Review 
pillar of The 
in this area
strengthening and public expenditure. 
(FY04) 
Master plan. The
their legal rights and 
Management.
Financial
Prioritize administration reform in key agencies that directly relate 
Development 
to the poor, such as MARD, MOH, MOTE, etc. to ensure the access 
Policy 
Review project together
of the poor to basic services of health, education, infrastructure, etc. 
(FY03) 
with the multidonor
in provinces, especially mountainous and urban poor areas. 
Technical 
trust fund for Public
Ensure that all citizens have access to information about the law and 
assistance for 
Financial
their legal rights and obligations, and that the poor have better 
managing the 
Management will
access to the justice system. 
irnplementation of 
the agenda under
Improve targeting for the poor and the allocation of resources to pro- 
the action plans in 
this pillar
poor programs. 
Assessment (FY03- E-Government
Implement the action plans embedded in the Legal Needs 
FY05) 
Systems 
and
Capacity Building
Assessment. 
(FY06)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Public 

B. Policies and measures to develop major sectors and areas to ensure sustainable growth and
for poverty reduction 

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

._ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

__ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

I. Policies and measures to develop sectors and areas and create opportunities for the poor.

I

Bank Group Instruments

AAA 

Lending

Other Donors

CAS - Annex Dl

Page 9 of 19

1. Develop agriculture and the 
rural economy to reduce 
widely poverty 

PRSCs 

Forest Sector 
Project (FY04) 

A formal forestry
partnership has been
established between
the Government and
different donors

Poor Communes 
A donor partnership
Infrastructure and 
led by the Ministry of
Livelhoods (FY06) Agriculture and Rural
Development and
FAO are
coordinating the
agricultnTal
Vietnam. Other
participants are the
World Bank, ADB,
UNDP, Denmark,
Germany, and the
Netherlands.

Forestry and 
Upland 
(FY05) 

o 
alberahzatlon of 
and output rnarkets
(FY03) 

Continue to implement the Govermment's Resolution No. 09 and No. 05 Land Use Rights 
on directions and policies to shift the economic structure and product 
Study (FY03-FY04) 
sale. 
Imnplement Resolution No. 13 to continue reform and improve the 
efficiency of Cooperatives; Resolution No. 14 to continue reform of 
mechanisms and policies to encourage the private sector. 
Provide concrete guidelines to protect land use rights in accordance 
with the Revised Land Law. Advance the task of planning land use 
and link it to land transfers. Complete land classification and 
accelerate the process of issuing land use right certificates to 
farmers, including those living in mountainous communes. 
Develop rural industrial zones at the district and commune level. 
Implement Decree No. 90 on support policies for developing small 
and medium enterprises. 
Diversify professions and encourage developing off-farm 
professions in rural areas. Implement Decision No. 132 issued by the 
Prime Minister on developing rural professions. 
Promote measures to help poor households that need cultivation land 
to be given enough land for production, to stabilize their hvelihood, 
reduce poverty and gradually become richer. Allocate un-used and
under-utilized land to poor farmers.
Encourage all economic sectors to invest in the agricultural sector;
develop household-scale economies; disseminate economic models
for farming in order to promote agricultural diversity and
development.
Complete rural financial policies, expand access to financial and
credit resources in rural areas. Increase the role of the People's
Credit Fund and micro fiscal programs in rural areas.

Develop regulations and standards regarding the safety and quality

CAS - Annex DI

Page 10ofl9

Other Donors

Bank Group Instruments
Lending

~~~AAA 

~~~ 

~ 

B. Policies and measures to develop major sectors and areas to ensure sustainable growth and
for poverty reduction

Policy areas and Objectives 

_ 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 
. _ 
of agricultural products, and work jointly with farmers and traders to
apply a monitoring mechanism for quality assurance.
Continue to liberalize input markets (fertilizer, insecticide, etc.) and
output markets (rice, coffee, etc.).
Create an environment that enables farmers to become rnore narket
oriented by establishing a system for rapid access to market prices
and price forecasts. Facilitate the development of closer links
between farmers, traders, processors and exporters.
Policies to develop and manage fishery resources. Implement
Decision No. 132 issued by the Prime Minister on the fiscal
mechanism for rural road development programs, fishery
infrastructure and rural professional infrastructure.
Research and issue policies on supporting production and
consumption of important agricultural, forestry and fishery products
that have high econonric value, are competitive, have a large
consumer market, both export and import substitutions, using
technical, economnic and market analysis to assess Vietnam's
comparative advantage for producing these commodities.
Raise annual investment in agricultural research with a fair share
going the research for upland farming. Increase spending on
extension to put in place a highly qualified extension service that is
responsive to the needs of farmers, especially in ethnic minority
areas. Encourage co-payments by farmers for extension services for
industrial crops.

2. Develop industry and urban Develop agricultural industries (chermicals, fertilizer, packaging, 
areas to create more jobs and etc.) 
-
to improve the living standard 
for the poor. 

.

.
.
Develop 
dustnes to process agincultural, forestry and fishery 
or poor. 
products, and microbiological industry. 
Implement Decree No. 90 on encouraging the development of small 
and medium scale enterprises in specific traditional sectors and 

professions with modem technology. 

Urbanization 
Urban Upgrading 
Strategy, 
including 
(FY04) 
City Development GEF funds to 
Strategies for select 
support demand- 
cities (FY03-04) 
side management in 
Study on human 
the Energy sector 
settlements policies 
(FY03) 

in urban areas 

Official Development
Assistance
Partnership (ODAP)
and the Urban Forum
provides the
framework for
coopertion among

the Government

CAS - Annex Dl

Page 11 of 19

Bank Group Instruments
AAA 
(FY03) 

Lending

Urban Congestion 
(FY05)

Other Donors

and the donors in the

urban sector.

ADB provides
support for

vocational training

B. Policies and measures to develop major sectors and areas to ensure sustainable growth and
for poverty reduction

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

professions with modem technology. 

Develop the legal framework to permit establishing business 
associations. Develop an enabling policy environment for the 
operation of Business Development Service (BDS) providers,
regardless of their ownership structure. [BDS refers to training,
consultancy, technical services, accounting and auditing services,
market information services, computer services, internet and
telephone, advertising, etc).]

Provide guidance and implement Regulations on preferential 
policies to encourage industries to relocate to rural areas. 

Build urban development strategy; promote the urban-rural linkages 
that include suburb development along the lines of master-plans.

Synchronize the development of urban infrastructures in tandem
with job creation to reduce urban unemployment. Promote the
performance efficiency of employment promotion centers and
vocational training systemn; accelerate the export of labour and
specialists.

Carry out the reform of public administration procedures to reflect
the actual situation of the urban poor in such areas as land and
housing management, business and construction certificate issuance,
residency registration, etc.

Develop criteria, process and norms in urban planning and design to
ensure that sanitation and environmental requirements are met and
that also take into account the requirements of the urban poor and
their ability to pay.
Develop housing development policies for the urban poor; upgrade
current residential neighborhoods squares taking into account the
economic condition of the urban poor and also ensuring their
employment.

Create access to basic social services for all urban people, including

unregistered migrants. Develop measures to help poor people find

B. Policies and measures to develop major sectors and areas to ensure sustainable growth and
for poverty reduction 

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for Implementation during 
2003.2005 

I
Bank Group Instruments

AAA 

Lending

Other Donors

CAS - Annex Dl
Page 12 of 19

appropriate jobs in urban areas.
Review labour migration policy and household registration policy to
make it easy for people to move to better-paying jobs.
Develop decrees on the demand side of energy management and
energy efficiency

Implement policies on ensuring essential infrastructures, especially 
water supply and living hygiene, for all poor areas, poor communes 
and poor quarters in cities and towns (Program No. 135. No. 143). 
Continue the mechanism of the "State and people will do it together" 
to develop infrastructure in rural areas. The Govermment will provide 
support to train and coach staff who are in charge of management, 
operation, and maintenance of basic infrastructure constructions. 
Fomulate regulations on utilizing basic infiastructure constructions at 
the commune level. 
Promote the use of local labor for implementing infrastructure 
projects. 
Strengthen the participation of local people in planning,
implementation and maintenance of local infiastructure projects.

3. Develop infrastructure and 
create opportunities for the 
poor to access public services. 

4. Training and Education:

Towards 
Program Road Network 
Financing in Rural 
Improvement 
Roads (FY03) 
(FY03) 
Rural Transport II, 
(FY05) 
Rural Water 
Sanitation
astructure 
Health
Improvement
Project (FY05)

and

and

Build a more equal and higher Strengthen and develop the achievements of primary education 
quality education for people. 
universalization and illiteracy eradication, moving towards primary 
education at right age universalization and gender equality, paying 
special attention to disadvantaged areas and communities. 
Increase the net enrolment rate in lower secondary education with 
the aim to achieve universal lower secondary education by 2010. 

Follow-up to 
Quality Assessment 
of Primary 
Education 
TA to prepare a 
national framework Higher Education H1 
for "Education for 
(FY05) 
Raise budget expenditure for education and training from 15% of 
all" 
i"Education 
Move twrctotal budget expenditure to 18% in 2005, moving in the direction of 
uc 
Move towards completon of 
increasing expenditure for basic education. Continue policies on the MTEF 
(FY06)
junior secondary 
package exemption of school fees for poor children, extend

Primary Education 
for Disadvantaged 
Children (FY03) 

for all" 

The partnership with
Japan and the UK on
rural transport is
expected to be
continued.

UNICEF provides
assistance to the
Ministry of
Education to monitor
progress on meeting
the intenational
commitments under
the Education for All
programme.

CAS - Annex Dl
Page 13 of 19

Other Donors

________

Japan is supporting
the Ministry of

Education in
preparing its Primary
Education
Development Plan

B. Policies and measures to develop major sectors and areas to ensure sustainable growth and
for poverty reduction

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003.2005 

.

education universalization and 
illiteracy eradication. 

preferential loans to poor students to cover training fees. 
Raise the awareness of parents in remote, isolated and ethnic 

Bank Group Instruments

~~AAA 

for 
Education (FY03) 

Lending 

PRSC m (FY04) 

minority communities about the value of education through 
information, education and commrunication. 

Provide improved school infrastructure and facilities for basic 
education in difficult areas to replace "leaf' schools and start the
move towards full-day schooling for such communities.

Expand the lending of textbooks and books for children to
schoolchildren from ethnic minorities.
Encourage the participation of the private sector in education and
training, especially vocational. Adjust the rate of training levels;
focus on training for a skilled workforce.

Develop special policies for teachers and training staff working in
disadvantaged areas, complete the salary and allowance regime,
training priorities and other preferential regimes. Have appropriate
policies to strengthen, train and stabilize the livelihood of teachers
and training staff working in disadvantaged areas and to train them
on new teaching programs, methodologies and information to
inprove teaching.

Improve curriculum and teaching in tertiary education by linking
scientific research and technology transfer in universities and
colleges with research institutes.
Implement priority regimes regarding land use and preferential loans
for investment in education infrastructure.

Promote training according to location; apply the appointed
selection enrolment for disadvantaged areas.

5. Health: Improve quality of 
health services; increase the 
equity and efficiency of the 
health care system: concentrate 
on developing basic health care 

Implement Instruction No. 06 issued by the Party's Central 
Secretariat on strengthening and completing the grassroots-based 
health care network; continue support policies on primary health 
care tasks for people, especially for poor people and poor areas. 

Study on linkages 
between health 
service availability, 
health service 

utilization and 

Curative Care 
the Poor (FY05) 

for WHO is leading a
health sector donor
working group which
again provides input
into the international

CAS - Annex DI
Page 14 of 19

Other Donors

support group under
the Ministry of
Health

B. Policies and measures to develop major sectors and areas to ensure sustainable growth and
for poverty reduction

Policy areas and Objectives 

and community health care. 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

Bank Group Instruments
AAA 
Lending 

health outcomes 
(FY03). 
MTEF for health 
(FY03)
Early Childood
Development Study
(FY04)

Transport Safety
Strategy Review
(FY03)

Continue investments to develop health stations and ambulatory 
health groups in mountainous, remote and isolated areas. 
Maintain the achievements in abolishing infant poliomyelitis and 
tetanus. Continue to implement extended vaccination in 10 kinds of 
vaccine for children. 
Have appropriate policies to provide financial support to health 
services for poor people. 
Encourage the development of traditional medicine in light of
Instruction No. 25 issued by the Prime Minister. 
Implement Government Resolution No. 90 on the socialization of 
health, education and culture. 
Continue investment and complete policies for the National Action Plan
on HIV/AIDS control and prevention. Mobilize the masses to strive to
control and prevent HIV/AIDS and to manage the care ofthose infected
with HrV/AIDS.
Have appropriate preferential mechanisms and policies for medical
personnel working in disadvantaged, remote and isolated areas.
Strengthen information dissemination, education and propagation of
hygienic practices, disease prevention and health imnprovement for
poor people and poor areas.
Gradually increase the share of recurrent budget expenditure for health
to 5% of total budget expenditure in 2005 and to 8% in 2010.
Inplement appropriate policies to channel financial resources to support
health care for the poor.
Implement the National Strategy on Maternal Health Care for the
period of 2001-2010.
Promote the regime of health insurance and free-of-charge health
examination and treatment for the poor. Continue to expand the
scope and level of support for medical examination, treatment and
medicines for poor people and disadvantaged children.

B. Policies and measures to develop major sectors and areas to ensure sustainable growth and
for poverty reduction

Policy areas and Objectives 

PoHcies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

Bank Group Instruments

AAA 

Lending

Other Donors

CAS - Annex Dl
Page 15 of 1 9

Increase population coverage of health insurance by mobilizing
premium collections among those who can afford to pay.

Implement Decision No. 147 issued by the Prime Minister on the
implementation of the National Population Strategy of Vietnam for
the period 2001-2010, strengthening information dissemination on
family planning.

6. Develop a modem culture Promote investment to develop culture and information; develop a 
closely lined to the identity of modem culture closely linked to our national identity.
the nation and 
improve 
the
provision of information 
to Concentrate investment on the development of commune cultural
help people 
expand 
their centers, which can be extended to meetinghouses and entertainment
capacity to make choices, 
areas. The Government will provide primary material support to
capacity build essential infrastructure works such as cultural houses, post
offices, radio and television stations, library of technological and
scientific books, etc.

UNESCO

7. Strengthen environmental Continue implementation of Decision No. 104 issued by the Prime 
Annual 
Rural Water and 
protection and ensure a healthy Minister on the National Strategy for Rural Hygiene and Clean Water to Environmental 
Sanitation 
environment for the poor. 
the year 2010. 
Monitor (FY03- 
Infrastructure 
Approve and implement the National Strategy for Environmental 
FY06) 
Project (FY05) 
Protection (NSEP) 2001-20 10. Strengthen capacity in government 
Urban Congestion Water Resources 
agencies at the central and local level for environmental 
(FY05) 
Assistance Project 
assessments. Improve environmental monitoring and disclosure of 
(FY03) 
environmental data. 
Limit and roll back the environmental degradation in industrial 
zones and densely populated areas in cities and rural areas. 
Strengthen education, mobilization and control of environmental 
hygiene with respect to aninal breeding at the household level and at 
the large scale level and in craft villages. 
Supplement, complete and develop new legal normative documents 
to provide concrete guidelines for implementation of the Water 
Resource Law, Environmental Protection Law and other legal 

Local 
Actions Project 
(FY06-FY07) 

Rural Energy II 

~~~~~ 

Environmental
institutional
strengthening 
has
been selected as the
first partnership and
is being supported by
UNDP, 
Sweden,
Denmark, 
Canada,
Switzerland,
IUrCN
Australia, Japan,
Austrk, Japans
Denmark, Netherlans
in the area of Water
Resource
management

and ADB are [1 ctive

.

~ 

~ ~~~(FY04) 

documents. Expand the range of regulatory instruments and

B. Policies and measures to develop major sectors and areas to ensure sustainable growth and
for poverty reduction

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

incentives for pollution reduction.
Build construction works to clean the environment such as
wastewater and rubbish treatment stations, dust and noise treatment
facilities in cities, townships. Develop auto-disintegrative latrines in
rural areas. Improve the quality of natural resource management
with respect to the pdor, who mainly depend on natural resources for
their livelihood. Develop the framework to enable community
participation in natural resources management.
Encourage the use of biogas in rural areas and develop solar, wind
energy and other energy resources.
Strengthen the sustainability of Develop the classification of forestry and reform forest data
using natural resources in rural collection.
areas.

Implement the transfer of land and forests to farmers in association
with fixed-cultivation and fixed-residence and stabilize the
livelihood of mountainous farmers.

Research, revise and amend policies on standard price norms in
caring for protected forests, afforestment and protective forest
protection.

Evaluate the current forest classification system and improve the
monitoring system of forest covering level.

Integrate the National Program on 5 million hectare afforestation
with the Forestry Assistance and Co-operation Program.

Implement the Water Resource Law to improve the sustainable
management of water resources, river headed forests and land
resources.

Develop prudently fishery production, ensuring the environment
assessment and proper area selection to be carried out.

11. Ensure the balanced development, increase gender equity and advancementfor women

1. Promote balanced 

Continue increasing investment in less developed areas with the 

1 

CAS - Annex Dl

Page 16 of 19

Bank Group Instruments

AAA 

Lending

Other Donors

PovertY Assessment Mekong 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

"~~~~~~~~~~~F 

04) 

Japan and

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ _

B. Policies and measures to develop major sectors and areas to ensure sustainable growth and
for poverty reduction

Policy areas and Objectives 

and 
sustainable 
economic 
growth between regions. 

2. Promote gender equity, 
enhance the participation of 
women at all levels of 
leadership. 
leadership. 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

Bank Group Instruments
AAA 
Lending 

aim of reducing the development gap between different areas, urban Regional Poverty 
and rural areas in particular. 
Reduction 
Ensure an appropriate population distribution across areas; increase 
.
..
.
.
.
FY06) 
step by step the quality of life for all population strata with the aim 
Poverty Update 
of reducing the gap in living standard between different strata and 
PeyU 
to
groups; bring population variables into development plans. 
(FY06)
Sources of growth
and causes of
poverty in the
Mekong Delta

~~~~~Strategies (FY04- 

(FY04)

Region 
Infrastructure 
Project (FY06) 

Implement Decision No. 19 issued by the Prime Minister on the 
Gender 
National Strategy for the Advancement of Women to the year 2010. mainstreaming fund 
for high priority 
projects (FY03- 
FY06)

Ensure that the names of both husband and wife appear on land-use 
~~~rights certificates by 2005. 
Increase the number of women in government-elected bodies.
Reduce inequality in naking decisions in families. Increase the role 
of women with respect to their family's assets. 
Strengthen women's access to credit resources and capital from the
National Strategy for Poverty Reduction, creating conditions for
them to access social services fully, equitably and equally.
Have policies to reduce the vulnerability of women against family
violence.

Country Gender
Assessment (FY05)

CAS - Annex DI

Page 17 of 19

Other Donors

Australia are
expected to co-
finance the Mekong
Region infrastructure
Project

UNDP provides TA
for mainstreaming
gender in national
policies and pl

3. Create conditions to enable 
all social strata to fully take 
part in economic growth 

Ensure that ethnic minorities in the mountainous areas benefit from 
growth. Evaluate and disseminate models to support disadvantaged 
areas and ethnic minorities, and encourage them to take part in the 
economic development process. 
Encourage NGOs and socio-political organizations to take part in 
poverty reduction by providing a legal framework for NGOs. 

Rural transport and 
poverty 
Rural energy and 
poverty 
Evaluation of 
project impacts on 

Poor Communes 
A partnership
Infrastructure and 
supporting the
Livelihoods (FY06) Government's
Program 135 to assist
cormunes
coordinates work

_ Improve the access of the poor to legal support services. Help the 

project affected 

among donors in this

CAS --Annex Dl
Page 18 of 19

Other Donors

________

area

B. Policies and measures to develop major sectors and areas to ensure sustainable growth and
for poverty reduction

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

Bank Group Instruments

AAA 

Lending 

poor inprove their knowledge of their legal rights and obligations. 
Increase the two-way information system between local government 
and poor families. 
Irnplement fully the Decree on Democracy at the Grassroots Level, 
and create an enabling environment for poor households to take part 
in local economic development plans.

people (including 
ethnic minorities)
Implementation of
indigenous people
development plan

III. Develop the social safety net to support poor and vulnerable people.

1. Minimize social impacts on Reduce negative impacts on the poor caused by ongoing reforms. 
the poor 
in 
the process of Broadly disseminate information on policy changes to facilitate 
adjustment 
farmers in changing their production and business operations. 
Ensure job security, extend unemployment insurance, training for 
the redundant workforce and improve working conditions. 

ASEM grant
imnplement and
monitor the social
safety net for
redundant workers
(FY03-FY05)

TA on
"Unemployment
Insurance Policy"
(through ASEM or
other grant) (FY03-
FY05)

2. Minimize 
the impacts of Develop a set of solutions to effectively address emergency social 
natural disasters on the poor 
relief for poor and vulnerable people who are hurt by natural 
disasters and accidents. 
Expand the official social safety net (health insurance, social 
insurance, etc.) and encourage the development of the voluntary 
safety net (school insurance and insurance of crops, diseases, etc.) 

Transport Safety 
Strategy Review 
(FY03) 

Natural Disaster 
Management 
Project (FY05) 

A formal partnership
on Natural Disaster
management was
established in 2001.
It is now in the
developing action
plans based on
identified priority
areas

B. Policies and measures to develop major sectors and areas to ensure sustainable growth and
for poverty reduction

Policy areas and Objectives 

Policies, measures and timeframe for implementation during 
2003-2005 

Bank Group Instruments
Lending 

Other Donors

CAS - Annex DI

Page 19of19

3. Protect worker rights and Review and strengthen the role of labor unions in protecting worker
working conditions in a market 
rights and working conditions.
economy.

4. Provide targeted assistance 
to vulnerable groups. 

Improve the targeting mechanisms of programs 133, 135, and 143
and implement them in a more participatory way.
Undertake independent evaluations of these programs and use
findings to improve the design of the projects.

C. Monitoring and Evaluation

1. Improve macroeconomic 
statistics 

Promulgate the Law of Statistics.
Strengthen the statistical agencies at various levels.

Promote the transparency and data quality.
Strengthen the statistical database.
Strengthen the national account within 2 years and improve budget
data quality to correspond to the Governments fiscal statistical
standards.
Present a website of Vietnam in the International Fiscal Statistical
Book published by IMF.

2. Poverty monitoring 

Collect high quality data on the poverty situation and trends, and Supor t
ensure that data and information is publicized and used regularly. 
CPRGS (FY03-
Implement enterprise surveys to collect high quality data on growth FY06)
and employment trends, and make it publicly available.

CAS Summary of Development Priorities

CAS - Annex D2
Page I of I

Network area 

Country 
performance' 

Major issue b 

Country 
priorityC 

Bank priority C Reconciliation of
country and Bank

priorities d

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

Excellent 
Good, 
Fair 
Good 

Sustainability 
Implementation 
Pace of reforms 
Ownership of land 

High 
High 
High 
Moderate 

High
High
High
Moderate

Good 
Good 
Good 

Good 
Fair 
Good 

Affordability for the poor 
Affordability for the poor 
Lack of targetting to the poor 

High 
Moderate 
Moderate 

High
Moderate
Moderate

Slow off-farm employment generation 
Low management capacity 
High poverty among ethnic minorities 

High 
Moderate 
Moderate 

High
Moderate
Moderate

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Private sector 
Energy & mining 
Infrastructure 

Fair 
Fair 
Good 
Fair 

Non-performing loans 
Business environment 
Energy prices 
Maintenance 

High 
High 
High 
High 

High
High
High
High

a. Use 'excellent,' good,' 'fair," or 'poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty;' for educaton, 'female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use 'low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

-29' < 

< 

>7z}54/g 

2>chL80, 

LT.ng Proborg S ,m 

, 

.

14 2

/

2 

7N 

22 M

21 7I ' 

b l ' 
on.DbngH& 

' 

1n

19 HNt0~o.,g 

49 B ~ToBA 

L Vy

/ T H A 
L A N D_ 

I 

{ 

/ 

4_- 

N 

< % 

Dolol 

I

22HNn 

VIEooTNAMB~ 

52VIC DoogTAL 

J,I,ho 

, 

_ 

+ 

I 

\ 

o,i

X

2 E MOCRATn 

30 

ROD 

6 

RIER 61 

G RE PBnh 

a m 

ID 

EOUNDAR~~~~~~~~~~~~I 

Aab 

0 

0 Doa Al

Jr 

E 

I 

I (@ 

I 

3n 
9cpneoser

(China

f 

i NH= Bn,I 

S2 D=G,ong 

hDPomP>\(fG)4 

co 

/ 

} 

10 hTh>ho 

460n,VInI, 

I_ 

e 

TO 

,dyIOop-,~ 0B~IT, Wo,I4Bo,kb

27 HoOy47BnhTI 
omb 
< 
, 

, 

29 QNmh gBnnh 

54 An lo2ngC

25 

I7 

Kbo5 

1 

I0n 

NhLon 

°
IMAGING

Report No.: 

Tvne: 

_ CAS _

24621 VN

