Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No.76232 NE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF NIGER

FOR THE PERIOD FY13-FY16

Public Disclosure Authorized

March 29, 2013

Country Management Unit: AFCW3
Africa Region
The International Finance Corporation
Africa Region
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank Authorization

The date of the last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) is April 29, 2008

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective March 29, 2013)
Currency Unit
CFAF 510 = US$1
US$1.5 = SDR1
FISCAL YEAR: January 1 – December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACROYNYMS
AAA
AGRHYMET
AQIM
CAFER
CAS
CILSS
DHS
DPO
DSA
ECOWAS
EITI
ESW
FDI
GDP
GEF
GNI
GER
HALCIA
HIPCs
HIV-AIDS
ICA
ICRISAT
ICT
IDA
IMF
INS
MDGs
MDRI
MIGA
MSME
MTR

: Analytical and Advisory Assistance
: Centre Regional de Formation et d'Application en
Agrométéorologie et Hydrologie Opérationnelle
: Al Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
: Caisse Autonome de Financement de l’Entretien Routier
Country Assistance Strategy
: Comité Inter-Etate pour la Lutte contre la Sécheresse au Sahel
: Demographic and Health Survey
: Development Policy Operation
: Debt Sustainability Analysis
: Economic Community of West African States
: Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
: Economic and Sector Work
: Foreign Direct Investment
: Gross Domestic Product
: Global Environment Fund
: Gross National Income
: Gross Enrollment Ratio
: Haute Autorité pour la Lutte contre la Corruption et les Infractions
Assimilées
: Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
: Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome
: Investment Climate Assessment
: International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid-Tropics
: Information and Communication Technology
: International Development Association
: International Monetary Fund
: Institut National de la Statistique
: Millennium Development Goals
: Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
: Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
: Mid-Term Review
ii

NBFI
NPV
ODA
OECD
OHADA

:
:
:
:
:

PEFA
PEMFAR

:
:

PDES
PETS
PRGF
PRODEM
PRSP
RDS
RSE
SMEs
SSA
TVET
UEMOA
UNDP
UNFPA
WAEMU
WDR

:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

Non-bank Financial Institution
Net Present Value
Official Development Assistance
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Organisation pour l’Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des
Affaires
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability
Review
Plan for Economic and Social Development
Public Expenditure Tracking System
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Multi-sector Demographic Program
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Rural Development Strategy
Export Statistical Change
Small-and-Medium Enterprises
Sub-Saharan Africa
Technical and Vocational Education and Training
Union Economique et Monétaire Ouest Africaine
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Population Fund
West African Economic and Monetary Fund
World Development Report

IDA

IFC

Vice President

Makhtar Diop

Bernard Sheahan (Acting)

Director

Ousmane Diagana

Yolande Duhem

Country Manager

Nestor Coffi
(Task Team Leader)

Marie-Jean Moyo

iii

MIGA
Izumi Kobayashi
(Executive Vice President)
Michel Wormser
(Vice president and Chief
Operating Officer)

FY13-FY16 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF NIGER
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................... vi
I. INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................... 1
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT ................................................................................................. 1
A. Regional Context……………............................................................................ 1
B. Political Context…. ............................................................................................ 2
C. Economic Context.. ............................................................................................ 3
D. Poverty and social context ................................................................................. 7
E. Progress toward the MDGs and human development indicators ....................... 9
III. CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES ................................................................. 10
A. Vulnerability and Resilience ............................................................................ 11
B. Weak Business Environment and Lack of Diversification .............................. 13
C. Governance and Public Sector ......................................................................... 14
IV. GOVERNMENT POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY 2012-2015 ..................... 16
V. BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY .......................................................... 16
A. Lessons Learnt from previous CAS, Stakeholder Feedback and Gender
Assessment…………. ........................................................................................... 16
B. Strategic Approach…………. .......................................................................... 20
C. Bank Group Program ....................................................................................... 21
D. Delivering the Bank Group’s Program ............................................................ 31
E. Aligning Current Portfolio ............................................................................... 33
F. Managing Program Implementation ................................................................. 34
G. Partnerships and Donor Coordination .............................................................. 35
H. Monitoring and Evaluation .............................................................................. 35
VI. MANAGING RISKS .................................................................................................. 37
iv

Annex 1. Niger CPS Results Matrix FY13-16..................................................... 40
Annex 2: CAS Completion Report ....................................................................... 49
Annex 3: Country at Glance ................................................................................. 86
Annex 4: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management . 88
Annex 5: Niger Social Indicators .......................................................................... 89
Annex 6: Niger Key Economic Indicators ............................................................ 90
Annex 7: Niger Key Exposure Indicators ............................................................. 92
Annex 8: Operations Portfolio .............................................................................. 93
Annex 9: Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio ................................ 94
Annex 10: Donor Mapping, Bank sectoral mapping in FY16 and ODA
Coordination………… ......................................................................................... 95
Annex 11: Country Financing Parameters ............................................................ 96
Annex 12: Debt Sustainability Analysis ............................................................... 97
Annex 13: Proposed WBG Assistance for FY13-16 and Corresponding PDES
Axes…………………………………………………………………………….110
Annex 14: Results of Stakeholder Consultations and FY12 Country Survey .... 112
Annex 15: Central Government Operations (% of GDP), 2009-2015 ................ 114
Annex 16: Axes of the PDES.............................................................................. 116
Annex 17: EITI process in Niger: Challenges and Achievements ..................... 118
Annex 18: Progress on MDGs ............................................................................ 119
Annex 19: Trust Fund Country Report on Niger ................................................ 119

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Key Macroeconomic Indicators ................................................................ 4
Table 2: Assessment of Niger Progress on MDGs ............................................... 10
Table 3: CPS Strategic Objectives and Outcomes……………………………… 21
Table 4: Indicative Lending & AAA Program mapped to CPS Pillars FY1316…………………………………………………………………………………39

v

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
Niger has recently embarked on a path to political stability and has attained
positive results in reducing poverty, albeit not without uncertainties. In 2009, efforts
by then President Tandja to circumvent a two-term limit resulted in a severe political
crisis that led to the February 2010 military coup d’état. Following a referendum and the
adoption of a new constitution in November 2010 and a series of local, legislative, and
presidential elections in early 2011, a new President took office in April 2011. Poverty
has declined from 64 percent in 2005 to 61 percent in 2007/08 and 56 percent in 2011
based on preliminary World Bank estimates.
ii.
Despite progress, Niger’s development challenges continue to be magnified
by significant internal and external stresses. Weak institutions, economic grievances
and potential spill-over effect of the Mali crisis, and the risk of a growing young
population, could alter the country’s fragile equilibrium. Vulnerability to droughts and
severe climate shocks represents a major threat to Niger’s stability. The Authorities are
committed to introducing an integrated approach to building resilience of communities.
iii.
Niger displays a ‘grievance-generating resource economy’ that has yet to
provide tangible benefits for the majority of the population. The agriculture sector
has been the main engine of growth over the past decade. A poor harvest in 2011 had a
negative impact on economic growth and caused severe cereal deficit, mitigated with
large inflows of humanitarian aid. A good harvest last year and the start of oil production
improved the economic outlook. Fiscal policies remained prudent even during the period
of highest political instability.
iv.
Strong and inclusive growth is an urgent priority for Niger. After more than
three decades of declining or stagnating per capita incomes, sustaining economic growth
remains vital for Niger’s development and poverty reduction. In the medium term, scaled
up production in the uranium and petrol sector will be the primary driver of growth. Good
results have been attained in reducing poverty over the past decade and in improving
social indicators. However, gender inequality and high population growth rate, both
linked to long-standing cultural norms, may hamper inclusive economic growth.
v.
The strategic objectives of the proposed Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
are to assist Niger achieve resilient growth, reduce vulnerability and strengthen
capacity for service delivery. Accordingly, the CPS supports actions aimed at
strengthening the macroeconomic foundation, the investment climate and access to
finance to build resilient growth, improve agricultural productivity and marketing of
selected crops and promote risk-based agriculture to mitigate the impacts of climatic
changes and variability. Safety net programs will be further strengthened to reduce
vulnerability of the poorest and improve resilience of the population to natural hazards,
climatic change and variability; the program will target in particular gender-specific
vi

actions across all activities, will reinforce education and youth employment skills, and
support improved coverage and quality of basic services.
vi.
This Strategy is fully aligned with the 2012 Government Plan for Social and
Economic Development (PDES) and the World Bank Strategy for Africa. In
particular, the CPS is aligned with the PDES objectives of strengthening the credibility of
public institutions; creating the conditions for inclusive, sustainable and balanced
development; supporting food security and sustainable agricultural development; creating
a competitive and diversified economy for accelerated, inclusive growth; and promoting
social development.
vii.
The success of this strategy may be hampered by four foreseeable major
risks: (i) the Sahel crisis and security risks; (ii) climatic exogenous shocks e.g droughts,
locust infestation, floods; (iii) capacity constraints; (iv) and natural resources related
risks. Mainstreaming gender and strengthening governance and capacity across the board
will need to be pursued to deliver the two interdependent and mutually reinforcing
strategic objectives. Innovative financing mechanisms such as the Crisis Response
Window (CRW), Contingent Emergency Response Component under the framework of
Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) are considered under this CPS to act flexibly and
in a timely manner should a crisis arise.

vii

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Niger was discussed by the
Board on April 29, 2008 and was intended to cover the period up to June 30, 2011.
However, political instability caused severe disruptions to implementation that forced the
Bank to slow down its program. The Bank re-engaged with Niger following the lifting of
OP/BP.7.30 restrictions and the establishment of a new government in accordance with
Niger law in April 2011. The new regime engaged with its partners to formulate its Plan
for Social and Economic Development – PDES – adopted in August 2012.
Implementation of the current CAS was extended by one year as a result, and this
extension enabled the full delivery of the originally planned program. The proposed
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) covers a period of four years, from FY2013 to
FY2016.

II.
A.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

Regional Context

2.
Niger is located in an unstable sub-region, surrounded by armed conflict and
rebellions. The Libyan conflict led to the return of over 100,000 migrants and an outflow of arms which contributed to regional instability. Remittances declined drastically as
a result of the massive return of migrants, and it was further exacerbated by the financial
burden of supporting returnees. As many Sahel countries face recurrent food and
nutrition crises, the influx of refugees in Niger has put additional strain on families
already struggling with a shortfall in agricultural production.
3.
The coup d’état and rebellion in Mali have resulted in an additional inflow of
around 64,000 refugees into Niger, compounded by existing tensions in the north
between Tuareg populations and the Government in Niamey. The refugee population
is mostly concentrated in the northern Tillabéry region, one of the areas hit the hardest by
the 2012 food crisis. Given that around 5 million people1 are at chronic risk of food
shortages and malnutrition, the inflow of additional refugees has worsened an already
fragile humanitarian situation.
4.
Political and religious groups from outside Niger have emerged as alternative
service providers and authorities, finding easy ground to establish roots among the
disenfranchised and marginalized parts of the society. The Boko Haram sect in
Nigeria has increasingly used Niger for recruitment and as a refuge. The expulsion of
more than 10,000 Nigeriens from northern Nigeria and border closures by Nigerian
authorities has significantly threatened the economy in the south of Niger.
5.
1

These factors have overstretched the security forces and border protection

Corresponding to 34 percent of Niger population
1

resources. A weak regional security architecture and general militarization in the region
have facilitated cross-border trafficking of drugs and arms across the entire Sahel region.
The military intervention against AQIM and Jihadist militants in Mali presents a risk of
spill-over into Niger2. Tuareg insurgencies elsewhere are perceived as a source of tension
that could potentially involve the Nigerien Tuareg community.

B.

Political Context

6.
Historically unstable, Niger has experienced frequent political infighting and
coups d’états but has recently stabilized. In 2009, efforts by then President Tandja
to circumvent a two-term limit resulted in a severe political crisis that led to the
February 2010 military coup d’état. As a result, from February 2010 to April 2011,
Niger was governed by the Supreme Council for the Restoration of Democracy under the
presidency of a military general. Following a referendum and the adoption of a new
constitution in November 2010 and a series of local, legislative, and presidential elections
in early 2011, a new President took office in April 2011.
7.
Niger has now entered a period of relative stability but long term trends are
challenging. Repeated coups d’états and violent rebellions have reduced trust in the
effectiveness and stability of the political system. Coupled with weak service provision,
these phenomena weaken state legitimacy and open up space for alternative service
providers and claimants of legitimacy, such as emerging conservative religious groups
and traditional authorities, which are mostly implanted in rural areas, where more than 80
percent of the population lives and where central government influence is weak.
8.
The army is a powerful actor in Niger’s political and economic landscape.
With four military governments since independence, Niger has experienced longer spells
of military than civilian rule. However, since 1991, the army has transferred power to
civilian rulers and now plays the role of the guardian of democratic rule. As a result of
the presence of security threats, the army has benefited from substantial amounts of
resources and training, reinforcing its importance.
9.
Niger displays a ‘grievance-generating resource economy’ that has yet to
provide tangible benefits for the majority of the population. The Tuareg rebellions of
2007-2009, were fuelled mainly by grievances over: (i) lack of economic benefits from
uranium exports; (ii) under-representation in the labor force of French and Chinese
companies, and (iii) poor working conditions in uranium mines and oil sites. With the
uranium mines mainly located in the Tuareg-inhabited North, these phenomena
underscore the importance of focusing on local governance and improving the
mechanisms to channel local grievances and resolve them in an inclusive fashion3 .

2

Illicit activities generate significant funds for terrorists, which are used for arms purchases and the creation of local
patronage networks that consolidate extremists’ standing in communities.

2

C.

Economic Context

Recent Economic Developments and Economic Outlook
10.
The structure of the Nigerien economy is dominated by agriculture, which
contributes 43 percent of GDP, and commerce and services, which contribute 41
percent. Industry accounts for only 16 percent of GDP and remains characterized by a
lack of competitiveness and low diversification. While manufacturing industries
increased their contribution from less than 2 percent of GDP over the period 1990-2004
to 4 percent in 2011, significant potential remains, in particular to increase the processing
of agricultural products.
11.
Niger’s historical growth performance has been difficult with a decline in
real per capita incomes by more than 30 percent between 1980 and 2000. Following
a short lived uranium boom in the 1970s, Niger experienced a continuous decline in per
capita incomes until around 2000. Annual average per capita growth between 1960 and
2000 was a mere one percent. While macro-economic stability and economic reforms
resulted in a significant increase in average growth to 4.7 percent during the period 20012010, this was largely negated by high population growth, resulting in GDP growth per
capita of around 1 percent per year. Niger has one of Africa’s highest population growth
rates estimated at 3.3 percent per year.
Figure 1: Per-capita Incomes and Economic Growth, 1960-2010
.. as Niger has not been able to generate sustained
high growth, while its population growth rate is
increasing and one of the highest worldwide

1000

15

900

10
annual percentage change

GDP per capita, PPP (constant 2005
international $)

Niger’s per capita GDP in 2009 is 30 percent lower
than it was in 1980…

800
700
600
500
400
300
200

5
0
‐5
‐10
‐15

100
0

‐20
2008

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

GDP growth (annual %)

Population growth (annual %)

12.
Over the past decade, the rural sector has been the main engine of growth.
In the short run, the sector’s performance is primarily determined by rainfall patterns,
resulting in large year to year fluctuations of production. While in years with strong
harvests Niger becomes a net exporter of cereals, in years with poor harvests Niger
becomes a net importer, with imports funded with the support of the international
community. Livestock as well as agricultural niche products such as onion, black eyed
peas, or gum Arabica contribute about 50 percent of Niger’s exports.

3

13.
Frequent droughts, political instability, and fluctuations in revenue from
Niger’s mineral exports have contributed to high volatility in Niger’s growth rate.
Niger’s extreme vulnerability to climatic shocks, unstable enabling environment, and
developments in the global demand for uranium is a result of the undiversified structure
of the economy, which is unable to absorb or mitigate the impact of shocks
14.
A poor harvest in 2011 resulted in economic growth of only 2.3 percent and a
severe cereal deficit, which triggered large inflows of humanitarian aid in 2012.
Growth in 2012 is expected to reach 11.2 percent as the result of a good harvest and the
start of oil production. Annual average inflation was 2.9 percent in 2011 and is projected
to drop to 0.6 percent in 2012. Still thanks to heavy rains, the 2012 harvest generated
over 5 million tons cereals surplus – the highest in 5 years – which shows the huge
potential if water resource were under control in such arid lands.
15.
Niger commenced oil production in November 2011 in a joint venture with
the Chinese National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC). Due to pricing, regulatory and
coordination problems in upstream oil production, refining, and marketing, the refinery
was only producing in 2012 around 11,000 to 12,000 barrels per day, well below its full
capacity of 20,000. The launch of oil production has also given rise to social pressures for
a reduction in domestic fuel prices and for increases in civil service salaries.
Table 1: Key Macroeconomic Indicators

Real GDP growth (annual %)
Inflation (annual average %)
Broad money growth (annual %)
Exports, f.o.b. (FCFA, annual
change)
Imports, f.o.b. (FCFA, annual
change)
Curr acc bal (% of GDP, excl off
trans)
Curr acc bal (% of GDP, incl off
trans)
FDI (% of GDP)
Foreign Aid (% of GDP)
Net foreign assets (months import)
PPG External debt (PV, % of GDP)
PPG Domestic debt (PV, % of GDP)
Debt service (% of government
revenue)

2009

2010

2011
2.2
2.9

2012
p
11.2
0.5

2013
p
6.2

-0.9
1.1
18.3

10.7
0.9
22.0

6.2

21.9

11.6

6.4
1.6
10.3

15.2

21.1

5.4

31.1

8.2

11.3

40.2

14.8

8.1

4.2

7.2

7.4

-25. 7

-25.4

-28.0

-20.9

-22.9

-23.3

-25.0

-19.9

-24.7

-17.7

-18.9

-19.9

13.9
6.1
2.2

17.5
6.0
1.8

14.9
6.8
3.0

8.4
11.2
3.0

-4.31
12.6

9.3

8.4

12.1
5.0

12.0
5.5

10.9
8.1

11.8
7.1

18.6

19.4
5.7

25.7
4.9

26.7

6.4

3.5

3.9

5.1

11.0

37.0

3.3

27.9
4.2
7.2

Source: IMF and staff estimates.
1/ Domestic revenue minus expenditures net of foreign financed projects
Note: p –projection

4

1.7

4.1

2014
p

4.9

2015
p
6.0

1.3
6.0
4.8
3.8
-22.7
-19.5

16.
Revenue from the extractive industries sector accounted for about two
percent of GDP in 2011 and is projected to increase to about 5 percent of GDP by
2015. The completion of the link to the Chad-Cameroon pipeline in 2015 is expected to
contribute to a further significant increase in revenue from the projected export of 60,000
barrels of crude oil per day. Yet high yielding physical, human, and financial capital
associated with revenue from the extractive industries represent major challenges for the
authorities.
17.
Niger’s manufacturing and handicrafts sector is small and mostly informal.
It has shown little dynamism in recent years, but with improvements in the business
environment it could be the basis for diversification and job creation.
18.
Niger’s economic outlook is affected by large scale investments in the
uranium sector. Total uranium production was 4351 tons in 2011 generating exports of
about F CFA 300 bn. Since 2009, development of the Imouraren deposit has been
ongoing and is expected to more than double uranium production by adding 5000 tons
per year when production commences in 2015. In 2010, mining of the Azelik deposit
started in a joint venture between the Nigerien government and Chinese partners.
Production is expected to reach 2500 tons per year by 2015 and potentially double by
2020. Realization of these investments, together with increased petroleum production,
will be a major driver of growth in the medium term.
19.
Developments in the agriculture, mining, and oil sectors are the main
determinants of Niger’s balance of trade. Exports of uranium currently account for
about 50 percent of total exports and increased by 24 percent in 2011. The value of other
exports, mainly livestock and agricultural products, increased by 14 percent in 2011
contributing to an overall increase in the value of exports by 19 percent. The value of
imports increased by 12 percent and imports of capital goods destined primarily for the
mining and oil industry grew by four percent and accounted for about one third of total
imports. Due to the good 2010/11 harvest, imports of food declined by seven percent and
their share in total imports dropped from 27 to 22 percent. Donor grants and loans are the
main source of current account funding in Niger and increased from 4.1 percent of GDP
in 2010 to 9.3 percent of GDP in 2011.
20.
Despite the economic and political turbulence experienced between 2009 and
2011, fiscal policies remained consistent with macroeconomic stability. Government’s
fiscal policy was broadly in line with macro-economic programs agreed with the IMF.
The fiscal deficit (including grants) increased only slightly from 2.6 percent of GDP in
2010 to 2.8 percent of GDP in 2011. For 2012, the deficit is projected to increase to 3.9
percent of GDP. The medium term challenge for Niger is to enhance domestic revenue
mobilization, which stood at 15.1 percent of GDP in 2011 and to enhance the allocative
and operational efficiency of public expenditures.
21.
Niger’s financial sector remains severely underdeveloped with most of the
rural economy and SMEs without access to credit. Financial sector depth (M2/GDP)
increased from 19 percent by the end of 2009 to 22 percent by the end of 2011, but Niger
remains well below the 41 percent average for Sub Saharan Africa. Credit to the private
sector as a percentage of GDP has increased steadily from 6.8 percent in 2004 to 13.0
percent in 2010 and further to 14.2 percent in 2011 but credit to SMEs remains
5

inadequate. In February 2012, the authorities completed a financial sector development
strategy and action plan4.
22.
Enhanced public financial management and a prudent debt policy are key to
preserving debt sustainability and ensuring the efficient use of available fiscal space.
Following a significant reduction of Niger’s external debt through the Enhanced HIPC
initiative and the MDRI, the NPV of external debt has been rising rapidly from 10.9
percent in 2009 to a projected 29.0 percent in 2012, mainly on account of borrowing and
guarantees for Government engagement in the mining and petroleum sectors. Most of
Niger’s external borrowing is on concessional terms to support Niger’s large
development needs. Preliminary results from the latest debt sustainability analysis
(DSA)5 based on end-2011 data show that the risk of debt distress remains moderate. The
DSA highlights the need to minimize borrowing on commercial terms for public
investment projects, and limit as much as possible the Government’s involvement in the
financing of natural resources projects6. A Debt Management Performance Assessment
was carried out by the Bank Group in 2012 and the authorities have requested technical
assistance for the preparation of a debt management reform plan and a medium term debt
strategy to be provided in 2013.
23.
Increasing per capita income growth is imperative for Niger. After more than
three decades of declining or stagnating per capita incomes, promoting economic growth
remains vital for Niger’s development and poverty reduction. The main elements to
support economic growth and competitiveness defined in the World Bank’s Strategy for
Africa - namely improving infrastructure, the business environment, and human
capacity/skills - are all highly relevant for Niger.
24.
In the medium term, scaled up production in the uranium and petroleum
sector will be the primary driver of growth. However, as the growth impact of the
large scale extractive industry investments peters out, sustained economic growth and
employment generation will depend on scaled up productivity in the agriculture sector
and the diversification of the economy. Several areas have potential to contribute to a
diversification of the economy. First is the diversification of natural resource exploitation
beyond uranium, with significant proven potential for gold, base metals and coal. The
Government is actively seeking to promote this diversification within the mining sector.
Second, the promotion of mining sector related activities by strengthening the linkages
with the rest of the economy through development of clusters. Third, agriculture sector
activities, in particular related to processing and trade in agricultural products (beef and
hides). Fourth, scaling up of non-agricultural and non-mining activities that are currently
concentrated in the informal sector. Investing in women and men as economic agents
4

The strategy envisages, among other things, improvements in the legal and judicial framework (including for
mortgages and guarantees); deepening the financial sector (including through credit to SMEs), increasing the stability
and transparency of the financial sector, and developing and building capacity and knowledge of financial institutions
and the public as well.
5
IDA and IMF. 2013. Draft Niger Joint Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Analysis. (Expected to be submitted to the
Board before or with the CPS.)
6
This would include a primary focus on mobilizing concessional resources in order to ensure debt sustainability;
strengthening of the management of public investments and increasing absorptive capacity will be critical to ensure the
effective use of external resources.
6

provides the potential to improve women’s on-farm and off-farm productivity and their
relative wages, thereby lessening the demand for large family size and high fertility.

D.

Poverty and social context

25.
Poverty has declined from 64 percent in 2005 to 61 percent in 2007/08 and 56
percent in 2011 based on preliminary World Bank estimates7. Poverty trends are
dependent upon the rate of economic growth and the manner in which the growth is
distributed between groups in the population. In line with population concentration,
poverty remains primarily a rural phenomenon because 80 percent of the population is
rural and a little more than nine out of ten poor Nigeriens reside in rural areas. Therefore,
the economic growth resulting from increased returns to the agricultural sector will
disproportionately benefit the poor because that is where the majority seek their
livelihoods. The reduction in poverty occurring during this period is likely attributable to
positive changes in agricultural sector growth. This sector relies predominantly on rainfed agriculture in which performance is exposed to droughts, locusts, pest and disease
outbreaks and a number of agricultural risks. The incidence of drought – which occurred
four times between 2000 and 2012 – caused dramatic fluctuations in annual real GDP
growth and wielded significant adverse impacts on per capita income.
26.
Household size, lack of education, and agricultural employment are
important correlates of poverty in Niger. Household dependency ratios have a hugely
negative effect on household consumption. The level of consumption increases in the
household by about 0.4 percent with each additional one percent increase in household
size which suggests a strong negative relationship between fertility and poverty. Urban
household heads who have completed primary education are likely to sustain greater
levels of consumption compared with urban heads who did not attend school. Education
has no poverty reduction effect on rural households. Given that agriculture is practiced
predominantly using low levels of inputs and technology in settings where population
densities have increased rapidly over time, the returns to labor would be low. As
expected, heads of households working in agriculture face a significantly larger
consumption shortfall and by implication face a higher probability of being poor.
27.
The impacts of economic shocks are likely to exact the largest toll on the
poorest households in the population. During the period following a drought
households are likely to experience extreme spikes in grain prices- well above the level of
fluctuations attributed to seasonality. Household behavior is extremely sensitive to these
events since grain consumption represents a significant portion of the household diet. As
an example, in early 2010, a period that followed the drought of 2009, a 10 percent
increase in the price of millet led to an almost 10 percent reduction in millet consumption
per capita. In addition to cutting back on millet and other dietary consumption,
households also responded by selling their productive assets and in dire cases households
consumed the seed stock that was reserved for future seasons. These events led to large
welfare losses in households which aren’t likely to be recovered easily.8
7

These figures are under discussion with the National Institute of Statistics and are subject to revision.
For more discussion on the welfare implications of economic shocks, see World Bank, “Niger: Investing for
Prosperity – A Poverty Assessment”, 2012.

8

7

28.
Besides the immediate welfare losses, high exposure to shocks also induces
risk-averse behaviors in agricultural decision making among households. This partly
explains low levels of uptake by farmers of modern agricultural inputs, and in turn low
agricultural productivity growth9. Other factors such as affordability, lack of availability
and relatively expensive inputs, limited agricultural advisory and financial services, also
impair farmer’s ability to adopt improved agriculture practices.
29.
Poverty trends appear to be unstable for several reasons. First, despite the
downward trend in poverty incidence that occurred between all survey-referenced
periods, the poverty gap and the poverty severity trends present more varied outcomes.
These indicators focus on measuring the welfare of the poor relative to the poverty line
and suggest that inequality among the poorest has grown. The change in the rural poverty
severity measure remained positive between all three periods. These trends suggest that
while agricultural growth has led to a reduction in poverty over time, the poorest
segments may be less able to bounce back from economic crises and they remain
entrenched in low levels of consumption. Second, although the incidence of poverty is
estimated to have decreased the absolute numbers of the poor have not declined in Niger.
The percentage reduction in poverty did not keep pace with the rate of population growth
and any gains in poverty reduction have been cancelled out.
30.
Despite significant progress on social indicators, there are strong concerns
that gender issues and the high population growth rate, both of which derive from
long-standing cultural norms, will hamper inclusive economic growth. Niger is
among the fastest growing populations (3.3 percent per annum) coupled with a young age
structure, in which half the population is under age 15 and can be expected to experience
high rates of population growth in the medium term. At this current growth rate, the
population would reach about 54 million by 2050. This high population growth is largely
the product of an extremely high fertility rate: with an average of 7.6 children per
woman, Niger stands alone as the country with the highest fertility rate in the world. High
population growth creates huge challenges in terms of demand for social infrastructure
and services (e.g., education, health, nutrition, employment, housing and urban
management) and the availability of factors of production. Further, high fertility is likely
to result in low worker output- or low capital intensification- and provide disincentives to
females to make tradeoffs in family size over increased labor force participation. Females
bear high opportunity costs in terms of lost school completion, educational achievement,
and capacity to earn and generate income.
31.
Persistent poverty and high levels of gender inequality have hindered female
participation in Niger’s development processes. Gender differences are pervasive in
human development outcomes, legal status, economic opportunities, and political voice.
Enrollment gaps in primary education are most acute for poor girls living in rural areas.
They trail boys by about 15 percentage points. Uptake in contraceptive usage edged up
9

Preliminary evidence based on 2011 household survey data indicate that large portions of the population tend to
experience some level of food insecurity during the year. Approximately 40 percent of the population is found to be
food insecure during at least one episode while nearly 23 percent are considered to be chronically food insecure.
8

only to about 12 percent and high maternal mortality remains of paramount concern.
Differences in legal capacity and status are particularly acute for married women who
possess lower legal status and property rights than men. These differences are likely to
undermine business opportunities in the non-agricultural economy for women and also
impinge upon their productivity in the agricultural sector. Female farmers are likely to
use lower levels of productive inputs and be less exposed to technological innovations
compared with their male counterparts. Women are poorly represented in public life and
in decision-making institutions in Niger. Female parliamentarians hold less than 14
percent of the seats in the Parliament. Increasing opportunities for girls to access
education will offer the benefit of not only facilitating economic empowerment and
opportunities for women but also help to curb the high rate of demographic growth and
accelerate economic development. Specifically, this will entail breaking the cycle of
early-marriages, unsustainably high birth rate, infant and maternal mortality rates, and
girls’ school dropout rates.

E.

Progress toward the MDGs and human development indicators

32.
Despite significant progress achieved in the last decade, Niger is far from
reaching the MDG targets by 2015 (see Table 2 and Annex 22) and its human
development indicators remain among the lowest. Based on present trends only 3 out
of the 7 MDG targets appear likely to be met by 2015, in spite of some positive
developments. The primary completion rate grew from 18 percent in 1990 to 52 percent
in 2011. While this is a notable increase, Niger’s education indicators remain among the
lowest in SSA. With an enrollment rate of only 13 percent, secondary education
coverage, for instance, is extremely low. Gender inequalities have also tended to decline
but remain strong, particularly in terms of education and access to healthcare. The
girls/boys ratio in primary school increased from 56 percent in 1990s to 82 percent in
2011. While the child mortality MDG target is likely to be met, highlighting a positive
trend partly related to increased use of bed nets, child and maternal mortality indicators
remain very high. With a rate of over 500, Niger is notably among the highest in maternal
mortality. Access to health care, including the coverage of vaccines, remains inadequate
especially in rural areas and the incidence of malaria and HIV prevalence have slightly
increased despite government efforts. While prevalence of stunting in children aged 2435 months has fallen slightly, about 47 percent of children under 5 are stunted and 34
percent are under-weight, these are very high rates at the SSA level. Child malnutrition
rate is still very high due to recurrent food shortage, particularly in rural areas. Access to
water indicator is on target. Against this backdrop, Niger signed up to the MDG
Acceleration Framework (MAF) to focus more on poverty and food insecurity (MDG1).
Human capital improvements will be critical to achieve higher competitiveness and
growth and reduce vulnerability.

9

Table 2: Niger's Progress toward the MDGs
1990
Status
2015
(08-11)
trend

MDG

1. Poverty
MAF Targets: Halve, between 1990 and 2015
- Proportion of people whose income is less than 1$ a
day
- Proportion of people who suffer from hunger (%
underweight children under 5)
2. Universal Primary Education (ensure full
completion rate)
3. Gender equality (eliminate disparities - Girls/boys
ratio primary school)
4. Child Mortality (reduce by 2/3 under-5 mortality deaths/1000 live births)

Likelihood of
achievement

63%
36%

59.5%
33.7%

55%
29.8%

32.5%
18%

Unlikely
Unlikely

18%

52%

55%

100%

Unlikely

56%

82%

100%

100%

Unlikely

322

130.5

112.7

106.1

Likely

554

526.7

175

Unlikely

0.7%

n.a

<0.7%

Likely

48.9%
9%

58%
15%

58%
50%

Likely
Unlikely

5. Maternal Health (reduce by ¾ maternal mortality 652
deaths/ 100,000 births)
6. HIV/AIDS, malaria & other diseases (HIV/AIDS
0.87%
Prevalence rate)
7. Environmental Sustainability
- halve non-access to safe water
22.3%
- halve non-access to improved sanitation facilities
5%
Source: Niger authorities and World Bank Staff estimates

III.

MDG
targets

CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES

33.
At present, Niger has an unprecedented opportunity to make significant
advances in development and poverty reduction, but also faces high risks from
conflict in neighboring countries. The successful return to constitutional order in April
2011 provides the basis for a renewed focus on economic development and poverty
reduction. The government program sets out an ambitious agenda to foster economic
growth, food security, universal primary education, and good governance. At the same
time, the start of oil production in November 2011 and large scale investments in the
uranium sector promise to boost economic growth in the medium term and provide
additional resources to Government for the realization of its program.
34.
Over the past decade, Niger has also developed a strong record of reforms
that have been implemented despite severe human and institutional capacity
constraints and frequently recurring domestic and external shocks that claim much
of government’s attention. Niger’s Country Policy and Institutions Assessment rating
has increased steadily over the past few years and stands now at 3.4, above the average
for Sub-Saharan Africa of 3.2. Progress has been particularly strong in strengthening
economic management, but also in the area of policy for social inclusion and equity,
which plays an important role in reducing the potential for conflict.
35.
On account of these improvements in policies and institutions, Niger is not
formally on the World Bank’s fragile situations list, but internal and external
stresses could, if left unchecked, alter its fragile equilibrium. These include political
fragility where failure of the Government to deliver tangible results could result quickly
in the loss of popular support and a political stalemate; increased security threats from
10

conflict and terrorist activities in the sub-region; continued vulnerability to climatic
shocks and developments in commodity markets; and a high fertility rate which puts
further stress on Niger’s scarce land resources, weak social service delivery systems, and
its small labor market.
36.
Strong economic management and improved policies and institutions provide
a conducive environment for the productive use of official development assistance,
but various studies identify Niger as an “aid orphan” with inadequate and
unpredictable flows of aid representing a main constraint to the expansion of social
services and infrastructure. In response to the commitment of the international
community contained in the Accra Agenda for Action to “address the issue of countries
that receive insufficient aid,” the World Bank and the OECD carried out research that
sought to identify countries that receive insufficient aid.10 Using a variety of global aid
allocation approaches as benchmarks, this research consistently identified Niger among
the countries that receive insufficient aid. Efforts to help mobilize aid in conjunction
with private sector resources are thus essential, and the CPS envisages to support these
efforts.

A.

Vulnerability and Resilience

37.
Niger is extremely vulnerable to severe climate shocks with drought being
the most important risk in terms of frequency and impacts. Despite availability of an
efficient early monitoring system – Système d’Alerte Précoce (SAP) - insufficient
preparedness and lack of ex-ante risk management strategies have led to frequent
drought-related insecurities. Indeed, between 1980 and 2012, 10 major episodes of
drought have been recorded, of which 8 led to major food and fodder deficit11. The food
crisis resulting from the 2011 drought affected more than 7 million people or half of the
country’s total population. On top of drought, locust infestation and crops and animal
disease are contributing to food insecurity.
38.
Flooding is another important natural hazard affecting people’s lives and
physical assets in Niger. Recent floods in August 2012 adversely affected more than
500,000 people of which at least 176,000 were rendered homeless. More broadly, the
country’s vulnerability to frequent weather shocks has impacts on housing, agriculture,
livestock, business, industry, soil degradation with implications on soil fertility.
39.
While the agricultural sector is exposed to a large number of constraints and
risks, demographic and climatic changes also offer a number of opportunities. The
trend of aggregate rainfall is increasing and movement of isohyets to the north provides
new areas for acreage expansion as well as new opportunities for tapping groundwater for
irrigation. Increased penetration of cell phone use in rural areas offers a new delivery
10

Utz, Robert. 2010. Will Countries that Receive Insufficient Aid Please Stand Up? CFP Working Paper Series No. 7.
September 2010. OECD/DAC. 2011. Aid Orphans: A Collective Responsibility? Improved Identification and
Monitoring of Under-Aided Countries. DCD/DAC(2011)18. April 27, 2011.
11
In 2008, more than 50 percent of Niger’s population was estimated to be chronically food insecure, with 22 percent
suffering from extreme chronic food insecurity. The implication of climatic shocks on Niger’s ability to significantly
address issues of poverty is put in better perspective given that agriculture accounts for over 40 percent of GDP and is
the main source of livelihoods for over 80 percent of the population.
11

channel to provide services and enable effective decision-making by agricultural sector
stakeholders. While burgeoning population remains a huge challenge for food security, it
also offers big market opportunities for agricultural producers. In addition, proximity to
Nigeria and sustained demand for agriculture commodities from coastal cities in the
ECOWAS space provide potential markets for Niger.
40.
More importantly the Government’s 3N Initiative (Nigeriens Nourish
Nigeriens) offers a unique window of opportunity to support an integrated approach
to building resilience of communities by improving land-use planning and secure
property rights, developing flood risk analysis and early warning systems; increasing
efficiency and productivity of agriculture and livestock production systems, through inter
alia sustainable land and water management, improved agriculture and livestock services
and inputs markets for accelerated adoption of improved technologies and good
agricultural practices, integrating information services to improve government and
farmers decision making, and scaling-up safety net systems.12
41.
Demographic dividend or youth bulge? High population growth makes it
much more difficult to achieve development outcomes. Human development indicators
are all lagging in Niger and are a key cause of vulnerability for the country. High fertility
rates and related rapid population growth severely limit the development outcomes which
can be achieved through education and health services. For instance, the links between
high fertility and high malnutrition (of mothers and children) also means that the children
of today face a double burden of competition for scarce resources as well as the
likelihood of poor cognitive and nutrition traps that will put them on a permanently lower
trajectory in terms of opportunities. To be able to take advantage of the demographic
dividend, Niger needs to make faster progress in reducing child mortality, and continue
expanding reproductive health services and the promotion of modern contraceptive
usage, while creating high level support for population policy through nationwide
advocacy and communication efforts. Longer-term measures to reduce fertility also need
to include the promotion of gender equality through higher women's labor force
participation and better access to health and education services.
42.
High population growth also creates daunting challenges to absorb the youth
into the labor force. Youth faces several problems that pose a threat to stability and can
be seen as a driver of fragility, as they become increasingly more frustrated with the
political situation and its inability to adequately respond to their challenges. Two key
issues that cause frustration and a sense of marginalization have been identified as the
following: (i) high unemployment amongst both educated and non-educated youth with
the perception that jobs are distributed based on personal relationships rather than skill
sets; and (ii) a mismatch between education and the employment market, as the options
for the majority of educated youth seem to be limited to two professional paths: the army
or teaching.

12

One key issue is the absence of a comprehensive safety nets scheme able to protect human capital in times of crises.
The social protection strategy needs to focus on improving the efficiency, scope, and coordination of safety net
programs (both existing and new ones), while supporting better nutrition practices and promoting effective mediumterm strategies and investments to improve resilience to economic and natural shocks.

12

43.
A broad-based, inclusive growth pattern can go a long way to address some
of Niger’s economic grievances. As the country transitions into a resource-based
economy, it is critical that the proceeds of natural resource revenues are used to advance
the development agenda; increase the potential for youth employability and job creation;
and provide benefits to the poorest segments of the population and further reduce the
incidence of poverty.
44.
Niger exemplifies social cohesion in the Sahel that needs to translate into
equitable development impact. Four years after the end of the rebellion symbolized by
the Mouvement des Nigériens pour la Justice (MNJ) which started in 2007 following
claims on the lack of equal sharing of mining revenues and social investments, the
integration movement of Tuareg in Niger has found a new dynamic in combination with
the acceleration of the decentralization process. Local and regional elections organized in
2011 saw many former rebellion leaders appointed or elected to official positions.
Populations are more closely involved in the local management, investments have been
obtained and the Government’s anticipation of the consequences of the Libyan crisis –
returnees and weapons – was key in keeping the region pacified. Finally, the ethnic and
cultural intermixing is such in Niger13 that the bulk of the challenges remain at the
economic level. In order to curb the poverty gap, this will require increasing financial
support for investments in the northern regions embodied by the current Strategy on
Security and Development in the Sahel Regions known as SDS Niger.

B.

Weak Business Environment and Lack of Diversification

45.
Although extractive industries are important for the economy of Niger, the
growth of mining activities has not spurred the development of other economic
sectors. The extractive industries have evolved as enclave projects, and their impact on
broad-based growth has been constrained by low level of private sector development and
weak forward, backward and sideways linkages with the non-extractive economic
sectors.
46.
Despite Niger’s important energy resources, energy consumption is limited
and mainly based on massive use of wood fuel (85 percent of total consumption).
Niger imports 85 percent of its electricity consumption from Nigeria, with a national
estimated rate of access of 8 percent (47 percent in urban areas and 0.4 percent in rural
areas).
47.
With an underdeveloped financial sector and approximately 1,400 businesses
registered contributing to only about 15 percent of GDP, Niger’s formal private
sector base is one of the smallest in the region. It is estimated that about 60 percent of
Niger’s economic activity takes place in the informal sector. With the exception of some
niche markets, the private sector base is poorly connected to the global economy. Most of
13

Gado Alzouma - Identité politique et démocratie: les trois dimensions de l’ethnonationalisme touareg au Niger et au
Mali, In Marisa Fois and Alessandro Pes, Politics and Minorities in Africa, 2012 issue of Nova Collectanea Africana,
Centro di Studi Africani in Sardegna (CSAS), Italy, Aracne, Pp. 47-70.
Chekou Koré Lawel - Rébellion Touareg au Niger: raisons de persistance et tentatives de solution, p 54
13

the country’s growth potential is associated with the oil and mining sector, livestock, and
regional trade mostly with Nigeria (its main economic partner) and with the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) countries. The 2013 Doing Business DB
report considers Niger as one of the most difficult countries to engage in private sector
activities (176 out of 185 countries). Private sector development is hampered by poor
infrastructure, limited access to finance, slow government procedures, corruption, low
labor productivity, ineffective taxation and tax administration.
48.
Private sector development is also hampered by high transport prices which
reduce competitiveness, and indirectly, negatively impact growth and the job market.
Poorly designed market regulation has resulted in the provision of low quality transport
services, insufficiently capitalized trucking companies and obsolete trucking fleets.
Existing regional and bilateral arrangements discourage the provision of efficient road
transport services. Regulatory reforms including regional freight sharing agreements and
national carrier restrictions need to be coordinated at the regional level to be
transformational.
49.
The projected increase in natural resource production and revenues offers an
opportunity to promote inclusive growth. The 2010 Constitution contains far-reaching
provisions to allocate 15 percent of mining revenues to the local government of the
regions where these resources are generated and requires greater transparency in the
extractive industries at large.

C.

Governance and Public Sector

50.
Despite recent improvements, public service delivery is limited by capacity
constraints. Public service is provided by a tiny administration made of a small number
of aging civil servants that are poorly trained and often lack adequate qualifications,
resources and training opportunities for their functions. Human resource management
cannot track the overall number of civil servants, develop a merit-based policy and
provide adequate incentives. Introduction of ICT tools and systems, and related changes
in working procedures are still at an early stage.
51.
Improvements in Public Financial Management (PFM) are needed to
streamline budget preparation, execution processes and internal and external
controls. The draft report of the 2012 repeater PEFA reveals very limited progress
achieved since 2008. Among 31 indicators, 20 received ratings equal or inferior in
comparison with the 2008 assessment while 11 indicators marked slight progress, mainly
in areas where technical assistance had been strong.
52.
Rent seeking remains relatively common in the provision of service delivery,
and politicization is relatively common in the public administration. Recruitment is
not systematically based on merit, and skills need to be significantly strengthened.
Overall, the public sector does not have effective incentive mechanisms. Other challenges
include multiple personnel statutes, staff turnover, and discrepancies in the payroll
systems, and lack of precise information on the number of public servants. The judicial

14

system is also facing important challenges such as limited access, and interference in
enforcement processes.
53.
The mining sector is bedeviled by non-transparent mechanisms for award of
exploration licenses and mining contracts. Mining contracts are often characterized
by high up-front payments with little attention to maximization of medium/long-term
value – and revenues - for the state. The tax administration capacity especially in the
mining sector has been limited. Finally, the allocation of resources and the quality of
public investment systems and expenditure execution does not allow for the effective use
of public resources generated by mining investments for growth. The Government of
Niger is committed to revisit existing contracts in the extractive industry sector for a
better win-win deal.
54.
Niger’s international governance indicators have shown a favorable trend in
recent years in a difficult regional context. On the 2012 Ibrahim Index of African
Governance, Niger ranks 28th out of 52 countries, up from 39th in the previous year.
Between 2006 and 2011, Niger’s score improved by 6.7 points - the best relative
performance in the sub-region.14 Other governance indicators such as the World
Governance Indicators and CPIA also confirm this trend thanks to recent initiatives. In
March 2011, Niger became the first country in francophone Africa to reach compliant
status under the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). Strong provisions of
transparency for natural resources and public procurement15 are also enshrined in the new
Constitution. In parallel, the new administration has required an asset declaration for
government officials upon entry into office, established an Anti-Corruption Authority
(HALCIA) and a corruption hotline in the Ministry of Justice, and arrested several
government officials on corruption charges. Finally, with support from the Bank, the
Government has developed a Governance Action Plan to (i) increase the transparency and
accountability of the state; (ii) strengthen the independence and credibility of the justice
system; and (iii) improve the performance of public administration.

14

http://www.moibrahimfoundation.org/niger/.

15

Article 52 forbids the direct or indirect participation of the President, Prime Minister, Members of the Cabinet, and
Members of Parliament in public procurement contracts.
15

IV.

GOVERNMENT POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY 2012-2015

55.
Niger’s new Poverty Reduction Strategy – the Plan for Economic and Social
Development (PDES) - was approved by the Council of Ministers on August 1,
2012.16 It represents Niger’s overarching framework for the Government’s development
agenda. The main focus of the PDES is on achieving economic growth of around 8
percent over the PDES period (2012-2015).
56.
The PDES represents a fundamental change in policy orientation and
institutional arrangements, responding to recent developments in Niger and the sub
region. In particular, in order to prevent a recurrence of the political instability
experienced during the period 2009 – 2010, the PDES pays particular attention to the
consolidation of the credibility and efficacy of public institutions. In the wake of political
developments in the sub-region, priority has been given to issues of security. The PDES
also advocates for a more inclusive development approach that seeks to reduce regional
disparities. In the light of recurring food crises, the PDES pays particular attention to the
agriculture and food security, as one of the priority programs of the government.
57.
The PDES targets 11 strategic results and identifies 86 programs for their
achievement. These are clustered in five programmatic areas which are (i)
Strengthening the credibility and efficiency of public institutions; (ii) Creating the
conditions for inclusive, sustainable and balanced development; (iii) Food security and
sustainable agricultural development; (iv) Competitive and diversified economy for
accelerated, inclusive growth; and (v) Promotion of social development. (See details in
Annex 20).
58.
The PDES was prepared through a broad-based and participative process
and was endorsed by donors at a Round-table in Paris who pledged to support its
implementation with US$4.8 billion. The staff of the World Bank and the IMF
discussed the assessment of the PDES under JSAN separately.

V.

BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

A.
Lessons Learnt from previous CAS, Stakeholder Feedback and Gender
Assessment
The 2008-2011 CAS Completion Report
59.
Results and lessons from the 2008-2011 CAS are assessed in the CAS
Completion Report and discussed with the Government in March 2012 (see Annex 2
to 5). The main conclusions of this report are summarized here. The 2008-2011 CAS
was built around two pillars (i) accelerating sustained growth that is equitably shared; and
(ii) increasing access to basic services and developing human capital and two cross
16

Subsequently, the Ministry of Planning, Regional, and Community Development also prepared and issued a Priority
Action Plan and a Strategic Results Framework.
16

cutting issues (i) demographics; and (ii) good governance. The CAS was well aligned
with PRSP-II. Given the structural challenges to development in Niger, the CAS
proposed to deliver about one third of IDA resources in the form of DPOs.
60.
During most of the period covered by this assessment, Niger was affected by
a dramatic combination of events and external shocks, with adverse consequences
on the country’s economic performance. The CAS period comprised two episodes of
catastrophic droughts in 2009 and 2011, and important political changes in four different
phases: (i) pre-2009 political events phase, broadly a continuation of the previous CAS
period; (ii) a period of severe political crisis from mid-2009 until the February 2010
coup; (iii) a transition period with interim de facto government until the early 2011
elections; and (iv) since 2011, renewed stability under the newly elected President and
new government resulting from the April 2011 parliamentary election. Overall the
performance of the CAS program is assessed as moderately satisfactory. Bank
performance is assessed as moderately satisfactory – satisfactory in design of the program
and moderately satisfactory in its implementation for the Bank failed to complete a CAS
Progress Report to adjust the CAS to new country context.
61.
Progress was mixed under pillar 117 with four out of five expected outcomes
partially achieved. Through the Bank support, progress was made in clearing
Government arrears to the private sector and introducing electronic processing of
Government bills to suppliers. The Second Private Irrigation Project (PIP2) and AgroSylvo-Pastoral Export and Market Development Project (PRODEX) also supported a
significant increase in areas under irrigation and contributing in a major way to the
development of a supply chain approach for priority commercial agriculture commodities
and livestock products, thus paving the way for enhanced private sector involvement in
the agriculture sector.
62.
Under pillar 2, five out of eight expected outcomes have been partially
achieved. The Basic Education Project and the FTI-Basic Education Support Project
contributed successfully to raising overall gross primary enrolment rates (GER) above
2011 targets. The Institutional Strengthening and Health Sector Program supported the
improvement in access to basic health and nutrition services of rural population; and
contributed to setting up a Sector Wide Approach program (SWAP).
63.
Promoting good governance was a cross-cutting theme under the CAS. The
outcomes focused on strengthening economic governance and capacity to implement and
monitor reforms and were partially achieved also.
64.
Finally, while progress under the cross-cutting theme “reducing the Rate of
Population Growth” was made, the specific outcomes aimed at increasing awareness in
family planning were only partially achieved. PRODEM has strengthened Niger's
capacity to address the demographic challenge by building the government capacity in
designing and implementing a nationwide multi-sector population program, increasing
17

Pillar1 of the CAS focuses on accelerating sustainable growth that is equitably shared with key outcomes including:
(i) ensuring macroeconomic stability; (ii) strengthening the competitiveness of supply chains; (iii) strengthening the
sustainable management of natural resources to reduce vulnerability to desertification; (iv) improving the investment
climate and supporting entrepreneurship; and (v) strengthening economic infrastructure for growth.
17

general awareness on population and reproductive health issues.
Experience and Lessons learnt from the 2008-2011 CAS Completion Report
65.
Lessons learned from the implementation of the FY08-11 CAS include the
following: (i) the strongest impact is achieved when multi-sectorial DPOs are delivered
in parallel with sectoral operations, creating substantial synergies. This is particularly the
case in areas where reforms are difficult and need sustained commitment and actions
from the Government; (ii) a programmatic DPO approach plays an important role in
keeping the reform agenda on track and mobilizing the Government on cross-cutting
issues in an environment of frequent external shocks and instability; (iii) long term
involvement in one area – spanning two to three CAS periods - and substantial partner
support by Bank, reinforces Government commitment and incentives for changes.
66.
In addition, the Bank Group’s involvement in one sector can often serve as
leverage and allows the Bank Group to play its convening role with other donors.
Furthermore a balanced approach involving addressing swiftly the critical short-term
crisis concerns while maintaining a long-term focus on reforms necessary for reducing
vulnerability and accelerating growth proved effective. Finally, addressing gender and
demographic issues is a challenging undertaking. It requires a multi-sectoral and
sustained approach over a long time horizon and underpinned by sharp social-culturaleconomic analysis and action
67.
Reducing Niger’s vulnerability – in particular getting its rural population
out of the “vulnerability to weather shocks” trap – is paramount. Supporting a
country that is highly vulnerable and prone to frequent shocks requires a balanced
approach, addressing rapidly the critical short-term concerns while maintaining a longterm focus on risk management. To address these challenges, Niger should not just rely
on windfall benefits from its growing extractive industries, but scale-up agricultural
productivity and risk management and diversify its economy.
Stakeholder consultations and Country Survey
68.
In-country consultations to collect perceptions and advice on the work of the
WBG in Niger from a diverse group of stakeholders were carried out in October
2012 throughout five out of eight regions. Over 500 stakeholder representatives
provided the views of the Government, civil society and organizations, community
leaders, development partners, parliament, private sector, media, academia with a
significant representation of women and youth. Overall, participants acknowledged the
relevance and contributions of the Bank Group to Niger development at large. All actors
agreed that it is very difficult to establish a hierarchy of development priorities in Niger
due to the many cross-cutting challenges and external shocks that make the country
highly vulnerable. The main conclusions were as follows (see Annex 18 for more
details):

In the agriculture sector, there was a consensus on the need to create new
opportunities in rural areas, notably for youth and to reduce migration to urban centers.
18


The need to improve the education sector, with a focus on quality of education
outcomes, was a consistent and recurring theme throughout the discussions;

Infrastructure and transport are considered vital for regional integration and
economic opportunities;

Corruption is seen as a major impediment to inclusive development in many
sectors. Increasing the role of civil society actors was seen as important as a mechanism
for assisting, communicating and monitoring Bank Group-financed projects and CPS
implementation;

Re-organizing the legislative economic framework to help create more businesses
(especially SMEs) was a predominant theme for the private sector.
69.
A country team retreat held on November 2, 2012 endorsed the outcomes of the
consultations and discussed the strategic directions to align the CPS with Government
PDES priorities.
70.
Several of these issues were repeated in a Country Survey undertaken in FY
2012. This survey, which is described in more detail in Annex 18, shows that perceived
development priorities place greater emphasis on corruption and public sector
governance. Respondents report that they recognize a significant role for the Bank Group
in the area of public sector governance. Along with governance and corruption,
education, rural development and energy and oil development are viewed as important
aspects of growth and/or poverty reduction in Niger. Domestic private sector
development is seen as an important aspect of growth and also an area where respondents
see value in Bank involvement.
71.
In terms of collaboration with the government and other donors, the survey
findings suggest that the Bank Group is doing well. The importance of its future
involvement in Niger is not questioned. Areas for improvement by the Bank include:
greater flexibility (in terms of its products and services and in light of changing country
circumstances); improvement in staff accessibility, responsiveness and openness in terms
of sharing its data and other information; and greater overall speed, especially in the
disbursement of funds.
72.
Finally, the survey highlights that the Bank Group is most valued for its
financial resources with recognition of the value of technical assistance and training
but that there needs to be greater outreach beyond government, especially towards civil
society.
Gender Assessment
73.
A recently completed Gender Assessment highlights the need for the Bank
Group program to be more gender-informed. The assessment reveals that currently
only 24 percent of projects contain gender analysis; and when done, it is often weak,
generic, and without sector or project specificity. The assessment also indicates that in 59
percent of projects there is a disconnect between analysis and actions resulting in some
gender-focused actions or components.
74.

With respect to indicators, many projects make an attempt to provide
19

gender-relevant and gender-disaggregated indicators. These include laudable efforts
to focus on registration of women's enterprises in the Competitiveness and Growth
project, and on disaggregating by gender involvement in local development initiatives
(Niger Basin), distribution of ruminants (Emergency Food Security II), and households
benefiting from social protection (Safety Net Project).

B.

Strategic Approach

Overview, objectives and principles
75.
The proposed CPS is aligned with priorities of the Government PDES and
aims at supporting Niger’s development as an emerging economy that is
competitive, diversified, resilient and inclusive with enhanced opportunities for
productive employment and improved standards of living. It provides the framework
for Bank Group support to Niger over the next four years ending June 30, 2016. It is also
closely aligned with the Bank’s Africa Strategy; the 2011 World Development Report on
conflict and fragility, and the update 2014 WDR on risk. Finally it also draws on the
findings and lessons from several analytical pieces, including the CAS Completion
Report, Client Survey, and feedback from stakeholder consultations.
76.
The Bank Group’s engagement will be guided by the following 4 principles:
(i) Flexibility, (ii) Selectivity; (iii) Leverage; and (iv) Aid effectiveness.
77.
Flexibility: In view of the recurrent crises in the Sahel and dynamic nature,
the Bank Group will seek to maximize flexibility in its engagement with Niger. The
need for such flexibility has been highlighted in the CAS Completion Report and FY12
Country Survey. The Bank Group will endeavor to discern early any project
implementation difficulties and act boldly and swiftly in undertaking corrective actions,
including early project restructuring to avoid prolonged stays by projects in problem
status.
78.
Selectivity: The Bank Group’s resources are limited relative to Niger’s needs.
Against that backdrop, concentrating resources in a few high priority areas is
critical. The choice of sector or thematic intervention will be based on the following
filters: (i) transformational impact with an emphasis on increasing competitiveness for
inclusive growth and poverty reduction; (ii) potential impact on the key drivers of
fragility and stability; (iii) ensuring a balance of interventions that produce short-term
results with interventions aimed at longer-term impact; (iv) operational feasibility; (v)
comparative strength of the Bank Group; and (vi) impact on Niger’s connectivity with
regional and international markets.
79.
Leverage: The Bank Group will utilize its programs as a catalyst for
leveraging other sources of financing to maximize development impact. In this
regard, where possible, the Bank Group will endeavor to: (i) access trust funds to finance
analytical and advisory work; (ii) encourage co-financing of its operations by other
development partners to scale up interventions; (iii) continue to lead the donors
coordination and harmonization through OECD/DAC and provide the platform for other
development partners’ interventions through the preparation of robust analytical work;
20

and (iv) work in collaboration with the IFC and MIGA to crowd-in private investments
especially in key growth sectors/markets.
80.
Aid effectiveness: Niger receives about 58 percent of its investment resources
from development partners and is thus highly impacted by the predictability of
these resources and whether they are effectively and efficiently translated into
results. The Bank Group in collaboration with others development partners will continue
to assist the government in developing systems to improve service delivery, monitor and
evaluate the impact of development programs by, among other things, promoting country
ownership and spearheading the use of country systems, coordinating interventions and
seeking opportunities for better division of labor amongst development partners for
greater synergy.

C.

Bank Group Program

81.
The Bank Group recognizes that accelerating economic growth and reducing
volatility need to be complemented by reforms to ensure that growth is inclusive and
its benefits widely shared. Increasing per-capita incomes is the central challenge for
Niger to reduce poverty. Yet given the structure of its economy, poverty reducing
economic growth will require a focus on three tightly interwoven issues: (i) focusing on
growth which increases the productivity of males and females; (ii) reducing growth
volatility and enhancing resilience to external shocks; and (iii) ensuring that growth is
inclusive and widely shared.
Table 3: CPS Strategic Objectives and Outcomes
Objective 1: Promote Resilient Growth
1. Fiscal Performance consolidated
2.

3.

4.

5.

Objective 2: Reduce Vulnerability
Increased Access of Poor and Food Insecure People to
Safety Net Programs

Improved Investment Climate and
Access to Finance for SMEs

6.

Increased Adoption of Climate Resilience Policies and
Actions in Targeted Communes

Increased Agricultural Productivity of
Selected Crops in Selected Areas

7.

Improved Education and Employment Skills
Youth

Improved Selected Economic
Infrastructures

8.

for

Increased Access to Water, Sanitation, Health and
Population Services
Cross-cutting Objectives: Mainstream gender and strengthen governance and capacity for public service
delivery
9. Improved Budget Execution and Efficiency
10. Improved Transparency of Sector Budget Allocations
11. Improved Transparency in the Mining and Oil Sector

82.
The Bank Group will partner with other development agencies to pursue the
following interdependent and mutually reinforcing strategic objectives articulated
as CPS pillars: (1) promote resilient growth, (2) reduce vulnerability, and (3)
strengthen governance and capacity for public service delivery across the board.
The rationales for selecting these strategic pillars are grounded in the following: (i) their
21

close alignment with the new priorities set by the PDES to address Niger development
challenges, (ii) lessons learned from the implementation of the previous CAS, notably
that long term strong engagement of the Bank Group in one area – spanning two to three
CAS periods – reinforces Government commitment and incentives for lasting change;
(iii) feedback from the stakeholders consultations and the results of the new country
survey that stress greater engagement on governance (iv) and the comparative advantage
of the Bank Group with respect to the current aid matrix (see Annex 13) to help reducing
the aid fragmentation. The specific rationale and objectives pursued under each pillar are
further elaborated below.
Pillar 1: Promoting Resilient Growth
Outcomes
1.

2.

Fiscal Performance
consolidated

Improved Investment
Climate and Access to
Finance for SMEs

Indicators
-

Efficiency of tax and customs collections has improved – increase in
PEFA rating of performance indicator 15 from D+ in 2012 to C in 2015

-

Treasury and debt management has improved- increase in PEFA rating
of performance indicator 17 from C in 2012 to B in 2015

‐

Average number of new enterprises registered per year increased from
2500 in 2012 to 3000 by 2015 (of which 20 % led by women)

‐

SMEs Loan Portfolio increased from US$19 million in 2012 to US$33
million by 2015 (of which 20% are received by female-owned SMEs)

3.

Increased Agricultural
Productivity of
Selected Crops in
Selected Areas

‐

Average yield of cereal crops (millet, sorghum & rice) in targeted rain
fed areas increased by 25% by 2015 (Baseline: average yield in kg/ha
in 2008-2012 period: Millet: 5061; Sorghum: 354, and Rice: 5500)

4.

Improved Selected
Economic
Infrastructures

‐

Connection of the country to regional fiber backbones established

‐

300 Kilometers of inter-urban roads rehabilitated in targeted areas by
2015

83.
Under this CPS Pillar, the Bank Group will support the sectors that drive
growth and have the greatest potential for creating jobs, while also supporting efforts
to strengthen the resilience against external shocks, through a flexible mix of
development policy lending, investment instruments, technical assistance and nonfinancial services. Under Axis 4 of the PDES, the Government is committed to achieving
strong and sustained economic growth. Recognizing the potential fiscal spillover of
external shocks, the Bank Group will continue to support authorities in pursuing and
maintaining policies for a stable and resilient macroeconomic environment. To this end,
the Bank Group will pursue the following specific interventions:
84.
Consolidate the fiscal framework. Under the DPO series - Shared Growth Credits
– the Bank Group together with other partners will support policy reforms to promote
resilient growth and improve the management of oil and mining revenues, internal
revenues and debt. More specifically the DPO series will focus on the consolidation of
the fiscal performance through the development and implementation of plans for
customs, tax department and reforms of debt management among other policy reforms.
22

85.
Improve investment climate and access to finance for private sector. The Bank
Group will spur reforms and investment to promote high potential growth opportunities
identified by the PDES, notably in the agribusiness, oil and mining sectors, to expand and
diversify the narrow economic base while reducing the economy’s vulnerability to
shocks. To that end, the Bank Group will extend lines of credit to local banks, promote
reforms to increase access to financial services for SMEs, establish PPP arrangements
and modernize OHADA laws for an improved investment climate. The Bank Group will
also continue supporting SMEs through matching grants and boosting the implementation
of the financial sector strategy. The ongoing Competitiveness and Growth Support
Project will be pursued with a focus on promoting value chains in agribusiness, livestock,
oil and mining coupled with a continuation of the DPO series - Shared Growth Credits aiming to promoting resilient private sector-led growth through policy reforms. A
potential DPO to support reforms of WAEMU regional transport regulations governing
the trucking industry is also under consideration.
86.
Increase agricultural productivity of selected crops. The Government plans to
achieve a forty five percent increase of cereal production by 2015 under the Axis 3 of its
PDES. This will require a strong focus on reforms in the agriculture and livestock sectors
which are the source of livelihood for about 80 percent of the population. To support this
objective, the Bank Group will help male and female producers adopt improved
agriculture technologies and drought resistant varieties of crops, support the development
of additional irrigation schemes with drainage services, and promote feeder roads in rural
and urban areas to connect the producers to markets. The ongoing Bank-financed
Community Action Program (CAP) supports sustainable natural resource management
and access to services at the local level by financing micro-projects and development
plans prepared by communities and local government. Third phase of CAP will mainly
support the implementation of 3N Initiative to increase agriculture productivity. The
ongoing Agro-Pastoral Export Promotion Project and Second Emergency Food Security
Project are helping small farmers increase the production of high-value irrigated crops,
using low-cost technology while facilitating the export of selected crops such as cowpea
and onion. After the closing of the ongoing projects, the Bank Group will continue to
support this objective with a new large scale sector-wide program in FY15. Accounting
for gender differences in access to productive inputs and respective roles in agriculture,
the Bank Group will ensure that these operations target female beneficiaries with an
overall aim of raising productivity and improving food security. The Bank Group will
also extend the ongoing Transport Project through 2015 to support the movement of
agricultural production to the markets.
87.
Promoting risk-based agriculture development is key to mitigating the impact of
climatic changes and variability. Building on a recent Assessment of Agriculture Risks,
the Bank Group will provide technical advisory services for a risk-based agriculture
development program that helps improve resilient approaches to scaling-up sustainable
land and water management in Niger. The Bank Group will promote climate change
adaptation to increase resilience through the following actions: adoption of drought
tolerant crop varieties; soil and water conservation techniques, selection of appropriate
23

natural resource management (NRM) techniques, irrigation, early detection and
destruction of desert locusts; support the Government to develop an Inclusive Green
Growth Strategy and supporting community level interventions through food/fodder
banks, and livestock vaccination and other veterinary services. The IFC’s Sustainable
Business Advisory is undertaking market research on a range of private sector
investments under the Climate Investment Fund’s Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
(PPCR). Subject to their commercial viability, the potential investments will include: a
mobile phone platform to deliver agro-meteorological information and market price
information to small scale farmers; a weather index-based insurance product for rain-fed
agriculture; expansion of vegetable production under drip irrigation; and production of
drought-resilient seeds.
88.
Improvement in economic infrastructures and opportunities. The Bank Group
will support this outcome through the development of transformative high-risk and high
reward programs notably the Kandadji Growth Pole that aims to produce low cost
electricity for the irrigation of 42,000 ha, and the Dosso Dry Port and the Expansion of
the Regional Railways Program to connect Niger’s economy with its main maritime
corridors of Cotonou and Abidjan at lower cost. More specifically a joint IFC/World
Bank business plan will be developed to spur agribusiness opportunities offered by the
Kandadji Growth Pole. With an additional financing, the Bank Group will continue to
support the rehabilitation of inter-urban roads to better connect the agriculture
productions with the markets and consumers. The Bank Group will also continue to assist
Niger in expanding and deepening the energy and telecommunication sectors by reducing
costs and increasing access to regional power market and telecommunication networks
under an Energy Sector TA operation and the regional fiber optic program. To further
deepen the knowledge base on the Regional Railways Program and support a marketable
PPP design, the Bank Group is preparing a TA operation to support the regional
Technical Secretariat set up by member countries to launch the Program.
89.
Regional synergies. Under the PDES, Niger reaffirms its commitment to comply
with WAEMU Convergence and Stability Pact by implementing sound macroeconomic
stability policies. To that end, the Bank Group will extend its support for macroeconomic
stability through a DPO series – Shared Growth Credits – with a specific focus on
implementing the new WAEMU PFM Directive and reduce the spillover of the ongoing
Sahel crisis. Niger participates in the regional Niger Basin Water Resources Development
project and the associated GEF-financed Reversing Land and Water Degradation Trends
in the Niger River Basin which are, respectively, strengthening the capacity of the Niger
River Basin Authority. Under this regional project, the Bank Group is supporting
Kandadji Growth Pole development. Niger also participates in the second phase of the
West Africa Agriculture Productivity project that promotes regional cooperation in
agricultural research. Depending on IDA availability Niger could participate in WARCIP
to improve its telecom connectivity with the rest of the world. The Bank Group is also
supporting improvement of trade with Nigeria through Growth and Competitiveness
Project and the development of a dry port in Dosso region to facilitate trade and transport
with the Benin corridor. In the Transport sector, Niger is highly affected by the
challenges faced by its partner transport, Benin, where tariffs remain punitively high;
24

domestic and regional regulatory reforms coupled with public and private investment in
roads and railways are necessary. High transport prices reduce competitiveness, and
indirectly impact growth and the job market. Depending on IDA availability, Niger could
participate in a potential DPO to support reforms of regional transport dealing with
WAEMU regulations governing the trucking industry. Finally the Bank Group is
supporting Niger together with Burkina Faso, Benin and Cote d’Ivoire to expand the
existing railways to Niamey in view of better integrating its economy with the rest of the
sub-region and increasing its resilience to climatic exogenous shocks.
Pillar 2: Reducing Vulnerability
Outcomes

Indicators

1.

Increased Access of Poor and
Food Insecure People to Safety
Net Programs

-

At least 100,000 additional households with access to the safety
net programs (the cash transfer and cash for work programs) by
2015

2.

Increased Adoption of Climate
Resilience Policies and Actions
in Targeted Communes

-

At least 2000 ha of additional agricultural areas with improved
Sustainable Land Management (SLM)

-

At least 5000 ha of additional sylvo-pastoral areas with improved
SLM

-

Number of Local Development Plans (LDPs) incorporating
climatic resilience increased from zero in 2012 to 25 by 2015.

-

Primary completion rate increased from 52% in 2012 to 55% in
2015;
Youth who completed dual apprenticeship programs increased
from 0 in 2012 to 30% in 2015 (with at least 20% of women)
Number of additional people in selected urban areas provided
with access to improved water sources: 480,000 by 2015
Number of additional people provided with access to improved
Sanitation in selected urban areas: 235,000 by 2015
Number of sex workers screened for sexually transmitted diseases
increased from 0 in 2012 to 3000 in 2015
Percentage of modern contraceptive use among women increased
from 16% in 2012 to 20 % by 2015

3.

Improved
Education
and
Employment Skills for Youth

4.

Increased Access to Water,
Sanitation, Health and
Population Services

-

90.
Vulnerability has to be prevented or mitigated While the focus will be on
prevention and mitigation, in some cases mitigation and coping activities to smooth the
effects of shocks will be the objective. Mitigating measures will require addressing the
underlying constraints giving rise to these risks. These include the role of demographic
pressures, gender inequalities and widespread poverty, weak governance, lack of
diversification of the economic basis, constraining social norms, and lack of adequate
information/education and incentives.
91.
A multi-sectoral approach focused on the key underlying causes of
vulnerability including the drivers of fragility notably agricultural risks is essential
for reducing vulnerability and building resilience. Most vulnerabilities have multiple
causes and are interrelated and thus require a multi-sectoral approach.

25

92.
A combination of investments, policy reforms and technical assistance
tackling the key underlying causes of vulnerability is therefore needed. Recognizing
this, the Bank Group will put a special emphasis on cross-sectoral interventions, such as
population programs and diagnostic work to support higher national awareness and action
on demographic issues, a skills development program and a job strategy to support youth
employability and job creation, to increase the flexibility of the labor force. These crosssectoral activities will be complemented by other interventions aiming at strengthening
the resilience of the communities and reduce their vulnerability. A particular focus will
be put on social protection and agriculture to reduce its vulnerability to weather-related
shocks by promoting the adoption of agricultural methods that are less subject to the
vagaries of Niger’s harsh climate. The Bank Group will pursue the objective of reducing
vulnerability through the following actions:
93.
Increase access of the poor and insecure people to safety net programs. In
order for Niger to pull the poor and food insecure people out of the humanitarian
dependency trap, sustainable safety net systems are needed to help identify and register
the beneficiary household while providing them with appropriate support to meet their
basic needs through cash transfer and cash-for-work. The Bank Group will continue to
support the overarching objective of providing sustainable food security and nutrition for
all Nigeriens by helping additional households to access cash transfer and cash-for-work
programs under the ongoing Safety Net Project. To further support the social protection,
a TA operation is underway to help strengthen the resilience of poor and food insecure
people and build the foundations of a safety net system. Bank support to GON agriculture
and national food security programs, notably 3N (Nigeriens Nourish Nigeriens) and the
Dispositif National, will be considered in FY16.
94.
Improve resilience of populations to natural hazards, climatic change and
variability. The Government of Niger is committed under Axis 2 of the PDES to
strengthen adaptive and resilience capacities, disseminate strategies for adapting to
climate change, and adopt adequate regulations and training curricula. The Bank Group
will continue to support this outcome through the ongoing Community Actions Program
for Climatic Resilience (CAPCR) and the Community-Based Disaster Reduction Project.
To that end, a climatic information platform for agricultural producers will be created to
improve climate change resilience together with local development plans incorporating
climate resilience features. A Land, Urban and Disaster Management Project will be
considered in FY14 to build on the achievements of the Local Urban Development
Infrastructures Project with a focus on multi-hazard early warning systems, land
development and integrated flood risk management. The third phase of CAP coupled
with an Integrated Ecosystem Management funded by the GEF will contribute to improve
the people’s resilience to climatic change and variability, notably for those living in
disadvantaged northern communes targeted under the Security-Development Strategy. In
addition, IFC will be promoting climate resilience in the private sector through the Pilot
Program for Climatic Resilience by exploring the development of a mobile phone
platform and a weather index-based insurance product which will both serve small scale
farmers; and expanding - through private sector financing - drip irrigation and drought
resilient seed production.

26

95.
Improve education and youth employment skills. Strengthening human capital
is an integral part of any growth strategy but is also a key ingredient to alleviate the
stresses posed by the alarming population growth and youth unemployment. Thus the
Niger Government is committed to continued improvements in education, population and
health services to improve socio-economic outcomes and reach the MDGs. The Bank
Group through the Global Partnership for Education Trust Fund will continue to support
access to basic education and improved quality of teaching. Special emphasis is placed on
promoting girls’ participation in school and parents and communities in children’s
education. To support the Government’s commitment to better integrate youth into the
economy and reduce the threat they pose to the country stability under the current volatile
security context, the Bank Group will help upgrade Technical, Vocational and Education
Training institutions in four critical sectors and set up on-demand technical training
programs to improve youth employability for the job market (Box 1. The skills for growth
project - PRODEC). A jobs and employability assessment will be conducted in FY14 to
identify the entry points and recommendations for youth job creation.
Box 1: The Skills for Growth Project (PRODEC)
Youth employability and job creation are a very important priority for Niger. Many employers look
abroad for skilled workers, and the lack of skills, from basic to advanced, of domestic workers is a constraint
to productivity, employability and job creation. To that extent Niger needs to invest in the skill development
of its youth. Well-designed interventions in the skill development sector can promote youth employability
and the job creation agenda, by providing the technical and other skills to make youth more employable by
the private sector, fostering local firms to create more jobs and supporting the development of small and
medium enterprises through entrepreneurship skills. Constraints to job creation in Niger will also depend
on other issues, including improving business climate, promoting investments, reinforcing infrastructure and
labor market institutions and policies.
The skills for growth project aims at developing skills for key economic sectors and improving youth
employability through providing access to improved formal technical and vocational training and new
shorter term skill development options. The project will target short-term on-demand skill development,
apprenticeships and entrepreneurship programs for, respectively, 1,500 youth of different education level,
3,000 out of school youth with very limited education, and 8,000 secondary and tertiary graduates,
apprentices and would be micro entrepreneurs. Job creation would be supported by fostering local firms to
hire the youth that they have asked to be formed through the on-demand skills development program, and
supporting the development of small and medium enterprises through the entrepreneurship skills provided to
the multiple target youth groups.
By enhancing employability and job creation, the project will not only support the broad social and
economic development of Niger but will contribute to increased security by providing unemployed and
under-employed youth new hope and concrete tools for meaningful integration in the Niger labor market and
society, reducing potential for unrest and involvement in violent activities.

96.
Increase access to clean water, sanitation, health and population services.
Increasing access to clean water, sanitation, health and population is vital for the survival
of the most vulnerable people. For over ten years, the Bank Group has been a prominent
partner to Niger in the development of the water and sanitation sector. A Bank Group
intervention under the present CPS will therefore consolidate successful achievements of
previous interventions; generate strategic continuity and strong operational synergies
with activities supported by the ongoing Urban Water and Sanitation Project,
acknowledging one of the main conclusions of the CAS completion report. In the same
27

vein, the Bank Group will continue to support Niger through Water Sanitation Program
TA to (i) improve programmatic conditions for scaling up rural sanitation, (ii) promote
private sector participation in the management of small and medium-sized water supply
systems, and sludge management facilities, and (iii) support the Ministry of Hydraulics to
set up sustainable monitoring system to better manage investment programs. The Bank
Group will also continue to help provide peer education to health-risk groups, sensitize
the population on health issues and provide training opportunities to health personnel on
family planning and reproductive health issues. Expanded coverage of basic health care
and HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment will be pursued under the ongoing HIV/AIDS
Support Project 2 and a new Population and Health Project will be considered for FY15
in view of, among others, scaling up gender and population oriented programs notably
Ecole-des-Maris and Adolescent Girls initiatives in partnership with UNFPA. To deepen
the Bank Group’s knowledge in these areas in view of underpinning follow-up
interventions, a health country status survey report and a Sahel Demographic study - the
latter currently being undertaken - will both be delivered in FY15.
97.
Regional synergies: Being at the cross-road between Saharan and the SubSaharan Africa, Niger is hugely exposed to developments, positive and negative, in the
sub-region. As a member of ECOWAS, Niger is also participating in regional efforts to
resolve the ongoing military crisis in the Sahel.. Niger also participates in the ongoing
regional studies notably on (i) Sahel Drylands Flagship Report, (ii) demography and (iii)
the drivers of fragility in the Sahel. Going forward the Bank Group will continue to
support Niger Food Security Programs notably 3N and Dispositif National in view of
scaling up the benefits of this Model to WAEMU countries. Recognizing that
demographic migration, open trade and free movement of citizens within ECOWAS are
key factors in addressing food crises, the Bank Group will continue to monitor the market
and prices of staples, livestock and support regional bodies e.g ECOWAS, WAEMU,
ICRISAT, AGRYMET, CILSSS, in charge of the oversight of regional versatile stresses
such as locust, animal diseases, drought and flood.
Cross-Cutting Theme: Mainstreaming gender and strengthening governance and
capacity for public service delivery
Outcomes
1.

Improved Budget Execution and
Efficiency

Indicators
-

2.

Improved Transparency of Sector
Budget Allocations

-

3.

Improved Transparency in the
Mining and Oil Sector

-

Budget execution ratio of own funded expenditures (actual/budget)
increased from 75 percent in 2011 to 90 percent in 2015;
Share of public procurement contracts awarded through
competitive bidding maintained above 75 percent.
Number of budgetary documents published based on the ‘Open
budget initiative classification)”increased from 1 in 2012 to 6 in
2015
EITI Reports published annually

98.
Faced with a heavy reform agenda, Government must improve implementation
capacity across the board in order to enhance its legitimacy. Addressing governance and
capacity constrains entails a focus on catalytic reforms to build strategic planning and
28

M&E capacity, effective contracts management and revenues collection in the natural
resources sector, support the modernization of the public financial management system
including the implementation of WAEMU PFM Directives, public investment and
oversight of SOEs. In addition to the ongoing Reform Management Technical Assistance
Project focused on PFM, the CPS envisions for FY14 a Governance and Capacity
Building Project to improve service delivery in partnership with the other development
partners. More specifically the Bank Group will help the Government through the
following actions with a focus on the implementation of its Governance and Anticorruption strategy:
99.
Improve budget execution and pro-poor spending. The government is
committed to ensure fair access of the citizens to public services that are delivered
efficiently under Axis 1 of the PDES. To do so, the Government envisages restoring the
credibility and improving the effectiveness of public institutions. The Bank Group will
support this outcome through the implementation of the ongoing Reform Management
and TA Project and Governance and Anti-corruption TA. The Bank Group will support
this outcome with a special focus on quick wins to provide incentives for the reforms to
stay on track. To that end, the ongoing Reform Management and TA Project will be
complemented in FY14 with financing new capacity building project to promote greater
governance, improve public financial management and service delivery with a focus on
pro-poor spending in health and education. Support to the National Institute of Statistics –
(INS) to boost capacity in the collection of quality household survey data and monitoring
of service delivery outcomes - and cultural change will be key to achieving these
outcomes in addition to the technical and political pre-requisites. Key Bank Group
operations include budget support, and analytical works, notably Service Delivery
Indicators (SDI) surveys that will monitor the quality and competency of service
providers, a Gender Assessment that explores issues related to social norms and agency
in Niger, and annual Public Expenditures Reviews. Consistent with WDR 2011 the Bank
Group will work with other development partners to deliver in FY14 a Public
Expenditures Management and Fiduciary Review 18of the security sector requested by the
Government to inform and help improve the economic efficiency and governance of this
sector. The review will remain within the Bank Group’s mandate in terms of scope,
methodology and will not analyze any security specific aspects.
100. Improve transparency of sector budget allocations with PDES Priorities. The
PDES recognizes the disconnect between the strategic planning, the annual budget and its
execution. This disconnect is furthermore exacerbated with the creation of two separate
18

The study is responding to a formal government request in a specific security situation where security expenditures
have significantly increased and to the need for economic consideration of the impact of such increasing security
expenditures on the budget remaining available for the financing of economic and social development activities. The
country has confirmed that the Bank would have legal access to the relevant information to carry out its review. The
Bank will act in concert with an acceptable partner that has specific sector expertise; the Bank would not be making
security sector judgment calls. On that basis the Bank has determined that the risk of carrying out this review was lower
than the risk of not responding to the country’s request under the circumstances. The scope of the review is also
compliant with Bank mandate: descriptive and comparative analysis of administrative procedures, practices, and
processes, transparency and governance; retrospective, prospective and generic description of related expenditure with
an informative focus; impact analysis of security expenditure scenarios upon economic development. It will not analyze
the security specific aspects of the sector.
29

ministries where one is handling the multi-year strategic planning and the other preparing
and executing the budget without effectively collaborating with one another. To help
improve the conjunction of sector alignment with PDES priorities, the Bank Group will
provide support through the Reform Management TA Project and to develop a
performance-based budgeting framework and promote competitive selection of high
officials. The project also supports capacity building for the preparation of cross-sectoral
and sectoral Medium Term Expenditure Frameworks as key instruments to strengthen the
link between the PDES and the budget. Public financial management reforms supported
through the annual DPO series also aim at enhancing fiscal transparency19, supported by
an annual Public Expenditure Review process, which envisages an annual review of
overall expenditure trends as well as in depth review of expenditures in a few key
sectors.20 Furthermore, the Bank Group will support building capacity in M&E and
design of robust indicators to improve both quantitative and qualitative analysis to better
inform both key decision-makers and citizens of progress. If major improvement is not
achieved in M&E, it will delay the introduction of targeted, means-tested programs.
101. Mainstream Gender. As noted above, gender disparities persist in Niger and are
reinforced by the country’s development challenges which continue to pose a serious
constraint to adopting specific measures that target women’s and girl’s access to public
services. These measures will be integral to reducing gaps in gender outcomes in human
and physical capital accumulation and ensuring that females engage completely in
Niger’s development. The Bank Group will continue to engage with other development
partners to support the implementation of the national gender policy and it will address
gender gaps notably by improving the education opportunities of girls, fostering activities
that reduce incentives for girls to marry early, and promoting the ongoing bold
community-level communication initiatives such as “Club d’Ecoute” which was
conceived by FAO and “L’école des maris” and “Adolescent Girls” piloted by UNFPA
to improve women’s agency. These initiatives have opened communication channels
between men and women and fostered exchanges on a wide range of reproductive health
and economic empowerment topics. The exchanges have been effective in improving
factual knowledge on the links between cultural practices and potential negative
consequences on women’s welfare and they may be instrumental in changing incentives
and relaxing social norms –critical to improving the ability of men and women to express
their preferences and to take action on their own behalf. Moreover, the Bank Group will
lobby for and support increased gender-sensitive programs from technical ministries that
can partner with the Ministry of Population. This focus will improve women’s
opportunities for acquiring economic assets and building their productive capacity.
Consistent with WDR 2012 the Bank Group will strive to reach a rate of 100 percent of
new operations being considered gender-sensitive. This would involve extensive sharing
and learning among TTLs of good practices, pitfalls to address gender across the entire
portfolio, and focusing on three approaches: (1) devoting a CPPR during the CPS period
to examining the gender impact of all new operations; (2) ensuring that the MTR of all
19
This includes support for the transposition and implementation of the WAEMU directives on public financial
management, including that on fiscal transparency, as well as support for regular procurement audits and their
publication. The government is also committed to publish quarterly budget execution reports.
20
The 2012 Public Expenditure Review, which is currently being finalized, focuses on the education, health, and rural
development sectors. For 2013, a focus on financial management in the security sectors is envisaged.

30

new projects specifically focus on gender impacts; and (3) increasing the use of genderrelevant analysis in ESW/AAA work in order to build on the gender knowledge base.
102. Improve governance: while Niger governance indicators have steadily improved
over the last two years, there is still a long way for the citizens to enjoy the outcomes as
suggested by the results of the Country Survey and stakeholder consultations. Inefficient
service delivery is still perceived as the manifestation of corruption and poor governance.
With the assistance of the Bank Group, Niger completed an assessment on governance
and corruption whose results are translated into an Action Plan to improve governance.
The Bank Group will continue to support the governance and anti-corruption reforms
initiated by Government such as implementing the EITI-post-compliance program – (see
Annex 22); strengthening transparency and accountability in the public sector in
particular through making information widely available (audits, public accounts laws,
budget laws, performance contracts); involving key stakeholders in the roll-out of PFM
reforms and deploying in other ministries the feedback mechanisms such as the hotline
initiated in the justice sector.

D.

Delivering the Bank Group’s Program

103. This strategy will be implemented using the traditional instruments of the Bank
Group: (i) partnerships with stakeholders; (ii) knowledge for development solutions; and
(iii) finance.
104. Knowledge for development solutions: The Bank Group’s support for reforms
in Niger is informed by various analytical works. Going forward, knowledge will be
generated to further assist Niger in service delivery and public capacity building as well
as supporting the two pillars of the Bank Group’s strategy with a focus on critical crosscutting themes such as gender, employment and jobs, vulnerability to natural shocks, land
tenure, population pressure, and security. The Bank Group will ensure that the results of
analytical work contribute to the public debate on major policy issues and are adequately
disseminated with other development partners. As much as feasible, the Bank Group will
strive to translate its knowledge products into development solutions through new
lending and operational technical assistance proposed under Table 4.
105. Finances: The Bank Group will use its financing instruments to support
policy and institutional changes that will influence development. A mix of
Development Policy Operations and Investment Lending will be the main financing
instruments to foster policy reforms informed by knowledge products. Knowledge
products and provision of technical assistance will be financed by the Bank, by partnering
with other donors, by leveraging trust funds, and IDA resources. The IFC will
strategically leverage its engagement to bring new partners on board in the developing
value chains and niches. Where feasible MIGA will provide partial guarantee to private
investors to leverage FDI under PPP agreements.
106. During this CAS period, the Bank Group will continue to provide strong IDA
support to Niger through available IDA resources, IFC funding and guarantees
opportunities presented to MIGA. The CPS period spans across two IDA
31

replenishment periods (FY13-14 in IDA16 and FY15-16 in IDA17). The indicative IDA
allocation available in FY13-14, which is the first half of the four year CPS, is estimated
at around US$320 million (SDR207.5 million). The indicative envelope for the second
half of CPS period, covering FY15-16 program presented in Table 4, is estimated to be
about US$332 million (SDR216 million). Therefore, overall indicative IDA allocation for
the four years of the CPS is estimated to be about US$652 million (SDR423.5 million).
The final allocations may vary depending on: (i) total IDA resources available, (ii) the
country’s performance rating, GNI per capita, and population; (iii) the terms of IDA
assistance (grants/credits) and the allocation deductions associated with MDRI debt
relief; (iv) the performance, other allocation parameters, and IDA assistance terms for
other IDA borrowers; (v) the decision on the post-conflict allocation for IDA17; and (vi)
the number of IDA-eligible countries. Also, the IDA allocation is provided in SDR terms,
while the US dollar equivalent amount is provided at the applicable prevailing rate at the
time of approval. From FY13 onward Niger is receiving 45 percent of its IDA allocation
on grant terms and 55 percent on credit terms.
107. Lending instruments: In the spirit of harmonization and selectivity, the
lending portfolio will increasingly move toward programmatic and multi-sectoral
approaches. Following the satisfactory implementation of two multi-donor programs for
water and health, the Bank Group will continue to support programmatic approaches
through SWAPs, PERs and DPLs. Furthermore the Bank Group will also strive to
consolidate the portfolio by forging synergy between sectors through transformative
programs that bring together several sectors to deliver key social and economic services.
In the same vein, the volume of the portfolio will gradually be reduced by integrating no
more than one investment lending per fiscal year while discouraging extension of projects
not deemed indispensable and phasing out single sector type projects at their closing.
108. The CPS proposes to explore access to additional funding through scaled-up
initiatives in the Africa region, depending on financing needs and absorption
capacity. The indicative IDA lending envelope is flexible and can be calibrated to
respond to the pace of reforms and progress as reflected in the upward trend in the
Country Performance and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) index, particularly in the areas
of economic management and governance, and portfolio performance. However, there
continue to be downside risks and the IDA program could be adjusted in case of policy
slippages and the pace of reforms, particularly through the sizing and timing of the DPO.
The support for proposed sector operations is also contingent on reaching agreement on
sector strategies among the donors and the Government.
109. The adoption of a programmatic approach to lending and AAA activities is
intended to help reduce fragmentation and to ensure coherence and synergies across
the main areas of Bank Group support. In particular, a programmatic development
policy series (annual Shared Growth Credits) is a key instrument to help the authorities to
prioritize and implement reforms in the CPS focus areas, and generate synergies with the
Bank’s investment support by helping improve efficiency at the sector level. Annual
Public Expenditure Reviews would not only seek to ensure that the Bank’s financial
support is well aligned and integrated into the overall government expenditure program,
32

but also support the productive use of all government resources. Finally, a demand
driven policy notes series is intended to provide real time advice in the CPS focus areas
and expand the space of policy options considered in the policy dialogue.

E.

Aligning Current Portfolio

110. As of end of December 2012 the Niger portfolio comprises 13 active projects
amounting to US$ 524million across sectors: urban sector (22 percent), human
development (12 percent), rural development (28 percent), public sector (24 percent),
private sector (9 percent) and transport (5 percent). Niger also participates in two
regional projects for about US$250 million. The FY12 disbursement ratio for
investment operations stood at 23.1 percent. Total disbursements reached US$126.8
million of which US$65.3 million is for DPO. The overall quality of portfolio remains
moderately satisfactory or above over the recent two years and is regularly discussed with
the Government, CSOs and other stakeholders during annual CPPRs. The submission of
interim financial reports to the Bank is timely and the reports are of acceptable quality.
During the last two years, Niger has achieved 100 per cent fiduciary compliance with
regard to submission of audit reports against the set target of 90 percent for the Africa
Region. Most of the audits opinions were unqualified and control weakness have been
resolved through follow up on the implementation of the auditor’s recommendations
111. Key systemic issues affecting the performance of the portfolio include (i) weak
internal control environment of the implementing units, (ii) procurement delays especially at evaluation of tenders and signing stages, (iii) institutional arrangements
challenges for operations supporting sector programs, (iv) ineffective monitoring and
evaluation systems, and (v) inappropriate incentive mechanisms for civil servants to
dedicate full attention to the implementation of development projects. An action plan
agreed upon after the 2012 CPPR to resolve these issues is being implemented in close
coordination with the government.
112. The Bank Group is conducting an assessment of the use of country systems
(UCS) with a strong interest of the other development partners. Ultimately the Bank
Group and development partners expect to reach an agreement with the Government to
foster greater use of the national systems notably procurement, budgeting, reporting and
external controls. To that end, the Bank Group is supporting the Cour des Comptes and
the Procurement Office – ARMP - to improve their capacity through two newly approved
IDF grants.
113. To respond to the multiple exogenous shocks of the past two years, the Bank
Group demonstrated great flexibility and responsiveness by providing just-in-time
advisory services and technically adjusting some of the existing operations.
Specifically, to address the fiscal shortfall resulting from the effects of the Libyan crisis
and the food shortages, in FY12 the Bank provided US$15 million in supplemental
budget support and technically adjusted four existing projects (Community Action
Program, Agro-Pastoral Export and Market Development, Social Safety Net and Second
Emergency Food Security Support) under a U$15 million rapid response compact to
provide cash transfers, cash-for-work and micro-project opportunities to help reintegrate
33

the returnees from Libya and Côte d’Ivoire. Under the proposed CPS the Bank Group
will continue to further response flexibly to demands and explore built-in flexible
mechanisms for new lending to address exogenous shocks in a timely manner.
114. While Niger is a priority country for the Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency (MIGA), having become its 177th member country, there is currently only
one guarantee operation for a private investor in Niger. Niger's membership in MIGA
means that direct foreign investment into the country is eligible for the agency’s political
risk insurance. This insurance protects investments against the risks of transfer
restriction, expropriation, breach of contract, non-honoring of sovereign financial
obligations, and war and civil disturbance. Investors from Niger going into other
developing countries may also receive coverage for their investments from MIGA.
115. The International Finance Corporation (IFC)’s strategy in Niger is selective
and has focused on actively developing projects in sectors such as agribusiness,
manufacturing and infrastructure; forging partnerships with local banks to foster joint
ventures aimed at supporting these projects with long-term local currency facilities to
banks and NBFIs; long term credit facilities to financial intermediaries to allow them to
provide long term facilities to their clients while strengthening their capital base as well
as developing micro and SME finance products to support the microfinance and SME
sectors. IFC will also offer: (i) trade finance facilities to banks supporting the trading
activities of their MSMEs clients; (ii) risk sharing facilities to banks supporting the
growth of their SME and agribusiness portfolios. To ensure that economic recovery is
inclusive and sustainable, focus will be on SME capacity building. The Africa for Micro
and SMEs (AMSME) program with local banks is designed to substantially increase the
number and value of outstanding SME loans. IFC will also follow up on selective PPP
opportunities. IFC is already advising the government on the implementation of a dry
port project in Dosso and Niamey. Three reputable pre-qualified bidders have expressed
their interest in the project. Key pending customs reforms are essential for any chance of
closing the project successfully. IFC has started providing assistance to the Government
of Niger for improving the country’s business climate. To this end, the Investment
Climate Advisory Services in Africa team has delivered in April 2012 a reform matrix to
the Government, including short and medium-long term recommendations. IFC will
continue to support the implementation of these recommendations in particular through
cross support to the Competitiveness and Growth Support Project.

F.

Managing Program Implementation

116. The proposed FY13-FY16 CPS program will be implemented by government
implementing organization (IO) and Project Implementation Units (PIUs) with close
support by WBG teams. Due to the existing capacity limitations and other structural
issues of the public administration, most PIUs are still not fully mainstreamed into the
respective implementing organization. It will be crucial to build mechanisms that would
allow the transfer for knowledge and skills related to project management prior to
mainstreaming PIUs. In the meantime the Bank Group will continue to support greater
use of country systems and involve CSOs in project implementation and monitoring.
117.

In addition to the close follow-up on implementation by sector teams, the
34

program implementation will be continuously reviewed through annual Country
Program Performance Reviews. Progress on the implementation of the proposed CPS
will be analyzed in the course of a mid-term review and subsequent elaboration of a CPS
Progress Report. Media and the Parliament Network on Bank Group –IMF programs will
continue to be involved in view of increasing ownership and oversight of the population.

G.

Partnerships and Donor Coordination

118. The Bank Group engagement will strengthen partnerships with national,
regional, and global players. In its engagement, the Bank Group will support stronger
dialogue between the public and private sector and involve CSO/NGO in strengthening
social accountability. Partnership with key development partners and regional bodies that
have demonstrated comparative advantages in priority areas for the Bank Group will be
nurtured and fully exploited to greater effect in delivering the CPS. The Bank Group is
co-leading a new mapping of partnership and division of labor amongst the OECD/DAC
to better leverage Donors’ support to achieve greater synergy and impact. Similar
outreach is also underway with regional bodies such as CILSS, ECOWAS and UEMOA
where Niger plays an important role on regional challenges such as security in the Sahel
and food security.
119. The development partners’ community in Niger is comprised of traditional
and non-traditional donors. The OECD/DAC group is the umbrella coordination and is
co-chaired by the Bank Group and UNDP. Through this arrangement, the Bank Group
and UNDP have coordinated the support of development partners in support of the
development of the PDES. A Joint Consultative Commission Government - Donors
under the leadership of the Prime Minister also meets up to four times a year depending
on the emerging issues, e.g food insecurity last February and the flood crisis last August.
The Bank Group is leading the harmonized budget support approach involving the
European Union and the African Development Bank; France and Denmark have
expressed interest to join. The mapping of thematic groups consistent with PDES and
division of labor amongst the development partners is being considered to increase
synergy and reduce aid fragmentation. Annex 13 provides the tentative configuration
under discussion.

H.

Monitoring and Evaluation

120. The first draft of the CPS Results Matrix (Annex 1) uses Niger’s PDES
Results framework as its starting point, and narrows down the range of outcomes to
those that the Bank intend to influence directly through its interventions over the
CPS period. It illustrates the country strategic objectives to which the CPS outcomes
seek to contribute. Achievement of the results of the proposed outcomes will depend to a
large extent on on-going programs and speed with which planned programs are
developed and implemented. The CPS results matrix will be used during implementation
to monitor progress toward the achievement of the CPS outcomes.

35

121. Annual CPPRs will be organized to align project results with the CPS results
matrix, assess progress in achieving CPS outcomes, and address risks and systemic
issues that might hinder portfolio performance and achievement of CPS outcomes.
Special attention will be paid to collecting gender-sensitive indicators, identifying
problem projects and constraints to disbursements. At mid-term, a CPS Progress Report
will be prepared, reviewing progress towards the CPS outcomes and assessing whether
they remain relevant to the country strategic objectives, given country conditions in the
very volatile Sahel context. A Completion Report will be prepared at the end of the CPS
implementation to feed into the next CPS cycle.
122. To the extent possible, the CPS monitoring framework will be linked with
PDES M&E Framework, which requires an integrated M&E system to collect data
from different sources to track progress of a set of selected outcome indicators and
report on results achieved. Hence, during the CPS implementation, the Bank Group will
focus on complementing and enhancing the government’s results-based monitoring and
evaluation capacities. Toward that end, the Bank Group will work with the Government
and civil society to increase demand for M&E information at national, regional, and local
levels through linking planning, budgeting, and reporting with results. The Bank Group
will help build Niger’s M&E systems and capacities at national and sector levels, as well
as Niger’s overall capacity for statistical data collection and regular reporting through an
IDF project. The Bank Group will collaborate with the INS to collect detailed panel
household survey data in 2014. Panel survey data will be an important first in Niger and
it will improve understanding about the dynamic impact of exogenous shocks on
households.
Box 2: Evolution of Statistical Capacity Building in Niger
Measuring advances made in poverty alleviation and other indicators of non-monetary welfare in Niger is critical for
determining whether the country is moving in the right direction and more specifically whether Niger is making
progress towards the achievement of development outcomes identified in its PRSPs. The Bank Group and the Niger
National Institute of Statistics (INS) have been engaged in a fruitful collaboration to promote the development of
statistical planning and overall capacity over time. The Niger country team has successfully integrated the Niger INS
into several important initiatives focusing on improved statistical management and survey data quality.
With support from the first set of development policy operations, the Niger Rural and Social Policy Reform Grant
(RSRC), the INS obtained a grant from the WB Statistical Capacity Trust Fund (TFSCB) in 2007 to prepare and
implement its first national statistical development strategy (NSDS). The NSDS enabled the INS to articulate a
comprehensive vision for priority data needs to monitor PRSP and MDG indicators with identified support from
development partners for specific survey operations and relevant training of its professional staff on overall statistical
program management and specific processes in survey design and analysis. The plan was successfully implemented
from 2008 -12 in tandem with its second PRSP. The RSRC identified several policy measures to strengthen operations
at INS including the adoption of a law that provided semi-autonomous administrative status to INS enabling the
Institute to plan and execute activities in closer alignment with its data monitoring needs and to hire qualified
professional staff as needed for these objectives. The RSRC also highlighted a measure to align the INS budget
allocation with the survey activities and training identified in the NSDS.
The INS has obtained support to build capacity in the measurement of activity in selected sectors including household
consumption, access to public services and social outcomes, and the informal sector. This assistance has buoyed
capacity in survey design and methodology, data processing and dissemination, and analysis. The Bank Group
selected Niger as one of seven African countries to join the LSMS-Gates Initiative, a household survey project to build
increased knowledge on activities in the agricultural sector and their linkage to household welfare and poverty
reduction. Niger conducted its first survey in 2011 and it will track those same household respondents and repeat the
survey in 2014. The Initiative offers Niger the opportunity to develop expertise in panel data collection- a first for
Niger INS- which will improve measurement of poverty dynamics and long term impact of economic shocks. Most
36

recently, INS has embarked on the preparation of its second NSDS with the support of the TFSCB. This work will be
aligned with the adoption of Niger’s third PRSP and the Niger CPS 2013-16.
Based on past achievements, INS has proved to be a viable partner and the CPS 2013-16 will endeavor to build further
capacity in data collection processes, monitoring, and data analysis at INS and in the sectoral statistical units with
whom INS partners to monitor the PRSP. Rigorous monitoring of Niger’s development programs depends on the
availability of both timely, high quality administrative data and survey data. The CPS will reinforce statistical
management and expertise in specific data collection and analysis activities in its proposed Governance & Capacity
Building Project to be developed in FY14. The CPS will leverage this support through the identification of trust funds
(TFSCB, multi-year Trust Funds) to undergird overall capacity and to build capacity in specific initiatives, including
the use of mobile survey technologies. Given the fragile political and economic landscape of Niger, it will be important
to build capacity for rapid assessment of potential impacts of shocks and public opinion responses.
INS requires
further support to build analytical capacity of its survey data which is essential for ensuring empirically-based policy
design. The Niger team will build analytical capacity through increased collaboration with INS in its analytical work
program, especially poverty monitoring activities. Collaboration will also instill ownership in the GON of these
products and ensure their integration into public policy design.

VI.

MANAGING RISKS

123. The success of this strategy may be hampered by the four foreseeable major
risks below for which specific mitigation measures are also discussed. In addition, the
Bank Group will encourage inclusion of contingent emergency response components21 in
selected existing and/or new investment projects. The respective Legal Agreements will
enable the rapid drawdown of funds via these components to meet emergency needs.
These contingent components will also be envisaged in the framework of Immediate
Response Mechanism.22 The Bank Group will also use innovative financing mechanisms
such as Crises Response Window (CRW23) to provide timely solutions against
vulnerability when crisis arise.
124. Sahel crisis and security risks: Although the current coalition government has so
far demonstrated its ability to take proactive measures to mitigate the spillover of the
Libyan crisis, the Sahel crisis poses a major threat to the political stability of Niger. The
ongoing military intervention in neighboring Mali coupled with the intensification of
Boko Haram activities in Nigeria pose serious risks to the stability of Niger. The
Government of Niger is playing an active role with the international community to
resolve the Mali crisis. The Bank Group will support these efforts through the
implementation of the National Strategy for Development and Security with a PER and
Fiduciary Review of the security sector and supporting under CAP III 19 communes that
are prone to increased insecurity and civil unrest. Micro-projects primarily targeting
women and youth will be promoted to expand economic opportunities and reduce the
temptation to resort to violence and criminal means. A CPS Progress Report will take
into account evolving developments and the need to adapt to changing country context.

21

See “Including Contingent Emergency Response Components in Standard Investment Projects
Guidance Note to Staff” – OPCS April 2009
22
See “Guidance Note for Staff: Implementing the IDA Immediate Response Mechanism” - OPCS, April
2012
23
Technical Note on the Establishment of a Crisis Response Window, September 2010
37

125. Climatic exogenous shocks pose high risks. Droughts, locust infestation, flood
and other exogenous shocks could limit the implementation of the CPS. To mitigate this
risk, the Bank Group continue together with other partners to support disaster risk
management and climatic adaptation activities through a new project in view of reducing
Niger’s vulnerability to such shocks. In addition the Bank Group will support the
Government to better monitor disaster risks, develop prevention and preparedness
capacities and tools.
126. Capacity constraints are an issue at all levels of the public sector. Weak
capacity and lack of coordination within the Cabinet constrain the pace of
implementation of Donor-supported programs. The creation of a new Ministry of
Planning distinct from the Ministry of Finances has increased the complexity of policy
dialogue and reform implementation. The ongoing coordination between OECD/DAC
and the Government serves to mitigate this risk. The Bank Group, as Co-Chair of the
OECD/DAC, will continue to play an active role to promote Government ownership and
harmonization among development partners. In addition, the proposed program will serve
to mitigate this risk by: (i) sustaining reforms that will generate stronger capacity in PFM
and governance; (ii) concentrating on a limited number of policy areas; and (iii) agreeing
on critical technical assistance required to overcome weaknesses identified in various
institutional capacity assessments, (iv) translating knowledge products into operational
development solutions through technical assistance where feasible. In addition a
Governance and Capacity Building Project is proposed to complement joint donors’
efforts to help the Government address the capacity challenges that are paramount.
127. Natural resources related risks: Mineral revenues can be volatile and destabilize
the macroeconomic framework and implementation of reforms supported by the Bank
Group. Alternatively the prospects of increase production of uranium and oil could result
in Dutch Disease with the negative effects on agriculture. Similarly failure in improving
the business environment is another risk that could compromise the Program. The CPS
supports the diversification and competitiveness of Niger economy to reduce
vulnerability to such shocks and its impact on the Bank Group Program. The
concentrated ownership of natural resources investments and the asymmetry between the
extractive industries and the government’s capacity have contributed to the existence of
multiple areas of risk along different stages of the natural resource value chain. The most
critical are the negotiation and award of licenses and contracts; the monitoring of
contracts; the mobilization of revenues; and the financing of development programs. The
Government has put in place a certain number of measures to mitigate governance risks
in extractive industries, including: (i) publication of mining and oil contracts in the
official national gazette; (ii) adoption of the National Resources Charter; (iii) transfer of
15% of natural resource revenues to extractive zones; and (iv) EITI conformity. The
results-based Governance and Capacity Building operation foreseen by the CPS will
contribute to mitigating these risks through strengthening the government’s capacity to
negotiate contracts, monitor the operations, and invest natural resource rents for
sustainable development.

38

Table 4 : Indicative Lending and AAA Program mapped to CPS Pillars, FY13-16
CPS Pillars and Foundation
Operations according to
Fiscal Year (FY)

FY13
Shared Growth Credit II

Source of Financing
(US$ million)
IDA
TF
IFC

50

Pillar I:
Promote
resilient
growth

Pillar II:
Reduce
vulnerability

Cross-cutting
Pillar: Strengthen
governance &
capacity for service
delivery

X

X

X

Community Action
Program III

40

Support to Transport
Sector - AF

19.5

X

Education Enhancement
& Skills Development
Manufacturing,
Agribusiness & Services
Asset Management
Company – Loan
Global Trade Finance
Program

30

X

Sub-Total FY13
FY14
Shared Growth Credit III

139.5

4.5

4.5

0.5

X

1.6

X

4.0

X

Local Development (Kandadji) TA
GAC Strategy & Inst. Develop. TA
Policy Notes Series25
PEMFAR Update
Advisory on Rural Finances
Social Protection Bldg Resilience TA
Gender Assessment I
Debt Management Reform Plan TA
EITI – Post Compliance TA
IFC –PPP/Niger Dry port TA
IFC – Access to Finances – AMSME
IFC- Pilot Program for Climate Resilience










Policy Notes Series
Debt Management Reform Plan TA
Regional Railways Program TA
Security Sector PER and Fiduciary Review
Country Status Report for Health
Education and health service delivery TA
Gender Assessment II
Agriculture Risk Management and
Inclusive Green Growth TA
Programmatic Study on PFM/Procurement
Bottlenecks to Service Delivery

X

Global Partnership for
Education

82.7

Sup to Governance &
Capacity for Service
Delivery
WARCIP - Regional WA
Com. Infrastructure

20.5

Land, Urban, Disaster
Management
Sub-Total FY14
FY15
Shared Growth Credit IV

100

X
X

10

X
X


180.5

82.7

50

Population and Health
Support

116

Sub-Total FY15

166

FY16
Shared Growth Credit V

50

Sub-Total FY16
Overall Total














6.1

50

Support Agric & Nat.
Food Security Programs
Regional DPO to spur
transport reforms

Key Knowledge Products24

X
X

Policy Notes Series
PER Update
Sahel Drylands Flagship Report
Sahel Demographic Study
Youth Employment and Jobs Study




Policy Notes Series
PEMFAR Update and Monitoring

X

116

X

TBD
166
652







X

87.2

6.1

24

Planned knowledge products are sequenced in a way to help the preparation of related lending in the following FY
Policy Notes Series will be demand driven intended to provide real time advice in the CPS focus areas and expand the space of
policy options considered in the policy dialogue including Growth, Gender, Governance, Trade

25

39

Annex 1. Niger CPS Results Matrix FY13-16
Country Strategic
Challenges
Objectives
(PDES 2012)
Pillar I. Promoting Resilient Growth

CPS Outcomes

Milestones

On-going Financing
. Competitiveness & Growth
Support Project (P127204)
. First Shared Growth Credit I

1.1 Fiscal Performance
consolidated
Reduce vulnerability
to external shocks
through a stable and
resilient
macroeconomic
environment (dept
management, revenues
collection etc…)
Increase access to
finance for SME and
boost private
investments

Weaknesses in
revenue
administration
result in an uneven
playing field for
economic actors
Weaknesses in
fiscal and debt
management
create additional
macro-economic
risks

The 2012 Doing
Business report
ranks Niger 173th
out of 183
countries

-

-

Efficiency of tax and
customs collections has
improved – increase in
PEFA rating of
performance indicator 15
from D+ in 2012 to C in
2015
Treasury and debt
management has
improved- increase in
PEFA rating of
performance indicator 17
from C in 2012 to B in
2015

40

Program instruments

Strategic plans for
customs and tax
department
implemented

Action plan for the
reform of debt
management developed
and implemented

Planned Financing
. Second Shared Growth Credit
FY13 (P132757)
Third Shared Growth Credit
FY14
Indicative AAA
. Policy Notes Series on
growth & poverty
. Financial sector development
strategy
. Public Expenditure Review Annual updates
. Policy Notes Series on
Growth, Gender, Governance
and Trade
. Debt Management Reform
Plan TA

Country Strategic
Objectives
(PDES 2012)

Challenges

The cost and time
for starting a
business in Niger
remain high,
compared to
similar
countries

CPS Outcomes

1.2 Improved Investment
Climate and Access to
Finance for SMEs
-

Private enterprises,
particularly Small
and Medium
Enterprises (SME)
in Niger
have limited
access to financial
services

Average number of new
enterprises registered per
year increased from
2500 in 2012 to 3000 by
2015 (of which 20 % led
by women)
SMEs Loan Portfolio
increased from US$19
million in 2012 to US$33
million by 2015 (of which
20% are received by
female-owned SMEs)

Milestones

Line of credits
extended to at least one
additional local bank.
Reforms that will
increase access to
financial services for
SME developed
At least 3 PPPs
established by 2015
Action plan for the
improvement of the
business environment
adopted and
implemented
Investment Climate
reforms to modernize
the OHADA laws
(company law and
insolvency law)
adopted

41

Program instruments

Country Strategic
Objectives
(PDES 2012)
Ensure food security
and sustainable
agriculture
development

Challenges

Yields of main
agriculture
products are low
for all three main
crops (millet,
sorghum, and
groundnuts)
Low access to
improved
technologies and
agricultural
services (research,
extension, training
and advisory
services)

CPS Outcomes

1.3 Increased Agricultural
Productivity of Selected
Crops in Selected Areas
-

Average yield of cereal
crops (millet, sorghum &
rice) in targeted rain fed
areas increased by 25%
by 2015
(Baseline: average yield
in kg/ha in 2008-2012
period:
- Millet: 5061;
- Sorghum: 354, and
- Rice: 5500).

Limited
development of
water for
agriculture (water
harvesting and
irrigation)

Milestones

Program instruments

On-going Financing
At least 90,000
producers have adopted
improved agriculture
technologies by 2015
(including drought
resistant varieties
demonstrated in
selected area)
At least 1500 hectares
of additional area
provided with irrigation
and drainage services
and 1000 hectares of
irrigated area
rehabilitated by 2015

• WAAPP-1C Niger Phase 1
(P122065)
. Niger Basin Water Resources
Program APL1 & APL2A
(P1093806)
. Agro-Pastoral Export Promotion
project (P095210)
• Second Emergency Food Security
Project (P123567)
• Shared Growth Credit I (P125272)
. Transport Sector Program SIM
(P101434)
. Community Action Program PAC2
(P102354)

Planned Financing
. Support to Food Security Programs
– 3N & Dispositif Nat. – (FY15)
• WAAPP2 (FY14)
. Shared Growth Credit Series
. Additional Financing for Transport
Sector Support Program (P131107) FY13
. PAC 3

Indicative AAA
. Regional Railways Program TA
. Agriculture Risk Management and
Inclusive Green Growth TA

42

Country Strategic
Objectives
(PDES 2012)
Increase access to
modern infrastructures
(energy, IT, transport,
etc…)

Challenges

Limited
geographical reach
of broadband
networks and high
costs of broadband
services
Low density of the
transport networks
constitutes a major
obstacle to the
development of
trade

CPS Outcomes

Milestones

1.4 Improved Selected
Economic
Infrastructures

- Connection of the country
to regional fiber
backbones established
-

300 Kilometers of interurban roads rehabilitated
in targeted areas by 2015

Lack of rail
connectivity as an
obstacle to mine
development and
livestock trade

PPP framework for
regional for railway
expansion adopted.

Program instruments

On-going Financing
. Niger Basin Water Resources
Program APL1 & 2A
(P1093806)
. Transport Sector Program
SIM (P101434)
Planned Financing
. West Africa Regional
Communications Infrastructure
Program (WARCIP)
.
Indicative AAA
. Energy Sector TA
. Regional Railways Program
TA

Pillar II. Reducing Vulnerability
Ensure food security

Cyclical natural
disasters,
particularly floods
and droughts,
which affect food
security of

2.1 Increased Access of
Poor and Food Insecure
People to Safety Net
Programs

43

On-going Financing
• Niger Safety Net Project
(P123399)
. Second Emergency Food
Security Project
• PUSA2/GFRP

Country Strategic
Objectives
(PDES 2012)

Challenges

vulnerable
communities.

CPS Outcomes

-

Severe external
shocks have
resulted in
unanticipated
financing needs,
including the
Libyan and Malian
crises

At least 100,000
additional households
with access to the safety
net programs( the cash
transfer and cash for
work programs) by 2015

Milestones

Program instruments

A management
information System for
the identification and
registration of
beneficiary households
established

• Community Action Program
CAP 2
. Community Actions Program
for Climatic Resilience
. Community-Based Disaster
Risk Reduction
Planned Financing
• Land, Urban and Disaster
Management Project –
FY14
• CAP III (cash for work)
• Support to Agric. Food
Security Programs – 3N &
Dispositif Nat.-FY15
Indicative AAA
. Security Sector PER
. TA on Social Protection for
Resilience
.

Create the conditions
for sustainable
development

Sustainable land
and water
management
practices are
insufficiently
integrated
High dependency
on rain-fed

On-going Financing

2.2 Increased Adoption of
Climate Resilience
Policies and Actions in
Targeted Communes
-

At least 2000 ha of
additional agricultural
areas with improved

44

Climate information
platform for
agricultural producers
created to improve

. Community Actions Program
for Climatic Resilience
CAPCR (P125669)
. Agro-pastoral Export
Program (P095210)
. Community-Based Disaster
Risk Reduction Project

Country Strategic
Objectives
(PDES 2012)

Challenges

CPS Outcomes

agriculture and
livestock

Disaster risk
management and
climatic adaptation
are still poorly
mainstreamed in
development plans
Increase access to
quality education as
well as vocational and
technical training

Program instruments

climate change
resilience

SLM
-

At least 5000 ha of
additional sylvopastoral areas with
improved SLM

-

Number of Local
Development Plans
(LDPs) incorporating
climatic resilience
increased from zero in
2012 to 25 by 2015.

Limited
infrastructure to
manage water
resources

Milestones

Too few children
2.3 Improved Education
complete basic
and Employment Skills
education, learning
for Youth
outcomes are low,
females have
- Primary completion rate
lower access
increased from 52% in
2012 to 55% in 2015;
Post-basic
education does not
- Youth who completed
respond to the
dual apprenticeship
needs of the labor

45

Planned Financing
.
. PAC III (P143079)
. Land, Urban and Disaster
Management Project – FY14
. Support to Agric. Food
Security Programs – 3N &
Dispositif Nat.-FY15
Indicative AAA

Education Sector Plan
completed

On-going Financing

Upgrade of TVET
institutions in 4 priority
sectors launched

Planned Financing
. Basic Education Support
Project FY13 (P132405)
. Education Enhancement and
Skills Development
FY13 (P126049)

On-demand technical
training program and
dual-apprenticeship
program set-up

Indicative AAA

Country Strategic
Objectives
(PDES 2012)

Challenges

market and youth
does not have the
skills for
employability

CPS Outcomes

Milestones

Program instruments

. Education and Health Service
Delivery TA
. Youth Employment and Jobs
Study

programs increased from
0 in 2012 to 30% in 2015
(with at least 20% of
women)

Lack of skills is
also constraining
job creation
Promoting social
development
Extend access to
drinking water and
sanitation services
Improve the supply
and quality of health
care services for the
population

One third of
population does
not have access to
improved water
resources and
more than 80%
without access to
improved
sanitation services
HIV/AIDS is
concentrated in
high-risk groups
(sex workers and
partners
Because of the low
level of use of
modern

2.4 Increased Access to
Water, Sanitation,
Health and Population
Services
- Number of additional people

in selected urban areas
provided with access to
improved water sources:
480,000 by 2015
- Number of additional people

provided with access to
improved Sanitation in
selected urban areas:
235,000 by 2015
- Number of sex workers

screened for sexually
transmitted diseases

46

450 Additional improved
community water points
constructed or
rehabilitated by 2015
73,000 new piped
household water
connections and 30,000
additional latrines
constructed by 2015
At least 2000 people form
the HIV/AIDS risk
groups receiving peer
education by 2015

At least 800 Health
personnel receiving

On-going Financing
. Urban Water and Sanitation
Project (P117365)
.
. Community Action Program II
(P102354 &P107841)
. HIV/AIDS Support Project
(P116167)
. Multi-sector Demographic
Development Project
Ongoing TA
Water and Sanitation Program
TAs (FY12 – FY15)
Planned Financing
. Community Action Program III
. Land, Urban and Disaster
Management Project – FY14
. Population and Health Sector

Country Strategic
Objectives
(PDES 2012)

Challenges

CPS Outcomes

contraceptives,
Niger has one of
the highest fertility
rate in the World
(7.1 children per
woman)

increased from 0 in 2012 to
3000 in 2015
- Percentage of modern

Milestones

training on Family
planning and
Reproductive health
issues by 2015

contraceptive use among
women increased from 16%
in 2012 to 20 % by 2015

Program instruments

Support project – FY15
Indicative AAA
. Health Country Status Report
. Sahel Demographic study

Cross-cutting. Mainstreaming Gender and Strengthening Governance and Capacity for Public Service Delivery
Strengthen credibility
and efficiency of
public institutions

Weak capacity
to implement a
transparent,
efficient, and
effective
framework for
public resource
management

3.1 Improved Budget
Execution and Efficiency




Weak link between
strategic policies
and priorities, and
the budget

Careful
management of
revenue from

Budget execution ratio of
own funded expenditures
(actual/budget) increased
from 75 percent in 2011 to
90 percent in 2015

National Capacity
strengthening Plan
adopted by 2014
PFM information
system improvement
plan adopted

Share of public
procurement contracts
awarded through
competitive bidding
maintained above 75
percent

Operational resultsbased M&E
framework established
at national and key
sectors

3.2 Improved
Transparency of Sector

Performance-based
budgeting framework
adopted

47

On-going Financing
. Reform Management TA
(P108253)
. Competitiveness & Growth
Support Project (P127204)
. Support to Cour des Comptes
(IDF)
. Support to Procurement
Office - ARMP (IDF)
Planned Financing
. Support Governance &
Capacity Building for
Service Delivery Project –
FY14
. Support to PDES Monitoring
and Evaluation System –
IDF grant

Country Strategic
Objectives
(PDES 2012)

Challenges

mining and oil
sectors essential to
ensure adequate
contribution to
Niger’s
development

CPS Outcomes

Milestones

Budget Allocations


Number of budgetary
documents published based
on the ‘Open budget
initiative classification)’
increased from 1 in 2012 to
6 in 2015

3.3 Improved
Transparency in the
Mining and Oil Sector
-

EITI Reports
published annually

48

Number of high level
officials recruited
through competitive
selection

Program instruments

Indicative AAA
. Public Expenditure Review Annual updates
. Gender Assessment
.Education and Health Service
Delivery TA

Annex 2: CAS Completion Report
Summary
1.
This Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR) assesses program
performance and Bank performance with the FY08-11 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for
Niger, which was discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on April 29, 2008 (Report No.
43443-NE). This assessment covers a period up to December 31, 2011, extending slightly
beyond FY01126. During most of the years covered by this assessment, Niger had to face a
dramatic combination of events and external shocks - some of which were not entirely
unexpected. But few could have foreseen that all those events would occur simultaneously.
2.
Niger’s performance has been affected by those events - but the overall impact could
have been much more profound. The country‘s achievements, in terms of economic growth and
fulfilling the objectives of its Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), fall short of the original
and very ambitious expectations, but are still encouraging considering the negative
circumstances. Overall the performance of the CAS program is assessed as moderately
satisfactory. On the basis of the self-evaluation conducted in early 2012 and slightly updated in
the context of the next CPS, Bank performance is assessed as moderately satisfactory –
satisfactory in design of the program and moderately satisfactory in its implementation for the
Bank failed to complete a CAS Progress Report to adjust the CAS to the new country context.
3.
Lessons learned include inter alia that the strongest impact is achieved when multisectoral Development Policy Operations (DPOs) are delivered in synergy with parallel sectoral
operations in areas where reforms are difficult and need sustained commitment and actions from
the Government. The strong impact of a long-term Bank involvement in specific areas and the
effectiveness of well-focused budget support with strong analytical underpinnings have been
confirmed once more. The difficulty of addressing effectively gender and demographic issues
has also again been highlighted.
4.
Niger faces the risk of an average sluggish growth – where growth stalls at around the
(still) very high rate of population growth and poverty decreases only very slowly. A steady GDP
growth rate of 5 percent and above will be necessary coupled with a steady reduction of
population growth. For the next CAS program, the Bank engagement should be comprehensive
with activities boosting sustained and inclusive economic growth and employment generation,
reducing vulnerability to climate change and other external shocks and more broadly the volatility
of growth (i.e. through the diversification of the economy), and enhancing good governance.
Absorptive capacity constraints - could be felt more acutely unless stronger efforts succeed in
modernizing rapidly Niger’s Administration. The new Bank instrument – Program for Results
(P4R) could be introduced as a pilot in selected sectors27.

26

The preparation of the next CAS has been delayed, partly because of the political events of 2009-011. Preparation of
this next CAS should coincide with the finalization of the Niger’s third Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP-III).
27

Such as rural development and food security.
49

Context and Objectives of the CAS
5.
Niger is one of the poorest countries in the world. With a limited natural and human
resource base it faces tremendous challenges and pressures. It is a large landlocked, mostly
desert country with a population of about 16 million people. It ranked 186th out of 187 countries
on UNDP’s Human Development Index in 2011, with a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per
capita in Parity Purchasing Power (PPP) terms of US$680, one of the lowest also in Africa. Head
count poverty in 2007/2008, was estimated at 60.8 percent overall and at 65 percent in rural areas.
About 30 percent of the population is extremely poor. Poverty is exacerbated by inequality which
affects girls, women and children disproportionately. Its population is growing at one of the
fastest rate in the world (3.3 percent/annum) with 47 percent of its population under the age of
1528. Niger’s economic growth is constrained by a combination of factors: agricultural
production highly exposed to extreme weather conditions like droughts, heat waves, and
occasional floods, plus locust invasions, as well as inadequate irrigation and the limited use of
modern inputs; its dependence on a narrow economic base with agricultural and mineral
commodity exports leaves the economy vulnerable to price shocks; economic diversification is
hampered by inadequate road and transport networks and the high cost of doing business due
inter alia to weak financing systems, a small national market, poor judiciary and legal practices,
weak private sector support institutions and a low-skilled workforce. As a landlocked country
more than 1000 km away from the nearest seaport, its exports and imports also face high
transport costs. Only about 12 percent of its land is arable and there is constant overuse of scant
natural resources. About 80 percent of the population depends on rain-fed agriculture and
livestock. Niger’s high vulnerability to droughts and other crop failures regularly leave a high
share of the population food insecure. Sporadic rebel movements in the north of the country,
kidnappings by Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQMI) and instability in neighboring
countries such as Libya and Cote d’Ivoire added to those pressures and recurrent internal political
instability.
6.
Nevertheless since 2000 the country has witnessed improvements in both economic and
social indicators, with a few notable achievements in education and health indicators29. Also,
Niger is endowed with important mineral resources such as uranium, gold, and only recently
exploited, oil. Niger is the fifth largest producer of uranium in the world and is expected to triple
its production by 2018. Still, reaching the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) is a
formidable challenge. Progress is predicated on effective and efficient utilization of national
resources and donor assistance funds. Niger’s progress towards the MDGs since 1990 is
illustrated in Annex 3 of CASCR full report.
7.
As the FY08-11 CAS was being prepared, the Government adopted its second generation
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, PRSP-II, covering the 2008-2012 period. It was prepared
through a broad-based participatory process and includes all the main objectives of the PRSP-I 30
of December 2001. It emphasizes the priority of creating an enabling environment for accelerated
28

At current rates growth the population would reach about 54 million by year 2050. It is a race against time as Niger adds around
450,000 extra mouths to feed each year
29
For example the primary gross enrollment rate increased from 25 percent in 1991 to 54 percent in 2005; primary completion rate
grew from 18 percent in 1990 to 40 percent in 2005; infant mortality rate declined from 126/1,000 live births to 81/1,000 in 2006.
30
Centered on four pillars: (i) putting in place a macroeconomic framework which ensures economic and financial stability while
promoting sustainable and robust growth; (ii) developing the productive sectors, especially in rural areas, to mitigate vulnerability and
stimulate income generation; (iii) improving the access of the poor to quality social services, and (iv) strengthening institutional and
individual capacity within and outside government, at the central and local level. It also aimed to address cross-cutting issues of
gender, governance and stakeholder participation.
50

economic growth - at an ambitious rate of 7 percent per year in order to reach the MDGs by 2015.
It is articulated around seven strategic pillars: (i) strong, diversified, sustainable and job-creating
growth; (ii) equitable access to quality social services; (iii) addressing the demographic challenge;
(iv) reducing inequalities and strengthening social protection for vulnerable groups; (v)
developing infrastructure; (vi) promoting high quality governance; and (vii) ensuring the effective
implementation of the strategy. The two cross-cutting issues of good governance and of
demographics are thus also specifically addressed in PRSP-II.
8.
The 2008-2011 CAS presented to the Board on April 29, 2008, was built around two
pillars: (i) accelerating sustained growth that is equitably shared; and (ii) increasing access to
basic services and developing human capital; and two cross cutting issues: (i) demographics and
(ii) good governance. The CAS was well aligned with PRSP-II – despite a different clustering
around a smaller number of pillars as explained below. The alignment of the CAS pillars with the
PRSP pillars is detailed in Table 1- Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation. In terms of
instruments the CAS proposed to deliver about one third of IDA resources in the form of DPOs.
9.
To achieve the first CAS strategic objective of accelerating sustainable and shared
growth, the Bank seek to promote the key sectors that drive growth and have the greatest
potential for creating jobs - such as the agro-pastoral and mining sectors - while also supporting
efforts to strengthen the private sector, improve the business climate and access to regional and
global commercial opportunities through DPOs, investment instruments, technical assistance
(TA) and non-financial services. This is in line with PRSP-II Pillar 1 (Achieve strong, diversified
and sustainable growth that creates jobs) and Pillar 5 (Endow the country with economic
infrastructure to promote growth). To achieve the second CAS objective of developing human
capital, the Bank is supporting access to basic education and improved quality of teaching;
expanded coverage of basic health care and HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment; and enhanced
protection for the most vulnerable groups. This pillar is in line with PRSP-II Pillar 2 (Equitable
access to social services); and Pillar 4 (Reduce inequalities and strengthen social protection for
the poorest). The cross-cutting challenges tackled by the CAS essentially coincide with PRSP-II
Pillar 3 (slow down population growth) and Pillar 6 (promoting good governance).
10.
This CAS is the first results-based CAS for Niger. The results-based framework
comprises 15 main outcomes aligned with PRSP objectives and MDGs. Bank support was
planned in the following areas under the two pillars and two cross-cutting themes, with the
corresponding major outcomes:


Pillar I: Accelerating Sustainable Growth that is Equitably Shared: supporting key
sectors that drive growth and have the greatest potential for creating jobs, with policies
and investments to promote “growth clusters,” such as agro-pastoral products and exports
and mining; strengthen economic infrastructure services, including irrigation, transport,
and municipal services; improve the business and investment climate; and strengthen
regional integration. Outcomes:
1. Macroeconomic stability maintained.
2. Competitiveness of supply chains strengthened.
3. Sustainable management of natural resources strengthened.
4. Investment climate and support of entrepreneurship strengthened.
5. Economic infrastructure to promote growth, access to services and regional
integration strengthened.



Pillar II: Developing Human Capital through Equal Access to Quality Social Services:
supporting access to basic education and improved quality of teaching and expanded
51

coverage of basic health care and HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment; and providing
technical input for better targeting of social protection to the most vulnerable groups,
through a mix of financial and analytical support. Outcomes:
6. Increased access to basic education and improved quality.
7. Improved access of the rural population to basic health and nutrition services.
8. Improved coverage and use of HIV/AIDS prevention services and treatment.
9. Increased access to safe drinking water and sanitation.
10. Increased access of urban residents to basic infrastructure services
particularly in disadvantaged areas.
11. Gender inequity reduced, as evidenced by improved girls’ access to education
and health services.
12. An effective food security and social protection strategy in place.
13. Government and farmers better prepared to deal with natural disasters.


Cross-cutting theme 1: Addressing demographic issues: Slow down population
growth. Outcome:
14. Increased awareness of and access to family planning.



Cross-cutting theme 2: Promoting Good Governance and Fighting Corruption. With
an emphasis on economy and financial management and capacity building. Outcome:
15. Strengthened economic governance and capacity to implement and monitor
reform.

11.
The CAS was strongly influenced by the previous CAS approved in 2003. That CAS was
itself aligned on PRSP-I and supported in particular three of its four pillars31: (i) Pillar 1: ensuring
economic/financial stability while promoting growth; (ii) Pillar 2: developing the productive
sectors, especially in rural areas, to mitigate vulnerability and stimulate income generation; and
(iii) Pillar 3: improve access of the poor to quality social services. A large number of activities
started prior to FY 2008– mainly nine operations32 - were thus pursued, including one APL and
eight investment or TA projects (see Annex 1 of CASCR full report).
12.
Using a selected mix of financing instruments and a targeted program of Analytical and
Advisory Activities (AAA), the CAS seek continuity with the ongoing reform programs,
including by using a programmatic approach around three DPOs. It also promoted selectivity by
focusing interventions on selected PRSP themes (where the Bank has the greatest comparative
advantage, and where the Bank can complement or leverage efforts by donors) and left other
aspects of the PRSP agenda aside33. Sector interventions were expected to decrease in terms of
number of new operations proposed and areas of Bank presence. The Bank was also to continue
promote donors harmonization in the spirit of the 2005 Paris declaration on Aid Effectiveness, of
which Niger is a signatory. Active partnerships with other donors were to be pursued, particularly
in Public Finance Management (PFM) reform/governance, agriculture and irrigation, transport,
31

Respectively through (i) Pillar 1: Improvements in public financial and fiduciary management and fiduciary controls; supporting
privatization of state-owned enterprises and improving the environment for private sector investment; reforming and developing the
financial sector including restructuring of state-owned banks, and strengthening financial institutions to expand SME financing; (ii)
Pillar 2: Improvements in rural production and income-generating activity and addressing environmental degradation by, among other
things expanding irrigated agriculture; and (iii) Pillar 3: Making primary education accessible to all; making health care accessible to
the poor; addressing population issues; and intensifying the fight against HIV/AIDS.
32
Two other operations were about to close. In addition there were three regional projects: the Africa Emergency Locust Project;
Reversing Land and Water Degradation Trends in the Niger River Basin Project; and the Niger Basin Water Resources Development
and Sustainable Ecosystems Management Program
33
This included stand-alone operations in the social sectors and in mining and energy. Budget support and a proposed Sources of
Growth operation were expected to cover, inter alia, mining and energy investments and/or reforms.
52

education and health (co-financing of multi-year investment programs), and water. The CAS also
stressed support to regional integration. The CAS report thus highlighted the regional synergies
expected within each of the 15 areas of intervention/outcomes.
13.
The IDA 15 allocation processing was not yet completed by the time the CAS was
prepared and the CAS was presented with an indicative annual IDA envelope of US$90 million
equivalent. Overall with IDA 14 and 15, the CAS proposed a program financed by a total
envelope of IDA resources of US$380 million over four years. The new IDA assistance was
expected to be slightly stronger in the first pillar, with a share of 49 percent of total financing
versus 38 percent for the second pillar, with the cross-cutting themes receiving about 13 percent
of the Bank’s assistance. By FY09 budget support was expected represent close to 40 percent of
the Bank annual support to Niger with the start of a new DPO series - with one multi-sectoral
operation per year. At the same time, the Bank intended to still rely on CDD-type operations,
with the aim to increase empowerment of local communities and final beneficiaries, and
strengthen the decentralization process. It was also planned to mobilize funding for ESW through
Trust Funds (TF) and collaborative efforts with other donors. For example the Public Expenditure
Management and Financial Accountability Review (PEMFAR) II was to be carried out with the
other partners involved in PFM reform.
14.
The CAS was based on rounds of extensive consultations held primarily by the Niger
Country office with key constituencies and opinion-makers in Niger including governments,
parliamentarians, the media, youth, and academics, the private sector, CSOs and other community
groups in the capital Niamey as well as in four other regions. These consultations followed and
build on the client survey of June 2007 involving approximately 600 stakeholders.
15.
While the CAS objective was to contribute to Niger’s higher order goals outlined in
PRSP-II, the Bank’s performance was not expected to be measured according to high order
indicators (such as GDP growth or reduction in poverty levels). Performance was to be measured
through 37 indicators (of which some were specifically related to MDGs) and milestones for the
15 outcomes. The results obtainable during the CAS period were expected to be mostly
influenced by operations already on-going in 2007-2008 and to a limited extent by new
operations started over the first two years of the CAS period. No dedicated CAS indicator
measurement system was foreseen for the regional operations. Specific data and feedback was to
be provided mainly by the PRSP M&E capacity of the Government (essentially the Statistical
Institute which benefitted from IDA and other donors’ support), ISRs/M&E of the different Bank
operations and PERs using Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS) in key PRSP sectors.
16.
The CAS report pointed at a high number of risks: security risks, internal political risks,
climate risks and vulnerability to other exogenous shocks (locust invasion, avian flu) with strong
negative effects in agriculture, commodity price risks, a possible Dutch Disease fueled by high
uranium prices, and particularly food insecurity. All in all, with such a high number of risks and
its current poverty levels and low Human Development Index, and neighboring countries having
just experienced conflicts, Niger had many features of a fragile state although it was and is still
not formally designated as such by the donors.

Developments and Adjustments during CAS Implementation
17.
Implementation of the CAS had barely started that Niger was hit by a succession of
shocks which deeply affected its political environment and weighted heavily on its economic
53

performance. Its internal political situation had been relatively stable since 2000. However in
2009 efforts by then President Tandja to circumvent a two-term limit resulted in a severe political
crisis that led to a coup d’état by a military junta in February 2010. The junta committed to a
one-year transition period that was to lead to the reinstatement of democratically governing
institutions in early 2011. From February 2010 to April 2011 Niger was thus governed by the
Supreme Council for the Restoration of Democracy under the presidency of a general. Seasoned
technocrats, several of them Nigeriens working previously for international organizations, were
appointed to key ministerial positions. Following a referendum and the adoption of a new
constitution in November 2010 and a series of local, legislative, and presidential elections in early
2011, the new President took office in April. The February 2010 military coup d’état however
triggered OP/BP 7.30 (Dealing with de facto government) affecting for a certain time the Bank’s
operations in Niger.
18.
During this difficult political period starting when OP 7.30 was triggered, the Bank has
reacted swiftly to the succession of shocks that Niger faced and responded with commendable
flexibility to the country’s needs. Following the start of the political crisis in mid-2009, IDA
largely refrained from presenting new projects to the Board and delayed the effectiveness of some
newly approved operations, although implementation of previously approved projects continued.
Following the coup, an assessment under OP 7.30 carried out in April 2010 provided the basis for
continued disbursements of the existing portfolio (such as the first DPO of the CAS period). The
Bank maintained close dialogue with the interim authorities and development partners to
encourage continued progress towards constitutional normalcy given the importance of stability
to development and poverty reduction. Also a limited number of financing activities were
approved on a case by case basis, especially to support the government’s response to a new food
crisis - through trust funding. A second assessment under OP 7.30 resulted in the Bank’s decision
in March 2011 to resume new lending to Niger. The Bank also reacted to the changed country
situation by agreeing with the authorities on a reprioritized reform program resulting in some
adjustments to the original triggers for the second DPO.
19.
In addition in 2010, with the repetition of the 2008 drought, Niger had to deal with a
severe food crisis which left 48 percent of the population food insecure. Finally, the crisis in Cote
d’Ivoire and the events in neighboring Libya, where many Nigerians worked, added also to
external pressures. Although most institutions are relatively weak in Niger, some institutions
showed remarkable willingness and capacity to deal with the stress during these years. The
preparation of a new constitution laid the foundation for a smooth return to a democratically
elected regime. Domestic institutions created to deal with food crises and strengthened after the
2005 famine, worked very well in 2010 – with the military government’s quick recognition of the
problem and call for external assistance.
20.
The 2008-2011 CAS period comprised four different phases, with a different political
environment and/or government: (i) pre-2009 political events phase, broadly a continuation of the
previous CAS period; (ii) a period of severe political crisis from mid-2009 until the February
2010 coup; (iii) a transition period with interim de facto government until the early 2011
democratic elections; and (iv) since 2011, renewed stability under the newly elected President and
new government resulting from the April 2011 parliamentary election. For more than one year
during the 2nd and 3rd phases missions could not be carried out as planned. Also, the Bank’s
Niger team was during 15 months without a Country Manager in the Niamey office. Still, the
Bank demonstrated a high degree of responsiveness and flexibility during the last three phases
that made a significant difference for the country and the CAS program. During this critical time,

54

as the IMF program had been interrupted, the Bank program, particularly the DPOs, was the key
instrument used to ensure that the macro situation stayed on track.
21.
The CAS remained relevant in the context of economic and political turbulence. The
2010-2011 transition authorities remained committed to the strategic orientation of PRSP-II and
the CAS, and advanced most of the reform agenda of the PRSP/CAS34. The new Government
democratically-elected in 2011 has likewise supported the trust of the CAS. No major
reorientation of the CAS was thus deemed necessary in the later part of the CAS period.
22.
A CAS Progress Report was prepared neither in 2010 as originally planned - given the
circumstances - nor later as the time of preparation of the next CAS and the PRSP II (2012) was
coming close. But this did not prevent the Bank to adjust adequately the strategy - primarily to
respond effectively to the crisis resulting from the successive shocks and particularly meet the
country’s urgent financing needs. The two emergency food projects, not planned in the CAS
were delivered respectively in 2008 and 2010. With the two DPOs - GPRC-1 which was declared
effective as soon as the basic constraints under OP 7.30 were lifted and GPRG-2 approved soon
after the newly elected Government was in place – the Bank provided budget support at a critical
time. The innovative safety net project – not planned in the CAS – was also nevertheless
delivered as soon as possible, and should contribute alleviating the effects in 2011-2012 of the
Libyan crisis causing inter alia the return of large numbers of migrant Nigerian workers. Still, in
these years when a difficult environment called for quick responses, the Bank at the same time
contributed significantly in having the Government keep the focus on longer term issues and on
areas of long-term growth potential.
23.
Despite the 2009-2011 political turmoil, the Bank delivered more IDA resources over the
CAS period (US$403.5 million excluding TFs) than originally programmed (US$365 million)
plus US$45 million of Niger’s share in two new regional projects. Thirteen new IDA operations
were approved until June 30, 2011, in addition to the two regional projects plus three Trust Fund
financed operations (see Table 2 and Annex 2). Instead of three PRSCs/DPOs (for a planned
total of US$120 million), two DPOs were approved for a total amount of US$92 million. The
two new investments operations (PRODEX and CAP2) plus the two Food Security Operations
and new regional agriculture operation, beefed up significantly the share of Rural Development
and Agriculture (RDA) in the portfolio. The weight of RDA became the most important - with
39% in terms of $ amount – of the portfolio by July 1, 2011 – followed by urban and water with
29%35. A significant use of TF resources was made during the CAS period, with total new
approvals for 2009-2010 of US 35.2 million, of which US$30.5 million from the Global Food
Price Crisis Response from and the Education for All - Fast Track Initiative Catalytic Fund (EFAFTI).
24.
A substantial program of analytical work has been undertaken. It not only broadly
fulfilled the scope of what was planned under the CAS (although with some slippage between
years) but included also a number of additional tasks (see Table 3). Significant non-lending work
included the PEMFAR 2, a comprehensive set of policy notes (covering 14 sectors) for the new
Government in 2011, and a batch of in depth analysis leading eventually to the innovative Safety
Net Project.

34

The transition government for example also requested Bank assistance in carrying out a governance assessment and
the preparation of a governance reform program, efforts which are being continued by the new government.
35

Followed by Public Sector (19%), Education & health (9%) and Transport (7%).
55

25.
The succession of shocks did impact GDP growth. After a lack-luster 2007 year with a
GDP growth of 3.4 percent, growth jumped to 9.6 percent with a bumper crop harvest in 2008.
But after the failure of the 2009 harvest, GDP decreased by 0.9 percent. It partly recovered in
2010 to increase by 8 percent – again on account of a good harvest. With another poor harvest in
2011 (leading to a severe food shortage in 2012), the growth rate is estimated at about 2.3% that
year. The average growth rate for 2008-2011 would thus not exceed 4.7 percent, lower than the
PRSP target of 7 percent but still slightly better than the 4.4 percent average achieved between
2001 and 2007 and better than the 4.2 percent of the base-case scenario of the Bank/IMF
estimates in 2008. It is not clear to what extent the slight improvement is due to the investment
boom and/or better price in extractive industries (2009-2011), structural reforms implemented
since 2000, and improvement in the agriculture sector36. On the negative side however, the large
yearly variations in GDP changes underscores the continuing extreme volatility and vulnerability
of Niger’s economy to climatic factors and other chocks. On the bright side, despite the 20092010 economic turbulences, Niger was able to maintain a sound fiscal policy, with a fiscal
balance remaining essentially under control: 1.5% in 2008, -5.5% in 2009, -2.5% in 2010, -3.6%
in 2011 (projected). Poverty remains deeply entrenched37 and most MDGs are still out of reach.
Analysis undertaken on the preliminary results of a recent Poverty Assessment in Niger indicates
that poverty has declined from 59 percent in 2008 to 56 percent in 2011 and the poor have
benefitted more from growth than the non-poor. Also the growth in GDP per capita – (probably
around 1.4 percent/year on average) over 2008-2011 suggests some improvement in poverty
incidence over the last four years.

Program Performance Evaluation
26.
An evaluation of program performance is provided in Table 1, essentially around the
outcomes and indicators38 and based on specific detailed subprogram reviews and evaluations for
each of the sectors or main areas of engagement provided in Annex 2. This evaluation is
summarized below for each of two pillars and the two cross-cutting themes. It concludes that
performance assessed up to December 2011 has been moderately satisfactory. Partial progress
was achieved towards most outcomes. The outcomes are mixed with respect to the financial
sector which remains shallow and expensive. While results are so far still short of expectations in
that specific sector, overall there are no significant shortcomings in the performance of the
program. The performance is fairly good given Niger’s absorptive capacity constraints – resulting
primarily from shortcomings in an administration that needs to be urgently modernized.
27.
For many outcomes the progress shown by the indicators is to a significant extent the
result of operations initiated during previous CAS. Most new operations approved during the
new CAS became effective or were approved only during last one and half year of the CAS.
Most of their effects will not been seen soon except for a few effects of triggers and prior actions
of the two DPOs. Most results of many operations started and implemented during the CAS will
only accrue during the next CAS. The success of these operations will be primarily seen over the
medium term in the context of the policy changes and strategies they introduced.

Pillar 1 – Accelerating Sustainable Growth that is equitably shared
36
An in-depth analysis of the growth of agriculture production and agriculture GDP growth over 2008-2011 is needed.
The PICAG data suggest an average growth of agriculture and élevage of 3.6%, barely above population growth.
37
Head count poverty is estimated to have declined by three percentage points from 64.4 percent in 2005 to 60.8
percent in 2007/08.
38
The Government’s PRSP evaluation report is not yet completed and no users’ survey is being carried out.

56

28.
Progress has been moderate under this pillar, with most expected outcomes partially
achieved. Outcome 1, Maintain macroeconomic stability, was partially achieved – with a
significant contribution of GPRG-1 and GRPC-239. The progress also was significant in clearing
Government arrears to the private sector and introducing electronic processing of payable needed
for paying Government bills in a faster and transparent way to the suppliers but keeping the
inflation rate under 3 percent was uneven. Outcome 2, strengthen competitiveness of supply
chains, is already partly achieved and well on its way to be fully achieved. The Private Irrigation
Project (PIP) and Agro-Pastoral Export and Market Development Project (PRODEX) have
significantly increased the agriculture areas under irrigation. PRODEX is contributing in a major
way in developing a participatory supply chain approach for priority export agriculture
commodities and livestock products and paving the ways for PPPs in the agriculture sector.
29.
Outcome 3, Strengthen sustainable management of natural resources to reduce
vulnerability to desertification - is well on its way to be achieved. The Community Action
Program (CAP) 1 and 2 APL projects have addressed this issue through a comprehensive CDD
approach. They substantially improved local governance as well as land and natural resource and
ecosystem management, raised levels of health, education and food security, and reclaimed and
protected large areas of land. The Local Investment Fund successfully stimulated local
development and empowered communes and communities to provide a response to their priority
needs. A supplementary grant equivalent to US$4.5 million added in 2008 to CAP 1 to finance a
new Avian Influenza prevention and control component was swiftly prepared as an emergency
project and successfully implemented. The networks built up by the project can be used against
other epidemic diseases. An innovative PHRD grant to promote carbon sequestration by acacia
Senegal trees planting was also added to the CAP 1 and this initiative is being pursued under the
CAP2 with both IDA and GEF financings.
30.
Outcome 4 Strengthen the investment climate and support entrepreneurship - was fully
achieved regarding investment climate, but financial sector reform and development objectives
were only partially achieved, albeit with reasonable prospects for tangible improvements over the
next two years. GPRG-1 supported the Government's efforts in promoting private sector-led
growth and entry in the formal sector by reducing the corporate tax as a first step towards
comprehensive tax reforms, broadening of the tax base, and overhaul of incentives to ensure a
level playing field for private firms. Doing Business 2012 indicates Niger “distance to frontier”
has been reduced and in terms of cumulative change over 5 last years, Niger ranks 53rd among
173 countries (with inter alia the reduction in cost and time for establishing a business, progress
in dealing with construction permits and resolving insolvency, etc..). With the Financial Sector
TA Project the new Microfinance Regulatory and Supervisory Agency was created and is
operational. Substantial progress was made in building capacity within the ministries, and
financial sector institutions and participants especially in microfinance institutions40, insurance
companies, and banks. But the cost of financial intermediation was not reduced and because of
the delays in setting-up a new the postal bank system, that project did not contribute to private
sector development as expected by expanding access to financial services in financially
underserved areas.

39

As stressed in paragraph 20, during the critical 2010-2011 period as the IMF program had been interrupted, the Bank
program mainly through these DPOs was the key instrument used to ensure that the macro situation stayed on track.
40

The audits of the main MFIs suggested some improvement in the capacity of the sector. The total number of MFI
members and clients, and the value of deposit accounts in MFIs both increased threefold
57

31.
Outcome 5, strengthen economic infrastructure to promote growth, access to services
and regional synergies - is basically achieved for transport and on its way to be fully achieved for
electric power. The targets of the Transport Sector Program Project for rural access and reduction
of transport time were reached. Road rehabilitation targets are now only partly met41. But with
this project and the two GPRGs, road maintenance funding for CAFER has at last reached the
target levels in 2011, although these are still not sufficient in relation to Niger’s relatively wide
and dense road network. Yet increased spending on road maintenance has resulted in some
increase in the share of the road network in good condition42. Regarding electrical energy supply,
rehabilitation of the hydropower units of the Kainji dam in Nigeria is not far advanced but is
expected to be achieved with the completion of the regional Niger Basin Water Resources
Development Project.
Pillar II. - Developing Human Capital through Equal Access to Quality Social Services.

32.
Under pillar 2, five out of eight expected outcomes have been partially achieved.
Outcome 6, increased access to basic education and improved quality – is partially achieved.
The Basic Education Project and the FTI-Basic Education Support Project contributed
successfully in raising overall gross primary enrolment (GER) above 2011 targets, but increased
only slightly girls’ GER. The GER in rural areas, the primary completion rate and pass rate
reached also project targets, albeit those were more conservative than CAS targets and MDGs.
33.
Outcome 7, improved access of the rural population to basic health and nutrition services
is also fully achieved. The Institutional Strengthening & Health Sector Program provided a
minimum package of essential health services targeted at the poor, women and children, and
made a significant contribution in the strengthening of the health sector. It achieved its specific
objectives and the principal objectives of reducing maternal and child mortality. It contributed to
set up a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp), established the conditions for a smooth transition from
project to program implementation, motivating donors to support the National Health
Development plan through a pooled account, a first in Niger. Outcome 8 - improved coverage
and use of HIV/AIDS prevention services and treatment is also fully achieved. The Multi-Sector
HIV/AIDS program project succeeded in establishing a permanent institutional framework and in
putting in place policies and programs that continue to guide the fight against HIV/AIDS. It
vastly improved the Ministry of Health’s capacity to deliver prevention, treatment, and mitigation
services and achieved significant institutional development at the central and regional levels of
both the public and NGO sectors. The recently approved HIV/AIDS Support 2 project will assist
the Government in aligning better its response strategy with the modes of transmission of the
epidemic to target high-risk groups.
34.
Outcome 9 - Increased access to safe drinking water and sanitation is partially achieved
with further progress under way. The Water Sector Project achieved or exceeded all its objectives
of substantially increasing access to potable water in urban and rural areas as well as sanitation
services in some peri-urban areas. Improving performance and implementation of sociallyacceptable tariffs allowed the urban water subsector to reach and maintain for some time its
financial equilibrium under a successful PPP. The new recent Urban and Water Sanitation
project will expand the achievements of the first project, with an emphasis on sanitation and
schools and capacity building. Outcome 10 - Increased access of urban residents to basic
infrastructure services particularly in disadvantaged areas, is partially achieved with further
progress under way. The Local Urban Infrastructure Development Project has made reasonable
41

Rehabilitation costs had been underestimated.
51 % of bituminous roads and 27.5 % of non-bituminous roads in good condition in 2009, compared to 41% and 16
% respectively in 2001.
42

58

progress in building local management capacities for programming, implementing and managing
urban infrastructure and basic services. It is financing municipal investments in infrastructure for
basic services (build partly through labor-intensive techniques) in three cities, as well as
infrastructure boosting local economic development. A national framework for public
intervention in the urban sector has been proposed and a law drafted on public project delegation
and management.
35.
Outcome 11 - Gender inequity reduced, as evidenced by improved girls’ access to
education and health service - has so far been partially achieved. The Basic Education Project
and the EFA-FTI FTI-Basic Education Support Project contributed in rising only slightly
girls’ Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) in primary education. The Institutional Strengthening &
Health Sector Program on the other hand significantly improved women’s access to health
services – essentially in terms of births attended by skilled medical personnel and ante-natal
coverage. Outcome 12 - An effective food security and social protection strategy in place - was
achieved regarding Food Security but there has been only limited progress on Social Security.
The first Emergency Food Security Project successfully helped mitigate the impact of the 2008
food crisis. The second Emergency Food Security Project has made great strides in reducing
Niger’s vulnerability to shocks and increasing income of the poor. Monitoring of food price and
national food security stock is effective and the capacity for preparation and implementation of
the institutions in the Food Crisis Prevention and Management Framework has been reinforced.
Targeted programs for cash transfer and cash for work have been launched and a comprehensive
safety net system is being established with the Safety Net Project. But implementation of policy
reforms for the pension system has barely begun under the GPRC2 and Financial Sector TA
project.
36.
Outcome 13. Government and farmers are better prepared to deal with natural disasters
by mitigating risks - achieved. The Avian Flu Prevention Component of the CAP1 established a
network that can be used against various epidemic diseases. The Africa Emergency Locust
Project established an Early Warning and Response system and a National Unit for Locust
Control. A National Contingency Plan is operational and adequate for response to draught/food
emergencies. The CAP1/2 introduced improved Sustainable Land Management (SLM) practices.
The West Africa Agriculture Productivity project will support adoption of improved technologies.
Cross Cutting Issue 1: Reducing the Rate of Population Growth

37.
Outcome 14: increased awareness of family planning. Partially achieved and further
progress expected. PRODEM has strengthened Niger's capacity to address the demographic
challenge by building the government capacity in designing and implementing a nationwide
multi-sector population program, increasing general awareness on population and reproductive
health issues. It has helped strengthen substantially the supply of, and demand for, family
planning and reproductive health services and contributed increasing demand for planning
services and the modern contraceptives prevalence.
Cross Cutting Issue 2: Promoting Good Governance.

38.
Outcome 15. Strengthen economic governance and capacity to implement and monitor
reforms. Partially achieved and further PFM progress under way. GPRG1 and GPRC2 and the
Reform Management & TA project have led to steady progress on the front of PEMFAR reforms,
including fiscal resource mobilization, enhanced budget preparation, execution and control using
PEFA methodology to evaluate progress and performance, and preparation of MTEFs. The public
procurement system has also notably improved with a more transparent and effective control of
contract awards. The Bank’s efforts in supporting Niger's adhesion to the EITI to promote good
59

governance in the extractive industries have borne fruit. Niger’s compliance with EITI standards
and principles was assessed as highly satisfactory allowing Niger to completed EITI validation in
2011.
39.
The CAS results matrix did not set forth specific outcomes for the regional operations in
Niger, three operations concentrated essentially under the Pillar 143. These are programs that
clearly contribute significantly to Niger’s growth. The specific development objectives of these
operations have or are in the process of being met as detailed in Annex 2.

Bank Performance
40.
The performance of the Bank is assessed as moderately satisfactory as a combination of
satisfactory for the design of the CAS and moderately satisfactory for the implementation of the
program. The design of the CAS program was well aligned with Niger’s development priorities
and the Government’s strategy laid out in PRSP-II. It was well clustered around two pillars and
two cross-cutting themes, with a clear objective to maximize impact and enhance synergy, and
while at the same time coping with the Bank’s overarching concern – possibly excessive in the
specific case of Niger - to reduce fragmentation. Starting with the guiding principle that it was
essential for Niger to break with its history of slow economic growth that was not keeping up
with a fast population increase, the program rightly stressed first the need for: (i) accelerated and
sustained growth that is equally shared; and (ii) developing human capital through equal access to
quality social services. With its two cross-cutting filters the program adequately stressed the
essential importance of addressing demographic issues and emphasized the fourth PRSP pillar
devoted to governance. Finally, the CAS rightly focused on food security, reducing vulnerability,
and rural development, given the severe food crises that critically affect Niger on recurrent basis.
Yet the selection of indicators proved difficult to measure the achievements of the program in an
unstable country context. The political instability from 2009 to 2011 and subsequent OP.7.30
were missed opportunity to complete a CAS Progress Report where the whole Program could
have been adjusted.
41.
The planned CAS assistance was selective and focused on actions where the Bank has a
comparative advantage, taking into account other donor programs. The CAS kept a significant
continuity with the ongoing reform programs. It refrained from evolving into a much stronger
budget support approach that would probably have been more risky with little additional benefits.
The areas of engagement were all highly relevant. It is likely that a broad Civil Service reform
program could have been premature and would most probably not have worked in the context
prevailing in 2008-2010. The Bank instead undertook to proceed with a more conservative
approach focused on PFM and capacity building in many sectors. A more ambitious and broad
approach on that front will nevertheless be crucial in the next CAS. The only apparent
shortcoming in the program was the decision44 to not to support the energy sector, except for very
limited AAA activities (which eventually were not even carried out during the CAS). The
unfortunate absence of the Bank from this sector - not covered by EITI - was not compensated by
43

The West Africa Productivity Program, the Emergency Locust project and the Niger River Basin Multi-Purpose
Water Resources Development project.
44
The country team’s original plans for staying engaged in energy were dropped following a lukewarm reaction by the
Government then in place and Bank management’s strong recommendation to make the CAS program more selective.
The negative experience with the failed attempts in 2004-2006 to privatize the power utility and petroleum products
distribution company under the unsuccessful Privatization and Regulatory TA project had also some influence on this
decision.
60

adequate comprehensive support by other donors. A swift and major re-engagement of the Bank
in the next CAS directly in this crucial sector is warranted, given Niger’s extreme dependence on
electrical power imports on one hand and its major hydropower development potential on the
other, the increasingly poor performance and difficult financial situation of the state-owned
utility, the fast recent development of its oil production and refining industry coupled with the
related probable surge of Government revenues, the major needs of the country in terms of rural
electrification, renewable energy at large and other environment friendly domestic fuel source.
The program was also weak on the ICT front.
42.
The mix of instruments was well balanced between SILs, SWAps and DPOs, plus two
emergencies operations. The two multi-sectoral DPOs had an important impact through strong
synergies with specific parallel sector operations and solid analytical underpinning from sector
operations and self-standing AAA. The choice of outcome indicators for the results matrix was
generally adequate: almost all could be measured properly. The targets were generally realistic
and were aligned on the specific targets of the operations except in a few instances. The CAS
report was correct in identifying risks – particularly political conflict, exogenous shocks and
related food security risks. The approaches to help mitigate the last two types of risks have been
chosen correctly: supporting diversification of Niger’s economy with various programs to reduce
vulnerability to such risks, and using flexibility in RDA projects and budget support operations to
help respond swiftly to the shock-induced crises.
43.
The CAS program was more realistic than the Government PRSP-II in terms of GDP
growth. The fact that the high order PRSP growth targets and poverty reduction objectives were
not achieved during the CAS is not a negative indicator of the quality of the CAS program and of
the Bank’s performance. It reflects more the magnitude of the shocks Niger had to face and over
optimism in setting the PRSP targets, and the low volume of donors’ financial support. That
support has been insufficient during the last 10 years when compared to major funding needs of
Niger, which is listed in recent studies as one of the countries identified as “aid orphans”45.
44.
During this CAS the Bank was particularly responsive: first by having a pro-active and
balanced stance after the political events trigger the application of OP 7.30 and it became
essential to rapidly reengage the new authorities; and second immediately thereafter by being
flexible in adjusting the program to changing country circumstances and priorities, and by
responding swiftly to its needs. As shown by the DPOs and the other operations prepared and
approved during 2010-2011, the Bank was swift in reengaging and efficient in helping Niger deal
with very challenging circumstances and mitigates the effects of the successive shocks. Bank
regional management as well as the country team devoted considerable efforts and demonstrated
a high degree of flexibility in this crucial reengagement. The Bank’s reengagement had also
significant impact by leveraging reengagement of many of Niger’s other partners. The highly
satisfactory stance of the Bank during the 2009-2011 can be considered as best practice. Overall
also during the whole CAS period the Bank has acted in balanced manner in addressing the acute
short-term crisis concerns while maintaining a focus on long-term accelerated and shared growth
and the necessary reforms it entails. Yet the Bank failed to conduct a CAS Progress Report as
initially envisaged to adjust the CAS to new country context.
45.
The Bank’s teams and management paid strong attention to the implementation of the
operations46 as shown by the quality of portfolio: only one project47 was rated MU for DPO or IP
45

OECD-DAC: AID ORPHANS: October 2011; and CFP Working Paper Series No. 7 Robert Utz September, 2010.
Albeit some ISRs focusing exceedingly on implementation issues did not pay sufficient attention to development
outcomes and monitoring of indicators. Sector managers’ attention was in some cases not well focused on DPOs.

46

61

by August 31, 2011. Disappointing outcomes in the financial sector reflect more the flaws in
overall project design than persistently insufficient attention during implementation.
Disbursements understandably fell in 2009 and picked-up fast thereafter48. By August 31, 2011
the outstanding portfolio amounted to US$411 million with a cumulated disbursement ratio of
18%. Overall supervision of execution of the program was reinforced through increased
decentralization of implementation to the Niamey office (particularly during the 2009-2010
periods). Concern for effectiveness and focus on development outcomes was generally adequate
and well documented in the detailed Annex 2 on operations. Seven out of the 17 non DPL
operations under implementation during the CAS period were restructured, of which three during
the CAS period itself. M&E was still weak in some operations and special efforts were
undertaken to correct those in most operations in the course of their implementation. The need to
do better on M&E was again stressed with the 2011 CPPR (given the 2009-2010 events, there
was no other CPPR since the 2008 one). Some of the Bank teams failed to follow on CAS
outcome indicators not directly derived from their operations. No special CAS implementation
plan was designed for specific follow up of the CAS results framework by the country team.
46.
The impact of most knowledge based AAA activities on the dialogue with the authorities
was generally significant and followed rapidly in the development of the portfolio of operations.
The country team reengaged proactively with the authorities after 2009, and particularly with the
new elected Government, to support them in the design and implementation of their new program
and provide necessary facts and policy analysis with the April 2011 sector policy notes on 14
sectors. It is too early to assess the full impact of those notes. The Bank together with other
donors devoted continuous efforts to advancing the PFM agenda.
47.
As shown by the co-financing or parallel financing mobilized for about one third of the
new CAS operations, the Bank has been successful in leveraging assistance from other donors.
Efforts were particularly dedicated to increase donor coordination in budget support and PFM,
health, water, transport and education sectors. The opinion of the majority of the Nigerien
counterparts and of the donors - based on recent interviews - is that the Bank generally met
expectations in terms of responsiveness, efficacy in almost all areas of intervention, coordination
with other donors and leadership in key areas.

Key lessons learned and suggestions for the new CAS
48.
First the strongest impact is achieved when multi-sectoral DPOs are delivered in parallel
with sectoral operations, creating substantial synergies. And particularly so in areas where
reforms are difficult and need sustained commitment and actions from the Government. An
optimum strategic approach to help achieve CAS (and more broadly PRSP) objectives rely in a
mutually reinforcing combination of investment and development policy support and AAA. A
balanced mix of DPOs, investment and TA operations, and AAA, carefully tailored to the
country’s needs and particularly capacity is essential.
49.
Second, for a country like Niger budget support plays an important role in buttressing the
functioning of government: predictable and sustained budget support plays a bigger role in Niger
47

The PRODEX. Its ratings were upgraded after the subsequent supervision mission.
From US$91 and 83 million in 2007-08, disbursements dropped to US$ 23million in 2009, and increased to US$
million in 2010 and 2011.
48

62

than in countries with a higher revenue base and less external stress. A programmatic DPO
approach plays an important role in keeping the reform agenda on track and mobilizing the
Government on cross-cutting issues in an environment of frequent external shocks and instability.
50.
Third, the strong impact of a long-term Bank involvement in specific areas has been
confirmed once more. Long term involvement in one area – spanning two to three CAS periods and substantial partner support by Bank, reinforces Government commitment and incentives for
changes. It is key to have deep and long lasting development (especially transformational) impact
(for example water, PFM, RDA). This argues in favor of the Bank pursuing its engagement in a
number of areas where much remains to be done and re-engaging in sectors it left “too soon”.
Even more so as the Bank is often perceived as an “honest broker”, many donors are more willing
to engage in a sector when the Bank is involved: this also increase leverage for change.
51.
Fourth, supporting a country that is highly vulnerable and prone to frequent shocks
requires a balanced approach, addressing swiftly the critical short-term crisis concerns while
maintaining a long-term focus on reforms necessary for reducing vulnerability and accelerating
growth.
52.
Fifth, addressing effectively gender and demographic issues is a challenging undertaking.
It requires a multi-sectoral and sustained approach over a long time horizon and underpinned by
sharp social-cultural-economic analysis and action. This undertaking should be forcefully
pursued. A lot remains to be done in Niger – taking into account cultural legacy and sensitivities.
53.
An approach which gives an overarching importance to selectivity may not be the most
appropriate for Niger. Considering Niger’s per-capita ODA receipts that are among the lowest
(US$38) in the sub-region, its very low HDI and per capita income, its very high funding needs
Niger clearly appears to be under-aided (a finding consistent with that of recent studies on aid
orphans). In addition, its high vulnerability to external shocks – commodity prices, climatic and
political (including in the neighboring countries), Niger could also be qualified as a fragile state.
Paradoxically other sub-Saharan countries have managed to attract more support from donors,
including TA and thereby benefit also from more external technical expertise than Niger. The
Bank has unique role to play, not only in funding but also as a knowledge Bank and through is
convening power. This argues for a presence of the Bank in all sectors where key and difficult
reforms are urgent and/or massive investments are needed. The energy sector is a case in point.
54.
The last two CAS put the emphasis on addressing rural development, increasing the
production and productivity in agriculture to bring the population out of the rural poverty trap.
With several operations, the overall weight of RDA in the portfolio may appear too high, but the
performance of the recent projects could indicate that the new approaches followed during the last
ten years are a last yielding significant positive results49. An ex-post evaluation of all major
RDA projects in Niger over the last 15-20 years, with a correlative analysis with climatic
changes, should be a very informative AAA. It would help sharpen the focus of new RDA
operations, inform the preparation of future climate mitigation actions, and indicate which new
approaches should be mainstreamed in the next phases of Niger’s Rural Development Strategy.
55.
Based on current trends, Niger is unlikely to reach most of the MDGs except three – child
mortality, HIV/AIDS and non-access to safe water. Niger faces the insidious risk of a sluggish
growth – where growth stalls at around the still high rate of population growth and poverty
decreases only slowly. A higher and steady average growth rate of 5 percent and beyond will be
49

Agriculture GDP appears to have grown by about 3.6%/annum between 2007 and 2011, despite the shocks.
63

necessary, coupled with a steady reduction of population growth. A simultaneous challenge is
that of employment creation – also as a means to avoid conflict and violence. Reducing Niger’s
vulnerability – in particular getting its rural population out of the “vulnerability to climate
shocks” trap – is paramount. To address all those challenges, Niger should not just rely on
windfall benefits from its growing extractive industries, but primarily scale-up the productivity in
the agriculture sector and diversify its economy, in an environment conducive to private-sector
led growth – as well formal private as informal private sector.
56.
Niger may now be at a turning point for significant changes – with significant
opportunities and risks. On the one hand, in addition to growing uranium exports, oil production
and refining should generate additional revenues for the Government. It is essential that the oil
sector be subject to the same transparency50 as uranium mining and that PFM be further
strengthened to translate increased government revenues into growth enhancing and poverty
reducing programs. On the other hand, climate change is likely to further affect negatively
Niger’s agriculture and non-mineral natural resources.
57.
The Bank is expected to help the Government articulate the new 2012-2015 PRSP on
which the next CAS should be aligned. For the next CAS program, the Bank engagement should
be comprehensive with activities boosting sustained and inclusive economic growth and
employment generation, reducing vulnerability to climate change and other external shocks and
volatility of growth (i.e. diversification of the economy) and enhancing good governance. A
balanced approach, based on basically similar mix of DPOs and investments operation as in the
2008-2011 CAS should be appropriate. The new P4R could be introduced a pilot in selected areas
- possibly food security and related aspects of RDA.
58.
Niger is likely to benefit from higher levels of external financing (IDA and other
partners) as well as more revenues generated from its natural resources. Absorptive capacity
constraints will be more significantly felt unless major efforts are urgently devoted all across the
board to modernize the administration, starting with the human resources. Short of a dedicated
broad Civil Services Reform program/project all future Bank operations should include a strong
component/approach to address the capacity problems in Niger’s administration.

50

Including monitoring all revenues that should accrue to the State and the proper costing of refined fuel products; and
ensuring the adoption of an adequate pricing policy of those products on the domestic market.
64

65

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS

CAS PILLAR 1: Accelerating Sustainable Growth that is equitably shared
PRSP Pillar 1: Achieve strong, diversified and job-creating growth
Outcome 1. Maintain
macroeconomic stability during
the CAS period

Partially Achieved

Lending

Overall fiscal balance: +1.5 (2008); -5.5 (2009); -2.5 (2010 est.); 3.6 (2011 proj.).

GPRG-1: Approved 3/26/2009,
closed 6/30/2010. Supports PFM
action plan, clearing arrears to
private enterprises. Build
confidence in financial system:
the amount corresponding to
CNE’s frozen deposits (FCFA5.7
billion) were deposited in
Treasury account at BCEAO.
Assessed as successful in
preparation of new 2012 DPO.

Indicators:
Inflation: 11.3 (2008); 1.1 (2009); 0.9 (2010); 3.7 (2011 proj).
1. Overall fiscal deficit
(commitment basis, including
grants) averages about 3%.of GDP
2 Inflation contained within
WAEMU convergence criteria
(<3%).
3. Ratio of internal debt arrears to
GDP reduced from 9% to 5% of
GDP.

CFAF 2.5 billion of arrears to private enterprise cleared under
GPRG-1. Also GPRG-1 supported the move to an electronic
processing of payables allowing private operators working with
public services to be paid in a more transparent way and faster (less
than 10 days now instead of 1 month)
Milestones reached
-Adequate macroeconomic performance evidenced by successful
implementation of the PRGF supported program. The three-year
ECF approved 2008 lapsed in June 2011 but without completing the
last three reviews, in the 2009-10 context of political turmoil. IMF
has initiated discussion on a new program with the new Government
of Niger (GoN) in May 2011.
- Continued implementation of the PFM reform Priority Action Plan
under GPRG1 and GPRC-2

66

GPRC-2: Approved 6/23/2011;
closing 6/30/2012. Supports
pursuing PFM action plan and
action on FINAPOSTE. GoN
initiated the second phase of the
return to depositors of their
deposits in the CNE and has
returned more than 68% of the
amount outstanding; and. GPRC2 Assessed as successful in

For a fragile country like Niger,
with low income and domestic
revenue, budget support plays an
important role in supporting the
functioning
of
government.
Predictable and sustained budget
support plays a bigger role in Niger
than in countries with a higher
revenue base and less external
stress.
A programmatic DPO approach
plays an important role in keeping
the reform agenda on track, in an
environment of frequent external
shocks and instability. In the 20092011 context of political disruption
and external shocks that claimed
much of the attention of policy
makers, the GPRCs were an
important tool for sustaining the
momentum of a number of
structural reforms supported by
these operations. The financial
support provided in 2010-2011
through GPRG-1 and GPRC-2 has
been critical in allowing

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Outcome 2. Strengthen
competitiveness of supply chains
Indicators
1. Export value of three major
Agro-pastoral supply chains
increased by 15%, from $170 M
(2006) to $195 M (2011).
2 Areas under irrigation increased
as a percentage of irrigation
potential, from 27% (2008) to 30%
(2011) – a 10% increase,
.

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS
government to maintain macroeconomic and fiscal stability in the
face of multiple pressures
emanating from the political and
food crises.

-FINAPOSTE restructured: instead following Bank’s best advice,
GoN has abandoned the creation and operationalization of
FINAPOSTE and adopted a detailed action plan prepared by Niger
Poste to seek a partnership with a commercial bank and/or a
company offering mobile banking services. Confidence in financial
since being rebuilt with second phase of CNE frozen deposits. 68.8
percent of the outstanding amount claimed by depositors and repaid
by February 2011.

preparation of new 2012 DPO.

PER/PEMFAR II

During the critical 2010-11 period
as the IMF program had been
interrupted, the DPOs were key in
ensuring that the macro situation
stayed on track.

Partially Achieved and likely to be fully achieved soon

Lending

Under PRODEX : (i) value of marketed products in the selected
supply chains by project supported producers estimated to have
increased by 16% on average (against a EOP target of 25%) ; (ii)
Incremental volumes of marketed selected products by project
supported producers have reached 8% (against a target of 15%).

.Agro-Pastoral Export and Market
Development Project PRODEX.
Approved 3/26/2009; closing
4/30/2014. PDO & IP now rated
MS.
Private Irrigation Project. (PIP)
approved 3/19/2002; closed
12/31/2008. Outcome: HS.
Community Action Program 1
(CAP1) with GEF. Approved
3/20/2003; closed 12/31/2010.
Avian Flu prevention component
added in 2008. Outcomes rated S.

During the implementation of
CAP-1, partnership agreements
have been established with 5
donors. The majority of
development partners viewed CAP1 as one of the most successful
projects ever implemented in Niger
and became more interested in
supporting the local development
program of the RDS& Action Plan.
This created an opportunity to
build a programmatic approach and
implement the Paris declaration on
harmonization.

PIP increased irrigated areas by 7% (5,491 ha) and consolidated
about 14% (10,904 ha) of existing irrigated areas. Incremental
production feeding 24,000 families. Under PRODEX another
irrigated 843 ha created/or rehabilitated (out of 2000 ha) sofar.
Milestones reached:
Accelerated Growth Strategy is finalized and under implementation,
with focus on four growth clusters (rural dev; artisans; tourism, and
mining) identified in PRSP and in DTIS. An Operational Action

67

Financial Sector TA (see outcome 4)

AAA

Community Action Program 2
(CAP2) + GEF. Approved

Setting up decentralized,
participatory, and transparent
financing mechanisms are
necessary to have community
/commune development plans and

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Outcome 3. Strengthen
sustainable management of
natural resources to reduce
vulnerability to desertification
Indicator
15,000-25,000 hectares of land
reclaimed and protected

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )
Plan for major export crops was elaborated, including on the basis of
the DTIS and under implementation. PRODEX supports
development of 6 selected supply chains for export .Strategic Plan
for agricultural export promotion (mobilizing public and private
financial/human resources) was prepared and under implementation.
Local Investment Fund (LIF) resources have been transferred to
commune budgets to finance micro-projects, including land and
natural resources management. Under development plans prepared
by CAP1 178 communities, of which 75% implemented at least 5
micro-projects. 1,546 micro-projects implemented with LIF.
Under CAP2 11,045 had reclaimed & protected so far
- Sustainable land management Country Investments Strategic
framework prepared with UNDP and IFAD and targeted investments
underway by CAP2, UNDP and IFAD operations

-Outcomes 4. strengthen the
investment climate and support
entrepreneurship

Achieved regarding investment climate. But financial sector
reform and development objectives only partially achieved.

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome
8/29/2008; closing 4/30/2013.
PDO now rated S and IP MS.
AAA
-Diagnostic Trade Integration
Study (DTIS)
- Irrigation Development
Impact of SLM programs on land
management and poverty
PER of rural sector with a focus
on Sustainable Land Management
-Policy notes on rural
development and agriculture, and
climate change.

Lending
GPRG-1 and GPRC-2

Indicators

Recent data on private investments and contribution of informal
sector to GDP are not available.

(i) -private investments as share of
GDP up from 16% to 20%;
(ii) -contribution of informal sector
(non-agric) to GDP declines from
35% to 30%

Financial Sector TA: Project ICR concludes that:
(iii) intermediation cost margins decreased to 8.3 percent as of
December 2010 but bank’s profitability did not improve.(by
December 2010, the ratio of profits over loan portfolio was 10.3
percent); (iv) Share of private sector credit to GDP increased to 14.

68

Financial Sector TA. Approved
2/19/2004; closed o12/31/ 2010.
Outcome: MU, despite substantial
progress made in building capacity in
ministries, financial sector and
microfinance institutions (MFIs),
insurance companies, banks contributing to increased customer

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS
to implement an ambitious number
of micro-projects in such a large
country as Niger.
In promoting environmental
improvements and SLM practices,
it is necessary to understand the
local people and their habits,
concerns, and priorities. To get
people interested in such long-term
matters as natural resource
management and environmental
protection, it is absolutely
necessary to them with concrete
incentives should be provided and
perhaps be more “supply-driven”.

The scope of Financial TA project
was too ambitious vis-à-vis
implementation capacity of the
Government. By covering 3
different subsectors around 5 main
components under weak
implementation arrangement,
achievement of DO was almost
unattainable. Reforms such as
postal services reforms called not
only for government commitment
but also for active consensus-

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

(iii) -cost of credit reduced with
spread between lending and deposit
rates down from 9.2% in 2007 to
7% (WAEMU avg)
(iv) private sector credit to GDP
increased from 9.09% in 2007 to
13%

% by December 2010; financial depth (M2/GDP) improved from
15.8 % in 2004 to 21.9% percent.
- Total number of MFI members and clients, and the value of deposit
accounts in MFIs increased by threefold

PRSP2 Indicator
Niger’s Doing Business ranking for
quality of business environment
improves to 100th.

51

Milestones partly reached:
-Business tax was reduced from 35% to 30% as incentive for
businesses to become formal (GPRC-2)
-Arrears to private sector cleared and FINAPOSTE liquidated and
being replaced under better alternative (see Outcome 1)
-GPRC-2: Cost of starting business reduced51 (registration duties
lowered); number of procedures for establishment reduced to9; one
stop shop established.
– New Investments Code and new Charta for SMEs prepared
- But the number of road check points (and related costs for
transporting goods) not reduced.
- Civil and Commercial Procedures Code not yet amended; but
studies on collateral, computerization of trade and credit registries
done, feeding into action plan.
-Microfinance Regulatory and Supervisory Agency created and
operational with Financial Sector TA Project
- Financial Sector Strategy and Action Plan drafted (under FIRST)
and to be adopted as prior action to 2012 DPO.
- Ordinance issued setting out the general framework for PPPs and
decree adopted establishing the minimum clauses for simplifying

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome
satisfaction.

AAA
- Financial Sector Strategy and
Action Plan (FIRST).
- Doing business

Between 2008 and 2010 time for starting a business dropped from 19 to 17 days and cost from 170 to 119 % of income/capita.

69

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS
building to ensure buy-in by key
stakeholders. The technical
underpinnings of the project
provided little guidance on the way
the envisioned institutional reforms
should be crafted. In its financial
services component (postal
banking reform) case, further
analysis was necessary to inform
the team on the most adequate
choice and instead the team relied
on a one size fits all approach.
TA projects aimed at supporting
complex reforms need to be
complemented by DPO from the
start.
Access to finance still needs major
and fast improvement. Less than 1
percent of the rural population has
bank account/uses banking
services. Judicial system continues
to be a barrier to access to financial
services. Government needs to give
its final approval to and start
implementation of the Financial
Sector strategy and action plan in
2012.

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS
Preparation of a new investment
code started in 2008. However, its
finalization and adoption of the
new investment code has been
delayed due to the political
developments and as the authorities
are waiting for the issuing of
WAMEU directives on investment
codes. The new code would be
finalized & adopted in 2012

procedures for PPP contracts.
2012 DB still ranks Niger 173th out of 183 countries despite other
progress (on dealing with construction permits and resolving
insolvency): but “distance to frontier” has been reduced: in terms of
cumulative change over 5 last years, Niger ranks 53rd among 173
countries.

PRSP Pillar 5: Equip the country with economic infrastructure to promote growth and improve access to social services
Outcome 5. Strengthen economic
infrastructure to promote
growth, access to services and
regional synergies

Partially Achieved for transport and Not achieved for energy.

Lending

With TSPSP: (i) rural access in project areas reached 36% in 2009.
(ii) transport time Balleyara to Banibangou decreased from 9 hours
to 5 (2009); (iii) 600 out of 1056 km of road rehabilitated so far

Transport Sector Program Support
Project: (TSPSP) Approved
7/03/2007; closing 1/31/2013. PDO
rated MS and IP S

Indicators (transport):
‐Proportion of population living
within 2 km of all-weather roads
has increased from 33% to 36% in
project area; transport time
decreased by 2 hours from
Balleyara to Banibangou, and 30
minutes from Maradi to
Madarounfa; 1056 km of road
maintained/rehabilitated under

Increased spending on road maintenance has resulted in an increase
in the share of the road network in good condition: in 2009, 51 % of
bituminous roads and 27.5 % of non-bituminous roads were in good
condition, compared to 41 and 16 % in 2001, respectively.
Milestones: about to be reached

GPRG-1 and GPRC-2
Niger Basin Water Resources
Development. PDO and IP rated MS

AAA-Diagnostic Trade
Integration Study

Transport: Increased revenues mobilized for maintenance by
CAFER reached FCFA 4.7 actual versus 7bn target in 2009. Under
GPRC-2 the budget was increased to 6 billion in 2010 and 7 billion

70

Road maintenance is improving.
But frequent road barriers, non
competitive practices in trucking
(particularly for access to sea
transport), and overloading of
trucks, are still challenges to be
addressed. Measures to reduce
those practices need to be
addressed at the sub-regional level
through collaboration of the
countries involved (with support of
a regional DPO).

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators
project

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS

2011.
Energy: three hydropower units in Kainji not yet rehabilitated (to
provide Niger a supply of low cost energy) but works about to start.

CAS PILLAR 2: Develop Human Capital and Promote Equal Access to Quality Social Services
PRSP Pillar 2: Equitable access to quality social services
Outcome 6: Access to basic
education is increased and
quality improved
Indicators
‐Gross primary enrollment rate
(GER) increased from 57%
(2006/07) to 70% by 2011
- Girls’ Gross primary enrollment
rate increased from 47% (2006/07)
to 63% (2011)
- Primary completion rate increased
from 43% (2006/07) to 59% (2011)
-Skills development strategy is
under implementation

Partially achieved with further progress under way

Lending-

With BEP and EFA-FTI Project so far: (i) Gross primary enrollment
rate reached 76% (2011); (ii) Girls’ Gross primary enrollment rate
increased from actual 42.7% (2006/07) to 44% (2011); (iii) Primary
completion rate increased from actual 45,8% (2006/07) to 51%
(2011). But skills development strategy only recently updated.

Basic Education Project (BEP)

Milestones: partially reached
- Improve gross enrollment rate specifically in Diffa and Zinder by
10% (not detailed in ISR); but GER in rural areas at large increased
from 58.9% in 2008/09 to 67% in 2010/2011.
- School Management Committees have been sensitized to
importance of girls’ education (training): IEC campaign underway in
23 areas with low girls’ education
.
- Share of schools with sanitation facilities up from 20% in 06/07 to
30% in 2010: not measured: But additional number students in
schools with latrines 19,000 (to reach 164,000 end of LUIP)

71

Approved 7/17/2003; closed
12/31/2009. Outcome rated S.
EFA-FTI Basic Education Support.
Approved 7/09/2009; closing
5/31/2012. PDO rated S and IP MS
Local Urban Infrastructure
Development Project. (LUIDP)

One Key consideration in BAP
preparation was to simplify the
design to increase chances of
success. The project and its
components were designed to be
easily implemented by the MOE in
partnership with other stakeholders
in the sector. Areas in which there
were innovations were first pilot
tested before being taken to scale;
substantial training and TA
provided to ensure that the required
capacity was in place.

GPRG-1 and GPRC-2
The Bank led substantial analytical
work in collaboration with other
partners in preparation of the
project. Bank input was
instrumental in the dialogue with
Government on policy and
program issues and played a major

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Outcome 7: Improved access of
the rural population to basic
health and nutrition services

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )
-Reduce to less than 10% the primary educ. repetition rate: pass rate
increased from 83.6% in 2007/08 to 86.6% in 2010/2011.
-Finalize and publish the results of PETS (education); done
-Develop a skills development strategy linking education and
training systems: done with IDA skills development study.

AAA -

Achieved

Lending

1. Number of children sleeping under treated mosquito nets
increased from 23% (2006 DHS) to 83% (2010).

Institutional Strengthening & Health
Sector Program (ISHSP) Approved
1/05/2006; closed 6/30/2011.
Designed under a SWAp. Outcome
rated S.

Indicators
1. Number of children sleeping under
treated mosquito nets increased from
68% (2007) to 80% (2011)
2. Breastfeeding increased from 23%
(2008) to 43% (2011).
3. Coverage of prenatal care increased
from 41% (2008) to 53% (2011)
4.-Births attended by skilled medical
personnel increased from 20% (2008) to

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

Indicators 2 not measured under the ISHSP.
3. Antenatal coverage increased from 42% (2006) to 88% (2011)
4.Attended births increased from 16% (2008) to 38% (2011)
5 Infant mortality reduced from 81/1000 (2006) to 63/1000 (2010)
6. Under 5 mortality reduced from 198/1000 (2006) to 130.5/1000 (2010
7. Maternal mortality reduced from 648/100,000 (2006) to 554/100,000
(2010)
8. Percentage of Population with access to facilities increased from 41.5%
(2005) to 49.4% (2010)

72

-Skills Development study
- PETS Education

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS
role in fostering harmonization
among partners.
While primary education system is
improving, Niger’s Technical and
Vocational Training (TVET)
suffers from a number of problems
which are reflected in limited
access and poor quality. It has
received little support from dnrs so
far. The government is currently
preparing a program to strengthen
the link between the education
system and needs of the company,
that will need urgent and
substantial support.

The SWAp in the health sector,
the first genuine one in Niger,
was successful and provided
the following lessons:

Avian Flu (AF to PAC)- -PAC 2

1. SWAPs need to carefully
balance expectations and
forward momentum.

AAA

2. Vision and leadership must
be continually present in order
to maintain momentum.

-PETS (health)

3. It is important with a

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators
25% (2011)

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )
9. Percentage of health centers staffed with agreed norms: increased from
57.5% (2006) to 70.5% (2010)

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome
- Policy note on health financing
- Health CSR updated

Additional ISHSP Indicators
Milestones –partially reached.
5. Infant mortality reduced
6. Less than 5 mortality reduced
7. Maternal mortality reduced
8. Population with access to facilities
offering minimum health package.
9. Health centers staffed with agreed
norms.

Not reached: Institutionalize and scale up the case management of severe
acute malnutrition with efficient (community) screening and effective follow
up and preventive interventions.
New Milestones reached with ISHSP:
- operationalized the SWAp, with a common fund;
- strengthened decentralized planning, procurement, financial management
- established the framework for free health services for women and children
- drafting comprehensive Health Law
Other new milestone: Niger prepared and adopted a new Health Development
Plan 2011 and design also a Country partnership Agreement "Compact" for
the sector endorsed by all donors in April 2011

- Outcome 8: Improved coverage
and utilization of HIV prevention
services and treatment
Indicators
‐Increase number of infected people
receiving Anti-retroviral treatment
increased from 39% (2007/MAP ISR)
to 80% (2009/MAP)

Increase number of infected people receiving Anti-retroviral
treatment increased from 39% (2007) to 52% (2009).

Milestones – reached
-Percentage of women age 15-49 tested for HIV in past 12 months

73

Common Fund to keep the
flexibility and decentralized
procedures for the financial
resources. The Common Fund
did improve the response to
local needs. The flexible and
decentralized procedures used
to channel the funds raised
staff motivation, improved the
ownership and accountability
for the results achieved.

Lending
Multi-Sector HIV/AIDS program
Approved 4/04/2003; closed
6/30/2009. Outcome MU
HIV/AIDS support 2 Approved
4/26/2011; closing 6/30/2016.

Partially Achieved

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS

Locating overall responsibility for
the fight against HIV/AIDS outside
the MOH undermined ownership &
willingness of the MOH to
implement its HIV/AIDS activities,
It is inherently difficult to
accurately assess the time frame
and resources required to build the
necessary institutional capacity
needed to implement complex
projects in very low capacity
environments, thus increasing the
riskiness of any multi-sectoral
HIV/AIDS project significantly.,

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

For HIV/AIDS Support 2 the
response strategy was better
aligned with the modes of
transmission of the epidemic to
target high-risk groups, While in
Niger the overall HIV prevalence is
still low & stable the rates are
worrisome
among
high-risk
transmitters, and HIV/AIDS is
concentrated in high-risk groups .

increased from 40% to 61% (2009).
A permanent institutional framework for the fight against
STIs/HIV/AIDS established; policies and programs that continue to
guide the fight against HIV/AIDS put in place; MoH’s capacity to
deliver prevention, treatment, and mitigation services significantly
improved; substantial institutional development particularly at the
central and regional levels of both the public and NGO sectors.

Outcome 9. Increase access to
safe water and sanitation
Indicators as stated in CAS
- Urban water: increase access to
piped water from 70% (in 2007) to
77% (2011)
- Rural water: increase access to
safe water from 60% (in 2007) to
64% (2011)
Sanitation: increase access to
improved sanitation services from
15% in 2007 to 20% in 2011.

Achieved with further progress under way

Lending

- Urban water: access to safe water increased to 72% (est. 2009)
- Rural water: access to safe water increased to 62% (est. 2009)
‐ Sanitation: access to improved sanitation services reached 38% in
urban and 5% in rural areas respectively (est. 2009).

Water Sector Project Approved
5/31/2001; closed 12/31/2009.
Outcome S.
Urban Water and Sanitation
project Approved 4/26/2011;
closing 12/31/2015.

Milestones reached & Additional Indicators
Under Water Sector Project:
- Number of additional people receiving improved water services in
urban centers; 541,000 by 2009.
- Availability of water facilities increased from 52% to 78% in rural
areas covered by the project.
-Number of additional people receiving appropriate sanitation
services in peri-urban areas of Niamey: 120,000
- Financial equilibrium in the urban water sub-sector achieved 2006
to 2009.
- water supply is now continuous in urban centers covered by project

74

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS

Local Urban Infrastructure
Development Project
.

1. Private sector participation is a
feasible delivery option even in a
poor country like; 2. Cost recovery
can be achieved: improving the
efficiency of the water utility while
matching investment programs to
the real needs of the sector, has
helped achieving cost recovery
with tariff increases acceptable to
the population; 3. Tackling water
sector reform without the funding
of major investments can be risky
as the latter usually provide a
counterbalance to the political cost
of the reform.
Bank‘s role was critical for the
successful implementation of the
sector reform: (i) through its
catalyzing power to ensure that
other donors participate in project

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

preparation and funding; (ii) by
ensuring the soundness of the
operation because of its technical
credibility and past experience; and
(iii) by ensuring that governance
and fiduciary issues are properly
addressed

- unaccounted for water decreased from 20 percent to 15.3 percent
- 55 rural piped water systems rehabilitated; 41 managed by private
operators.
–new Sector Policy Letter adopted April 2011.

Outcome 10. Increased access of
urban residents to basic
infrastructure services,
particularly in disadvantaged
areas.
Indicators
Three cities are providing all-year
access to transportation, have
improved access to safe water
supply and sanitation for citizens

Partially achieved with further progress under way

Lending

Significant increase access to water and sanitation under the Water sector
project
So far under LUIDP, population in Niamey, Maradi, Dosso with access to
infrastructure services has increased by mid-2011 as follows:
- all-year access to transportation: 8,000 people in addition to 440,000 people
(2008)
- improved access to safe water supply: 2,400 people in addition to 631,000
people (2008)
- access to sanitation: additional .2,800 people

Local Urban Infrastructure
Development Project. Approved
5/29/2008. Closing 4/30/2015. PDO
and IP rated MS

Milestones reached

Urban Water and Sanitation
project

-Capacity of local & other governments to plan, program, deliver and
maintain infrastructure and services in the 3 cities improved;
-national framework proposed for public intervention in the urban sector,
including a mechanism to transfer resources to local governments;
-a law drafted on public project management and delegation, including t
application by-laws to set up the legal framework that will allow institutions
other than Public Work Agency NIGETIP perform public project
management and clarify roles of actors in the provision of public
infrastructures.

75

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS

Transport Sector Support
Program
Water Sector Project

WSP-AF

Lessons learned from LUIDP:
(i) selection of investments based
on a participatory approach is a
determinant
for
continued
adherence of local governments to
priorities defined even in a context
of
institutional
instability;
(ii)
supporting
investment
programs by capacity building
activities is critical in improving
sustainability.

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS

PRSP Pillar 4: Reduce Inequalities and Strengthen Social Protection for Vulnerable Groups
Outcome 11: Gender inequity
reduced as evidenced by
improved girls’ access education
and health services

Partially Achieved

Lending

‐ Girls’ Gross primary enrollment rate increased from actual 42.7%
(2006/07) to 44% (2011). And Girls’ share in primary enrollment
increased from 39.87% in 2002 to 43% in 2009.

Basic Education Project (BAP).

--Births attended by skilled medical personnel: ISHSP indicates it
increased from 16% in (2006) to 38% (2011). And ante-natal
coverage increased from 42% (2006) to 88% (2011)

Institutional Strengthening &
Health Sector Program

Indicators
‐Girls’ Gross primary enrollment
rate increased to 63% 2011
--Births attended by skilled medical
personnel increased from 20%
(2008/sectoral review 2007) to
25% (2011/MBB07)

EFA-FTI Education

Milestones and other indicators

BAP indicated that to promote
access to education for girls,
provision of school places is not
enough. Demand side issues also
need to be addressed. Targeted
interventions are needed to address
specific constraints. The use of
Alternative rural schools and the
tutoring programs for girls was
used effectively in this project

-Training to School Management Committees to raise awareness of
girl’s education provided
- Increase the share of schools equipped with sanitation facilities (not
measured but see Outcome 6).
– 72% of women among the 46,000 adults enrolled in literacy
classes under BAP

Outcome 12. An effective food
security and social protection
strategy is in place
Social security:
-Implementation of policy

Achieved regarding Food Security

Lending

A number of programs have been or are being implemented to reduce
vulnerability to shocks, increase income of the poor, mainly with the 2
Emergency Food Security Projects and the Safety net project:
- regular reporting food price and national food security stock achieved.
- capacity strengthened for preparation and implementation of sustainable
safety programs established with the Food Crisis Coordination Unit

Financial Sector TA
GPRC-2

76

Emergency Food Security Project
(EFSP) Approved 8/26/2008;

While being an emergency
operation, the EFSP was used to
move forward the longstanding
agenda for developing safety nets
in Niger, a country which needed a
comprehensive and long-term
response to recurrent food crises
and chronic food insecurity. High

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators
reforms for the pension system,
including parametric reforms,
has begun
Food security
-Implementation of policies that
help to reduce vulnerability to
shocks, increase income of the
poor, and improve efficiency of
grain markets

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

(CCA)/other bodies involved in the Food Crisis Prevention and Management
Framework FCPMF /National Body for Prevention and management of food
crisis.
-Government started implementing pilot cash transfer
program in 2010 based on sales of fertilizers under EFSP1.
– under the Safety Net Project targeted programs for cash transfer and cash
for work have been launched and comprehensive safety net system being
established.

closed 6/30/2009. Outcome S

Partial progress for Social Security

2nd Emergency Food Security
Project Approved 1/24/2011;
closing 11/29/ 2013.

Implementation of policy reforms for the pension system has begun: actuarial
study and audit of CNSS completed and proposes options for the
restructuring of the pension systems. Government has increased employer &
employee contribution to the private sector pension fund, in order to ensure
its short term viability.(with reductions in the contribution to the family
allowance scheme and a reduction in salary taxes). Furthermore, CNSS was
restructured and employer, employee, and beneficiary files cleaned up.
Agreement on a comprehensive reform plan for the pension system now
requires tripartite negotiations

Milestones Reached
- Joint Government-Donors’ Food Crisis Prevention and Management
Framework (FCPMF) provides efficient early warning system.
- Government developing in 2011 a new agenda on food security under the
3N concept (Nigeriens feed Nigeriens), and created a High Commissioner for
its implementation, along with an Emergency Irrigation Program 2011-2012
in response to 2011 food crisis and for returnees from Libya/ Cote d’Ivoire.

77

Safety Net Project Approved
5/19/2011; closing on 6/30/2017.
DPO and IP rated S.

AAA
- Food Security and Safety Net
study
- Pension reform study

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS
level commitment, by the Bank and
Government was instrumental in
increasing effectiveness and speed
of preparing emergency operations.
The simple design of the project
(focusing on responding to the
Government's short-term priority
and to the urgent needs of the
beneficiaries) was a key factor in
the project's success.
The Bank has been playing and
continues to play a key role as a
source of knowledge with global
experience with safety nets
systems, bringing innovation and
with a strong convening power. As
a catalyst it facilitates essentials
discussions on the social protection
strategy

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators
Outcome 13. Government and
farmers are better prepared to
deal with natural disasters such
as locust surge, drought, avian
flu by mitigating risks
Indicators
‐ functioning early warning system
is in place
-earmarked resources in GoN
annual budget
-Gum Arabic planted and/or
protected areas increased from
7800 ha (2008) to 22,000 ha (2011)

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

Partially Achieved

Lending

As results of CAP1 Avian Flu Prevention Component: large network of
entities/agents established. It can also be used against other epidemic
diseases

Additional Financing to Mitigate
Avian Influenza (CAP1).
Approved 11/2007

At closing of regional Africa Emergency Locust Project, in Niger: Early
Warning and Response system effective; National Unit of Locust Control
operational; Risk Management Plan RMP finalized; key infrastructures being
finalized.

Africa Emergency Locust Project
(regional). Approved 12/16/2204;
closed 5/31/2011.

National Contingency Plan, including emergency plans and safety nets, is
operational and adequate for response to draught/food emergencies. But no
specific earmarked resources in Niger’s annual budget.
-Hectares of Acacia Senegalensis under the Biocarbon fund transaction:
Under CAP 1/GEF 7,837 ha of Acacia Senegalensis planted on degraded land
reforestation eligible for Biocarbon Finance. Under CAP2 11,045 had
reclaimed & protected so far and 6,966 of Acacia Senegalensis planted.

CAP 1 CAP2
West Africa Agricultural
Productivity Program

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS
GPRC 1 and 2 supported the
initiation of reforms of agricultural
institutions, increasing access and
use of agricultural inputs and
technology (transparency in the
management of the Central
Procurement Unit for Agricultural
Inputs (CAIMA) increased. The
adoption of an integrated
framework for agricultural
extension services provides the
basis for future reforms that will
also be supported through the West
African Agricultural Productivity
project.

AAA
‐Food Security and Safety Nets
study
-Sustainable Rural Growth??

Cross Cutting Issue 1: Reducing the Rate of Population Growth
PRSP Pillar 3: Slow down population growth
Outcome 14: increased
awareness of family planning
‐Use of modern contraceptives up

Partially Achieved and further progress expected

Lending

ISHSP indicated modern contraceptives prevalence up from 4 to 5%
(2006) to 17.8% (2010). Overall demand for reproductive health services

Multi-sector Demographic Project
PRODEM Approved 6/19/2007;

78

Population and fertility outcomes
depend on interventions in areas
other than health, in particular in
education but also in rural

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

for women 20-24 from 4.4%
(2006) to 7% (end 2010)

has increased. But increased demand for planning services not yet met by
sufficiently increased supply.

- Percentage of children 0-5 months
exclusively breastfed is up from
13.5% (2006) to 16% (end 2010)

55% of population over age 15 had been sensitized on population and
reproductive health issues.

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome
closing 3/31/2013. Restructured
mid-2011. PDO rated MS; IP rated
S.

Percentage of children 0-5 months exclusively breastfed is up from 13.5%
(2006) to 27% (end 2010)
Milestones partially reached
Appropriate institutional setup for the implementation of Government’s
(DGPP) at the central, regional, departmental, and communal level.
Consolidated responsibility for population issues, promotion of women,
and the protection of children in a single ministry, to facilitate the effective
implementation of the DGPP. Major capacity building done in Ministry of
Population and Social Reform. M&E system in place and demographic
data collected. Budget allocation for this ministry almost doubled from
2010 to FCFA 5.8 billion in 2011.

Institutional Strengthening & Health
Sector Program

Nationwide and culturally sensitive national advocacy, information,
education and communication (IEC) and behavior change communication
(BCC), on population and development and reproductive health, family
planning and breastfeeding issues progressing well under PRODEM
including with NGO support. Annual work plans prepared, adopted,
implemented each year.

AAA

-Introduce legal reforms to increase age at marriage: Government prepared
legal text and measures to increase minimum age of marriage: not yet done
Implementing policies that foster women’s economic autonomy: some

79

Basic Education Project
GPRC-1

Health and demographic survey
2011

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS
development, women affairs, and
justice. The multi-sector design
like the PRODEM is needed for
capturing the synergies between
these various sectors.

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS

limited actions under way with PRODEM and CAP.
Milestones for improved girls education, basic health services and gender
equity also contribute to this outcome

Cross Cutting issue 2: Promoting Good Governance
PRSP Pillar 6: Promoting high quality governance
Outcome 15. strengthen
economic governance and
capacity to implement and
monitor reforms
Indicators

Partially Achieved and Further PFM progress under way

Lending

PEMFAR reforms on fiscal resource mobilization (tax and
customs), enhanced budget preparation, execution and control,
using PEFA methodology to evaluate progress and performance
well under way.

- Reform Management and TA
Approved 7/02/2009; closing
4/30/2015. DPO and IP rated S.
- GPRC -1 and GPRC-2

-Improved capacity to implement
PEMFAR and procurement reforms
-More efficient and transparent
administration of government
resources
-Allocations to education, health
and rural development sectors
better aligned with MTEF and
budget law

The various performance measures of the budget cycle including
preparation, reliability of revenues forecasts, implementation,
monitoring and reporting, have experienced some progress against
the 2009 baseline. The quality of macroeconomic projections and
fiscal revenues has improved. The variance between actual and
planned revenues for the Customs and Tax Authorities in 2010
was smaller than a year earlier (15% versus 21% for Tax; and 1%
versus 11% for Customs.
Global MTEF is prepared, outlining sector budget allocations,
consistent with PRSP.
From 2007 to 2009 budget expenditures for priority sectors
increased from 5.7% to 7.5% of GDP. Budget allocations for pro-

80

- EITI TF
AAA
PETS
Political economy of Mining
PEMFAR II
GAC review and action program
proposal (2011)

The lack of success of previous
PFM reform programs in Niger
highlighted the need to combine
the design of a major policy and
institutional reform program in
PFM with implementation of a
comprehensive capacity-building
project supporting each main
objective of the aspects of the
program. Thus five-year Reform
management and TA project
supports an in-depth increase of
Ministry of Finance (MEF)’s
capacity.
The approach for PFM in Niger is
based on a long-term and systemic
treatment of existing anomalies of
the PFM system rather than a quick
short-term technical fix and
consists in a sequenced platform
approach for building credible and

I. TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CAS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
CAS Outcomes and Outcomes
indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary (with milestones and
additional indicators )
poor expenditures increased by about 1.3 percent of GDP and
expenditure allocations for priority sectors by 4 percent of GDP in
2011.
- Supreme Audit (Courts of Accounts established) with capacitybuilding provided to it.
- Public procurement system ensuring more transparent and
effective control of contract awards during the opening and
technical evaluation of bids, with the revision of the legal
framework (unique committee responsible for bid opening and
contract award established and composition of bid evaluation
committees adjusted). Draft new procurement code has been
submitted to the National Assembly.
-General Directorate for public procurement and its decentralized
divisions are staffed and operational
Niger's compliance with EITI standards and principles highly
satisfactory. Niger completed EITI validation on March 1, 2011.
EITI++ mission done. But in oil sector, the government does not
yet have the proper legal, regulatory and institutional framework
to properly manage oil development and review split of benefits
whiles oil production has started end 2011.

81

Lending and Non-lending
activities that contributed to
the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS
reliable PFM systems. It
encompasses a sequence of
activities which gives priority to
the most pressing needs, taking
into account the capacity and
institutional realities.
Civil service reform, a crucial
driver of public sector management
in Niger has not yet been
addressed.
Coordination and harmonization
among many donors active in PFM
has improved but more needs to be
done – as for budget support,
through common matrix.

II. TABLE 2. PLANNED LENDING PROGRAM AND ACTUAL DELIVERIES
STATUS

CAS PLANS
US$ M
30.0
4.7
15.0
30.0

FY
2008

Local Urban Infrastructure Development
Avian Flu Component added to Community Action Program 1
Niger Basin Water Resources Development Project
Transport Sector Program Support Project

Subtotal
2009

Community Action Program 2 APL
Agro-Pastoral Export and Markets Development Promotion
Reform Management and TA
DPL III on Growth

2010

Water Sector Support II
DPL IV/PRSC 1

2011

Education Enhancement and Skills Development
Sources of Growth
DPL V/ PRSC 2

79.7
30
30
10
30

Subtotal

100
50
50

subtotal

100
30
30
40

82

US$ M
30.0
4.5
15.0
30.0

Delivered
Delivered
Delivered
Delivered
Additional Actual projects
Emergency Food Security Project *
Basic Education Support EFA-FTI (FTI-BEP) *
Delivered
Delivered
Moved to early FY010
Delivered as Growth Policy Reform Grant GPRG-1
GEF additional to CAP2*

Subtotal
Moved to FY11 as Urban Water and Sanitation
Moved to FY11 as GPRG-2
Reform Management and TA (delivered; instead of FY09)
Moved to FY12?
Moved to FY12
GPRG-2 (delivered instead of FY010)
Urban Water and Sanitation (delivered; instead of FY09)
Additional Actual projects
Safety Net Project
2nd Emergency Food Security Project*

7.0
8.0
94.5
30.0
40.0
0
40
4.7
110.0
0
0
10
10.0
0
52
90
70
15

l
Subtotal FY09-011- IDA 15
Total FY07-10

Subtotal
Subtotal FY09-011
(of which additional GEF and other grants)*

100
300
379.7

212
332
418.5

Regional Projects
West Africa Agriculture Productivity Project 1 –C

2011

83

30.0

III. TABLE 3. PLANNED NON LENDING SERVICES AND
ACTUAL DELIVERIES
STATUS

CAS PLANS
Diagnostic Trade Integrated Survey

2008

Delivered based on 2006-07 missions and validated in
2008.52
Delivered
Delivered
Delivered
FSAP (report September 2008)
EITI Implementation
Delivered (based on 2007-2009 missions)
Delivered, updated &reviewed in FY010; validated in
November 2011
Delivered
Additional actual products
ROSC Accounting and audit
Four AAA activities for the Safety Net53
Delivered
Delivered
Dropped

Food Security and Social Safety Nets
Irrigation Development
PETS (health, education)

Review of Pension Systems/Pension reform study
PER/PEMFAR11

2009

Political Economy of Mining

Skills Development and Growth
Rural Finance study
Supporting Sustainable Rural
Growth
CAS progress report

2010

Dropped
Additional actual products
PEMFAR Action Plan
Country education status
Support to National Statistical Office
Financial Sector development Strategy (FIRST)
LSMS-ISA54 underway
Policy Notes for New Government (10)
Local Development Kandadji growth Pole
Poverty assessment/TA for Poverty Monitoring
CSO Support mining /EITI Post compliance
School Grants Impact Evaluation
Strengthening Results-Based M&E for Rural Dvt. Strategy

other AAA (TBD)

2011

AAA Carried out or started and during first quarters of FY012
Energy sector review (originally planned for 05 under previous CAS, rescheduled for FY08 and delayed again).
Support to preparation of new PRSP
Household Survey on Migration
Demographic and Health Survey
Informal Sector Survey55
Joint Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Analysis November 2011

AAA on climate change carried out during 2008-2012
PER of rural sector with a focus on Sustainable Land Management
Impact evaluation of land rehabilitation programs with Sustainable Land Management
Harmonizing resource management schemes and plans study
Regional ESW “Managing Land in a Changing Climate: An Operational Perspective for Sub-Saharan Africa” including a pilot area
on Niger

52

Action matrix adopted by Government in May 2010.
(i) Identifying the causes of food insecurity and policies to reduce it; (ii) assess the scope and coverage of existing safety
net programs; (iii) evaluating targeting methods of vulnerable population; (iv) assess the feasibility of cash transfer
programs.
54
Living conditions Panel Survey project supported by a US$ 1.6 million grant
55
for measuring the size and typology of the informal economy for both youth and adult entrepreneurs
53

84

IV. ANNEX 1 – LENDING OPERATIONS UNDER
IMPLEMENTATION 2008-2011
Operation

Approval
Date
5/03/2001
3/19/2002
3/20/2003

Closing
Date – Actual.
or (planned)
12/31/2009
12/31/2008
6/31/2008

Amounts
US$ mil.
Credit/Grant
48 + 10
38.72
4.0

Extensions (E)
Restructuring
(R)
E
R&E

Outcome
rating56 (Bank
Performance)
S (S) (ICR)
HS (S) (ICR)
S (S) (ICR)

Water Sector Project
Private Irrigation Promotion
Community-based Integrated
Ecosystem Management57

CAP I

3/20/2003

12/31/2010

35 + 458

E (2)

S (S) (ICR)

Community Action Program
Multi-Sectoral HIV/AIDS
Support project

4/04/2003

6/30/2009

25

R&E

MU (MU) (ICR)

PADEB

7/17/2003

6/31/2009

30

E

S (S) (ICR)

Basic Education Project
Financial Sector TA Project

2/19/2004

12/31/2010

14.8

R&E

IHSPP (Inst. Strengthening &

1/05/2006

6//2011

35

R&E

MU (MU)
(ICR59)
S (S)(ICR)

6/19/2007

3/31/2013

10

R

MS (S) (ISR)

4/29/2008

(12/15/2012)

30

R (2) E

MS (S) (ISR)

5/29/2008

(4/30/2015)

30

R

S (S) (ISR)

Health Sector Support Project). -

PRODEM
Multi-sector Demographic Project

Transport Sector Program
Support Project
Local Urban infrastructure
development project

CAP-2

8/29/2008

30+ 4.560

(4/30/2013)

S (MS) (ISR)

Community Action Program 2

GPRC-1

3/24/2009

6/30/2010

40

Agro-pastoral Export
and Market Development Project

3/26/2009

(4/30/2014)

40

Reform Management and TA
project.
HIV/AIDS Support 2
Urban Water & Sanitation
Safety net Project

7/02/2009

(4/30/2015)

10

4/26/2011
4/26/2011
5/19/2011
6/23/2011

(6/30/2016)
(12/31/2015)
(6/30/2017)
(6/30/2012)

20
90
70
52

8/26/2008
8/09/2009
1/24/2011

12/31/2009
(5/31/2012)
(11/29/2013)

7
8
15

4/24/2011

(6/30/2016)

30

12/16/200
4
7/03/2007

5/31/2011

9.9 (60 for 7
countries)
15

Growth Policy Reform credit

PRODEX

GPRC-2

MS (MS)(ISR)
E

S (S) (ISR)
na
na
S (S) (ISR)
na

Growth Policy Reform credit 2

GEF and other Grants
Emergency Food Security
EFA-FTI Basic Education
Second Emergency Food
Security

E
E

S (S) (ICR)
S (MS) (ISR)
na

Regional Operations
W. Africa Agricultural
Productivity
Africa Emergency Locust
(regional)
Niger Basin Water river
Development

(1/31/2013)

56

S (S) (ISR)
E

S(S61)(ISR)
MS (MS) (ISR)

Rating from ISRs: for the DPO and in brackets for IP. Rating from ICR is for overall outcome and in brackets for Bank
performance.
57
Parallel financing to CAP 1
58
US$4.5 million Avian Flu additional financing approved 12/12/2007
59
The IEG ratings are both U for outcomes and Bank performance:
60
PAC2 benefitted also from a US$4.67 GEF grant
61 Rating for Niger component: MS

85

Annex 3: Country at Glance
Niger

SubSaharan
A frica

Lo w
inco me

16.1
1,267
3.6
18

875
24,244
2.5
36

817
16,584
2.1
28

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

5.8
360
720

1,101
1,258
2,225

466
571
1,378

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

2.3
-1.2

4.7
2.1

6.0
3.7

P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

44
75
55
66
40

48
69
55
69
21

48.4
74.3
59
63
23

A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)

43
15
77
64

71
54
103
96

70
56
108
103

A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

49
9

61
31

65
37

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

Age distribution, 2011

( 2 0 11)

Male

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34
15-19
0-4
15

10

5

0

5

10

15

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 5 – 2 0 11)
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1990

Niger

N e t A id F lo ws
(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2010):
Euro pean Unio n Institutio ns
United States
Canada

19 8 0

19 9 0

2000

2 0 11

165

388

209

745

9
9
4

42
31
13

13
5
3

151
103
54

6.7
28

16.0
50

11.7
19

13.8
48

1995

2000

2011

Sub-Saharan Africa

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
15
10
5

A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

0
-5
-10

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds

-15
95

Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)

..
20.8

-2.9
-1.6

2.9
4.5

2.3
3.6

Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

211.3
..

272.3
152

712.0
100

471.9
95

05

GDP

GDP per capita

2 0 0 0 – 11
19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

5.9
2,509

7.8
2,481

10.9
1,798

16.1
6,017

2.8
-0.1

3.4
2.4

3.5
4.2

A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

43.1
22.9
3.7
34.0

35.3
16.2
6.6
48.6

37.8
17.8
6.8
44.4

..
..
..
..

1.7
-1.7
-2.7
-0.7

3.0
2.0
2.6
1.9

..
..
..
..

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n

75.1
10.4
28.1

83.8
15.0
8.1

83.4
13.0
11.4

75.1
11.5
22.6

-0.6
4.4
-7.1

1.5
0.8
4.0

..
..
..

Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

24.6
38.1
17.1

15.0
22.0
-2.1

17.8
25.7
2.8

15.0
24.2
..

-2.9
-6.3

3.1
-2.1

..
..

(% o f GDP )

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.

Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

86

Niger
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2 0 11
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2011

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

283
402
-135

438
830
-1,257

Voice and accountability

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

-147
-8.2

-1,198
-22.8

Regulatory quality

Political stability

Rule of law

P erso nal transfers and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)
Reserves, including go ld

14

102

..

..

Control of corruption
0
2011

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e

2000

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

10.3
8.0
11.2

11.3
9.9
9.9

Overall surplus/deficit

-5.7

-8.3

25

50

..
..

..
..

100

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
higher values imply better ratings

Source: Worldw ide Governance Indicators (w w w .govindicators.org)

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

75

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

2000
25.7

2 0 11
20.6

0

30
4.5

15.5

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)

1,721
27
944

1,408
35
646

To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)

95.7
7.9

23.4
4.5

Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% o f internal reso urces)

8
0

1,014
0

CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)

Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f land area)

29
1.0
7.1

35
0.9
7.1
218
67.5

299
67.5
0.07

0.08

GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

2000

2 0 11

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

723
68
14

355
83
3

0
0
0

1
1
0

0

0

–
–

–
–

Composition of total external debt, 2011
Short-term, 156

IBRD, 0

Private, 0

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio

IDA, 355
Bilateral, 224

(US$ millio ns)

IMF, 153

Other multilateral, 520

US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
Tax rates
A ntico mpetitive o r info rmal practices
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2 0 11

–
–
–

17
114.4
35

2000

2 0 11

..
..

32.8
20.8

..
..

..
..

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt
M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.

3/15/13

Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

87

Annex 4: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
CAS Annex B2 - Niger
As Of Date
1/28/2013

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation

2010

2011

2012

2013

10
4.1
10.0
4.9
50.0
44.5
18.9

10
2.1
20.0
18.1
40.0
29.6
29.0

11
2.8
0.0
0.0
9.1
7.0
23.1

10
3.3
0.0
0.0
20.0
24.7
7.0

a

Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80

Last Five FYs

54
1,347.0

7
216.6

40.7
39.0

42.9
31.9

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

88

Annex 5: Niger Social Indicators

Niger Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Grow th rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)
Food price index (2000=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Low est quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Net prim ary school enrollm ent rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an im proved w ater source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Im m unization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2005-11

SubSaharan
Africa

6.7
2.8
14.5
7.8

9.2
3.3
15.8
7.7

16.1
3.5
17.9
7.0

853.4
2.5
37.4
4.9

796.3
2.1
28.3
4.1

..
..
..

..
..
..

59.5
36.7
63.9

..
..
..

..
..
..

220
..
..

190
88
..

340
135
..

1,176
147
..

528
151
..

..
..
..

41.5
6.0
48.1

34.6
8.1
43.1

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

1.6
..

2.6
..

3.0
5.0

2.0
3.8

19
..
..

22
27
17

62
68
57

75
77
73

80
81
78

..
..
..

39
68
33

49
100
39

61
83
49

65
86
57

27
4
45

40
23
41

76
75
40

75
77
22

78
80
23

40
40
40

44
44
45

55
54
55

54
53
55

59
58
60

134
318

115
267

66
125

76
121

70
108

..
..
..
..

..
..
1,100
15

313
271
590
18

379
346
650
46

297
260
590
44

Low incom e

CAS Annex B5. This table w as produced from the CMU LDB system.
01/31/13
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series betw een 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

89

Annex 6: Niger Key Economic Indicators
Update

Niger - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Actual
2008
2009

2007

Estimate
2011

2010

Projected
2013
2014

2012

2015

100
41
13
38

100
44
14
35

100
39
15
38

100
45
12
36

100
42
12
38

100
43
12
39

100
43
12
39

100
44
12
39

100
44
12
38

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

90
23
16
7

85
32
15
17

94
33
17
16

88
37
14
22

88
38
13
25

89
35
16
19

85
40
16
23

85
41
17
25

86
38
17
22

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

18
30

19
36

21
47

22
48

22
50

27
48

27
48

28
50

27
48

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

10
11

15
..

6
6

12
12

12
12

11
11

15
..

15
..

14
..

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

4248.1
0

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 87 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
3.3
Gross Domestic Income
2.3

5359.4

5327.9

6468.6

6271.5

6939.1

7411.6

7908.1

0

0

0

0

0

..

..

..

9.5
7.4

1.0
-0.2

10.7
9.2

2.2
1.6

11.2
8.5

6.2
5.6

6.4
5.5

6.0
6.2

-2.2
..
..

7.1
..
..

-1.1
..
..

7.7
..
..

2.8
..
..

3.0
..
..

2.6
..
..

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 87 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
-0.3
6.0
Total consumption
..
..
Private consumption
..
..
Balance of Payments (US$ )
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

5793.3

731
590
1249
896
-517
0
-333

972
834
1890
1321
-918
0
-710

968
927
2224
1432
-1257
0
-1198

1006
1085
2849
1848
-1843
0
-1403

1015
1206
0
1848
1015
0
-1835

1032
1274
0
1848
1032
0
-2205

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd

121
..
70
..
..
-149

566
..
86
..
..
-131

736
..
74
..
..
101

1001
..
79
..
..
29

0
..
..
..
..
0

0
..
..
..
..
0

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR87 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

..

..

..

-4.4
..
..
7.9

-1.1
..
..
30.8

3.6
..
..
28.9

14.7
..
..
11.8

5.4
..
..

31.1
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

(Continued)

90

Niger - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

2007

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
22.4
23.4
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
-1.0
11.6
Capital expenditure
8.5
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR87 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

Actual
2008
2009

2010

Estimate
2011

2012

Projected
2013
2014

24.3
22.8
1.5
10.3
5.7

18.9
24.3
-5.4
12.3
5.8

18.3
20.4
-2.1
7.6
4.1

25.2
20.7
4.5
6.8
4.8

36.6
15.4
21.3
13.9
9.7

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

18.0
23.0
0.0

17.1
12.2
0.0

19.3
18.3
0.0

18.3
8.1
0.0

18.6
8.1
0.0

19.2
8.1
0.0

..
..
..

..
..
..

121.7
119.6
101.8
..

173.8
134.8
128.9
0.0

186.5
113.4
164.5
0.0

190.3
130.8
145.5
0.0

200.7

161.7

..
0.0

..
0.0

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
3.3

..
7.8

4.3
3.7

1.6
3.1

1.6
4.0

1.6
-5.7

..
1.1

..
1.0

GDP at market prices
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

91

Annex 7: Niger Key Exposure Indicators
Niger - Key Exposure Indicators

Update

Actual
Indicator

2007

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)

a

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

2008

2009

Estimated
2011
2012

2010

Projected
2014

2013

2015

818

1225

2156

2855

3124

3638

3953

4244

4555

23

22

29

24

70

96

551

133

146

15

13

16

14

17

26

33

32

33

263
19
5

341
23
3

745
40
5

580
51
3

778
49
4

578
55
4

572
54
5

579
54
4

581
54
4

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
234.87

..
248.1

..
265.733

..
275.24

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

92

Annex 8: Operations Portfolio
CAS Annex B8 - Niger
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 1/28/2013

Closed Projects

65

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

161.98
0.00
676.63
53.59
838.61
53.59

Total Undisbursed (Active)

232.48

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

4.57

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

237.05

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Project ID

Project Name

P102354
P127204
P095210
P107841
P116167
P096198
P101434
P117365
P125272
P108253
P123399
Overall Result

Community Action ProgramS
Competitiveness & Growth S
NE - Agro-Pastoral Export PS
NE Community Action ProgS
NE-HIV/AIDS Support ProjeS
NE-MS Demographic SIL (FMS
NE-Transport Sector PrograMS
NE-Urban Water and SanitaS
NIGER - Shared Growth CreS
Niger Reform Management S
Niger Safety Net Project S

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
S
S
S

2009
2012
2009
2009
2011
2007
2008
2011
2012
2010
2011

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

30
50
40
4.5
20
10
30
90
50
10
70
400

93

4.5

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0.038631
49.62992
16.31525
0.008197
17.21377
0.40328
2.048295
78.90959
0.384503
5.867723
61.66937
232.4885

1.1477486
2.6666667
13.962241 4.213062
1.4636931
-0.01853
2.9387393
2.5335672

-0.83146

2.2164694
-2.105494
-28.939 3.381599

Annex 9: Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
PEP Donor Activity: (as of June 30, 2012)
Name of Donor
IFC
IFC
Grand Total

Sector
PPP
Access to Finance

Program
Niger Port Devco
AMSME Program

Committed ($m)
0.80
0.50
1.30

Resource Mobilization: (as of June 30, 2012)
Name of IFC Initiative / Parallel financing / Bloan
Asset Management Company - Equity Fund
Asset Management Company - Sub-debt Fund
Asset Management Company - ALAC Fund
Asset Management Company - ALAC Fund
Asset Management Company - ALAC Fund
Asset Management Company - ALAC Fund
Asset Management Company - ALAC Fund
Asset Management Company - ALAC Fund
Grand Total

Partner
Institution
JBIC
JBIC
KIC
PGGM
Saudi
SOF Azer.
UN Pension Fund
ADIA

# of Projects in
which participant

Committed
Portfolio ($m)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

0.35
1.04
0.03
0.09
0.03
0.03
0.05
0.02
1.64

Investment Activity: (as of June 30, 2012)
Client
Marina Mkt Niger
Grand Total

Sector
Wholesale and Retail Trade

FY13 Investment Pipeline: (as of August 31, 2012)
None

94

Committed ($m)
0.50
0.50

*

*

*

*
*
*

*

*
*

*

*

*

*

*
*
*
*

*
*

*

*

*

*
*

*

*

*

*

*

HIV AIDS

*

Private Sector and
Finance

*

Transport

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

ODA Coordination
Thematic Groups
Coordination and Aid
Efficiency
Macroeconomics/PFM
Health
Transport &Infrastructure
Education
Climate Change &
Environment
Governance
Water & Sanitation
Demography/Gender/Social
Protection
Agriculture & Food
Security (3N)

*
*

Water and
Sanitation

*

*

*
*

Population and
Gender

*

*

*

Food Security and
RDA activities

FY 16

*

*

*

Health

*

62

*

*

*

Education

FY 12

*
*

*

Decentralization

World Bank FY

*

*

*

*
*
*

HIV AIDS

*

Private Sector and
Finance

*

Transport

*

*

Sector

62

Agriculture and
Rural Development

Food Security

*

Water and
Sanitation

Health

*

Population and
Gender

Education

*

*

Macroeconomics

Germany
Belgium
Denmark
Switzerland
Canada
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
USA
World Bank
ADB
BOAD
IMF
European Union
IDB
BADEA
UN Agencies

Decentralization

*

Governance and
Public Sector
Management

Donors
France

Governance and
Public Sector
Management

Sectors

Macroeconomics

Annex 10: Donor Mapping, Bank sectoral mapping in FY16 and ODA Coordination

Lead Donor
WBG&UNDP
EU
Spain
EU
UNICEF
UNDP
WBG
France
UNFPA
EU

Areas where the Bank Group will have a major intervention
95

*

Annex 11: Country Financing Parameters

96

Annex 12: Debt Sustainability Analysis
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
Niger
Joint IMF/IDA Debt Sustainability Analysis Update
Prepared by the Staffs of the International Monetary Fund and the
International Development Association
Approved by David Robinson and Peter Allum (IMF) and
Marcelo Giugale and Sudarshan Gooptu (World Bank)
March 14, 2013

The previous Debt Sustainability Analysis was prepared in 2011. The medium-term
economic framework underpinning the analysis has been revised to reflect new
information on the financing of large oil and mining projects, including the contracting of
a new concessional loan to refinance an oil refinery. While the various debt measures
remain below the relevant thresholds for the baseline scenario, the present value (PV) of
debt to GDP ratio breaches the threshold under the most extreme stress test. On the basis
of this, Niger’s risk of debt distress should continue to be considered as moderate.

97

I. BACKGROUND
1.
This debt sustainability analysis (DSA) was jointly prepared by the IMF and the
World Bank and updates the 2011 DSA of the external and total public debt of Niger. It
uses the standard debt dynamics template for low-income countries and is based on end-2011
data. The debt data cover external and domestic debt of the central government, debt of public
enterprises and parastatals, a state guarantee, and private external debt, derived from the
projected debt flows linked to large oil and mining projects. Domestic debt includes arrears,
debt to the central bank (BCEAO) for statutory advances and the SDR allocation, and
government securities.
2.
Niger’s debt ratios have been significantly reduced by debt relief, as discussed in
the previous DSA. The Enhanced HIPC Initiative, whose completion point was reached in
2004, together with the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) assistance in 2006 from the
African Development Fund, IDA, and the IMF, resulted in a significant decline in public
nominal external debt, from more than 80 percent of GDP in 2002 to about 17 percent in 2010.
In 2011, the government contracted a 650 million yuan loan for the financing of its share in the
construction of the new Azelik uranium mine, and extended a guarantee of 40 percent of a
US$880 million loan to the Soraz oil refinery. As a result, the stock of public external debt,
including guarantees, moved to 22 percent of GDP at end-2011. Looking ahead, the authorities’
ambitious economic development program includes increased infrastructure spending in the
next few years.
II.
UNDERLYING DSA ASSUMPTIONS
Text Table 1. Niger: Key Macroeconomic Assumptions (1)
3.
Medium-and long-term
Text Table 1. Niger: Key Macroeconomic Assumptions (1)
projections for Niger have been
2011‐12 2013‐16 2017‐32
updated since the last DSA in the light
Real GDP growth (percent)
of recent developments and discussions DSA 2012
6.7
6.1
6.3
8.9
6.9
6.2
with the authorities (Text Table 1). The DSA 2011
key differences from the previous
Total Revenue (percent of GDP) /2
DSA 2012
15.1
17.7
20.3
analysis stem from the fact that a bad
DSA 2011
16.4
19.1
21.1
agricultural harvest in 2011, together with
Exports of goods and services (percent of GDP)
important start-up difficulties
DSA 2012
23.8
25.9
33.8
encountered in the new oil project and a
DSA2011
24.5
28.9
33.3
significant shortfall in custom revenues in Sources: Nigerien authorities; and IMF and World Bank staffs estimates
1. Previous DSA covers the period 2011‐31
2012 led to downward revisions in GDP
2. Total revenue, excluding grants
growth, fiscal revenue and exports for
both 2011 and 2012. At the same time, the start of operations of the new Imouraren uranium
mine, currently under development and expected to double current uranium production capacity,
has been postponed by about two years, resulting in the expected impact of this new project
98

shifting from the medium to the longer term. Macroeconomic assumptions for the long-term in
GDP growth, revenue, and exports, remain close to those made in the last DSA.
4.
Natural resources are expected to continue playing a key role in GDP growth in the
longer term, together with a greater contribution from other sectors of the economy as the
economy diversifies. Our assumption remains that higher revenue will be used for productive
public investment, which, together with progress improving the business climate, will allow the
economy to diversify. The inflation rate is projected to remain low and stable, averaging
1.9 percent over the projection period.
5.
The exports-to-GDP ratio is projected to increase through 2028 as the economy
diversifies and develops. A crude oil export project is currently under development, which
might have an important impact on revenue and exports, but there is still too much uncertainty
at this point in time to include it in the baseline framework.
6.
The current account deficit, excluding official transfers, is projected to improve,
reflecting the coming on stream of petroleum. The current account deficit is financed by debt
creating flows, foreign direct investment, and capital grants, which account for about
17 percent of exports of goods and services on average over the projection period in Niger.
7.
The macroeconomic outlook continues to be subject to various risks. The country
remains vulnerable to exogenous shocks, including climatic shocks that frequently result in
food crises, commodity price fluctuations including through their impact on the return on
public sector investment projects, and the security situation in the region, as demonstrated by
the recent flooding and continued arrivals of migrants from neighboring countries.
III.
PUBLIC EXTERNAL DSA
IV. Niger’s public debt exposure is expected to increase significantly due to the
government’s involvement in natural resource projects. In particular, the authorities have
reached understandings with EXIM Bank of China on the contracting of a concessional loan of
US$880 million (CFAF 435 billion, or 12 percent of GDP). This loan will refinance the
existing non-concessional financing of the new refinery, which was initially provided by the
Chinese investment partner (CNPC), with 40 percent guaranteed by the state. While the nonconcessional 40 percent state guarantee will thus be terminated, causing a one-off spike in debt
service ratios in 2013, the government is expected to assume liability for the total amount of the
new loan, which will be on-lent to the refinery. As a result, the stock of public external debt is
expected to reach about 33.5 percent of GDP in 2013, from 24 percent in 2012. As private
external debt is expected to decrease by 60 percent in counterpart, as the previously contracted
loan is terminated, the stock of total (public and private) external debt (in nominal terms) is not
expected to be affected by this transaction. The rate of external public debt accumulation is
subsequently expected to remain broadly stable over time (Figure 1a). While the grant element
99

of the new borrowing in the short term has improved compared to the previous DSA, because
the new loan for the refinery is now concessional63, it is expected to gradually decline over
time, as the country develops and thus will have less access to new borrowing on highly
concessional terms.
V.
In the baseline scenario the external debt ratios remain below their
policy-dependent thresholds throughout the projection period (2012-32), as in the previous
DSA. The present value (PV) of debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to increase sharply from 2012
to 2013 and will continue to move upward for the rest of the period. The PV of debt-to-export
and debt-to-revenue ratios adopt similar trajectories, with a relatively more benign path for the
PV of debt-to-export ratio thanks to the increasing projected exports over the projection
period.64 Because of the assumed termination of the 40 percent state guarantee of the SORAZ
loan in 2013, the present value of debt service to export and debt service to revenue ratios
breach their thresholds in 2013.
VI. As in the previous DSA, the historical scenario shows a relative improvement in debt
ratios. The scenario underlines that if the current account deficit, FDI inflows, real GDP growth
and GDP deflator were at their historical averages, debt ratios would significantly improve. In
comparison to the baseline scenario, lower debt ratios in this scenario mainly stem from a
higher historical GDP deflator at about 8.5 percent compared to 2 percent in the projection
period (see box).
VII. The debt-to-GDP threshold is breached in the case of a one-time 30 percent
depreciation of the CFA franc. Following a one-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative
to the baseline in 2013, the PV of debt-to-GDP ratio would breach its threshold as early as
2016, and remain above it until 2032. The breach of thresholds is large and protracted. In
addition to a one-time nominal depreciation, Niger is also vulnerable to a worsening in its
financing terms during the projected period, as the PV of debt-to-GDP ratio would also breach
its threshold from 2020 onwards.
IV. PUBLIC DSA INCLUDING DOMESTIC DEBT
V.
As in the previous DSA, considering public debt does not change the analysis.
Domestic debt includes arrears, debt to the central bank (BCEAO) for statutory advances and
63

The terms are expected to be 1.5 percent interest rate, 20 years maturity and 9 years grace period, compared to a

3 percent interest rate margin over LIBOR, 10 year maturity and one year grace period for the guarantee.
64

As in the previous DSA, the large residuals shown in table 1a and 1b reflect capital grants that the country is

projected to receive thanks to the more stable political and economic environment. The large 2013 residuals also
result from the amortization of the previously non-concessional contracted debt from CNPC, a, transaction reflected
by large FDI outlows in that particular year.
100

the SDR allocation, and government securities. The public debt ratios remain relatively low
under the different scenarios except for the most extreme shock. The most extreme shock (real
GDP growth being set at its historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014) is
assumed to negatively affect nominal revenue while keeping the level of government spending
the same as in the baseline, consequently leading to an increase in primary deficit and financing
needs. This is reflected by the PV of debt-to-GDP and the PV of debt-to-revenue ratios more
than doubling during the projection period.
V. PRIVATE DEBT DYNAMICS
VI. The current DSA includes preliminary information on private debt provided by the
authorities. The main flows related to this category are linked to the large ongoing oil and
uranium projects. The estimates incorporate the impact of the contracting of a loan by the
refinery Soraz (60 percent privately owned) in 2011, and the expected gradual disbursement
and subsequent repayment of a loan of about 1.4 billion euro from a foreign investor to finance
the new uranium mine Imouraren. Including this debt, the stock of external debt would reach
56 percent of GDP in 2013. Amortization of this loan is projected to start from 2017 onwards,
thus gradually decreasing the stock of private external debt.
VI. CONCLUSION
VII. On the basis of the updated DSA, Niger remains subject to moderate risk of debt
distress. Although the grant element of new borrowing is projected to improve compared to
the previous DSA in the short run, the stock of public external debt is expected to increase
significantly, following the refinancing of the $880 million Soraz loan in 2013. This loan will
replace the existing private non-concessional financing of the refinery, which was 40 percent
guaranteed by the State, thereby substantially increasing the stock of public debt. The country’s
level of debt and the government’s involvement in the financing of natural resources projects
keep Niger very much vulnerable to adverse shocks, as demonstrated by the deterioration of the
debt indicators in the extreme shock scenarios.
VIII. Niger’s continued risk of debt distress calls for a limited government involvement
in financing natural resource projects. It also underlines the need to remain vigilant in terms
of seeking concessional new borrowing. Non-concessional borrowing should only be
considered for well-assessed, high-yield commercial and infrastructure projects that will
generate sufficient government revenue to cover debt service related to the projects.
IX. The Nigerian Authorities have indicated their agreement with the conclusions
reached in this DSA. In particular, the authorities have stated that the result of moderate debt
distress level, as well as staff recommendations in terms of limiting government involvement in
financing natural resources projects, are consistent with a debt sustainability analysis the
Technical Commission from National Public Debt Committee conducted in October 2012.

101

Baseline Scenario Assumptions
The baseline macroeconomic scenario for 2012-32 is based on the following assumptions:
•
Real GDP growth is projected to increase to an average of about 6.2 percent a year in
2013-32, reflecting increasing production developments in the extractive industries and higher nonresource GDP growth as private sector expands and business climate is improved. Inflation is
projected to remain stable at 1.8 percent over the projection period; compared to historical values,
The lower projected inflation reflects lower expected international food price inflation and the
recent average inflation of around 2 percent65.
•
The revenue-to-GDP ratio is projected to rise from 16 percent in 2012 to 21.5 percent in
2032, reflecting revenue generating developments in the extractive industries, further structural
reforms aiming at improving revenue collection and a more diversified private sector.
•
Primary Expenditure is expected to increase from 25.3 percentage points of GDP in 2012 to
29.8 percent of GDP in 2032, mostly driven by capital expenditure that is projected to increase from
13.3 percent of GDP in 2012 to stabilize at around 17.2 in 2032. The ambitious government
investment program is expected to result in an increase in infrastructure spending, including large
transport and irrigation projects in the pipeline. Infrastructure projects that would be financed by
non-concessional lending were assumed to be occurring only in the cases where sufficient
government revenue can cover debt service related to the projects, but there is still too much
uncertainty at this point in time to include it in the present DSA. The basic balance (the fiscal
balance net of grants and externally-financed capital expenditure) remains in surplus from 2022
onward (complying with the WAEMU regional convergence criterion).
•
The current account deficit is projected to significantly decline from 17.2 percent of GDP in
2012 to about only 9.5 percent of GDP in 2032. Exports are projected to increase from 25.4 percent
of GDP to 34.7 percent in 2032, as oil and uranium exports expand and the economy diversifies.
After a brief decline, imports would increase again before stabilizing, in line with foreign direct
investment patterns.
•
Following a few years of substantial FDI inflows linked mostly to the oil investment, net
FDI is projected to decline from a peak of 17.5 percent of GDP in 2010 as the large investment
projects come to completion, and in line with the delay in the large investment project related to
Imouraren. A large FDI outflow in 2013 will be recorded due to the reclassification of the Soraz loan
in that same year, previously considered an FDI, intra-company inflow now defined as public debt.
Assuming the start of repayment of the Imouraren debt-creating FDI, FDI is reduced in 2018.
•
Total external financing is expected to gradually decrease, from 10.7 percent of GDP in
2012 to about 8.8 percent of GDP in 2032. As in the previous DSA, this assumption relates to the
reduction in Niger´s borrowing needs and the expected increase in per capita GDP. Grants would
represent about 62 percent of total external financing on average during the period. The discount rate
is 3 percent, a lower rate compared to the previous DSA rate of 4 percent.

65

The drop in GDP deflator in 2012 results from a depreciation of the exchange rate in that year.
102

Figure 1. Niger: Indicators of Public- and Publicly-Guaranteed External
Debt under Alternatives Scenarios, 2012-2032 1/
a. Debt Accumulation

12

35
30

10

25

8
6
4

b.PV of debt-to GDP ratio
60
50
40

20

30

15

20

10

10

2

5

0

0

0

-10

2012

2017

2022

2027

2032

2012

2017

2022

2027

2032

Rate of Debt Accumulation
Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)
Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

c.PV of debt-to-exports ratio

160

d.PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

300

140

250

120

200

100
80

150

60

100

40

50

20

0

0
-20

-50
2012

2017

2022

2027

2032

e.Debt service-to-exports ratio

25

2012

2017

2022

2027

2032

f.Debt service-to-revenue ratio

40
35

20

30
25

15

20
10

15
10

5

5
0

0
2012

2017
Baseline

2022

2027

2032

Historical scenario

2012

2017

2022

Most extreme shock 1/

2027
Threshold

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2022. In figure b. it
corresponds to a One-time depreciation shock; in c. to a Terms shock; in d. to a One-time
depreciation shock; in e. to a Terms shock and in figure f. to a Terms shock

103

2032

Figure 2. Niger: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative
Scenarios, 2012-2032 1/
Baseline

Fix Primary Balance

Most extreme shock Growth

Historical scenario

70

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

2032

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

2032

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

2032

250

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
200

150

100

50

0
2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

35
30

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio

25
20
15
10
5
0
2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2022.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

104

Table 1a. Niger: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2009-2032 1/
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Historical 6/ Standard
Average
Deviation

Actual

6/

Projections
2018-2032

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2022

2032

External debt (nominal) 1/
of which: public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
of which: official
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
of which: exceptional financing

39.5
18.9
15.6
11.2
24.4
26.9
20.6
47.5
-2.8
-0.7
0.3
-13.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
4.4
-0.1

50.0
17.0
10.5
-0.3
19.7
26.9
22.2
49.2
-7.9
-5.5
0.6
-17.5
-2.5
0.2
-3.9
1.3
10.8
-0.1

50.4
22.4
0.4
3.1
24.6
28.5
22.2
50.7
-4.6
-3.3
0.7
-16.7
-4.8
0.1
-1.0
-4.0
-2.6
-0.1

54.0
24.0
3.6
3.8
17.2
20.4
25.4
45.9
-4.6
-3.3
1.4
-8.4
-5.0
0.4
-5.5
…
-0.3
-0.1

56.0
33.5
2.0
20.2
18.5
20.1
25.7
45.8
-4.5
-3.3
2.9
4.3
-2.5
0.5
-3.0
…
-18.2
-0.1

58.5
34.8
2.5
7.3
19.4
20.3
26.4
46.7
-4.6
-3.4
3.7
-9.3
-2.8
0.5
-3.3
…
-4.8
-0.1

61.2
36.4
2.7
7.8
18.9
19.2
25.8
44.9
-4.5
-3.2
4.3
-8.4
-2.7
0.5
-3.3
…
-5.1
-0.1

62.6
37.8
1.4
6.9
15.9
16.7
25.8
42.4
-4.4
-3.1
3.6
-6.2
-2.8
0.5
-3.4
…
-5.5
-0.1

59.2
38.6
-3.5
6.0
10.0
10.8
27.2
37.9
-4.1
-2.9
3.4
-0.6
-3.4
0.5
-3.9
…
-9.5
-0.1

48.0
41.7
-1.6
6.1
9.9
9.4
34.1
43.5
-2.8
-1.5
3.3
-1.4
-2.4
0.5
-2.9
…
-7.7
0.0

40.9
42.1
-0.5
5.5
9.5
11.1
34.7
45.9
-1.8
-0.6
0.2
-2.3
-1.7
0.6
-2.3
…
-5.9
0.0

PV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
PV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
In percent of government revenues
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt r

...
...
...
...
...
3.3
3.3
4.6
0.6
8.7

...
...
...
...
...
2.5
2.5
4.1
0.2
9.2

46.6
209.5
18.6
83.5
129.6
3.2
3.2
5.0
0.5
24.1

49.3
194.0
19.4
76.2
121.4
5.1
4.3
6.9
0.7
13.7

48.3
188.1
25.7
100.2
150.8
70.7
23.2
34.9
3.0
16.4

50.4
191.2
26.7
101.3
151.4
4.1
3.4
5.1
0.9
16.9

52.7
204.3
27.9
108.1
156.0
3.9
3.3
4.7
1.0
16.2

53.7
208.3
28.9
112.0
158.5
7.3
3.3
4.7
1.0
14.5

50.0
184.0
29.4
108.1
158.0
11.8
3.0
4.4
1.2
13.5

38.7
113.5
32.4
95.1
164.4
7.1
2.4
4.2
1.6
11.5

33.2
95.7
34.5
99.3
160.8
6.1
5.4
8.7
3.0
10.0

-1.0
0.0
1.7
4.9
29.4
...
14.5
0.3
0.2
0.1
...
...

10.7
-3.1
0.4
15.7
10.9
...
13.6
0.3
0.3
0.1
...
...

2.2
8.6
0.3
11.0
14.5
...
14.3
0.4
0.2
0.2
...
...

11.2
-6.8
0.9
18.5
-6.4
31.6
16.0
0.6
0.4
0.2
7.8
69.3

6.2
4.7
1.0
12.4
11.0
21.5
17.1
0.7
0.6
0.1
11.3
46.1

6.4
1.1
1.1
10.3
9.7
30.3
17.6
0.8
0.6
0.1
9.1
75.7

6.0
0.6
1.0
4.3
2.7
31.1
17.9
0.8
0.6
0.2
9.0
75.6

5.9
0.8
0.9
6.7
0.8
31.8
18.2
0.8
0.7
0.2
8.7
75.5

6.8
1.7
0.9
14.6
-2.9
31.5
18.6
0.9
0.7
0.2
8.1
74.1

6.4
2.0
1.2
18.1
18.3
26.1
19.7
1.1
0.9
0.2
7.1
69.7

6.0
2.0
1.6
6.5
5.0
16.7
21.5
1.9
1.6
0.3
5.7
62.4

5.3
-1.0

5.7
7.2

6.3
11.0
1.1

6.6
3.6
1.3
3.0
0.0
19.4
76.2
4.3

7.3
11.2
1.9
8.7
0.0
25.7
100.2
23.2

7.9
7.6
2.1
2.9
0.0
26.7
101.3
3.4

8.4
6.6
2.3
3.0
0.0
27.9
108.1
3.3

9.0
6.7
2.6
2.9
0.0
28.9
112.0
3.3

9.7
8.6
2.8
3.1
0.0
29.4
108.1
3.0

14.6
8.5
4.7
3.4
0.0
32.4
95.1
2.4

32.2
8.1
11.1
2.7
0.0
34.5
99.3
5.4

12.2

7.8

-4.4

1.5

-6.5

7.3

Average

10.3

-2.5

-1.8

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in perce
Government revenues (excluding grants, in percent of GD
Aid flows (in Billions of US dollars) 7/
of which: Grants
of which: Concessional loans
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of external financin
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (Billions of US dollars)
Nominal dollar GDP growth
PV of PPG external debt (in Billions of US dollars)
(PVt-PVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent)
Gross workers' remittances (Billions of US dollars)
PV of PPG external debt (in percent of GDP + remittance
PV of PPG external debt (in percent of exports + remitta
Debt service of PPG external debt (in percent of exports

0.0
...
...
...

0.0
...
...
...

4.8
8.5
2.2
16.2
21.6
...

0.0
18.6
83.5
3.2

4.3
7.2
2.1
11.8
13.2
...

6.2
2.0
1.3
10.1
9.7
23.4
20.4

6.6
66.7

8.3
3.1

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
0
1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar term
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price a
4/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.
8/ Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

105

Table 1b. Niger: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2009-2
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2009

2010

Average

2011

5/

Standard
Deviation

5/

Estimate
2012

2013

2014

2015

Projections
2012-17
2016
2017 Average

2022

2018-32
2032 Average

Public sector debt 1/
of which: foreign-currency denominated

27.2
18.9

24.0
17.0

28.9
22.4

29.7
24.0

38.3
33.5

39.7
34.8

40.7
36.4

41.5
37.8

41.6
38.6

43.0
41.7

42.5
42.1

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which: grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
of which: contribution from average real interest rate
of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

4.8
3.4
5.0
18.9
4.4
23.8
-1.5
0.2
-0.1
0.2
-1.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.4

-3.2
1.1
2.2
18.2
4.6
20.4
-1.0
-2.7
-0.1
-2.6
1.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-4.3

4.8
0.2
1.3
18.1
3.8
19.4
-1.0
-0.9
-0.3
-0.5
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.6

0.9
0.4
3.2
22.2
6.2
25.3
-2.8
-3.0
-0.1
-2.9
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5

8.6
2.0
3.9
24.8
7.7
28.6
-1.8
-1.7
0.0
-1.7
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.6

1.4
1.3
3.5
25.5
7.8
29.0
-2.2
-2.4
-0.1
-2.3
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

0.9
1.0
3.0
25.5
7.7
28.6
-2.0
-2.4
-0.2
-2.2
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

0.8
0.8
3.0
25.6
7.3
28.5
-2.1
-2.5
-0.2
-2.3
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.2
0.1
2.9
25.4
6.8
28.4
-2.8
-3.0
-0.3
-2.7
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

0.4
0.3
3.2
25.8
6.0
28.9
-2.9
-2.9
-0.3
-2.6
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

-0.3
0.7
3.3
26.5
5.0
29.8
-2.6
-2.6
-0.2
-2.4
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.1

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

25.0
18.6
18.6
...

25.1
19.4
19.4
...

30.6
25.7
25.7
...

31.6
26.7
26.7
...

32.1
27.9
27.9
...

32.5
28.9
28.9
...

32.5
29.4
29.4
...

33.8
32.4
32.4
...

34.8
34.5
34.5
...

4.7
…
…
…
-1.2
-1.5
0.2

3.5
…
…
…
7.2
9.6
5.4

2.0
138.1
174.6
129.6
4.0
5.1
-3.6

4.9
113.1
157.0
121.4
8.0
11.0
2.3

10.2
123.6
179.2
150.8
25.5
37.0
-4.7

4.1
124.1
179.2
151.4
2.3
3.3
2.1

4.3
125.7
179.7
156.0
5.0
7.2
2.1

4.2
127.2
178.5
158.5
4.8
6.7
2.2

4.1
127.6
174.5
158.0
4.6
6.3
2.8

-1.0

10.7

2.2

4.8

4.3

11.2

6.2

6.4

6.0

5.9

6.8

7.1

6.4

6.0

6.2

2.7
-4.7
-10.9
5.7
0.1

0.9
-0.6
10.0
1.7
-0.1

0.8
-1.9
-1.1
3.6
0.0

2.4
-2.7
-4.7
3.6
0.1

2.0
2.5
9.2
2.9
0.1

1.0
1.5
0.8
0.8
0.5

1.4
-0.1
...
1.6
0.2

1.2
0.0
...
1.7
0.1

1.2
0.2
...
1.3
0.0

1.2
0.1
...
1.6
0.1

1.1
0.2
...
1.7
0.1

1.2
0.3

1.2
0.2

1.5
2.0

1.3
0.8

1.5
0.1

2.0
0.1

2.0
0.1

2.0
0.1

...

...

...

31.6

21.5

30.3

31.1

31.8

31.5

29.7

26.1

16.7

...

0.9

2.2

3.2

3.1

Other Sustainability Indicators
PV of public sector debt

of which: foreign-currency denominated
of which: external
PV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
Gross financing need 2/
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent)
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent)

of which: external 3/

Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) 4/
Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

4.1
5.2
131.1 131.5
171.2 162.3
164.4 160.8
3.6
7.1
4.7
8.8
2.8
3.7

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percen
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

…

…

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ [Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used.]
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues excluding grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

106

...

...

...

...

Table 2a.Niger: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public- and
Publicly-Guaranteed External Debt, 2012-2032
(Percent)
Projections
2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2022

2032

19

26

27

28

29

29

32

34

19
19

12
29

10
31

8
34

6
36

4
37

-1
44

2
52

19
19
19
19
19
19

27
27
27
24
22
36

30
30
27
34
30
37

31
31
29
35
31
39

32
32
30
36
32
40

33
33
30
36
32
41

36
35
33
37
35
45

38
35
35
36
36
48

76

100

101

108

112

108

95

99

76
76

47
113

37
119

29
130

23
138

16
136

-2
129

6
149

76
76
76
76
76
76

100
114
100
94
85
100

101
131
101
130
111
101

108
139
108
136
118
108

112
143
112
139
122
112

108
137
108
132
117
108

95
116
95
110
101
95

99
115
99
103
102
99

121

151

151

156

158

158

164

161

121
121

71
170

56
177

42
188

33
196

24
199

-4
222

10
241

121
121
121
121
121
121

159
159
156
142
129
211

169
173
156
195
168
212

174
176
161
197
172
218

177
177
163
197
174
221

176
175
163
194
173
221

183
177
169
190
177
230

179
163
165
167
168
224

PV of debt-to GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2012-2032 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2012-2032 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2013 5/

PV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2012-2032 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2012-2032 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2013 5/

PV of debt-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2012-2032 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2012-2032 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2013 5/

107

Table 2a. Niger: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public- and
Publicly-Guaranteed External Debt, 2012-2032 (continued)
(Percent)

Debt service-to-exports ratio

Baseline

4

23

3

3

3

3

2

5

4
4

23
23

2
4

2
4

2
5

1
4

1
5

0
8

4
4
4
4
4
4

23
25
23
23
24
23

3
4
3
3
3
3

3
4
3
4
3
3

3
4
3
4
4
3

3
4
3
3
3
3

2
3
2
3
3
2

5
6
5
6
6
5

7

35

5

5

5

4

4

9

7
7

34
35

4
6

3
6

2
7

2
7

1
9

1
12

7
7
7
7
7
7

37
35
36
35
36
49

6
5
5
5
5
7

5
5
5
5
5
7

5
5
5
5
5
7

5
5
5
5
5
6

5
4
4
5
4
6

10
9
9
10
9
12

23

23

23

23

23

23

23

23

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2012-2032 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2012-2032 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2013 5/

Debt service-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2012-2032 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2012-2032 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2013-2014 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2013 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly assuming
an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

108

Table 2b. Niger: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of
Public Debt, 2012-2032
Projections
2012

2013

2014 2015

2016 2017

2022 2032

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

25

31

32

32

32

32

34

35

25
25
25

29
30
31

28
31
33

28
31
34

27
32
35

26
32
36

23
34
43

16
35
66

25
25
25
25
25

33
30
30
37
38

38
31
31
37
39

40
31
33
37
39

42
32
34
37
39

43
32
35
36
39

51
33
41
36
39

61
35
50
35
37

113

124

124

126

127

128

131

132

113
113
113

115
121
125

110
121
127

107
123
131

103
125
135

100
126
139

86
132
165

58
132
240

113
113
113
113
113

131
121
120
148
154

143
121
119
145
153

151
122
125
144
153

158
124
131
144
153

164
125
136
142
153

192
129
158
138
150

227
130
185
133
141

8

26

2

5

5

5

4

7

8
8
8

26
26
26

2
2
2

5
5
5

5
5
5

4
5
5

3
4
4

5
7
10

8
8
8
8
8

26
26
26
31
26

3
2
2
4
3

6
5
5
7
6

6
5
5
6
5

5
5
5
6
5

5
4
4
5
4

10
7
9
11
8

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2012
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1.
B2.
B3.
B4.
B5.

Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2013-20
Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2013-201
Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2013
10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2013
PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2012
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1.
B2.
B3.
B4.
B5.

Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2013-20
Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2013-201
Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2013
10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2013
Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2012
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1.
B2.
B3.
B4.
B5.

Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2013-20
Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2013-201
Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2013
10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2013

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of the length of the projection period.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

109

Annex 13: Proposed WBG Assistance for FY13-16 and Corresponding PDES Axes
CPS Pillars

PDES Axes

Pillar 1:
Promoting
Resilient
Growth

Axis 4:
Competitive and
diversified
economy for
accelerated and
inclusive growth
Axis 3:
Food security
and sustainable
agricultural
development

Pillar 2:
Reducing
Vulnerability

Axis 2: Creating
the conditions
for inclusive,
sustainable and
equitable
development
Axis 5:
Promoting social
development

WBG Operations

AAA and TA

Ongoing
Ongoing
 Competitiveness and Growth
 Public Expenditure Review 2012
Support project
 PEMFAR Updates and
 Competitive Growth Credits (II
monitoring
and Supplemental DPO)
 Policy Notes Series
 Agro-Pastoral Export Promotion
 Energy Sector Assessment
project
 Advisory Note on Rural Finances
 West Africa Agriculture
 EITI Post Compliance TA
Productivity Promotion project
 IFC Advisory Program for the
 Niger Basin Water Resources
privatization of dry port- Dosso
Development / Kandadji Growth Proposed
Pole program– APL1 & APL2A
 Policy Notes Series
 Transport Sector Support Program  PER updates
 IFC access to finance AMSME
 Medium term Debt Strategy TA
program
 Energy Sector TA Regional
 FIAS Investment Climate
Railways Program TA
Advisory Services Program
 Agriculture Risk Management and
(OHADA reforms)
Inclusive Green Growth TA
Proposed
 Shared Growth Credit Series I, II
and III
 AF for Transport Sector
 Support to Ag. Food Security
Programs – 3N & Dispositif
National
 Regional Railways Expansion
Program
 Regional Transport DPO
 WARCIP
Ongoing
Ongoing
 Safety Net Project
 Social Protection for Building
 Second Emergency Food Security
Resilience TA
Project
 Regional Security Assessment
 Community Actions Program for
 Water Sanitation Program TAs
Climatic Resilience
Proposed
 Community Actions Program II
 Security Sector PER and
 Multi-sector Demographic
Fiduciary Review
Development Project
 Health and Education Service
 Multi-Sector HIV/AIDS Program
Delivery TA
 Urban Water and Sanitation
 Youth Employment and Jobs
Project
Study
 Local Infrastructure Development
 Health Country Status Report
Project
 Sahel Demographic study
 Community-Based Disaster Risk
 Sahel Drylands Flagship Report
Reduction Project
Proposed
 Basic Education Support Project
 Education Enhancement and Skills
110

Development
 Community Actions Program III
 Land, Urban and Disaster
Management Project
 Population and Health Sector
Support project
Cross Cutting:
Mainstreaming
gender and
Strengthening
Governance and
Public Service
Delivery

Axis 1:
Strengthening
Credibility and
Efficiency of
public
institutions

Ongoing
Ongoing
 Reform Management and TA  Governance and Anti-corruption
Strategy and Institutional
project
Development TA
 Support to Cour des Comptes Proposed
IDF
 Support to Procurement Office -  Annual PER updates and dialogue
 Programmatic study on
IDF
FM/Procurement bottlenecks to
Proposed
service delivery
 Support to Governance and
 Gender Assessment
Capacity Building for Service
 Policy Notes Series
Delivery
 Support to PDES Monitoring and
Evaluation System –IDF

111

Annex 14: Results of Stakeholder Consultations and FY12 Country Survey
Stakeholders’ Feedback
In October 2012, the Niger Country office conducted extensive consultations with key
constituencies and opinion-makers in Niger including governments, parliamentarians, the
media, youth, academics, the private sector, CSOs and other community groups. The
discussions took place in the capital Niamey as well as in the regions of Tillabery, Dosso,
Tahoua and Maradi. Although different groups brought diverse perspectives, there were
significant areas of agreement:
In the agriculture sector, there was a common consensus to create new opportunities in
rural areas, notably for youth and to reduce migration to urban centers. In the same vein,
there was an emphasis on the importance of processing and transforming products at the local
level to add value to exports (for ex. seeds, onions, tomatoes, sesame, potatoes). The creditgranting process of some projects was considered an issue for some farmers, including the fact
that some projects do not accept land properties as personal contributions in order to access these
grants.
The education sector, with a focus on quality of education outcomes, was a consistent and
recurring theme throughout the discussions. Key amongst the issues featuring prominently
were (i) ways to end contracting in the sector and focus on quality; (ii) addressing skills
development of youth and putting an emphasis on adult literacy, (iii). Another issue which was
put on the table regarding the elaboration of basic education projects is the variable relating to
the discrepancy between nomadic and sedentary environments which is not always taken into
account.
Infrastructure and transport are considered vital for regional integration and economic
opportunities. As a result, the implication of the Bank Group in the upcoming sub-regional
railway project and the finalization of the Dosso Dry Port are key priorities for the population.
The recent $203 million supplemental effort provided by the Bank in the Kandadji program to
create a Growth Pole has been saluted by all stakeholders and maintained that its must be
monitored carefully to ensure a proper implementation and timely execution.
On population growth and gender, most representatives felt the need for Bank Group support
in conducting a socio-cultural analysis including regional diversity to study social behaviors
towards demography. The increasingly rapid annual growth population (3.3%) and the extremely
high fertility rate which stands at 7.6 children per woman are viewed as one of the strongest
impediments to economic growth. Besides, the loss of young girls in the education system must
attract the attention of the Bank to help find ways to eradicate the access bottleneck between
primary school and middle-school, and help support mitigating measures to reduce early
marriages. Finally, there should be a necessary focus on ways to create measures to facilitate
access to land.
Corruption is seen as a major impediment to an inclusive development in many sectors.
Government participants, however, did not mention the issue of anti-corruption much, but
several did nevertheless underline the need for a strengthening of institutions and the importance
112

of the Bank Group supporting the Government in this area. The process of decentralization was
seen as crucial step in dealing with the governance challenge as it would help build local
government capacity to plan and manage budgets and services but also create a platform between
decentralized governments and the Bank in order to support directly local development plans
were very important topics raised in the regions visited.
Increased role of civil society actors as a mechanism for assisting, communicating and
monitoring Bank Group-financed projects and CPS implementation. Most CSOs noted the
importance of ensuring that the Bank Group supports greater transparency of government
decisions as well freedom of information. Media also needs to help inform the general public
about Bank programs and elaborate a communication strategy with them. Members of parliament
mentioned the need to strengthen the capacity of parliament to provide checks and balances to
the executive, especially through the Parliamentary Network of the Bank Group and the IMF.
Re-organizing the legislative economic framework to help create more businesses
(especially SMEs) was a predominant theme for the private sector. This will enhance their
productivity, competitiveness, and help them do the transition from an informal and commercial
economy to a formal and investment-oriented one.

FY12 Country Survey
In October and November 2012, 300 stakeholders of the World Bank in Niger were invited
to provide their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a
country survey. Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Niger, their overall
attitudes toward the Bank; the World Bank’s effectiveness and results; the Bank’s knowledge
work and activities; working with the World Bank; the Bank’s future role in Niger, and the
Bank’s communication and information sharing.
Priorities: Perceived development priorities have shifted since FY 07 with far greater emphasis
currently on corruption and public sector governance. The issue of corruption emerges in a
number of ways as a key priority in terms of development, poverty and growth. Respondents
report that they recognize a significant role for the Bank in the area of public sector governance –
aligned with the perceived priorities. Along with governance and corruption, education, rural
development and energy and oil development are viewed as important aspects of growth and/or
poverty reduction in Niger. Domestic private sector development is seen as an important aspect
of growth and also an area where respondents see value in Bank involvement.
When considering the priorities as identified by stakeholders, it is worth considering how the
Bank’s efforts and emphasis are aligned with these perceptions. In addition it is important to
look at perceptions of the Bank’s effectiveness in these key areas. Ratings have stayed relatively
high in key sectors: poverty, education and public sector governance, but they have diminished
in agriculture, demography, growth, domestic private sector development, gender. The survey
findings are a good starting point for further discussion with stakeholders and internally.
How the Bank works in Niger: The survey findings suggest that the Bank is doing very well in
terms of how it collaborates with government and other donors. The importance of its future
involvement in Niger is not questioned. Areas that the team might consider further exploring, as
113

they received quite negative ratings include: flexibility (in terms of its products and services and
in light of changing country circumstances), staff accessibility and responsiveness and openness
in terms of sharing its data and other information, and the speed of disbursement of funds and
overall speed. While the speed of disbursement is often difficult to change because of
circumstances on the ground, behaviors such as accessibility and responsiveness are certainly
areas that can change. In terms of overall attitudes, The Bank is working within a positive
context. The Bank is viewed as relevant and respectful. In addition, one of the most positive
trend in findings to emerge from the survey is related to the perception of how realistic the
programs are, in Niger, that the Bank supports. Ratings increased significantly from 3.3 to 6.5 on
a ten point scale.
Knowledge: There are a number of findings that are important to consider overall in Niger. The
Bank is most valued for its financial resources with recognition of the value of technical
assistance and training. However, as in FY 07, there is less recognition of the value of the Bank’s
knowledge, advice, etc. Some of the concerns expressed in the survey findings include how well
the knowledge is disseminated and translated and whether there is an adequate level of
stakeholder involvement during preparation. Use of the Bank’s website has increased from 29%
in FY 07 to 56% in FY 13. Many modes of dissemination and distribution must continue to be
considered.
Collaboration: Throughout the survey the view emerges amongst many that there needs to be
greater outreach beyond government. A third of stakeholders attribute slow or failed reform
efforts to an inadequate level of citizen participation and an equal amount says that the Bank
would be of greater value if it reached out beyond government. This is important to consider
particularly in light of the Bank’s overall emphasis on ensuring openness, accountability and
voice in countries.

114

Annex 15: Central Government Operations (% of GDP), 2009-2015
Domestic Revenue
Current Expenditure
Capital Expenditure)

2009
14.7
12.1
12.5

2010
14.4
13.7
8.1

-9.9

-7.4

-6.8

-12.2

-11.4

-12.7

-12.0

4.5
1.4
4.5

4.9

4.0

8.3

1.0

1.3

5.5

2.0

1.62

-1.2

7.8
4.1
-0.3

7.5
5.3
0.2

7.4
5.2
-0.5

Fiscal deficit (commitment basis, excl.
grants)
Grants
Net. Loans
Domestic financing
Source: IMF
Note: pr – preliminary, p –projection, db – draft budget

115

2011pr 2012p
2013db 2014p
15.1
16.0.0
17.7
19.3
14.7
14.1
12.8
13.9
7.3
14.1
16.3
18.0

2015p
20
14.3
17.6

Annex 16: Axes of the PDES
Axis 1: Strengthening the credibility and efficiency of public institutions
The PDES is built on the Government of Niger’s desire to provide a new foundation for
dynamic, economic and social development. Strong public institutions are to guarantee
political stability and respect for human rights, leading individuals to invest and participate in the
economy. This is expected to improve the overall efficiency of the administration and public
services to ensure fairness and equality of citizens' access to them.
Axis II: Creating the conditions for inclusive, sustainable and balanced development
The second programmatic area of the PDES seeks to strengthen the preconditions for the
achievement of sustainable inclusive economic growth. These include (i) peace and security;
(ii) control of demographic growth; (iii) the preservation and sustainable management of natural
resources; and (iv) a balanced regional development. These programs will be critical to
achieving the goals as set out in the PDES.
Axis III: Food security and sustainable agricultural development
The third axis of the PDES represents one of the key initiatives of the government – the 3N
initiative – Nigeriens Nourish Nigeriens. The initiative aims, firstly, to ensure sufficient
supply and quality of food for all Nigeriens based primarily on the development of local
production and, secondly, to increase the resilience of households in food crises and natural
disaster. Key areas of intervention include (i) growth and diversification of agro-forestrypastoral and fish products, (ii) the regular supply of rural and urban markets for agricultural
products and food, (iii) the improvement of people’s resilience to climate changes, food
insecurity and disasters, (iv) improving the nutritional status of populations, and (v) sector policy
coordination, mobilization, and empowerment of stakeholders.
Axis IV. Competitive and diversified economy for accelerated and inclusive growth.
To emerge as an economy that is both competitive and diversified, the PDES envisages an
accelerated and inclusive growth that will leverage Niger’s natural resource potential. The
PDES takes into account Niger’s potential of mining and hydraulic resources and promotes a
long-term transformation of the structure of the economy in order to reduce vulnerability to
climatic shocks. While recognizing that the agricultural sector is essential for social and
economic development, the PDES also identifies the extractive industries as the main lever for
accelerated growth and will seek to promote activities that will facilitate the exploitation of these
resources. The implementation of a large-scale program for public investments in infrastructures
such as the Kandadji hydro electrical dam, the Salkadamna mine; and the promotion of rail
development will be prioritized under the PDES with the aim to economic diversification and
reducing the impact of Niger’s landlocked situation. The Plan also aims to create 50,000 jobs a
year over the 2012-2015 period including through public private partnership (PPP).
Axis V. Promotion of Social development
This axis aims at improving the level of development of social indicators through enhanced
access of the populations to basic social services and the implementation of a social
116

protection policy for the most vulnerable populations. The main results revolve around
improvement of the health status of the populations, strengthening of educational levels and
knowledge, more equitable access to drinking water and sanitation infrastructures, reduction of
gender inequality and inequity, social protection of the most vulnerable populations,
improvement of the living environment and protection and the promotion of the youth.

117

Annex 17: EITI process in Niger: Challenges and Achievements
Challenges

Achievements

Legal requirements

Multi-stakeholder
approach

Technical and financial
assistance

Communication and
public debates

Dissemination of
collection and
reconciliation reports
Auditing
Ownership

Niger qualified as Compliant country by EITI Board in March
2011;
EITI-Post Compliance Program is under implementation with
the Bank Group support

Article 150 of the Constitution now states that “exploration, exploitation
licenses and contracts of natural resources and subsurface as well as
revenues paid to the State, on a company-by-company basis and
disaggregated, are fully published in the Official Journal of the Republic of
the Niger”
 Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) and extractive industry (EI)
companies are actively involved in governing the process, including
with the Government (Ministry of Mining and Oil, Ministry of
Finance).
 In the process of creating:
o a multi-stakeholder framework for strategic thinking which
will formulate recommendations for decision-support tools
in anticipation of a changing EI context;
o mechanisms of investments in the extractive sector
The Bank Group provided EITI advisers and consultants to train thirty local
EI CSO leaders in areas of exercising citizen oversight to ensure
transparency and good governance in the EI. This TA program also aims at:
 sharing of international best practice;
 providing training, information and public awareness on the
nature of the exploitation of natural resources;
 promoting advocacy, and lobbying for increased transparency in
the use of mining, oil, and gas resources;
 Encouraging greater inclusion of gender in the EITI.
WB support has helped improve debates at the government level but also
among the population through forums by:
 CSOs (ROTAB, Publish What You Pay, Transparency International
– Niger Chapter), trade unions working in IE, Journalists, students;
 local elected representatives, members of parliament;
 Cabinet members, advisors of the Presidency and students.
Through reconciliation of payments and revenue collection, EITI reports
(2005-2010) showed that GoN received an average of 66 billion CFA per
year ($132m USD) over 6 years, a figure considered as very inadequate to be
a catalyst for the country’s development goals.
The Court of Auditors conducts periodic sectoral audits
Creation of Networks of journalists and CSOs focused on EI

118

Annex 18: Progress on MDGs
Millennium Development Goals

Niger

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

N ige r

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

19 9 0
72.8
63.0
7.5
41.0

19 9 5
78.2
..
6.0
..

2000
..
..
..
43.6

2 0 10
43.6
59.5
8.1
39.9

G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

23
16
6
..

24
13
6
..

27
19
7
14

57
46
13
37

G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

53
..
5

60
..
..

65
..
1

78
36
12

311
132
25

267
115
40

218
98
37

143
73
71

1,400
15
4

1,300
..
..

1,100
16
14

820
18
18

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
0.1
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
125
Tuberculo sis case detectio n rate (%, all fo rms)
53

0.6
138
16

1.0
152
28

0.8
185
35

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
35
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
5
Fo rest area (% o f to tal land area)
1.5
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f land area)
7.1
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
0.1
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
..

39
5
..
7.1
0.1
..

42
7
1.0
7.1
0.1
..

49
9
1.0
7.1
0.1
..

0.1
0.0
0.0
..

0.2
0.0
0.0
..

0.5
24.5
0.8
0.9

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)
G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
Co mputer users (per 100 peo ple)

Education indicators (%)

0.1
0.0
0.0
..

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

30

100

100
75

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

75
20

50
50
25

10
25

0
2000

2005

2010
0

0
1990

1995

2000

2010

2000

2005

2010

Primar y net enrollm ent ratio
Fixed + mob ile subscr iber s
Ratio of girls to boys in pr ima ry & secondar y
education

Niger

Sub-Sah aran Afr ica

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

119

Inter net users

4/5/12

Annex 19: Trust Fund Country Report on Niger
1.IBRD, IDA and RETF Approvals and Disbursements , FY11 - FY13 Q2
Amounts in $million
IBRD

IDA

RETF

GRAND TOTAL

Fiscal Year
Disb

Commit

Disb

Commit

Disb

Commit

Total
Disb

Total Commit

FY11

0.00

41.99

232.00

6.19

17.83

48.17

249.83

FY12

0.00

126.80

115.00

8.63

65.10

135.44

180.10

FY13 Q2
Grand Total

66.21
0.00

235.00

6.54
347.00

TF Country Report
FY11 - FY13 Q2
Niger

120

21.36

72.75
82.93

256.36

429.93

2. BB and BETF Disbursements, FY11 - FY13 Q2
Amounts in $million
Fiscal year

BETF

BB

Grand Total

FY11

1.14

2.77

3.91

FY12

1.70

2.62

4.32

FY13 Q2

0.69

1.22

1.91

3.54

6.61

10.14

Grand Total

IBRD/IDA Trust Funds
(Bank & Recipient Executed Grants)
Disbursements, approvals and pending requests

121

3. Disbursements (BETF, RETF) by Managing Unit, FY11 - FY13 Q2

Amounts in $million
The Managing Unit of the disbursing grant or, if the several units are making changes to the grant, the managing unit of the cost object (WBS or I/O)under wchich the disbursements are made

BETF

RETF

Grand Total

Managing Unit
FY11

FY12

FY13 Q2

FY11

FY12

FY13 Q2

FY11

FY12

FY13 Q2

AFTA1
0.18

0.10

0.07

1.58

5.54

2.19

1.76

5.64

2.26

0.10

0.13

0.19

4.23

2.05

1.37

4.33

2.18

1.56

0.10

0.08

0.01

0.10

0.08

0.01

AFTEW
AFTFW
AFTG2
0.03

0.03

AFTHW
0.12

0.03

0.15

0.24

0.32

0.10

0.13

0.33

0.07

0.31

0.09

0.05

0.01

0.05

0.03

0.27

0.03

0.37

0.65

2.80

0.13

0.32

0.09

0.05

0.03

AFTN2
2.70

AFTP4
AFTP5
AFTSW
0.01

0.01

DECPI
0.11

0.48

0.17

0.11

0.48

0.17

0.06

0.00

0.11

0.16

0.16

0.38

0.44

0.11

PRMED
0.06

0.00

0.03

0.08

0.04

0.38

0.44

0.11

SEGOM
0.08

0.08

0.12

TWIAF
TWIWP
0.02

Grand Total

1.15

1.70

0.02

0.69

6.19

122

8.63

6.54

7.33

10.33

7.23

4. Disbursements (BETF, RETF) by Grant Type, FY11 - FY13 Q2
Amounts in $million
Execution
BETF

Grant
Type

Grant Type Description

FY11

FY12

FY13 Q2

1.14

1.43

0.62

0.00

0.18

0.07

0.08

0.00

6.63

6.37

Project/activity support
BEA
Partnership Secretariat & TF Admin
BES
Partnership - Project Umbrella
BEU

RETF

Stand-alone Recipient Executed Project
REP

4.61
IBRD/IDA Cofinancing

REB

0.15
Other Recipient Executed Project

REO

1.58

Grand Total

7.33

1.85

10.33

0.17
7.23

5. Disbursements (BETF, RETF) by TF Program, FY11 - FY13 Q2
Amounts in $million
Program Type

Program

Free Standing

Program Name

FY11

FY12

FY13 Q2

0.48

0.17

0.01

0.00

FREE-STANDING TFS FOR DEC
FS-DEC

Programmatic

0.11
POVERTY & SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS MDTF

PSIA
STRATEGIC IMPACT EVALUATION FUND(S)--HD
SIEF

0.01
PUBLIC-PRIVATE INFRASTRUCTURE ADVISORY F

PPIAF

0.03
GLOBALFACILITYFORDISASTERREDUCTION&RECOV

GFDRR

0.03
JAPANESE SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT FUND

JSDF

0.03
NORWEGIAN POST- PRIMARY EDUCATION FUND

NPEF

0.00

0.01

0.03

0.06

0.00

DEBT MANAGEMENT FACILITY FOR LICS
DMF
STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING PROGRAM
TFSCB

0.05

0.01

0.05

0.04

BELGIUM POVERTY REDUCTION PARTNERSHIP PR
BPRP
HEALTH RESULTS-BASED FINANCING
HRBF

0.12
ITALIAN FUND FOR CHILDERN & YOUTH IN WES

ICHYAO

0.15
TERRAFRICA LEVERAGING FUND

TERRAF

0.03

0.16

0.10

0.08

0.01

0.05

0.01

0.17

0.11

0.16

0.16

0.12

0.32

0.13

FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORM & STRENGTH. INIT
FIRST
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOMENT FUND
IDF

0.19
EFA FTI EDUCATION PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT F

FTIE
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRIES TRANSPARENCY INITI
EITI
LUXEMBOURG POVERTY REDUCTION
LPRP

123

WATER AND SANITATION PROGRAM(WSP)
WSP

0.38

0.46

0.11

1.50

1.85

0.17

0.34

0.49

2.77

0.02

3.76

2.05

4.27

2.16

1.37

GEF-IBRD AS IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
GEFIA
SCF - IBRD AS IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
CSCFIA
GLOBAL FOOD CRISIS RESPONSE PROGRAM
GFCRP
EDUCATN FOR ALL-FAST TRACK INITIATIVE
EFAFTI
Grand Total

7.33

10.33

7.23

6. Disbursements (BETF, RETF) by Freestanding/Programmatic
Funds, FY11 - FY13 Q2
Amounts in $million
FY11

Type

FY12

FY13 Q2

Free Standing
0.11

0.48

0.17

7.22
7.33

9.86
10.33

7.07
7.23

Programmatic
Sum:
7. Disbursements (BETF, RETF) by Single Donor/Multi
Donor, FY11 - FY13 Q2
Amounts in $million
Type

FY11

FY12

FY13 Q2

Multi-donor

2.66

7.01

5.48

Single-donor

4.67

3.32

1.76

Grand Total

7.33

10.33

7.23

8. RETF Disbursements by Sector, FY11 - FY13 Q2
Amounts in $million
Sector

FY11

Share of
FY11
Disbursement

FY12

Share of
FY12
Disbursement

FY13
Q2

Share of
FY13 Q2
Disbursement

Agriculture

1.45

23.40%

5.69

65.86%

4.14

63.33%

Education

3.83

61.88%

1.95

22.53%

1.26

19.31%

Energy & mining

0.08

1.28%

0.08

0.93%

0.12

1.83%

0.02

0.37%

0.14

1.57%

0.03

0.51%

0.81

13.07%

0.79

9.11%

0.98

15.01%

Finance
Health & social serv
Industry and trade
Not assigned
Public admin, Law
Transportation
Water/sanit/fld prot
Grand Total Actuals

6.19

8.63

6.54

124

125

10°E

NIG ER

L I B YA

To Djanet

15°E
To Tajarhi

ALGERIA

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
DEPARTMENT CAPITALS

NIGER

NATIONAL CAPITAL

Madama

RIVERS
MAIN ROADS
DEPARTMENT BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

0

50

100

Mont Greboun
(1,944 m )

Arlit
0

50

100

20°N

A G A D E Z

t
s e r
D e

Air Mts.

200 Kilometers

150

r é
n é
T é

To Tamanrasset

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

150 Miles

MALI

Bilma

Agadez
Ingal

TAHOUA
To
Gao

TchinTabaradene

Tahoua

TILLABÉRI
Tillabéri
er
Nig

NIAMEY

Illéla
Filingué

Téra

Birnin
Konni

NIAMEY

Tanout

Bouza

Dakoro

MARADI

S

a

h Gouré e

Zinder

Maradi
Dosso

0°

DOSSO

Magaria

To
Kontagora

l

Nguigmi

a

a
ng

Mt

s.

Maïné- Diffa
Soroa
1963 Level
1973 Level
2001 Level

Lake
Chad

NIGERIA

To
Ouagadougou

BENIN

5°E

To
Kaduna

10°E
10
10∞E

15°E
15∞E
15

IBRD 33457

SEPTEMBER 2004

BURKINA
FASO

15°N

Keïta

Aguié

Kollo

CHAD

ZINDER

M

15°N
15∞N
15

To
Ouahigouya

D I F F A

