Public Disclosure Authorized

India

& The World Bank Group
in a Time of Transformation

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

82604

THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 2013–2017
A Summary

THE WORLD BANK GROUP

Full text of the COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 2013–2017 is available on
http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/india

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

India

& The World Bank Group
in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 2013–2017
A Summary

THE WORLD BANK GROUP

1

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

2

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

Foreword
This India Country Partnership Strategy for the World Bank Group comes at a moment where both India and
the World Bank are at important points in their history: India has crossed the threshold to become a Middle
Income Country and is poised to lift millions out of poverty in years to come, in all likelihood more than any
other country in the world. The World Bank has committed itself to the goal of eliminating extreme poverty
by 2030 and boosting shared prosperity. For our team it was clear that our strategy should aim squarely at
supporting India’s and the World Bank’s shared goal to eliminate poverty. We therefore analyzed what would be
the best ways of maximizing the impact of growth in India on poverty alleviation. We did this by comparing the
performance of Indian states over the last decade and analyzing why those states that lifted more people out of
poverty succeeded in doing so. We also looked at historic performance of other large federal countries at times
when they had long periods of sustained growth and lifted many people out of poverty. And we took India’s
own 12th Five Year Plan as our basis, as the Plan’s goals are fully aligned with our objectives. Through this work
we came to a number of important shifts compared to previous strategies:
1. In order to help eliminate poverty, we should shift our resources (limited though they are in comparison to
India’s needs) to where the battle against poverty must be won: in India’s low income states;
2. We should see India’s rapid rural to urban transformation as a tremendous opportunity, both for agriculture
and for poverty alleviation and competitiveness;
3. All parts of the World Bank Group, IBRD, IDA, IFC, MIGA should work as one, not by accident but by design;
4. We should not be content just to provide financing. Our limited resources can only have meaningful impact
when they bring something new that can be tested and after that rolled out in other programs.
With our partners in the Government of India, we hope to use this strategy as the basis for a continued strong
engagement with India for years to come. In order to justify the resources that this requires, we understand that
our primary focus should be on using the available resources in the best way possible and faster. Development in
India is a rapidly moving process, so anyone who wishes to contribute to it must move fast. We also understand
that we need to keep learning to adjust to India’s unique and complex path and to understand some of the
fundamental challenges the country faces: How will cities become sources of competitiveness and efficiency?
How will India keep growing rapidly and have enough water and energy to keep that growth going? How
can India lift more people out of poverty faster without them being at risk of falling right back when a family
member gets sick?
We will not answer these questions alone, and these are not the only questions that need answering. But we will
work hard to add our experience and knowledge to help answering them and others.
I am grateful to all those who contributed to this strategy, in the Government of India, IFC, MIGA, IBRD and IDA.
We all understand that this is just a document. The hard work starts now.
Onno Ruhl
Country Director, India

3

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

Contents
1.

Introduction / 6

2.

A Strong Voice for National and Global Development / 8
India’s Development Path / 9
The Role of the World Bank Group / 11

3.

Impressive Progress, Serious Challenges / 12
India and the Millennium Development Goals: National and Global Contexts / 14
Moving to Middle-Income Status / 16

4.

Exploiting Opportunities through the Country Partnership Strategy / 20
Integration: Connecting India’s Many Parts / 22
Transformation: Achieving Urban–Rural Balance in Development / 24
Inclusion: Ensuring Benefits from Faster Economic Growth for All / 27
Improved Governance, Sustainability, and Gender Equality / 28

5.

Synchronizing the CPS with India’s Development Plans / 30
Low-Income States: Economic integration and Poverty Reduction / 31
Building Capacity and Institutions / 33
		
Building on a strong portfolio / 35
6.

Conclusion: A Partnership across India / 36

List of tables
Table 1: India’s performance on the Millennium Development Goals / 14
Table 2: Low-income and special category states / 32
List of boxes
Box 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:
Box 4:

Contributing to growth through better domestic, regional and global integration
and achieving results / 23
Water and sanitation: contributing to global goals / 25
Helping India reap the benefits of urbanization while raising agricultural productivity / 26
Working in partnership with India to promote human development and
strengthen social programs to support more inclusive growth / 28

List of figures
Figure 1: Poverty rates in Indian states / 13
Figure 2: A Global Perspective on India’s Progress on MDGs / 15
Figure 3: India CPS results chain: engagement areas and outcomes / 21

5

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

1. Introduction
India is uniquely placed to help reduce global poverty and boost shared
prosperity. While the country has achieved encouraging results in recent years
in tackling these dual challenges, it remains home to one-third of the world’s
poor, as well as the largest number of people who have recently escaped poverty
but are still vulnerable to falling back. India is now in the midst of an important
transition, casting off its long-held status as a developing nation to emerge as a
new leader in the international economic arena. Strong support for the country at
this crucial juncture can help bend the arc of history by accelerating the decline
in poverty both in India and the world.
India’s ongoing transformation calls for a new phase in its long-standing partnership
with World Bank Group (WBG). The new Country Partnership Strategy (FY2013–17)
between India and the WBG responds by setting out a program of support—from
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), International
Development Association (IDA), International Finance Corporation (IFC), and
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)—that seeks to develop
transformational and innovative solutions to tackle the country’s most pressing
development challenges, especially in the poorest, least developed, and most
isolated of its states. A more pronounced focus on India’s low-income
states (Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh) and on urbanization are hallmarks of this new phase of

6

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

partnership, and represents a key strategic shift in the WBG’s support to India’s
development.
The strategy seeks to help India lay the foundation for achieving a long-term
vision for 2030—a vision of the nation as a global economic powerhouse where
more and more people share the benefits of growth and where no more than 5.5
percent of the population lives in poverty and 41.3 percent of the population is
no longer vulnerable to falling back.

Key Elements of the World Bank Group
Strategy
To help achieve the vision for India in 2030 and contribute to its ongoing
transformation, the WBG strategy focuses on three broad areas of engagement:
integration, rural-urban transformation and inclusion. Improving domestic—as
well as regional and global—integration is key to high, sustained growth, and
accelerated poverty reduction. As India continues to transform from a largely
rural, agrarian economy into an increasingly urbanized one, more emphasis will
be needed on creating strong linkages between the urban and rural parts of the
country. WBG will support efforts to help India and its people reap the benefits of
urbanization while also improving agricultural productivity. A third area of support
is to work in partnership to help foster the inclusion of all social and economic
groups - regardless of age, gender, caste, or place of residence – thus ensuring that
the benefits of faster economic growth touch the lives of all of India’s people. All
three areas of engagement will share a focus on improving governance, promoting
environmental sustainability, and bolstering gender equality.

As India continues
to transform from
a largely rural,
agrarian economy
into an increasingly
urbanized one,
more emphasis
will be needed on
creating strong
linkages between
the urban and
rural parts of the
country. The World
Bank Group will
support efforts
to help India and
its people reap
the benefits of
urbanization, while
also improving
agricultural
productivity.

World Bank Group Support
Given the deep and complex challenges confronting a rapidly changing country,
the strategy makes the case for continued high levels of support for India.
Aware that WBG finances will always be modest compared to the task at hand,
the strategy aims to leverage resources in creative ways that take into account
the different strengths of India’s states and regions, the entrepreneurial spirit of
its people, the deep experience of civil society, and the convergence of better
governance and social responsibility. To make a meaningful contribution to the
assault on poverty, the volume of support from the WBG should be in the order
of about $5 billion per year over the next five years. For the WBG’s endeavors
to be effective, actions will be required at the national level, at lower levels of
government, as well as through partnerships with the private sector, civil society
and development partners.
The strategy is closely aligned with India’s own vision for development outlined in
the 12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013–17), which calls for “faster, sustainable, and more
inclusive growth”. Lessons have been incorporated from the Group’s long-term
engagement in the country, and take into account learning from the previous
strategy (FY2009–12) as well as inputs from experts across a broad spectrum of
economic, social, and government sectors.

7

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

2. A Strong Voice for National and
Global Development
In recent years, India has emerged as an important player on the world stage,
playing a pivotal and leading role in the global information technology (IT)
revolution, and being on the cutting-edge in using IT for e-government and
the delivery of services. The country is home to internationally recognized
companies that have become global leaders in pharmaceuticals, steel, and space
technologies. India enjoys a prominent voice in global forums, advocating for
creative ways for multilateral development banks to raise capital and financing to
enable them to meet the infrastructure-financing needs of the developing world.
Recently, India has been one of the most vocal advocates for expanding the role
of multilateral institutions to help countries reach the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), finance the development of their infrastructure and human
resources, manage global financial crises, and ensure a balanced, prosperous, and
inclusive economy. Given the country’s global significance, India’s continued rapid
economic growth will be essential for poverty reduction and shared prosperity,
not just within the country but also around the world. In this critical endeavor,
India’s role and impact cannot be overstated.

8

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

India’s Development Path
Before the industrial revolution India was one of world’s wealthiest countries,
accounting for more than a quarter of global Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
By the time of Independence in 1947, however, its economy was universally
stagnant. Hobbled for decades by great poverty and widespread hunger,
frequent famines, and low rates of literacy and productivity, India has once
again emerged to become a global economic powerhouse. In the process the
country has undergone a number of development revolutions - agricultural,
technological, and entrepreneurial - and its strides in economic and human
development can be counted among the most significant global achievements
of recent times:
•

Between 2005 and 2010, India’s share of global GDP increased from 1.8 to 2.7
percent. 53 million people were lifted out of poverty, enabling India to achieve
the first Millennium Development Goal of halving the proportion of people
living on less than $1.25 a day.

•

During the last decade India’s economy expanded at an average annual rate of
7.6 percent, placing it among the top 10 of the world’s fastest growing nations.
The economy showed resilience even in the aftermath of the global economic
crisis.

•

Exports have been three times as high as 1990 levels, accounting for 21.5 percent
of GDP.

Despite progress,
only a fifth of the
population has
firmly escaped
vulnerability and
many of India’s
newly non-poor,
especially in rural
areas, are still at
risk of falling back
into poverty.

9

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

Today, even as India
hones the cutting
edge of technology,
its urban highrises tower over
city slums, and its
modern economy
overshadows a
once-predominant
agricultural
sector, significant
challenges remain.

10

•

Progress on human development has been remarkable; life expectancy has
more than doubled - from 31 years in 1947 to 65 years in 2012 - and adult
literacy has more than quadrupled - from 18 percent in 1951 to 74 percent in
2011.

Yet, despite this progress, only a fifth of the population has firmly escaped
vulnerability and many of India’s newly non-poor, especially in the rural areas,
are still at risk of falling back into poverty through economic shocks such as
illnesses, natural disasters, poor crop yields, or indebtedness. Today, even as India
hones the cutting edge of technology, its urban high-rises tower over city slums,
and its modern economy overshadows a once-predominant agricultural sector,
significant challenges remain:
•

Poverty remains widespread, and people who rise from poverty remain
extremely vulnerable.

•

India’s rapid growth in the last decade has not benefited everyone. Significant
inequities persist between the urban and rural areas, rich and poor states, and
between social and economic groups and genders.

•

Many human indicators lag behind world averages, especially in health,
malnutrition, and actual educational outcomes.

•

Infrastructure—transport, electricity, and sanitation—is inadequate to meet
demand.

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

Although India has done better than most countries in terms of economic growth,
the degree of poverty reduction associated with one percentage point of GDP growth
has been substantially less than in countries such as Brazil and China. Therefore,
for growth to be sustainable, it will need to be more inclusive than in the past, and
engender greater prosperity across the broad economic and social spectrum.

The Role of the World Bank Group
The World Bank Group has contributed to India’s development since the time
of the country’s independence, providing support where and when it was most
needed. Since the first International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD) loan to the Indian Railways in 1949, India has made extensive use of
WBG financing, knowledge, advisory services, and technical assistance to tackle
fundamental developmental challenges and build a modern economy. In the
course of the 60+ years of the WBG’s partnership with India, the country has
benefited from approximately $160 billion in IBRD/IDA/IFC financing at 2010
prices—far more than any other member country.

India has been
home to major
innovations in
development,
from the Green
Revolution and
the Mahatma
Gandhi National
Rural Employment
Guarantee program
to the promotion
of the Right to
Information Act.

In the process, the World Bank Group has also benefitted enormously from the
partnership. India has been home to major innovations in development, from the
Green Revolution and the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
program to the promotion of the Right to Information Act. Given the growing demand
to learn from India’s diverse development experience, the country is emerging as a key
provider of development experience in South–South knowledge exchange.

11

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

3. Impressive Progress, Serious
Challenges
While India has made significant progress in reducing absolute poverty, it remains
home to one- third of the global poor1. On the positive side, India has done well
by halving the proportion of people living on less than $1.25 a day. Most notably,
rural poverty has decreased by 14 percentage points, and the less well-off are
increasingly reaping the benefits of shared prosperity, with consumption growth
of the bottom 40 percent rising to catch up with average consumption growth.
But with GDP per capita at $1,410 in 2011, India remains at the bottom of the
group of middle-income countries. More than 400 million people still live in
poverty. With population growth, the absolute number of poor people actually
increased in some of India’s poorest states between 2004–05 and 2009–10 (figure
1), with poverty rates three to four times higher than those of the most advanced
states—Haryana, Kerala, and Punjab. And some states have poverty rates
comparable to those of the poorest low-income countries.

1.

12

Based on 2009-10 data in POVCALNET. Preliminary estimates based on recently released household survey for 2011-12 suggest a
further decrease in India’s poverty rate.

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

Indian society remains highly segmented and income inequality is rising.
Inequalities persist with a number of groups - scheduled castes, scheduled
tribes, and women - remaining the most disadvantaged. Structural inequalities
have kept entire groups trapped, unable to take advantage of opportunities that
economic growth has offered. While much progress has been made in education,
health, maternal mortality, and fertility, gender inequality remains high. The
number of girls to boys has decreased steadily over the last fifty years—a trend
associated with the “missing women” phenomenon; it is particularly evident in
some of India’s more advanced states.
A middle class is emerging, but only a fifth of the population has firmly escaped
vulnerability.2 A large number of people who are no longer considered “poor”
have consumption levels that are very close to the poverty line. Many of India’s
newly non-poor, especially in rural areas, remain highly vulnerable; minor
shocks—illness, natural disasters, poor crop yields, indebtedness—can easily push
them below the poverty line.

Structural
inequalities have
kept entire groups
trapped, unable to
take advantage of
opportunities that
economic growth
has offered. While
much progress
has been made in
education, health,
maternal mortality,
and fertility, gender
inequality remains
high.

It is vital to increase the number of people who are not only above the poverty
line, but are no longer susceptible to easily falling into poverty. India’s continued
progress is not only significant for its people, especially those still living in poverty,
but also for the global achievement of the MDGs. Helping India address its
development challenges is central to the World Bank Group’s goal of reducing
poverty and boosting shared prosperity.

Figure 1.
Poverty rates in Indian states
80

Bihar
Chhattisgarh

70
Poverty Rate

60

Jharkhand
Odisha

50
40
30

Punjab

20

Goa

10

Himachal
Pradesh

Bulgaria
Malaysia
Turkey
West Bank and Gaza
Croatia
Slovania
Belarus
Jordan
Czech Republic
Lithuania
Uruguay
Seychelles
Thailand
Romania
Estonia
Argentina
Chile
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Dominican Republic
Iraq
Mexico
Ecuador
Peru
Brazil
Goa
Panama
Algeria
Paraguay
Guyana
El Salvador
Bhutan
Belize
South Africa
Punjab
Nicaragua
Suriname
China
Yemen, Rep.
Philippines
Gujarat
Pakistan
Delhi
Tamil Nadu
Mauritania
Turkmenistan
Ghana
Rajasthan
Botswana
Namibia
West Bengal
Gambia, The
Papua New Guinea
Timor-Leste
Togo
D & N Haveli
Swaziland
Bangladesh
Kenya
Uttar Pradesh
Burkina Faso
Jharkhand
Mali
Bihar
Mozambique
Central African Republic
Tanzania
Zambia
Madagascar
Liberia

0

Legend
Countries

Indian States

Note: At $1.25 a day, constant 2005 PPP, US$; for countries, figure indicates poverty rates for the latest year available in POVCALNET; for Indian states data
is from 2009/10
Source: POVCALNET

2.

Vulnerability in the Indian context is defined as households living on income that is twice the national poverty line of US$1.17.

13

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

India and the Millennium Development
Goals: National and Global Contexts
Again, India’s development is one of the most significant global achievements of
the 20th century, but significant challenges remain. Over the last two decades,
India has achieved or is on track to achieve some of the Millennium Development
Goals by 2015. Extreme poverty—the proportion of people living on less than
$1.25 a day—has been halved (MDG1) to under 30 percent, and the number of
people without sustainable access to safe drinking water (MDG7) has also been
halved. In addition, 96 percent of Indian school children—boys and girls alike—
will complete a full course of primary education (MDG2) and India will likely
eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education (MDG3) by 2015.
Table 1.
India’s performance on the Millennium Development Goals
MDG

Performance

1 Extreme poverty

Achieved

2 Primary education completion rate

On track

3 Gender parity in primary and secondary education

On track

4 Child mortality

Off track

5 Maternal mortality

Off track

7a Access to improved water source

Achieved

7b Access to improved sanitation facilities

Off track

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the World Development Indicators database.

14

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

However, at least three MDGs are off track. Although much progress has been
made in India since 1990, under-five and infant mortality rates remain high.
According to 2010 data, 63 out of 1,000 under-five children and 48 infants out
of 1,000 live births die. While both rates have reduced by half, it is unlikely that
India will meet the target of reducing them by two-thirds. Reducing the target
on maternal mortality (MDG5) by three-fourths is also likely to be missed, even
though it has decreased from 570 out of 100,000 live births in 1990 to 230 in 2010.
From a global perspective and for most MDGs, India is making more progress than
the rest of the developing world. For primary education completion, India has
already achieved 96 percent of the required target, whereas developing countries, as
a group, have achieved 87 percent. This is also the case for health-related MDGs, even
though more progress is needed in this regard, particularly in reducing maternal
mortality. Recent estimates indicate that although the country may not fully achieve
the MDG on reducing maternal mortality MDG, it has already achieved 75 percent
of the target. This is far above the 46 percent reduction observed in developing
countries as a whole. Increased efforts are nonetheless required in terms of access to
improved sanitation facilities where progress is significantly lower (62 percent of the
target) than the 72 percent achieved in the rest of the developing world.

India’s contribution
to meeting global
Millennium
Development
Goals (MDGs)
is significant,
especially for MDGs
that are furthest
away from meeting
global targets.

India’s contribution to meeting global Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) is
significant, especially for MDGs that are furthest away from meeting global targets.
India’s contribution to lowering the maternal mortality ratio (MDG5) was 33 percent
between 2005-2010 while for the mortality rate of children under five (MDG4) it was
28 percent. Given India’s track record and its continued and focused attention to
Figure 2.
A Global perspective on India’s progress on MDGs
100%

Progress toward 2015

90%

100%

96%

96%

87%

100%
92%

80%

75%

70%
60%

52%

72%
62%

59%

50%

46%

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

MDG 1a.
MDG 2a.
Extreme
Primary
poverty
completion
(% of
rate, total (%
population of relevant
below $1.25 age group)
a day in
2005 PPP)

MDG 3a.
MDG 4a.
Ratio of girls
Mortality
to boys in rate, under-5
primary and
(per 1,000
secondary
live births)
education
(%)

Developing countries

MDG 5a.
Maternal
mortality
ratio
(modeled
estimate,
per 100,000
live births)

MDG 7c.
Improved
water
source (% of
population
without
access)

MDG 7c.
Improved
sanitation
facilities
(% of
population
without
access)

India

Note: a value of 100% means that respective MDG has been reached. Values denote present progress as illustrated by most recent available data:
Extreme poverty-Global: 2010, India: 2008; Primary completion rate-Global: 2009, India: 2008; Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary-Global:
2009, India: 2007; Mortality rate, under 5-2010, Global: 2010, India: 2009; Maternal mortality ratio-2010; Improved water source-2010; Improved
sanitation facilities-Global: 2008, India: 2010.
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from the World Development Indicators database.

15

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

India has the
potential to
increase income per
capita to $5,283 by
2030, and lift 304
million more people
out of poverty
and ensure that
another 394 million
people are above
the vulnerability
threshold.

addressing the MDG challenge, India has the potential to contribute even more to
global targets. Without India making further and faster progress on reducing child
and maternal mortality and improving access to sanitation, the global MDGs are
unlikely to be achieved.

Moving to Middle-Income Status
The diverse experience of Indian states is revealing of what could be
accomplished—and what would be realistic—in aiming for the overarching
objectives of the CPS—higher economic growth, accelerated poverty reduction
and increased shared prosperity. Some states have done better than others in
terms of economic growth; others have done better in terms of poverty reduction
and reducing vulnerability. Differences are to be expected in the short term, but
these differences have persisted over extended periods.
The CPS presents two scenarios for India in 2030. Both are based on the observed
performance of Indian states between 2005-2010, a period of high growth and
poverty reduction.
•

16

Base scenario. Under the base scenario, India’s GDP growth rate, as well as the
speed at which the numbers of poor and vulnerable people decline for every
percentage point of growth, remain the same as in 2005–2010. In this scenario,
the GDP growth rate would be sustained at 8.2 percent average over this period.
Income per capita would reach $5,283 in 2030 at 2010 prices, compared with
$1,375 in 2010, poverty would drop from 29.8 to 12.3 percent, and the share of
people above the vulnerability threshold would increase from 19.1 to 33.6 percent.

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

•

Ambitious scenario. Under the ambitious scenario, India sustains rapid GDP
growth in the base scenario but improves its performance to that of the bestperforming state at the 80th percentile of the distribution in terms of poverty
reduction and reduced vulnerability. Over the period 2005–2010 those
states were Rajasthan and Karnataka, respectively. Matching, at the national
level, the performance of these high-achievers would be an extraordinary
accomplishment. Under the ambitious scenario, the poverty rate would
decline to 5.5 percent, and the share of people who are no longer vulnerable
would reach 41.3 percent.

The CPS scenarios to 2030 also reveal the implications of India’s average sustained,
high growth on the number of people worldwide living below the poverty line
and above two poverty lines or the vulnerability line (those no longer vulnerable to
falling back into poverty). If the base scenario were realized, the number of global
poor would fall by 191 million and the number of people above the vulnerability
line would increase by 277 million. If the ambitious scenario were realized, the
corresponding figures would be 304 and 394 million. The former compares to
China’s contribution to global poverty reduction over the last two decades and
the latter amounts to raising to prosperity the equivalent of the combined present
populations of France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom.

With a young
population and
8 million people
entering the labor
force every year,
India could reap
a substantial
demographic
dividend, but
there could also be
considerable stress
if employment
opportunities are
not commensurate
with expectations.

India’s recent development experience shows that achieving the ambitious
vision by 2030 will require addressing a wide range of challenges. With a young
population and 8 million people entering the labor force every year, India could
reap a substantial demographic dividend, but there could also be considerable
stress if employment opportunities are not commensurate with expectations. At
present only 16 percent of the workforce derives its income from regular wage

17

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

An estimated 300
million people
are not connected
to the national
electrical grid,
and those who
are, face frequent
disruptions. The
manufacturing
sector remains
underdeveloped
and has grown at a
pace that is below
expectations.

18

employment, and more than 50 percent are engaged in agriculture. The female
labor force, already low as a proportion of the total labor force, decreased from 34
to 29 percent between 2000 and 2010, with the drop being particularly marked
for women at higher levels of education.
Constraints across three main areas could make India miss its potential
demographic dividend:
•

Platforms for growth. Infrastructure needs are massive. Only 20 percent of the
national highway network is four-lane, ports and airports have inadequate
capacity, and trains move very slowly. One-third of the rural population lacks
access to an all-weather road. Road safety is a growing concern in a country
that is adding new drivers at a record pace. An estimated 300 million people
are not connected to the national electrical grid, and those who are, face
frequent disruptions. The manufacturing sector remains underdeveloped
and has grown at a pace that is below expectations. The size distribution
of businesses in India is characterized by a “missing middle,” which is a
source of concern given that small and medium enterprises are typically an
important source of wage employment. Improving and maintaining a healthy
investment and business climate is also crucial to growth.

•

Managing spatial transformation. The number of urban centers has grown from
about 5,000 in 2001 to 8,000 in 2011, and 53 cities already have a population in
excess of one million. Every year there is a need to accommodate an additional
10 million urban dwellers and provide them with adequate basic services.
Success at meeting this challenge has so far been partial. The number of slum

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

dwellers increased from 75 million in 2001 to 93 million in 2011—a quarter of
the urban population. The rural space is not well connected to cities, resulting
in weak value chains for agricultural products and an insufficient creation
of off-farm employment. Although half of the Indian population derives its
income from agriculture-related activities, agricultural output remains below
government targets.
•

Human development potential. Health outcomes compare poorly with those of
countries at similar levels of development. At 65.4 years, life expectancy is more
than 5 years lower than the world average. Malnutrition rates remain high: 40
percent of the world’s malnourished children live in India. Maternal and infant
mortality as well as fertility rates remain high compared with those of other
growing economies in Asia. Out-of-pocket health expenditures are among the
highest in the world and make households, especially the very poor, highly
vulnerable to health shocks. Primary education has been largely universalized,
but progress on actual learning outcomes has been limited. Secondary
education is the new bottleneck. At 4.4 years, educational attainment is low, and
India still accounts for one-third of all illiterate people worldwide. Enrolment
rates for grades 9–12 are just 40 percent; of those enrolled, approximately
15 percent drop out and one-third fail their examinations. Inequity in all
dimensions, including caste and gender, is a major concern.

At 65.4 years, life
expectancy is
more than 5 years
lower than the
world average.
Malnutrition
rates remain
high: 40 percent
of the world’s
malnourished
children live in
India. Maternal and
infant mortality
as well as fertility
rates remain high
compared with
those of other
growing economies
in Asia.

India has the potential of making a dramatic contribution to reducing poverty at
home and increasing shared prosperity globally. In principle, the new global target
to “bend the arc of history” could be attained through a combination of successes
across other countries. But it is unlikely that this will happen unless India continues
to make substantial inroads. Successfully addressing these key constraints.

19

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

4. Exploiting Opportunities
through the Country Partnership
Strategy
The CPS vision through 2030 includes a balanced use of financing, knowledge,
advisory services, and technical assistance that is catalytic and transformative.
WBG resources will attract investment and financing from many sources inside
and outside of India. And Bank sector expertise will help India maximize the
effectiveness of financing, program management, and project execution.
Specifically, the CPS will contribute to three main engagement areas: integration,
rural-urban transformation, and inclusion. Effective engagement will require
actions at the national level, at lower levels of government, and through
partnerships with the private sector, civil society and development partners.
A range of high-level intermediate development objectives provide both the
rationale for the content of the World Bank Group program as well as a clear
line-of-site to higher order country goals. Analytical work underpinning this CPS
shows a strong correlation between select development outcomes and the CPS
program—its overarching goals and engagement areas. For example:

20

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

Figure 3.
India CPS results chain: engagement areas and outcomes

Overarching goals:
Economic growth
Poverty reduction
Shared prosperity

Engagement area: 3
Inclusion
• Improved access to services to
excluded segment of population
• Increase female labor force
participation
• Decreased infant mortality

Outcomes:
• Improved transport
connectivity
• Improved inter-regional power
transmission
• Improved market-driven skills
for productive employment
• Enhanced private investment in
low-income states
• Strengthened regional
integration

Outcomes:
• Strengthened institutional
capacity of urban government
• Improved urban transport
services
• Improved access water supply
and sanitation services
• Increased agricultural
productivity
• Improved environment
protection and biodiversity
conservation
• Reduced Greenhouse Gas
emissions through energy
efficiency and renewable energy
production

Outcomes:
• Improved access to electricity
• Strengthened public & private
health-delivery systems
• Improved child nutrition delivery
systems
• Improved access & quality of
education
• Increased coverage of social
protection programs
• Enhanced rural livelihood
opportunities
• Increased access to financial
services
• Enhanced disaster risk
management system

CPS Outcomes

Engagement area: 2
Transformation
• Increased population of
secondary cities
• Increased off-farm employment

Country Long-Term
Objectives*

Engagement area: 1
Integration
• Increased GSDP growth in
low-income & special category
states
• Increased trade and
investments in the region

Note: *Analytical work completed as part of the CPS indicates strong correlation between these country long-term objectives and economic
integration, spatial transformation and social inclusion.

•

The rate of urbanization (as measured by population growth of secondary
cities) is correlated with economic growth, while creation of jobs (more
specifically off-farm employment) is correlated with increased shared
prosperity. Both these aspects are addressed through activities under the ruralurban transformation engagement area.

•

Human development (infant mortality), gender equity (female job
participation), jobs (off-farm employment), urban development, policies
(business climate) and transfers (public spending) supports all three
overarching goals. Human development (education, health, nutrition and
especially, infant mortality) is strongly linked to rapid poverty.

21

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

More balanced
growth across India,
and especially in
its low-income and
special category,
is correlated with
improved economic
integration.

•

Support under the third engagement area of inclusion will aim to help
the Government of India ensure inclusive growth by improving human
development outcomes as well as gender parity (figure 2).

•

More balanced growth across India, and especially in its low-income and
special category, is correlated with improved economic integration. This is
addressed under the first engagement area of integration.

Integration: Connecting India’s Many Parts
Enhanced efforts to increase India’s market integration can significantly boost
India’s economic growth. Better integration – the connection of India’s diverse
regions and sectors – will result in more-balanced growth among Indian states,
helping low-income states converge more quickly with their faster-growing
neighbors. For instance:

22

•

To benefit from economies of scale and increase competitiveness, there
is a need to remove physical and policy barriers across states (notably the
multilayered system of taxation) that impede markets from functioning
efficiently.

•

India’s massive infrastructure gap must be bridged so that people can get to
jobs and goods to markets.

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

•

Reforms in the power sector are also needed to rationalize energy pricing
and improve the capacity and reliability of the generation, transmission, and
distribution system.

•

Innovative forms of financing can harness hitherto unfocused household
savings into infrastructure finance, a potentially significant way to achieve
investment targets in infrastructure. Mobilizing financing for publicprivate partnerships (PPPs) through new management structures and with
appropriate government support is needed to attract investors.

•

The development of a vibrant manufacturing sector— especially small and
medium-size enterprises—will require reforming labor laws, improving land
access and management, cutting bureaucratic red tape, and providing better
access to financing. As jobs are created, India’s youth will need skills and
knowledge that are better tailored to the needs of a fast-growing economy.

As the largest and most-populous country in the region, India is central to many
efforts toward regional economic integration and cooperation. Despite steady
and unprecedented progress, South Asia remains one of the least economically
integrated regions in the world. Further integration with neighbors in South
Asia and beyond can contribute exponentially to India realizing its 2030 growth
potential, while also greatly benefiting other countries in the region. Key among
seventeen possible areas for increased regional collaboration are management
of common natural resources (most importantly water), transport, and power.
Supporting the Government to help states converge and grow more evenly
through improved market integration is one of the main development objectives
of the WBG strategy for India. The WBG will also facilitate the exchange of
knowledge and experiences in a more systematic manner, so that international
good-practice examples can inform India’s development while showcasing India’s
development successes to the rest of the world.

As the largest and
most-populous
country in the
region, India is
central to many
efforts toward
regional economic
integration and
cooperation.
Further integration
with neighbors
in South Asia
and beyond
can contribute
exponentially to
India realizing
its 2030 growth
potential, while
benefitting other
countries in the
region.

Box 1
Contributing to growth through better domestic, regional and global integration and
achieving results
World Bank Group financing, analytical and advisory services will help India:
•

Improve transport connectivity (9000 km of additional State highways upgraded and
maintained in good condition in Targeted states by 2017)

•

Improve inter-regional power transmission (Power exchange between regions and states
increase from 46,027 Gwh in 2009 to 60,000 Gwh by 2017)

•

Enhance private investment in low-income states (additional US$2.3 billion private
investment facilitated in low-income states)

•

Improve market-driven skills for productive employment (70 percent of graduates of
Industrial Training Institutes employed within 1st year of completing training)

•

Strengthen trade regional integration (border crossing time between Nepal and India
reduced by 20 percent)

23

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

An acceleration
of India’s ongoing
transformation from
a largely agrarian
economy to one
that depends on
an ever-expanding
manufacturing
sector, and from a
predominantly rural
to an increasingly
urban population,
would significantly
boost India’s
potential for
growth and poverty
reduction.

Transformation: Achieving Urban–Rural
Balance in Development
Advancing urban progress
The faster a country urbanizes, the faster it grows—and, with the right policies in
place, the faster the country can reduce poverty and increase shared prosperity.
An acceleration of India’s ongoing transformation from a largely agrarian economy
to one that depends on an ever-expanding manufacturing sector, and from a
predominantly rural to an increasingly urban population, would significantly boost
India’s potential for growth and poverty reduction. Accomplishing that acceleration
will require a focus on both rural and urban development, on improving the
livability of cities and villages, on creating more jobs in manufacturing and more
off-farm jobs in rural India, and on improving agricultural productivity, especially
among smallholders. Success in this effort will avoid an out of control migration to
cities that results in a vast underclass for every city.
Effective, flexible, and accommodating urban planning, land management, and landuse regulations are essential to addressing the urbanization challenge. Improving the
investment climate to attract increased private sector investment (from domestic and
foreign sources) and improving local access to credit will allow small and medium-size
enterprises—an important growth engine in India—to flourish.
This transformation also calls for further empowering local governing bodies—
Panchayat Raj Institutions in rural areas and local urban bodies in cities across

24

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

India—so that they are able to identify and respond to local needs and to plan
long-term for a more systematic rural-urban transformation. If developed and
managed well, cities in India can be a source of greater efficiencies—resulting in
more efficient use of natural resources and lower carbon intensity.
By 2031, it is projected that 600 million people will live in India’s cities. Prominent
in the 12th Plan are the current and future needs and challenges of India’s cities
and their burgeoning populations. Government priorities include:
•
•
•
•

Increasing investment in new urban infrastructure (e.g., expanding the metro
rail network and the bus rapid transit system);
Strengthening urban governance; enhancing human and organizational
capacities; developing long-term, strategic urban planning capacities;
Addressing the needs of the urban poor and improving slums; and
Raising environmental sustainability.

If developed and
managed well,
cities in India can
be a source of
greater efficiencies,
resulting in more
efficient use of
natural resources
and lower carbon
intensity.

On urban transport, the Government’s goal is to increase the share of public
transport to at least 50 percent of all motorized trips. Private, and often very
expensive, urban transportation exacts a huge cost on the urban population,
especially the very poor. Universalizing safe drinking water and sanitation remains
a priority, as is ensuring that all Indian cities are free of open defecation—a
contributor to malnutrition, as well as a major public health risk. The Government
strives for 100 percent metering of water supply and 24-7 access where possible
and feasible. The Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM)
remains the main vehicle for the Government’s urban development and reform.
The 12th Plan calls for a series of reforms at the national and state level, as well as
interventions to strengthen the institutional framework. State governments also
have their own urban development plans.

A strong focus on agricultural and rural development
The Government recognizes the need for an equally strong focus on agricultural
and rural development. Under the 12th Plan, agricultural productivity is targeted
to grow by 4 percent annually, and irrigated areas are expected to increase from

Box 2
Water and sanitation: contributing to global goals
Making India’s cities more livable will require improvements in the reliability, financial and
environmental sustainability, and affordability of water supply and sanitation services. Although
more than 90 percent of the urban population has access to drinking water and more than 60
percent to basic sanitation, piped water is only available for a few hours per day and raw sewage
often overflows into open drains. The already stressed water supply and sanitation delivery
system will have to be revamped to respond to the urbanization challenge—an additional 250
million people will migrate to cities in the next 20 years. To improve service delivery, the WBG’s
work will focus on strengthening governance and institutional arrangements for water supply
and sanitation services; piloting service delivery models that are efficient, accountable, and
customer-oriented; and improving financial sustainability of providers. IFC will help address
efficiency and conservation issues in municipal, agricultural and industrial water. A new
program will focus on water-use efficiency in major water-intensive commodities such as rice,
and will also help private sector partners adopt water efficient technologies.

25

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

90 million to 103 million hectares. Income opportunities in agriculture, which
includes horticulture, animal husbandry and fisheries, are expected to expand,
while simultaneously creating more off-farm employment. Strengthening the
implementation of major centrally sponsored schemes that cover everything
from rural employment and social security to rural sanitation and water supply is
central to the Government’s rural development strategy—is rapidly emerging as
the next major development and policy challenge for India, and it is central to the
12th Plan. The Government and organized citizens also recognize that sustaining
a high annual growth rate of 8.2 percent under the 12th Plan and beyond will
require placing environmental sustainability and the sound management of
natural resources—air, water, forests, and biodiversity—front and center in India’s
development.

Planning the urban-rural transformation
The WBG’s focus on the rural-urban transformation—and particularly on
urbanization— represents a significant shift in its strategy, and engagement
in this area is expected to intensify over the CPS period and beyond. The
strategy will focus on supporting the efforts of national, state, and city
governments to improve the management and livability of second-tier
(medium-sized) cities as well as larger metropolises. Because 85 percent of
the urban poor live in small and medium-size cities across India, efforts are
likely to contribute to the ambitious scenario’s poverty reduction target. This
multi-sectoral engagement will focus on urban management and planning,
infrastructure and service delivery, financing systems and frameworks,
and capacity building at the national, state and city levels. Analytical work
to inform urban sector policy and initiatives will supplement a growing
operational engagement.

Box 3
Helping India reap the benefits of urbanization while raising agricultural productivity
The World Bank Group’s integrated package of support—technical assistance, lending and
investment, knowledge services—will help India:

26

•

Strengthen institutional capacity of urban government (220 cities with updated urban
management systems for improved service delivery in targeted states)

•

Improve urban transport services (Modal share by public transport in targeted cities doubled
to 8 percent by 2017.)

•

Improve access water supply and sanitation services (Additional 6.7 million people provided
with access to improved water resources)

•

Increase agricultural productivity (Cereal yield for beneficiary farmers increased from 2.8 tons
of wheat per hectare to 3.5 by 2017)

•

Improve environment protection and biodiversity conservation (160 million liters per day of
untreated municipal and industrial waste water prevented from entering the Ganga River by 2017)

•

Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions through energy efficiency and renewable energy
production (Additional 1.5 million (tCO2e) GHG emissions reduced per year by 2016)

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

Inclusion: Ensuring Benefits from Faster
Economic Growth for All
Inclusive growth is another key priority for the Government’s 12th Five-Year Plan.
Inclusion is about ensuring that everyone benefits from faster economic growth,
regardless of social grouping, age, gender, or place of residence. This will require
significant improvements in the social sectors of education and health (notably
progress toward universal health coverage), better access to safe water and electrical
power, and the creation of meaningful employment and livelihoods opportunities.
The Government’s 13 large, centrally sponsored schemes for inclusiveness—
covering rural and agricultural development, health and nutrition, education, power,
water, and urban development—will have to be reformed to drastically improve
implementation performance, reduce duplication, create convergence, and most
important, to improve development outcomes. Economic integration and ruralurban transformation can benefit a large share of India’s population, but only if there
is a stronger focus on human development and on policies that help make growth
inclusive. For example, a growth strategy that focuses on labor-intensive sectors,
rather than on skill- and capital-intensive ones, and on the development of small and
medium-size enterprises will help create productive employment opportunities for
India’s poor people and make growth more inclusive.

Economic
integration and
rural-urban
transformation
can benefit a large
share of India’s
population, but
only if there
is a stronger
focus on human
development and
on policies that
help make growth
inclusive.

India’s weak health system and poor nutritional outcomes undermine its
competitiveness. And even while India eradicates major infectious diseases, the
growing burden of non-communicable diseases increases disability among the
working-age population; malnutrition reduces lifetime productivity; unmanaged
27

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

World Bank
will work with
counterparts at
the national and
state levels to
scale up support
in performancebased public
management,
e-governance,
public procurement
and financial
management, M&E,
implementation of
the right to service
law, strengthening
India’s anticorruption
framework, and
supporting social
accountability
mechanisms.

Box 4
Working in partnership with India to promote human development and strengthen social
programs to support more inclusive growth
The World Bank Group’s financing and knowledge work with support India’s efforts to:
•

Improve access to electricity (Additional 220,000 households with off-grid connections)

•

Strengthen public and private health-delivery systems (Coverage of poor households under
the Government Sponsored Health Insurance Schemes almost doubled to 350 million by 2017)

•

Improve child nutrition delivery systems (400,000 additional poor households with access to
community managed nutrition centers)

•

Improve access and quality of education (Secondary school enrollment for grades IX and X
increased from 28 million in 2012 to 40 million by 2017)

•

Increase coverage of social protection programs (Coverage of program beneficiaries increased
to 25 percent by 2017)

•

Enhance rural livelihood opportunities (Additional half billion supported poor households
report a 20 percent increase in income)

•

Increase access to financial services (Additional to micro, small and medium enterprises in
targeted states)

•

Enhance coastal disaster risk management system (An operational Early Warning
Dissemination System installed in 3 states in targeted vulnerable communities.)

health care costs displace more productive investments by the state and by
households; and high fertility rates keep women out of the workforce. The
main health-related target of the 12th Five-Year Plan is greatly reduced rates
of maternal and child mortality. Other necessary changes include improving
delivery systems by strengthening accountability, providing regulation and
oversight of private providers of health care, and ensuring insurance coverage for
more people, especially the very poor.

Improved Governance, Sustainability, and
Gender Equality
Engagement under the CPS will focus on extensive capacity building, technical
assistance, analytical work, and knowledge exchanges that underpin lending
operations, focusing on the three broad engagement areas: (i) integration;
(ii) transformation; and (iii) inclusion. An inherent part of this is improved
governance, environmental sustainability, and gender equality.
•

28

On governance, many of the actions required to foster economic integration
concern public investments and government regulation. Institutional
development plays a key role in the case of spatial transformation, whereas
strengthened accountability is critical for social inclusion. More specifically, the
World Bank will work with counterparts at the national and state levels to scale
up support in performance-based public management, e-governance, public
procurement and financial management, M&E, implementation of the right to
service law, strengthening India’s anti-corruption framework, and supporting
social accountability mechanisms.

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

•

On environmental sustainability, economic integration has important
implications for natural resource management, whereas the priority in relation
to spatial transformation is to minimize congestion, improve resource use
efficiency, and reduce pollution impacts, including greenhouse gas emissions.
Efforts to improve disaster risk management help households cope with
natural disasters, reducing their chance of falling back or deeper into poverty.

•

Finally, economic integration and spatial transformation should lead to greater
paid employment opportunities for women, whereas social inclusion can be
promoted by enhancing voice and tackling discrimination.

29

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

5. Synchronizing the CPS with
India’s Development Plans
The implementation of the CPS program is guided by the 12th Five Year Plan as
well as the Government’s new “Innovation, Impulse, and Investment” approach.
That approach lays out India’s vision of how best to use the financing and
expertise from multilateral institutions to address its development challenges and
places significant importance on the value-added of the World Bank’s program
that goes well beyond financing.
The Government seeks World Bank support for projects that:
•
•
•

Have a systemic or transformational impact
Help innovate and pilot new approaches
Introduce innovative financing instruments and leverage resources

The approach provides a push towards working together to shape a pipeline of
projects that takes advantage of the World Bank’s international expertise, while
addressing financial sustainability and overall funding for the CPS program.
Following these principles will result in greater country-led program selectivity
and effectiveness. The approach also proposes a rebalancing of the World
Bank portfolio toward state-level activities and, within that segment, toward
low-income and special category states, where a majority of the poor and the
vulnerable live.
30

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

Special emphasis will be placed on multi-sectoral projects and programs, as well
as on creating synergies with existing Government programs across sectors.
Although access to financing remains important to India’s development, the
knowledge services that come with that financing are particularly valued. Those
services include the transfer of knowledge and international good practices,
guidance on reforming processes and systems, and the building of capacity for
improved service delivery.

Low-Income States: Economic Integration
and Poverty Reduction
Major economic powers are often strengthened by their constituent parts, such
as the United States and the European Union, and have experienced long-term
convergence in living standards. In India, by contrast, divergence across the states
has remained the norm.

India’s seven lowincome states are
now growing faster
than the average
and investments
in those states
thus have higher
economic returns
than investments
elsewhere. The
impact is even
greater when
considering the
payoffs in poverty
reduction.

Convergence is supported by economic integration, and this in turn requires
policies at the national level. But it can also be supported through a greater
emphasis on policy reforms and investments in the low-income states
themselves. For instance, India’s seven low-income states are now growing faster
than the average and investments in those states thus have higher economic
returns than investments elsewhere. The impact is even greater when considering
the payoffs in poverty reduction.

31

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

Table 2.
Low-income and special category states (US$)
Low-income States
Population
(mn)
Bihar

Special Category States

% Poor

GSDP per
capita

Population
(mn)

% Poor

GSDP per
capita

103.8

53.5

294 Assam

31.2

37.9

536

Chhattisgarh

25.5

48.7

695 Himachal
Pradesh

6.9

9.5

1,267

Jharkhand

33.0

39.1

589 Manipur

2.7

47.1

569

Madhya
Pradesh

72.6

36.7

555 Meghalaya

3.0

17.1

866

Odisha

41.9

37

676 Mizoram

1.1

21.1

883

Rajasthan
Uttar Pradesh
Total

68.6

24.8

666 Sikkim

0.6

13.1

1,715

199.6

37.7

436 Uttarakhand

10.1

18

1,233

545.1

39.5

494 Total

55.5

29.5

792

Notes: GSDP per capita has been converted from INR to USD using the period average exchange rate. Total for population weighted average of the
group. Total % of poor is the HCR for the group. Special category states are mostly northern mountainous states, sparsely populated, and those with
high transport costs leading to high delivery cost of public services. (as defined in the 13th Finance Commission). IFC also includes West Bengal, but
excludes Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand.
Sources: Census 2011, Planning Commission, poverty figures 2009-10, CSO GSDP, 2010-11, MF-IFS exchange rate

Over the five-year
period of the CPS,
the WBG program
will be rebalanced
toward more statelevel activities,
particularly in lowincome and special
category states,
home to half of
India’s 400 million
people living on
less than $1.25 per
day.

Guided by the Government’s new approach to working with multi-lateral
development institutions, the World Bank Group strategy will contribute to
India’s continued efforts for better economic integration and inclusive growth,
by gradually shifting its program of support to low-income and special category
states (described in table 2). Over the five-year period of the CPS, the WBG
program will be rebalanced toward more state-level activities, particularly in
low-income and special category states, home to half of India’s 400 million
people living on less than $1.25 per day. Overall, the aim of that rebalancing will
be to raise the share of the Bank’s commitments devoted to direct financing of
state projects to 60 percent, of which half (30 percent of total lending) will go
to low-income and special category states. Under this CPS, the approach for
engaging low-income and special category states will build on lessons learned
from successes and failures over the last four years. Specific activities will build
on the successful approach already adopted in Bihar, which combines extensive
capacity building, technical assistance, and analytical work that underpins
lending operations. Past experience also shows the relevance of local knowledge,
particularly in the context of state-level political economy.
IFC is also intensifying its program in low-incomes states. Its strategy aims to
ensure that people at the “base of the pyramid” gain greater access to finance,
infrastructure, and markets, while working to formalize the private sector in
these states. IFC is in the process of expanding its program in Bihar, Odisha, and
Rajasthan by increasing investments and improving business-climate reforms
(with a special emphasis on small and medium-size enterprises), enhancing
certainty and transparency, and reducing business risks. Currently, 44 out of 66
advisory projects in India involve at least one low-income state. By the end of this
CPS period, IFC aims to invest approximately $2.3 billion, and facilitate another
$1.4 billion in private investment in low-income states alone.

32

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

Lending to more advanced states will focus on activities that are innovative and
transformative. These projects can test second-generation approaches, which
then can be applied to low-income states that often have limited capacity. For
example, the pilot Beneficiary Verification System for health services, which
produces timely data, is serving more than 3,000 beneficiaries in Karnataka and
may now be replicated in the low-income state of Uttar Pradesh. IFC, having
led many innovative renewable-energy investments in India, will promote
the replication of its solar rooftop pilot in Gandhinagar in five additional cities
in Gujarat and develop solar policy recommendations to engage other state
governments.

Building Capacity and Institutions
Support for centrally sponsored schemes and national projects will focus
on capacity and institution building. Sharing knowledge and international
good practices can help leverage public financing by improving design,
implementation, and monitoring on a national scale. The core concept in World
Bank support for centrally sponsored schemes will be to support the Government
in scaling up successful state-level interventions into national programs. The
World Bank has played an important role in such efforts; in the process, it has
learned that success is not always guaranteed. Support for the Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan Education-for-All Program, for example, has shown that successful
scaling-up requires significant upfront inputs into improving management
and fiduciary systems, building national institutions, careful supervision, and

Support for
centrally sponsored
schemes and
national projects
will focus on
capacity and
institution building.
Sharing knowledge
and international
good practices
can help leverage
public financing by
improving design,
implementation,
and monitoring on
a national scale.

33

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

IFC is supporting
inclusive business
models to
expand access to
goods, services,
and livelihood
opportunities for
those at the “base
of the pyramid” in
commercially viable
and scalable ways.
Such models have
huge potential
for scale up, and
contribute to the
goals of reducing
poverty and
boosting shared
prosperity.

34

adjustments along the way. Increasingly, projects will focus on helping states
implement programs supported by central schemes. The complex challenges of
bringing development solutions to national scale in a large and diverse country
like India require a learning partnership.
Given the size, diversity and magnitude of India’s development challenges,
selectivity principles are central to World Bank Group engagement under this CPS.
Selectivity in the India context is primarily about the “where” and “how” of WBG
engagement, the former guided by the Government’s “Innovation Impulse with
Investment” approach and the latter by management and staff’s understanding
that better collaboration across the WBG and sectors is likely to result in improved
development outcomes. Country-led selectivity principles are being applied more
systematically upstream by Government, and internally by the India management
team. Such a concerted effort is needed to intensify engagement in low- income
and special category states. Selectivity principles will also be applied to IFC’s
engagement in low-income states. IFC will aim to support projects/programs that
offer scope for scalability. For example, alongside a growing number of business
and development partners, IFC is supporting inclusive business models to expand
access to goods, services, and livelihood opportunities for those at the “base
of the pyramid” in commercially viable and scalable ways. Such models have
huge potential for scale up, and contribute to the goals of reducing poverty and
boosting shared prosperity.

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

Building on a strong portfolio
The CPS builds on a large current portfolio, which will be the main source
of development results over the next five years. The current portfolio—with
financing from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
and International Development Association (IDA)--includes net commitments
of $23.7 billion across 78 projects. Of that amount, $16.7 billion is undisbursed,
reflecting a relatively young portfolio (38 percent of the total undisbursed
amount is for projects approved by the Board in the last two years). At the end
of January 2013, IFC’s committed portfolio contained 219 projects amounting to
$4.8 billion, including $564 million syndications. MIGA has no existing exposure
in India, but may support investments into critical areas during the CPS period
through the provision of credit enhancement. During the last CAS period, IFC
delivered a strong program. During FY2009–12, IFC committed $4.5 billion in total
financing (including its own account and mobilized funds), with nearly 34 percent
supporting infrastructure. Through end February 2013, IFC has committed $822
million in total financing. Thirty-four percent of IFC’s own account commitments
were in equity and 63 percent were in loans. IFC’s India portfolio is performing
well. Investments in low-income states have grown from $60 million in FY2009 to
$265 million in FY13 as of end of February 2013, an increase of 342 percent. The
advisory portfolio has grown from $30 million over 42 projects in FY2009 to $55
million in 66 projects by end February 2013.

The CPS builds
on a large current
portfolio, which will
be the main source
of development
results over the
next five years.
The current
portfolio—with
financing from the
International Bank
for Reconstruction
and Development
(IBRD) and
International
Development
Association (IDA)-includes net
commitments of
$23.7 billion across
78 projects.

35

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

6. Conclusion:
A Partnership across India
The CPS is not just between the Government of India and the World Bank Group,
it is a partnership with the people of India. This document can only present the
vision and grand plan, but taking it to fruition will require the support of a great
cross-section of Indian society: entrepreneurs, (whether trained to run large
companies or those naturally gifted who start micro-enterprises of their own),
workers who devise better ways of doing things, civil society as it strives for
improved governance, educators, farmers, and members of the state and national
government. The CPS has a core that spreads out like the spokes of the spinning
wheel, offering a diversity of possibilities to the equally diverse people of India
who share the goal of balanced, equitable development and a vision of India in
2030 where more people share the benefits of India’s economic success.

36

India & The World Bank Group in a Time of Transformation
THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2013–2017)

THE WORLD BANK GROUP
70 Lodi Estate
New Delhi - 110003, India
Web : http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/india
Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/WorldBankIndia
38

