Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 65028-UZ

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

Public Disclosure Authorized

AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

FOR THE PERIOD FY12-FY15

Public Disclosure Authorized

November 1, 2011

Central Asia Country Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
Europe and Central Asia Region
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The last Country Assistance Strategy was discussed by the Board on June 12, 2008

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Uzbekistan Soum
US$1 = 1,758 Soum
(October 17, 2011)
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
(January 1 to December 31)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ADB
APL
CAHMP

Asian Development Bank
Adaptable Program Loan
Central Asia Hydrometeorology
Modernization Project
CAREC
Central Asia Regional Economic
Cooperation
CAS
Country Assistance Strategy
CAEWDP Central Asia Energy and Water
Development Program
CBU
Central Bank of Uzbekistan
CEDAW Convention on Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women
CIFA
Country Integrated Fiduciary Assessment
CIS
Commonwealth of Independent States
COM
Cabinet of Ministers
CPI
Consumer Price Index
CPIA
Country Policy Institutional Assessment
CPPR
Country Portfolio Performance Review
CPS
Country Partnership Strategy
ECA
Europe and Central Asia
FDI
Foreign Direct Investment
FRD
Fund for Reconstruction and Development
GAP
Gender Activities Master Plan
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GNI
Gross National Income
GPOBA
Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid
GIZ
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit (German Technical
Cooperation
HDI
Human Development Index
IBRD
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
ICT
Information and Communications
Technology
IDA
International Development Association
IDF
Institutional Development Fund
IFAS
International Fund for Saving Aral Sea
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IFIs
International Financial Institutions
IFS
International Finance Statistics
IMF
International Monetary Fund

IsDB
ISN
JICA
NGOs
MDGs
MFN
MFRIT
MIGA
MOE
NQI
ODA
PEFA
PFI
PFM
PIU
PPP
PRSP
RESP II
RRA
SDC
SDR
SME
SOEs
SSC
TA
UN
UNDP
UNECE
UNFPA
UNICEF
UNODC
USAID
WBG
WDR
WHO
WIS
WUA

Islamic Development Bank
Interim Strategy Note
Japanese International Cooperation Agency
Non-governmental Organizations
Millennium Development Goals
Most Favored Nation
Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations,
Investment and Trade
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Economy
National Quality Infrastructure
Official Development Assistance
Public Expenditure & Financial Accountability
Participating Financial Institutions
Public Finance Management
Project Implementation Unit
Public-Private Partnerships
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Rural Enterprise Support Project
Rural Restructuring Agency
Swiss Agency for Development & Cooperation
Special Drawing Right
Small and Medium Enterprise
State-owned Enterprises
State Statistics Committee
Technical Assistance
United Nations
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Children‘s Fund
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
United States Agency for International
Development
World Bank Group
World Development Report
World Health Organization
Welfare Improvement Strategy
Water Users‘ Association

IBRD
Vice President:

Philippe Le Houérou

Country Director:

Motoo Konishi

Country Manager

Takuya Kamata

Task Team
Leaders

Fabrice Houdart

IFC

MIGA

Dimitris Tsitsiragos

Izumi Kobayashi

Tomasz Telma

Ravi Vish

Oksana Nagayets & Zafar
Khashimov

Franciscus Johannes Linden

UZBEKISTAN: COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY, FY12-15
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................................... i
I.

INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................... 1

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA ...................................................... 1

A.

Political and Regional Context .......................................................................................................... 2

B.

Poverty Profile and Trends ................................................................................................................ 2

C.

Recent Economic Developments ...................................................................................................... 4

D.

Economic Prospects .......................................................................................................................... 7

E.

Development Challenges and Opportunities ..................................................................................... 8

F.

Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy ........................................................................ 10

III.

BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY ......................................................................... 12

A.

Lessons Learned from previous CAS and Stakeholder Feedback................................................... 12

B.

Proposed Bank Group Strategy ....................................................................................................... 14

C.

Expected Results and Program of Lending and Analytical and Advisory Activities ...................... 16
Result Area 1: Increasing the efficiency of infrastructure.................................................................. 16
Result Area 2: Enhancing the economy‘s competitiveness ................................................................. 18
Result Area 3: Diversifying the economy ........................................................................................... 19
Result Area 4: Improving access to, and outcomes of social services ................................................ 20

D.

Implementing the Country Partnership Strategy ............................................................................. 22

E.

Partnerships and Donor Coordination ............................................................................................. 23

F.

Monitoring and Evaluation.............................................................................................................. 24

IV.

MANAGING RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 24

A.

Country Risks .................................................................................................................................. 24

B.

External Shocks ............................................................................................................................... 25

C.

Risks to World Bank Group ............................................................................................................ 25

BOXES
Box 1: Data Availability and Transparency
Box 2: Gender in Uzbekistan
Box 3: CPS Gender Strategy
FIGURES
Figure 1: Uzbekistan‘s economic performance, 1998-2010
Figure 2: Official inflation data, 1998-2010
TABLES
Table 1: Uzbekistan‘s macroeconomic framework, 2009-14

ANNEXES
Annex 1: Results Framework for the Uzbekistan CPS FY2012-2015
Annex 2: IBRD/IDA activities for FY12-FY15 (by Strategic Theme)
Annex 3: Mapping of CPS Activities by Strategic Themes
Annex 4: Development Partner Coordination
Annex 5: CAS Completion Report
Annex A2: Country at a Glance
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3(a): IBRD/IDA Program Summary
Annex B3(b): IFC Investment Operations Program
Annex B4: Summary of Non-lending Services
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8(a): Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Annex B8(b): Statement of IFC‘s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex C: Uzbekistan Country Financing Parameters

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
Recent Economic Developments. Uzbekistan has enjoyed robust gross domestic product
(GDP) growth since the mid-2000s—averaging 8 percent annually according to official data―due
mainly to three factors: first, favorable terms of trade, in particular the continued high world market
prices of the country‘s key export commodities—copper, gold, natural gas and, since 2010, cotton;
second, the government‘s macro-economic management, including its end-2008 stimulus; and third,
limited exposure to international financial markets, which shielded it from contagion effects.
ii.
Economic Prospects. Overall growth is projected to continue around 7-8 percent annually
during 2011-14, supported by net exports and a large capital investment program. World prices for
Uzbekistan‘s principal exports are currently projected to remain favorable at least through the first
half of the FY12-15 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) period. The impact of recent increases in
global food and energy prices is expected to be limited because of Uzbekistan‘s policy of selfsufficiency in both food grains and energy. Given the authorities‘ plans to finance up to two-thirds of
their investment program from external sources, including loans, external debt is expected to increase
gradually.
iii.
Development Challenges and Opportunities. The authorities‘ vision is for Uzbekistan to
become an industrialized, high middle-income country by mid-century. Critical elements for such a
transformation include: (a) increasing the economy‘s efficiency and competitiveness and reducing its
dependency on a few commodity exports; (b) strengthening the financial sector to support private
entrepreneurial activity; (c) diversifying production towards higher value-added activities where
comparative advantage can be demonstrated; (d) creating jobs for the rapidly growing population of
young educated people; and (e) improving governance, including access to information on
government policies and their outcomes.
iv.
Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy. The authorities‘ approach toward
achieving these goals is to continue the gradual transition to a more market-oriented economy, to
ensure equitable distribution of growth between regions, and to maintain infrastructure and social
services. Their medium-term growth and development strategy is reflected in a five-year Industrial
Modernization and Infrastructure Development Program (2011-15) and in recently issued presidential
decrees. These documents embody four cross-cutting development policy goals and priorities:





to increase the efficiency of infrastructure, especially of energy, transport, and irrigation;
to enhance the competitiveness of specific industries, such as agro-processing,
petrochemicals, and textiles;
to diversify the economy and thereby reduce its reliance on commodity exports; and
to improve access to and the quality and outcomes of education, health and other social
services.

v.
Bank Group Strategy. The strategy‘s principal goal is to support implementation of these
four development policy objectives and priorities. It will continue with the two-track approach
employed under the previous Country Assistance Strategy (CAS)—namely full or limited
engagement, depending on the extent of agreement with the authorities on the direction of reforms in
the policy areas or sectors concerned. In practice, this means that CPS support for increasing the
efficiency of infrastructure and for human development and social inclusion—where government
and Bank Group views broadly converge—will broaden and deepen the operational involvement and

i

related policy dialogue already in place from the previous CAS. Conversely, support for the
government‘s industrial competitiveness and economic diversification agenda, where government
and Bank Group perspectives differ, will be limited initially to analytical and advisory services.
Overall, the CPS‘s framework and the program outlined below reflect the reform priorities that
emerged from last year‘s dialogue with the authorities on the outcome of the 2009 country
performance institutional assessment (CPIA). They are also broadly aligned with the Europe and
Central Asia (ECA) region‘s three strategic pillars of competitiveness, inclusion, and climate change.
vi.
Bank Group Program. The provisional lending program comprises fifteen operations over
the four years FY12-15, of which eleven will support reforms and investments for achieving
sustainable growth, including more efficient energy use and diversification of exports. The total
financial envelope will be about $1.3 billion, i.e. commitments averaging about $325 million
annually. Besides new lending, the existing portfolio of investment projects will support the
infrastructure efficiency and social inclusion elements of the government‘s strategy. Proposed
analytical and advisory services will cover all four elements of the government‘s growth and
development strategy. In addition, , the provisional list of analytical and advisory services includes a
proposed joint strategy report ―Uzbekistan Vision 2030‖. This would lay out roadmaps to facilitate
implementation of the authorities‘ industrial development, competitiveness and diversification
agenda.
vii.
International Finance Corporation (IFC) Program. IFC will maintain its focus on private
sector development through a combined investment and advisory approach. It will seek opportunities
in the following priority areas: (a) direct investments in the real sectors, such as general
manufacturing, services, and agribusiness; (b) strengthening access to finance for private sector
through banks, especially by strengthening privately owned banks; and (c) encouraging private sector
participation in infrastructure.
viii.
Risks. While the country‘s economic, political and social environment is currently stable,
CPS implementation could be affected by a combination of risk factors. Regionally, these include
deteriorating security conditions due to the situation in Afghanistan, and increasing tensions between
Uzbekistan and its neighbors over regional issues—especially the management and use of transboundary energy and water resources. Domestically, they include the economy‘s vulnerability to
possible external shocks affecting commodity prices and the anticipated inflow of foreign direct
investment (FDI) and external loans to finance the large public investment program. The three main
risks to CPS implementation are: (a) the significant political commitment required to confront
bottlenecks currently blocking the efficient functioning of the economy and private sector
development; (b) the lack of reliable data and related effectiveness of Bank Group policy advice; and
(c) implementation delays and the potential for mis-procurement as a result of the authorities‘
contract expertise and price verification process. The program includes measures designed to
manage or mitigate these risks.

ii

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The FY12-15 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) builds upon the experience of the
previous Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), which ended on June 30, 2011. The FY08-11
CAS, reflecting increased engagement following the FY06-07 Interim Strategy Note (ISN), adopted a
two-track approach. This was defined as: full engagement, comprising both lending and analytical
and advisory services in policy areas and sectors of common agreement on the path and pace of
reform; and limited engagement, comprising only analytical and advisory services in areas where
there was no, or incomplete consensus. It anticipated IDA15 financing in the range $375-450 million
for FY08-FY11, with non-lending activities focused on key sector and thematic areas proposed by
the government. Eight operations totaling $533 million were approved during the period, including a
$110 million IBRD loan for energy in FY11—the largest sector investment loan to Uzbekistan to
date. While this outcome exceeded expectations in mid-2008, it remains modest both in absolute
terms and relative to the size of Uzbekistan‘s economy and population as well as the country‘s
regional role and importance.1
2.
Continuing the two track approach, the CPS proposes a program linked to the
efficiency, competitiveness, diversification, and social equity elements of the government’s
medium-term growth and development strategy. Thus, support for increasing the efficiency of
infrastructure and for improving access to social services and its outcomes, where government and
Bank Group views broadly converge, will combine new lending, within a $1.3 billion IBRD/IDA
envelope, with related analytical and advisory services, technical assistance, and implementation of
10 operations currently underway. Conversely, support for the government‘s competitiveness and
economic diversification agenda—where government and Bank Group perspectives differ—will be
limited initially to policy dialogue and possibly technical assistance. IFC will maintain its focus on
private sector development through a combined investment and advisory approach.

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

3.
Uzbekistan is a lower middle-income, resource rich, doubly-landlocked country,
strategically located in the heart of Central Asia. Its population of about 28.2 million (mid-2010),
about half of whom live in urban areas, accounts for about forty percent of Central Asia‘s total. It is the
world‘s sixth largest cotton producer 2 and fourth largest raw cotton exporter 3 . Other important
commodities include natural gas, gold, copper and uranium. As the only country bordering five other
Central Asian states including Afghanistan, Uzbekistan‘s economic and social development is
important not only for its own young and rapidly growing population, but also for the management of
the region‘s energy, water, and trade as well as for its political stability and security.

1

2
3

Uzbekistan did not fully utilize its IDA allocation in the past. Bank/IDA lending during the 14 years (FY94-07) preceding the previous CAS
totaled $654.1 million—an annual average of $47 million or less than $2 per capita—of which $599.1 million was committed between FY9403 and $55 million between FY04-07.
National Cotton Council of America – Rankings, 2010.
UN COMTRADE database.

1

A.

Political and Regional Context

4.
Uzbekistan’s government and public administration have undergone important
reforms, especially since the mid-2000s, but continue to be highly centralized. The influence and
executive powers wielded by the Presidency and the Cabinet of Ministers (COM)—through
numerous, sometimes internal, decrees and resolutions—are far reaching; and there appears little
room for individual ministries or agencies to take even minor decisions or initiatives. Public
accountability therefore remains weak and voice and participation in economic and social policy
dialogue is limited.
5.
Governance and transparency remain major challenges. The limited availability of key
economic, financial, and social data, including consumer price indices (CPI), national accounts, and
fiscal accounts4, significantly hampers the relevance, timeliness, and value of economic analysis and
policy advice—both macro and sector-specific. It also undermines Uzbekistan‘s compliance with
international standards and obligations and indirectly impedes FDI. The authorities recently
indicated readiness to provide data for publication in the International Monetary Fund‘s (IMF‘s)
International Finance Statistics (IFS) and undertook to improve national accounts statistics, but
progress in implementing these commitments remains slow (cf. Box 1 in the next page).5 They have
also improved public access to official information and data, including on-line through the State
Statistics Committee‘s (SSC) website. Despite these advances, however, data availability remains
selective.
6.
Internationally, Uzbekistan’s relations with key bilateral development and trade
partners—the European Union, Japan, Russia, the United States and, more recently, China—
have continued to improve. On the other hand, its interactions with Central Asian neighbors remain
weighed down by concerns over the management of the region‘s shared energy and water
resources—exemplified by Uzbekistan‘s opposition to the construction of two large hydropower
projects in the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan that could affect the flow of water it requires for
irrigation. Given upstream and downstream countries‘ differing interests as far as energy and water
are concerned, regional cooperation in these two crucial areas—beyond the minimal bureaucratic and
technical coordination needed to ensure effective functioning of their integrated infrastructure—is
likely to remain difficult in the near term.

B.

Poverty Profile and Trends

7.
Poverty has declined in recent years, due to rapid economic growth, government
investments, and increased remittances from abroad. According to official data, poverty as
measured by a national food-based norm of 2,100 kilo-calories per person per day declined from 27.5
percent of the population in 2001 to 19.5 percent in 2010. Rapid GDP growth, regular increases in
public sector salaries, and increased remittances mainly from Russia (which peaked at an estimated 7
percent of GDP in 2008) were the main contributing factors. Although recent trends imply an
accelerated decline in poverty since 2005, especially in rural areas, the elasticity of poverty reduction
to GDP growth remains relatively low. Explanations include: the low productivity of agriculture
which still employs one third of the population, but is subject to numerous implicit taxes; the high
level of informality in the labor market; and the high and growing dependency within households

4

Uzbekistan provides CPI data, but not in accordance with the generally accepted methodology required under Article VIII, Section 5 of the
IMF‘s Articles of Agreement.
5
An IMF-financed long-term resident statistical advisor is helping the authorities improve price and national accounts statistics.

2

(i.e. the small number of working adults relative to total household members) and regional
divergences (i.e. richer regions growing faster).

Box 1: Data Availability and Transparency
The limited availability and poor quality of key economic, financial, and social data impedes a detailed, realistic
assessment of the country‘s macroeconomic policies and structural reform performance. During the previous CAS,
the authorities have made efforts to improve data quality and transparency and this Box summarizes progress
achieved and challenges remaining in this important area.
The main effort to improve access to information on public policies has been through the introduction of
government-run websites. A wide range of economic statistics is now available on-line on the State Statistics
Committee‘s (SSC) website. However, these data are often not aligned with international data dissemination
standards. Specifically, until 2010, economic data had not been reported to any of the internationally recognized
databases. Tangible progress was made in 2010 when the government published Financial Soundness Indicators on
the International Monetary Fund‘s (IMF) website.
The Bank and the IMF, together with other development partners, have launched a series of initiatives to assist
the authorities in improving national statistics. Starting 2008, the IMF placed several long-term resident advisors in
the SSC to provide technical assistance in improving the quality of balance of payments data, restructuring of the
national accounts data collection system, revising the CPI methodology, and aligning the public financial reporting
system with international standards. IMF technical assistance has also contributed to the improved quality of fiscal
and monetary accounts and balance of payments. A financial statistics dataset is well advanced in terms of
compliance with international standards and readiness for disclosure to the IMF. Reconciliation between fiscal and
monetary data has been streamlined.
In addition, the UNICEF and the Bank Group have been providing assistance to improve sampling and data
collection practices and data analysis methodologies of household surveys, in particular for the 2011 Multi Cluster
Indicators Survey (MICS)―a large household-level survey covering 20,000 households. It aims to facilitate
verification of poverty-related statistics.
In order to move public disclosure forward, the Bank Group engaged with the government on data transparency
issues under the broader CPIA policy dialogue, linking data transparency with improvement in the overall
governance environment. Partly as a result of these efforts, and those of the IMF an April 4, 2011 COM Resolution
(# 2629) authorized initiation of preparatory work to publish economic data in the IMF‘s databases. Subject to the
IMF‘s own procedures and timetables, the first publication is expected by early-2012. Nevertheless, actual progress
towards improved data transparency remains slow.

8.
In 2010, Uzbekistan ranked 102 out of 169 countries on the UNDP’s Human
Development Index (HDI). Its score of 0.617 in the HDI‘s ‗medium human development‘ group of
42 countries, is below the ECA region‘s average of 0.717, but has improved from 0.588 in 2005.
Uzbekistan has reached its United Nations‘ Millennium Development Goal (MDG) for maternal
mortality and is on track for child (under five) mortality and reversing the spread of tuberculosis. Its
MDG target for improving the quality of primary and basic secondary education while maintaining
universal access is expected to be met. Reversing and halting the spread of HIV/AIDS by 2015,
however, is unlikely, and halving poverty—from 27.5 percent in 2001 to 14 percent in 2015—will
require maintaining high growth rates. A 2011 government COM resolution ―On additional
measures for implementing the United Nations Millennium Development Goals in Uzbekistan‖
outlines tasks, measures, outcomes and responsible ministries for each MDG for the period 2011-15.
9.
Uzbekistan’s national targets for gender equality and women’s empowerment are on
track. It achieved gender equality in primary and general basic secondary and secondary vocational
education in 2005 and is expected to improve gender balance in higher education by 2015. An

3

overview of opportunities and outcomes for women, using the upcoming 2012 World Development
Report‘s (WDR) three-dimensional analytical framework, is summarized in Box 2 below.

Box 2: Gender in Uzbekistan
Endowments: Gender differences at the primary, secondary, and tertiary levels of the education system are
small, but the educational attainment of employed women is on average higher than employed men. Access to
prenatal and family planning services is high, with virtually all births attended by that of skilled health staff and
97 percent occurring in a health facility. According to official data, infant mortality is 11/100,000 births, but
according to field surveys it may be three times higher. Importantly, there is no gender imbalance at birth.
Contraceptive prevalence is about 65%. The total fertility rate has roughly halved since the early 1990s, from 4
to 2 live births per woman. Women‘s life expectancy exceeds that of men by 4 years.
Access to economic opportunities: According to official data, 95 percent of both men and women of
working age were employed in 2010, although according to survey data female employment is only 50 percent.
Women account for about 45 percent of the labor force and over 65 percent of health and education system
employees. They are under-represented in agriculture, construction, industry, and services, and only 25% of
female entrepreneurs received credit in 2007. There is also evidence that women are benefiting less than men
from the restructuring of shirkats into private farms: in 2007, only 7.2 percent of private farmers were women,
according to Women‘s Committee statistics.
Agency: Uzbekistan‘s Constitution and Family Code provide for equal rights and responsibilities for men
and women. The State Committee for Women‘s Affairs—an officially registered non-governmental
organization (NGO) comprising a nation-wide network of almost 80,000 primary organizations—coordinates
and promotes women‘s activities. Its chairwoman is a Deputy Prime Minister. There is provision for
mandatory nomination of female deputies for all administrative bodies at regional, district and township levels
dealing with women‘s issues. As a result, nearly 400 women participate in decision-making at various levels of
government, at the same time acting as head of the local branch of the State Committee for Women‘s Affairs.
This structure extends down to the community level, where 10,000 women‘s adviser positions have been
created. It was recently expanded to include full-time positions of Deputy Rectors in charge of women‘s issues
at all higher education institutions.
In terms of the political process, women remain underrepresented and, to address this issue, political parties
set a quota of 30% for female candidates in elections. As a result, the number of women deputies in the
national bi-cameral legislature increased from 9 percent to 17 percent in 2005. The Speaker of the Legislative
Chamber (lower house) and the Vice-President of the Senate (upper house) are both women. Uzbekistan
ratified the Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1996.
More recently, the government has evidenced increasing commitment to efforts to combat human trafficking.

C.

Recent Economic Developments

10.
Uzbekistan has enjoyed robust GDP growth since the mid-2000s—averaging 8 percent
annually according to official data. Its economy withstood the 2008-09 global financial crisis
relatively well. Three factors explain these positive outcomes: first, favorable terms of trade, in
particular continued high world market prices for the country‘s key commodities—copper, gold,
natural gas and, since 2010 cotton; second, the government‘s macro-economic management,
including its end-2008 stimulus equivalent to 4 percent of GDP, financed partly by the Fund for
Reconstruction and Development (FRD)—a sovereign wealth fund established in 2006 to collect
windfall gains from commodity-based revenues; and third, the country‘s limited exposure to world
financial markets, which largely shielded it from contagion effects. Nevertheless, remittance inflows

4

fell by an estimated 30 percent in 2009, which most likely impacted the poorest, most vulnerable
groups.
11.
The 2010 consolidated balance, including FRD resources totaling $4.9 billion, posted a
surplus equivalent to 2.2 percent of GDP. This enabled the government to continue its
interventionist economic policies, including support for import substitution and export promotion.
Specific measures included budget subsidies, tax holidays, preferential access to credit and foreign
exchange, as well as duty-free imports of capital goods for enterprises in government-determined
priority industries. The authorities intend to maintain these policies over the medium term, including
a fiscal stance aimed at accumulating considerable FRD resources ($10 billion by 2014).
12.
Uzbekistan has enjoyed large current account surpluses since 2004, owing to continued
high prices for its commodity exports, remittances, and the authorities’ export promotion
efforts. These surpluses, together with foreign exchange restrictions and net savings as a result of
the government‘s tight fiscal policy, enabled the central bank to accelerate the accumulation of
reserves, which had increased to $14.6 billion by 2010—equivalent to over 12.5 months of recorded
imports, or 38 percent of GDP. Meanwhile, the authorities‘ zero net borrowing policy improved the
country‘s debt indicators. External debt, 70 percent of which is public or publicly guaranteed,
declined from 64 percent of GDP in 2001 to 15 percent of GDP in 2010, by which date the debt
service to exports ratio had fallen to about 7 percent.
13.
The spread between the official and (curb) market exchange rates in Uzbekistan
remains considerable reflecting the existing restrictions in the availability of foreign exchange
and trade. When export receipts declined in 2008, a spread between the official and curb market
exchange rates re-emerged, averaging up to 40 percent during 2009-11 (cf. Figure 1 below).
Although this may not jeopardize overall macroeconomic stability as long as strong internal and
external surpluses continue, the central bank would decide when to exit from its exchange rate anchor
if the balance of payments were to weaken. In this context, the existing level of reserves seems more
than enough to satisfy the incremental demand for foreign exchange that would arise if current
restrictions were removed. A more serious concern is the additional burden the wide spread imposes
on private businesses that do not have preferential access to foreign exchange, increasing the cost of
their imports and fueling imported inflation. It also inflicts an additional de facto tax on cotton and
wheat producers under the state order or procurement system because government purchases of
cotton and wheat are valued at the official exchange rate.

5

Figure 1: Uzbekistan’s economic performance, 1998-2010
Sectoral composition of GDP, %

Sectoral contribution to GDP growth rates, %

Budget performance, % of GDP

External inflows and changes in international reserves

12.0

45
40

10.0

35

8.0

30
25

Consolidated Fiscal Balance (LHS)

6.0

20
Revenue (RHS)

4.0

15
10

Expenditure (RHS)

2.0

5

0.0

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Debt ratios, % of GDP

Exchange rate, soum/$1 (daily 1998-2010)

70

30

60

23.9

25

21.5

50
40
30

17.8

20
12.8

64.2
58.2

60.6

55.3

20

Debt-to-GDP ratio (LHS)

18.0

10.3

%

Debt service-to-export ratio (RHS)

24.7 24.1

48.6

7.5

40.2

31.5

29.5

10

15

11.9

24.1

6.2 5.7 6.7

16.8 14.3 15.3 15.2

0

10
5
0

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010p

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on official statistics

6

14.
Although the reported inflation
has shown a secular decline, price
Figure 2: Official inflation data, 1998-2010
pressures
remain.
Prudent
macroeconomic management, selective
50
price controls, and the soum‘s de facto peg
40
to the US dollar all helped to lower inflation
which, according to official data, fell from
30
GDP deflator
double digits through the early 2000s to less
20
than 10 percent during 2004-10. According
CPI, official
to the State Statistics Committee (SSC), the
10
CPI increased 7.2 percent year on year in
0
2010 (cf. Figure 2). Unlike in other
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
countries in Europe and Central Asia,
imported food price inflation is not a major
risk because Uzbekistan is essentially selfsufficient in key foodstuffs. However, high
Source: State Statistics Committee
foreign exchange inflows combined with a
policy of nominal depreciation of the soum, high credit growth under the government programs, large
increases in public-sector wages and social benefits, and the recent wide spread between the official and
market exchange rates, are together creating inflationary pressures. Retail trade data indicate that actual
inflation may be as high as 15 percent annually, twice the officially reported rate and similar to the
International Monetary Fund‘s alternative CPI estimate.

D. Economic Prospects
15.
Overall growth is projected by the authorities to continue around 7-8 per cent annually
during the strategy period, supported by commodity exports, domestic demand and
investment. The government has embarked upon a $47.3 billion, five-year (2011-15) Industrial
Modernization and Infrastructure Development Program; of which almost $26 billion, or about 60
percent is allocated to investments in oil and gas; over $5 billion, or about 11 percent to electricity;
$2.6 billion, or roughly 6 percent each to chemicals and metallurgy; and the remaining 16 percent to
construction materials, machine-building, textiles, transport, and other industries. The program,
comprising 519 large investment projects, aims to increase industry‘s share of GDP from 24 percent
in 2010 to 28 percent in 2015. Sources of financing have already been identified for about $30
billion, or 64 percent of the program, over two-thirds of which is expected to be funded by a
combination of external loans and foreign direct investment (FDI), 25 percent by domestic
investment and borrowing, and about 7 percent by the FRD. In this connection, external financing
has already been secured for large projects in chemicals, hydrocarbons, and textiles—from China,
India, Korea, Russia and Turkey—and about 23 percent of the program‘s projects are under
implementation. While the program will not raise budget expenditures directly, it might increase
public and publicly guaranteed external debt significantly, depending upon how much FDI can be
mobilized.
16.
Trends in commodity prices will be an important determinant of economic outcomes
and performance in the short- and medium-term. Gold prices increased by about 26 percent on
average in 2010, and are forecasted to increase by a further 16 percent in 2011, before trending down
in 2012.6 Likewise, cotton prices are expected to remain much higher in 2011-12 than in 2005-09.
The price of natural gas exported to Russia, after increasing by two thirds during 2008-09, is also
projected to remain around its current level. Moreover, Uzbekistan will soon start selling natural gas
6

Source: Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU).

7

to China, thus diversifying its export market. As for imports, the impact of recently increasing world
food and energy prices is expected to be limited because Uzbekistan is essentially self-sufficient in
both food grains and energy.
Table 1: Uzbekistan’s macroeconomic framework, 2008-14
2008

Actuals
2009

2010

2011

27.3

27.8

28.2

28.3

28.7

29.0

29.3

9.0
27,934

8.1
32,818

8.5
38,974

8.3
46,114

8.0
53,344

7.8
57,239

7.5
63,285

Fiscal Balances (augmented Government,
[incl. FRD]), US$ billion
Revenues
Expenditures
Consolidated fiscal balance

42.8
32.1
10.7

37.4
34.2
3.2

37.1
34.9
2.2

38.9
36.0
2.9

39.0
35.3
3.7

38.9
35.6
3.4

38.9
35.5
3.3

BoP (in percent of GDP), US$ billion
Current account
Exports, G&S
Imports, G&S
Gross reserves [incl. gold],

8.7
43.5
40.8
9.5

2.7
35.6
35.6
12.2

6.7
31.2
28.3
14.6

5.7
30.0
29.7
18.4

4.9
30.2
30.4
22.8

4.4
31.7
31.7
27.5

4.0
32.2
32.6
33.7

Relative prices
CPI inflation rate (average),percent

7.4

7.8

7.2

7.7

7.5

6.9

6.5

Public debt
External debt-to-GDP ratio
14.3
Source: Official Statistics and Bank staff estimates

15.3

15.2

18.8

20.3

23.1

23.6

Population (million)
National Accounts
Real GDP growth rates, percent
Annual average GDP, US$ million

Projections
2012
2013

2014

17.
External debt is projected to increase gradually during the next few years. The
authorities‘ conservative foreign borrowing policy and favorable credit ratings provide ample room
for additional borrowing in the medium term.7 Given their plans to finance the public investment
program with foreign loans, external debt is expected to increase gradually from about 15 percent of
GDP in 2010 to about 18 percent of GDP in 20158. Domestic public debt is small. Total domestic
debt, including transactions between government accounts and the monetary sector, remains negative
due to the accumulation of large fiscal savings at the central bank. Existing external public and
publicly guaranteed debt is being serviced fully and there are currently no arrears.

E.

Development Challenges and Opportunities

18.
To become a high middle-income country, Uzbekistan needs to continue to industrialize
and expand domestic demand. As other middle income economies in Asia and Eastern Europe
start experiencing increases in relative factor prices, their industrial structure will shift from lowerend labor-intensive manufacturing to higher value-adding manufacturing and associated knowledge
Cf. ADB and IBRD positive creditworthiness assessments and the EIU‘s ―B‖ credit rating, which is comparable to Croatia, Indonesia and the
Philippines.
8
Both the IMF and the WB teams estimate that Uzbekistan debt at around 15 percent of GDP in 2010. However debt figures may be revised
based on the GOU‘s recent official submission of debt statistics to DECDG for Global Development Finance report. According to this
submission, Uzbekistan‘s external debt was estimated at around 19.6 percent of GDP in 2010.
7

8

services. When the lower-end industries start migrating out of these countries, Uzbekistan may be
able to capture a substantial share, thanks to its cheap and abundant labor, relatively high skilled
work force, low cost utilities and infrastructure and relatively large domestic market. Also, as one of
the largest food producers in the region, some segments of its agriculture sector have potential to
bring high growth and greater value added to the economy.
19.
Critical elements for the transformation are to increase the efficiency and
competitiveness of its economy. One of the critical issues for Uzbekistan‘s industrialization vision
is to ensure that the country offers competitive factor prices, adequate services, and a hospitable
investment climate. Sound infrastructure to support agglomeration and cluster development of
manufacturing industries could also help reduce external costs such as supply logistics and market
accessibility to firms. While existing labor costs and utility prices are competitive, Uzbekistan is one
of the most energy inefficient countries in ECA: its consumption of energy per unit of GDP is three
times the ECA average and of electricity per capita four times the CIS average. While its transport
infrastructure is adequately maintained, it still takes 93 days on average to import goods, due not only
to its doubly-landlocked geography but also to outdated customs procedures and related governance
issues. As a result, Uzbekistan ranked 107 out of 155 countries for the customs-related subcomponent of the Bank Group‘s Logistics Performance Index (LPI). Its tariff rates are high and there
are other tariff-equivalent measures as well. All these barriers make Uzbekistan‘s current trade
regime one of the most restrictive in the ECA region. However, the most recent (2009-10) Business
Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS) data indicates a gradually improving
trend.
20.
Uzbekistan also needs a stronger financial sector so that it can support entrepreneurial
activity. Although financial intermediation measured by broad money to GDP has doubled—from
10 percent in 2003 to 20 percent in 2010—it remains low for a country at this income level. The
authorities recently increased the capital of the largest banks to strengthen the long-term resource
base for investment and to mitigate the consequences of the global economic and financial recession.
However, significant amounts of national savings, public and private, are not channeled for economic
development, due to weak financial intermediation. Financing for private agricultural enterprises has
also been limited, evidence of which includes the immediate oversubscription of agricultural credits
by private farmers offered by a Bank-financed credit program.
21.
Diversification of sources of growth based on private demand is key. Uzbekistan needs
more private sector entrepreneurs. Its large firms are mainly state-owned enterprises even in nonstrategic, non-mining sectors. Their performance and accountability receive little public scrutiny;
they remain major sources of inefficiency and rent-seeking; and they have stifled transfer of new
technologies and innovation. Uzbekistan has yet to see large-scale entry of new private enterprises or
investment. The share of small and medium-sized enterprises in GDP is officially estimated at about
53 percent in 2010—up from an estimated 45 percent during the last decade; and its FDI stock per
capita of $131 (2009)—one of the lowest within the CIS—is much less than the $1,023-$1,780 of the
Caucasus countries, Russia, and Ukraine. In addition, small- and medium-sized private enterprises
are not only agents of economic growth, but also of employment generation.
22.
Diversification of production towards higher value-added activities and sub-sectors is
also important. Compared to cotton, where state control over cropping patterns as well as input
supply and output procurement remains substantial, horticulture can help private farmers move up the
value chain and earn higher profit margins—in particular, in processing and exports. In textiles,
garment production adds much higher value than yarn and textiles and requires advanced skills for
marketing and sales. It also creates a greater number of jobs as well as a wider spectrum of

9

professional opportunities. Similarly, Uzbekistan‘s natural gas resources could be monetized by
transforming them into petro-chemicals.
23.
Uzbekistan’s social services—primary and secondary education, and primary health
care—are well maintained. According to government statistics, over 65 percent of public budgets
are allocated to social services and are in line with international standards on a per capita basis.
Uzbekistan‘s long-standing National Education Program has resulted in a satisfactory physical
infrastructure, broad provisions of learning materials and equipment, a 100 percent primary
enrollment ratio, and 99 per cent adult literacy. Life expectancy at birth was 68 years in 2009, close
to the world average and that of other regional CIS countries. However, inter-regional differences
are one of the remaining challenges.
24.
The growing population of young educated people will need employment. Between
2004-09, the working age population is estimated to have grown from 14.6 million to 16.8 million,
while actual employment during the same period increased only from 9.9 million to 11.3 million (68
percent and 67 percent of the working age population respectively). Those who could not find
employment at home, many from rural communities, migrated to find employment abroad. The
number of Uzbek migrants in Russia and Kazakhstan is currently estimated at about 2 million, or
about 12 percent of the country‘s working age population. While remittances, estimated at about $1.8
billion or 4.5 percent of GDP in 2010, help low income families maintain a minimal standard of
living, more jobs need to be created within the country. In addition, structural changes in the
economy will bring about changes in the nature of the skills development required in vocational and
higher education.
25.
Improving governance will help enhance the effectiveness of industrial development.
The authorities‘ large scale medium-term program for industrial modernization and associated
infrastructure development relies predominantly on state-owned enterprises (SOEs). The success of
their SOE reform strategy will depend on SOEs‘ capacity for continuous change, leading to greater
efficiency through the adoption of new technology, cooperation with foreign investors, and
production of competitive products or public accountability for services. To achieve this objective,
much stronger and more transparent governance and accountability structures are needed.
26.
A final related challenge is the need to improve access to information on government
policies and their outcomes, as well as on the living standards of the population. Despite the
existence of several formal institutions, public accountability remains in practice limited. Reasons
for this include: the de facto dependence of the legislative and judicial branches of government on the
executive; a nascent mass media that remains essentially government controlled; a still nascent civil
society. Moreover, the limited access and poor quality of key economic, financial, and social data
impedes a detailed, realistic assessment of the country‘s economic policies and performance. While
the government has recently taken initial steps towards improving data transparency and information
sharing (cf. Box 1), substantial improvements in the quality of national economic statistics and the
dissemination of economic data through internationally recognized channels remain a high priority.

F. Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy
27.
Uzbekistan’s strategic long-term development goal is to become an industrialized, high
middle-income country by mid-century. The authorities‘ approach toward achieving this goal is to
continue the gradual transition to a more market-oriented economy, to mitigate the potential negative
consequences of external shocks, to ensure equitable distribution of growth across regions, and to
maintain infrastructure and social services at an adequate level. Their long-term strategic
development goal is clearly ambitious: it implies inter alia that the economy will need to grow at an

10

annual average rate of 8 percent for the next 20-30 years, with GDP per capita reaching about $6,500
by 2030 and over $13,000 by 2040. According to the 2008 Growth and Development study, only 13
countries have been able to sustain this high level of growth for such an extended period. 9 The same
study also emphasizes that the transformation of a low income economy to a middle or high income
one requires significant structural changes.
28.
Against this background, the authorities’ medium-term growth and development
strategy is reflected inter alia in: (a) the $47.3 billion, five-year Industrial Modernization and
Infrastructure Development Program (2011-15); and (b) four recently issued presidential
decrees. The latter cover the financial sector, industrial development, infrastructure, transport and
communications, and economic reforms. These documents, together with President Karimov‘s
statement at a government meeting to discuss 2010 outcomes and 2011 priorities, embody the
following four cross-cutting development policy goals and priorities:



to increase the efficiency of infrastructure, especially of energy, transport, and irrigation;



to enhance the competitiveness of targeted, strategic industries, such as agro-processing,
petrochemicals, and textiles;



to diversify the economy, in particular to reduce its reliance on commodity exports; and



to improve access to and the quality and outcomes of education, health and other social
services, so that the benefits of overall growth are shared equitably by the entire
population.

29.
These goals and priorities are important prerequisites for continuing and sustaining
longer-term growth. Their achievement, however, will ultimately depend on greater progress
towards reducing the structural distortions inherent in Uzbekistan‘s gradualist, state-led development
model and strategy. As noted in the preceding analysis of the country‘s development challenges and
opportunities (paras.18-26), these include the issues discussed in the following paragraphs.
30.
Industrial Development. The authorities have identified several strategic industries as
priority candidates for industrial development and they plan to provide large scale financing. While
certain industries are competitive, e.g. petrochemicals and higher-value added agro-processing, the
comparative advantage of several others is less clear. More detailed assessments of these industries
may be needed to ensure that Uzbekistan‘s true comparative advantages are realized, given the
rapidly changing global economy.
31.
Trade regime. As part of the diversification agenda, various measures are planned to
encourage exports by small and medium-sized enterprises—such as the establishment of an export
promotion agency and the adoption of international quality standards. The authorities have plans to
gradually liberalize the trade regime—and to reduce transaction costs by streamlining customs
procedures and reducing customs duties. But currently its trade regime remains one of the most
restrictive in the ECA region
32.
Private sector. As part of their competitiveness agenda, the authorities recognize the need to
expand the private sector inter alia through protecting private property, reducing government
controls, and minimizing the costs of doing business. However, there is still no clear implementation
9

The Growth Report—Strategies for Sustained Growth and Inclusive Development (Commission on Growth and Development)

11

plan for enhancing the private sector‘s role in the economy. In the absence of such a strategy and of
much greater private sector development—including in agriculture, where liberalization of the state
procurement system for cotton could increase incomes and unleash new opportunities for
productivity growth in the rural economy—the authorities‘ competitiveness and diversification goals
may be difficult, if not impossible, to achieve.
33.
Financial sector. The authorities plan to implement various measures designed to further
enhance the banking system and develop non-bank financial institutions. However, restrictions on
access to foreign exchange and to local currency in cash remain major obstacles in Uzbekistan‘s
business environment and investment climate. Until these constraints have been mitigated or
removed, it may be difficult to attract the levels of investment required for the financing of the
government‘s $47.3 billion industrial modernization and infrastructure improvement program, two
thirds of which is supposed to be financed by foreign loans and foreign direct investment.
34.
Social equity and inclusion. In health, the government‘s plans focus on achieving the
MDGs and envision improvements in primary, emergency and specialized health care, preventive
health measures, and a gradual transition to output-based financing. In education, the objective is to
maintain high literacy rates, move to 12 years of mandatory free education, and improve the quality
of primary, secondary and tertiary education (e.g. a new higher education development program that
envisions improving laboratory equipment, curricula, and professors‘ salaries), while maintaining
universal access to basic education. The authorities also envisage creation of millions of new jobs in
small enterprises, mainly in rural areas, and in home-based businesses through labor contracting and
improved provision of infrastructure and services. They also highlight the importance of refocusing
social assistance so that it targets the poor, but provide few details as to how this will be done.
35.
Governance and transparency. The authorities have issued decrees and made major
statements which lay down principles for promoting the development of non-governmental
organizations and assisting in the growth of the media. However, these documents provide few
details about how goals such as reducing legal restrictions on information disclosure are to be
achieved.

III.
A.

BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

Lessons Learned from previous CAS and Stakeholder Feedback

36.
The FY08-11 CAS Completion Report rated CAS program results and Bank Group
performance as moderately satisfactory. 10 This outcome mirrored the country‘s moderately
satisfactory progress towards its development goals. Relatively strong performing areas included
macroeconomic management, education, health, water supply and sanitation. Relatively weak
performing areas included agriculture, governance, transparency and financial and private sector
development. While the number of operations approved was in line with expectations in mid-2008,
the total $533 million committed by end-FY11 was significantly higher. This was partly because
Uzbekistan utilized more of its IDA allocation than expected and partly due to the resumption of
limited IBRD lending in FY11 as well as the addition of two new energy operations. Analytical and
advisory as well as technical assistance activities were implemented largely as planned, except for
poverty analysis and the private sector. Portfolio performance remained moderately satisfactory.

10

Cf. Annex 5: Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR), FY08-11

12

37.
IFC focused on strengthening the private sector through several advisory projects.
These facilitated technical improvements in the business environment, supported financial sector
development, and promoted private sector participation in infrastructure. In addition, IFC invested
$8 million in two financial sector projects, including a first equity investment in one of the country‘s
few privately-owned banks.
38.
The FY08-11 CAS incorporated several lessons learned from the preceding interim
strategy (ISN) and more broadly from the Bank Group’s experience in Uzbekistan since the
early 2000s. These included the following: (a) despite the slow pace of structural reforms and
diverging views of the Bank and the government in several areas, a solid engagement through
investment projects can create effective entry points for policy dialogue; (b) IFC‘s long-standing and
constructive relationship with the government through advisory projects has not yet translated into
significantly increased direct investments, due to the difficult business environment and the
government‘s active engagement in private sector operations; and (c) given the country‘s limited
capacity for project implementation, renewed attention needs to be paid to generic issues, such as the
country‘s public procurement process and project management.
39.
The outcomes recorded in the Completion Report have validated the accuracy and
relevance of these lessons learned—especially as they relate to investment projects as entry points
for encouraging structural reforms in some sectors where ESW engagement alone might be
ineffective. Given their systemic nature, they have continued to inform the design and content of the
FY12-15 CPS. In addition, four more detailed lessons emerge from experience since mid-2008:
 the quality, relevance, timeliness, and value of the Bank‘s economic analysis and policy
advice—both macro and sector-specific—remain constrained by the limited availability
and poor quality of official economic, financial and social data;



the Bank‘s project cycle and the government‘s internal process for approving
investment projects are still not well aligned, causing significant delays in credit or loan
signing and effectiveness and thus in initial project implementation;



the failure to address fundamental policy differences during project design leads to poor
portfolio performance. The credit for Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises,
approved in mid-2010 but which only became effective more than one year later, is the
most recent example; and



the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations, Investment and Trade‘s (MFRIT)
procedures for contract expertise need to be streamlined. In particular, its often
protracted process for ‗price verification‘ of contracts awarded following competitive
bidding continues to complicate and delay the procurement process and, ultimately,
project implementation.

Early government action to address and resolve these issues will be an important prerequisite for
effective and efficient implementation of this CPS.
40.
Stakeholder consultations at the national and local level in March 2011 offered several
important insights for the design and preparation of this CPS. Consultations were held with
central and local government officials as well as with representatives of the private sector and civil
society (including women‘s groups). Specific events included: meetings with key Ministers, both
one-on-one and in groups; and meetings with local government officials and civil society groups and

13

the private sector in the city of Tashkent and in the regions of Bukhara, Fergana, Kashkadarya,
Navoi, and Samarkand and Karakalpakstan. These consultations validated the importance of the goal
of achieving growth with equity in Uzbekistan and provided support for the CPS four strategic
objectives. Not surprisingly, support for the competitiveness and diversification agenda was
strongest among the private sector and local government officials, while support for increasing the
efficiency of infrastructure, improving access to social services, and the CPS governance and
transparency objectives was strongest among representatives of civil society. Consultations at the
sub-national level proved useful in providing an appreciation of the scope for tackling inter-regional
disparities.

B.

Proposed Bank Group Strategy

41.
The CPS’ principal goal is to support implementation of the efficiency, competitiveness,
diversification, and social equity elements of the government’s medium-term development
strategy. It will continue with the two-track approach employed under the previous CAS, i.e. full or
limited engagement, depending on results achieved. In practice, CPS support for the result areas,
where government and Bank Group views on sector-specific reforms and strategy broadly converge,
will broaden and deepen the operational involvement and related policy dialogue already in place
from the previous CAS. These programs, comprising full engagement, will thus maintain a high
degree of continuity with the previous CAS. They include: (a) increasing the efficiency of
infrastructure (energy, drainage, irrigation and water management, and, potentially, transport); and
(b) human development and social inclusion (education, gender, health, poverty, and municipal
services). Conversely, support for the government‘s industrial competitiveness and economic
diversification agenda, where government and Bank Group perspectives differ, will be limited
initially to analytical and advisory services and possibly technical assistance. Effective fulfillments of
these agenda areas will require structural reforms related to trade, the financial sector, and the
business regulatory environment as well as public sector management and institutions. Whether or
not these limited activities lead to more comprehensive, full engagement will depend upon the Bank
assessment of government intentions and progress in the reform areas concerned. Overall, the CPS‘
framework and the program outlined below reflect the reform priorities that emerged from last year‘s
dialogue with the authorities on the outcome of Uzbekistan‘s 2009 country performance institutional
assessment (CPIA). They are also broadly aligned with the ECA region‘s three strategic pillars of
competitiveness, inclusion, and climate change.
42.
A recently completed creditworthiness assessment reaffirmed Uzbekistan’s eligibility
for IBRD lending. However, since its GNI per capita income exceeded the IDA operational cutoff
for the first time only in 2010, Uzbekistan will retain its access to IDA resources for the entire FY1215 CPS period, with no explicit timetable for graduation. The creditworthiness assessment also
recommended that the CPS focus on: (a) improved data transparency and reliability to enable the
monitoring of credit risk; (b) measures to improve the business environment; and (c) reforms
necessary to sustain high growth rates and diversify the economy away from a declining stocks of
primary commodities.
43.
The focus on investment lending and its emphasis on improving the business
environment and on data transparency is consistent with the creditworthiness assessment’s
recommendations. Planned lending is directed primarily towards investments and related reforms
designed to increase the efficiency of infrastructure, to diversify the economy, especially agriculture,
and to promote social inclusion and human capital development—all necessary conditions to sustain
high rates of sustainable growth. Likewise, non-lending activities will focus on measures to improve
the business environment and investment climate, to promote private sector development, and to

14

strengthen institutions for competitiveness, including continued progress in public information
disclosure and data transparency.
44.
The provisional IBRD/IDA lending program comprises sixteen operations over the four
years FY12-15. Eleven would support reforms and investments for achieving sustainable growth
and reducing reliance on primary commodities directly, including more efficient energy use and
diversification of exports. The total financial envelope with be $1,350 million11, comprising $710
million IBRD and $640 million IDA, of which $540 million is the amount available to Uzbekistan
during FY12-14 under IDA-16.12 Although much larger than the original IDA-only allocation in the
previous CAS, this IBRD/IDA $325 million annual average would be in line with the actual outcome
in FY11. Two operations—for Advanced Electricity Metering and Alat-Karakul Water Supply—are
at an advanced stage of preparation for delivery in FY12.
45.
Besides new lending, the existing, recently expanded portfolio of investment projects
will support the infrastructure efficiency and social equity elements of the government’s
strategy. Six of ten investment projects totaling $433 million, or 68 percent of the current $634.7
million portfolio, were approved during the last two years (FY10-11), including four for education,
health, and municipal services. Given their significance in terms of direct support for
implementation of sector-specific reforms in these areas, management and supervision of these
operations will be an important component of the program, especially during the first two years.
46.
Proposed analytical and advisory engagement would cover all four elements of the
government’s growth and development strategy. Thus, in addition to project-related analytical
and advisory services and technical assistance in the infrastructure efficiency and human
development result areas, the provisional summary of analytical and advisory services includes a
proposed joint strategy report—―Uzbekistan Vision 2030‖—that would lay out roadmaps to achieve
selected key development goals. These goals include industrial development, the competitiveness and
diversification agenda, as well as a series of policy notes designed to address comparative advantage
and structural reform issues in specific industries selected by the government. In line with other
similar ongoing exercises, such as ―China Vision 2030‖, particular attention will be paid to
collaborative or joint analytical work with relevant Uzbek think tanks, with an emphasis—in addition
to the planned vision report—on providing ‗just in time‘ policy advice and technical assistance to
maximize the impact of analytical and advisory program.

47.
Building upon the positive results achieved during the previous CAS, sector policy
dialogue will address strategic issues and provide deeper analytical underpinning for planned
lending operations. For the efficiency agenda, a water utility note will address sector-wide
effectiveness and institutional issues, based on the preliminary findings of a recently completed
fiduciary review, and provide the policy framework for proposed water supply and sanitation
investment lending. In addition, a planned energy sector strategy review will analyze efficiency
issues in a holistic manner as background for preparation of a proposed downstream electricity
distribution project. As regards the diversification agenda, a horticultural sector study will explore
practical options for developing higher value-added agriculture activities as the basis for preparation
11

Overall lending amounts will depend on the IBRD's lending capacity and demand by other borrowers as well as Government demand and
performance in the course of the CPS period.
12
Depending upon its continued IDA eligibility, Uzbekistan‘s IDA-17 allocation is expected to be at least as much as under IDA-16, subject
however to the total IDA resources available, the country‘s CPIA rating, the total number of IDA-eligible countries, the performance and
assistance terms of these other IDA-eligible countries, and the terms of IDA‘s assistance, which are determined annually and based on the risk
of debt distress. IDA allocations are denominated in SDRs, with the US dollar equivalent dependent on the prevailing exchange rate.

15

of a horticultural operation. A series of technical engagements in the financial and private
sectors―innovation, quality infrastructure, information and communications technology, mortgage
finance, and new business registration―have resulted in a proposed program of private sector
development policy notes and a proposed credit access operation. However, the pace and scope of
these analytical and advisory services will ultimately be determined by the government‘s own
agenda, priorities, and political will.
48.
Uzbekistan is a relatively small recipient of Bank Group-managed trust funds, with a
$3.8 million portfolio and disbursements averaging about $800,000 annually. Well integrated
into the country program, trust fund financing has proven especially instrumental in: (a) expanding
the Bank Group‘s ability to provide advisory services; and (b) piloting activities for eventual
mainstreaming (e.g. the Karakalpakstan silk development pilot, global partnership on output-based
aid, and energy efficiency strategy for manufacturing). Additional trust fund resources for similar
advisory services and pilot activities will be sought during the CPS period, although the main focus
will be on implementation of the nine existing activities.
49.
The strategy is consistent with regional strategies and programs for Central Asia. The
Bank Group contributes to the sound management of water resources for both irrigation and power
generation in Central Asia at the regional and country levels. As part of its regional approach, the
Bank has initiated a comprehensive Central Asia Energy-Water Development Program (CAEWDP),
which aims to improve diagnostic and analytical tools to help the countries in the region manage their
water and energy resources, strengthen regional institutions, and stimulate investments, in
coordination with other development partners. It includes assessments of Uzbekistan-AfghanistanPakistan regional electricity trade and United States Agency for International Development (USAID)
funded work on a Regional Energy Markets Assistance Program. The Bank also works together with
German International Cooperation (GIZ) and the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
(UNECE) on institutional strengthening of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea (IFAS).
50.
IFC will maintain its focus on private sector development through a combined
investment and advisory approach. It will seek opportunities in the following priority areas: (a)
direct investments in the real sectors, such as general manufacturing, services, and agribusiness; (b)
strengthening privately owned banks; and (c) encouraging public-private partnerships, especially in
infrastructure. Through financial sector intermediaries, IFC will provide credit lines for small and
medium sized enterprises to support job creation and diversification of the economy and will try to
extend trade finance lines, a relatively new product, to facilitate private sector trade flows. Onlending by banks to SMEs will be enhanced by the financial infrastructure advisory project to further
develop credit information sharing systems and facilitate the introduction of risk management
certification as well as develop modern collateral registry jointly with the World Bank. Real sector
investments may include projects with international joint ventures, especially in export-oriented
projects, as well as projects that introduce modern technologies and increase domestic value-added.
Infrastructure advisory work will continue.

C.

Expected Results and Program of Lending and Analytical and Advisory Activities

Result Area 1: Increasing the efficiency of infrastructure
51.
Activities in this result area will support sustainable growth through increased
efficiency of energy, transport, and water resources management—in line with the 2010
Presidential Decree (1446) on Acceleration of Development in Infrastructure, Transport and

16

Communications Construction. In addition to completion of three ongoing operations—Enterprise
Energy Efficiency phase I, Talimarjan Transmission, and Ferghana Valley Water Resources
Management-Phase 1—the Bank plans to initiate new lending and associated analytical activities in
electricity metering and distribution, in transport, and in water resources management. IFC‘s PPP
work in infrastructure would also contribute to these government objectives.
1.1 Sustainable infrastructure development
52.
Despite being one of only two double landlocked countries in the world, Uzbekistan’s
strategic location between Asia and Europe makes it a key transit point for Central Asia. The
transport sector‘s performance and contribution to the government‘s efficiency, competitiveness and
diversification agenda is therefore an important component of its medium-term development strategy.
Using international standards and practices, the government has initiated a series of measures aimed
at improving the efficiency of transport operations and services while reducing costs and
environmental footprint. Bank engagement—a proposed transport assessment (FY12-13) followed
by a potential transport lending operation (FY15)—will be targeted towards improving the country‘s
links with the global market place, increasing the efficiency of various transport modes, preserving
the value of existing assets, and upgrading civil works and construction management practices to
international standards. These activities will also address the transport system‘s environmental
footprint and safety dimensions and, through seminars and the proposed transport assessment,
knowledge sharing about international good practice.
1.2

Improving water resources management and climate change preparedness

53.
Activities in this area will continue to focus on development of sustainable water
management systems for irrigation and addressing associated land quality and drainage
problems. With more than 85 percent of Uzbekistan‘s cropland dependent upon irrigation, in turn
comprising about 10 percent the country‘s total land area, the availability of water and its efficient
and sustainable use is arguably one of the country‘s most important development challenges. Bank
support to upgrade and improve the efficiency of the irrigation and drainage network in selected
districts will continue through two ongoing projects—Rural Enterprise Support Project (RESP) II
and Ferghana Valley Water Resource Management-Phase I—and in FY13 a proposed South
Karakalpakstan Drainage Project in northwest Uzbekistan, one of the country‘s poorest regions.
54.
At the regional level, activities will continue to support ongoing Bank Group regional
initiatives, such as the Central Asia Energy-Water Development Program (CAREC), CAREC‘s
Energy Sector Coordinating Committee work program13, and the International Fund for Saving the
Aral Sea (IFAS). These activities include the following: (a) an ongoing Uzbekistan-AfghanistanPakistan (UAP) electricity supply and trade study to assess the potential for regional electricity trade
and, more broadly, regional integration of electricity markets in Central and South Asia; (b)
strengthening mathematical modeling of water management in the Amu Darya and Syr Darya river
basins under the ongoing CAREC work program; (c) strengthening Central Asia‘s weather, water,
and climate services through the recently approved Central Asia Hydrometeorology Modernization
Project (CAHMP); and (d) technical assistance and capacity building in water and energy resources
management. Under these programs, opportunities exist to leverage Uzbekistan objectives and
regional funding for both energy and transport infrastructure and water resources management.

13

As approved at the November 2009 CAREC Ministerial Meeting.

17

Result Area 2: Enhancing the economy’s competitiveness
55.
Activities in this result area aim to support government priorities for enhancing the
economy’s competitiveness. Since this will require significant reforms to reduce the structural
distortions inherent in the government‘s development strategy, broadening and deepening the policy
dialogue with the authorities will not only be a significant challenge, but also a prerequisite for
meaningful CPS engagement in this area. Thus, unlike Result Area 1, where existing and planned
investment lending accounts for a large share of targeted outcomes, analytical and advisory activities
will be the main instruments for Bank engagement. Two areas are envisaged: (a) strengthening
institutions and macroeconomic environment; and (b) enhancing the competitiveness of strategic
industries and promoting exports.
2.1 Strengthening institutions and macroeconomic environment
56.
The key instrument for the competitiveness agenda would be a joint strategy report
“Uzbek Vision 2030”. This will be carried out early in the CPS period at the request of the
government. The report will analyze the potential sources of high and sustained growth that could be
exploited as it moves towards a more competitive, diversified economy. Policy recommendations
will aim to maximize the potential of the economy to maintain real GDP growth and generate more
jobs, focusing on macroeconomic management, international trade policy, the business environment
and enterprise reform, and labor market policies. The report will be supported by regular
macroeconomic policy dialogue, in conjunction with the IMF.
2.2 Enhancing the competitiveness of strategic industries and promoting exports
57.
The government plans to promote export-oriented strategic industries as defined in the
Presidential Decree (1442) on "Priorities for Industrial Development, 2011-2015‖. Although views
between the Bank and the Government differ on how to reach this important objective, the Bank will
develop a series of policy notes on the competitiveness or otherwise of selected industries, designed
to provide the government and other stakeholders with a diagnostic analysis, including the constraints
impacting a particular industry‘s competitiveness and suggest a roadmap for policy actions. IFC will
seek to promote selected export-oriented industries by partnering with foreign investors planning to
set up joint ventures in Uzbekistan.
58.
Uzbekistan has made export diversification—particularly into production of higher
quality goods—and technological upgrading a main priority of its development strategy.
Upgrading the national quality infrastructure, which includes standardization, accreditation,
certification and metrology, is a central part of this strategy. A modern and internationally
harmonized national quality infrastructure (NQI) will give Uzbek firms the tools to surmount existing
barriers to quality production and exports, and benefit from foreign technologies embedded in
standards and in modern testing, measurement and certification procedures. In FY12, the Bank will
continue to work closely with Uzstandard and relevant ministries to identify areas for technical
assistance. It would eventually lead to greater contributions by the private sector to the export
diversification while existing state-owned enterprises will continue to make a fair share of
contributions until the private sector in the country develops to a larger extent.
59.
The CPS will also provide support for initiatives by the Ministry of Economy (MOE)
and the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations, Investment and Trade (MFERIT) to promote
exports. Proposed technical assistance will support the development of policies and programs

18

designed to promote an export-oriented economy, taking into account the lessons of international
experience from Eastern Europe, East Asia and elsewhere. Specific areas will include the design and
scaling-up of financial instruments to promote exports (trade finance, guarantees, credit lines for
SMEs), carrying out an export process mapping to reduce the number, time and costs of export
procedures, and contributing to the planned development and implementation of a ―one-stop-shop‖.
IFC‘s direct lending to the real sector as well as on-lending to SMEs and trade finance lines through
the financial intermediaries will also contribute to these objectives.
Result Area 3: Diversifying the economy
60.
In support of the government’s objective to diversify the country’s sources of growth,
the CPS will help provide a comprehensive platform of assistance to support enterprise reform
and modernization. Targeted areas of support include: business environment reforms; accelerating
innovation and ICT development; and upgrading of the country‘s national quality infrastructure. In
addition, the CPS will support selected value chains in agriculture and livestock by continuing to
provide financing opportunities with particular focus on non-cotton related activities. In addition, it
will support the formulation of a horticultural strategy (FY13), paving the way for a possible
horticultural project (FY14).
3.1

Strengthening the foundations for private sector-led diversification

61.
The Bank Group will continue policy dialogue on private sector development, the
business environment and the investment climate. Through an investment climate reform
advisory task, the Bank will assist in further developing an institutional and regulatory framework
conducive to encouraging private sector-led diversification. The strategy objective is to develop a
strategic engagement that can offer concrete recommendations and assistance for reforms that are
implementable and that ultimately result in an improved business environment. In addition, the Bank
Group will support private sector development in rural areas by scaling up activities under the
ongoing RESP II. Following completion of its long-standing broad-based investment climate and
business environment advisory work, IFC will contribute to private-sector led diversification through
new forms of advisory projects more narrowly focused on the PPP agenda and financial
infrastructure, as well as through possible direct investments in priority sectors.
62.
Given the government's intent to attract increased FDI, and while the availability of
political risk insurance for investments into Uzbekistan is still limited, there is a demand for
MIGA's products. Sectors potentially suitable for expanded MIGA engagement in the course of
CPS implementation are energy (oil and gas production and transportation) as well as foreign
investment in health sector PPPs.
63.
Uzbekistan’s banks continue to face challenges in meeting the needs of small and
medium-sized enterprises. In addition to the ongoing RESP-II, which improves access to credit by
small- and medium-sized agricultural enterprises, the Bank plans to prepare a possible microfinance
operation towards the end of the CPS period. To support reforms in the area of financial access, the
CPS will also provide targeted technical assistance to the Central Bank of Uzbekistan (CBU) to help
improve a secured transaction system and increase the efficiency of credit information sharing in
accordance with international good practices. IFC will continue supporting the privately-owned
segment of the banking sector with targeted lending for SMEs and explore opportunities for
providing trade finance to private companies.

19

3.2

Diversifying agriculture

64.
Agriculture is the sector where efforts to diversify output and exports could produce
results in the medium-term. Agriculture accounts for about 20 percent of GDP, 15 percent of
export revenues, and still over one-third of employment. CPS interventions will focus on two key
challenges: (a) diversifying agriculture away from cotton and wheat into other high value crops such
as fruit and vegetables, as well as livestock; and (b) intensifying agricultural yields and productivity.
These will be supported by additional financing for the credit-line component of RESP II, with a
focus on crops other than cotton, as well as analytical and advisory activities to develop a horticulture
strategy that would pave the way for preparation of a horticulture project. These activities will also
help further develop Uzbekistan‘s domestic market and encourage a gradual shift from the cotton
state order system and public intervention towards a more liberal and diversified agricultural sector.
Result Area 4: Improving access to, and outcomes of social services
65.
This result area will support the government’s objective to reduce regional and ruralurban inequities through promoting social inclusion and human capital development. To this
end, the Bank would initially address the following government requests through recently approved
lending (under the previous CAS) and studies: (a) improving the quality, and equitable access to
early childhood education and basic education services; (b) providing more accessible quality and
sustainable health services, especially in the rural areas, (c) continuing to improve the coverage and
sustainability of potable water supply and sanitation services, and (d) improving the social protection
system, especially the targeting of assistance to the most vulnerable groups.
4.1
Strengthening the quality of health and education and improving access to early
childhood development
66.
CPS support for health will comprise a combination of investment operations, technical
assistance, and related analytical and advisory services to extend and deepen ongoing reforms.
Thus, CPS activities will focus on secondary care, medical education, drug policies and
implementation of a multi-sectoral public health strategy. Technical assistance and analytical work
on the role of the private sector and output-based financing will continue throughout the CPS period.
67.
CPS support for education will continue improvements in the quality of basic education
and tackle access to and the demand for pre-school education. The ongoing second Basic
Education Project supports efforts to improve the effectiveness of teaching and learning through: (a)
targeted interventions in selected general secondary education schools and preschools in rural poor
areas; (b) development of institutional capacity to assess student learning; and (c) adoption of
predictable and transparent school budgets nation-wide. Pre-school coverage is only 16-20 percent
and parenting programs are negligible. Through a proposed Early Childhood Education project, the
CPS will include more flexible provision of preschools to increase enrollment, address parental
perceptions of the importance of preschool education especially in rural areas, and carry out
interventions that would increase the demand for pre-schooling.
4.2

Water Supply and Sanitation

68.
Rehabilitating and expanding the country’s water supply and sanitation infrastructure
remains a top government priority. In addition to the utilities‘ substantial investment and capacity
needs in both urban and rural areas, a major challenge is to optimize their roles and capacities for
developing and implementing a more effective and sustainable water strategy. This entails matching

20

financing mechanisms to sector priorities and strengthening its regulation and governance towards
achieving higher efficiency and sustainability of public expenditure, while leveraging better
management and performance of operators. CPS support will include ongoing work designed to
strengthen water sector governance and capacity. This will include studies on financial and
institutional aspects of water supply and sanitation and integrated management of water resources. It
will also include lending for water supply (Alat-Karakul) and sewerage (Karakalpakstan)—with the
latter to be integrated into two larger programmatic operations (Water & Sanitation Sector
Investment Projects 1 & 2) that would establish rules of project engagement, give the government
greater planning flexibility, and, at the same time, create accountability for quality of feasibility
studies, project design, preparation, and outcomes. The indicative program also involves technical
assistance for institutional capacity building and identification of potential sector reforms.
69.
CPS support is also envisaged for integrated urban development projects in major
cities. Municipalities suffer from a backlog of infrastructure investments, weaknesses in service
provision, and inadequate or non-existent town development plans or strategies. Diversifying from
the exclusive focus on water supply and sanitation, these integrated projects will address various
municipal investment needs, including solid waste management, infrastructure including roads,
public heating, information and communications technology (ICT), electricity, community-based
heritage protection and tourism promotion. A first project is tentatively planned for FY15. The CPS
also provides for a municipal services sector review.
4.3

Promoting social inclusion

70.
Uzbekistan’s mahallah (community-based) social protection system is designed to
benefit poor families. Over the years, however, targeting efficiency has weakened due to different
patterns of economic development, such as the increasing role of informal sector earnings and
remittances, and the delegation of additional responsibilities to the mahalla administration. Building
on the achievements of the existing system, the Bank Group will help address these emerging
challenges by introducing efficiency enhancing innovations (e.g. an electronic registry of
beneficiaries, and proxy-means based identification criteria.). These activities will support evolving
reforms aimed at effective implementation and results monitoring of these and other social protection
policies and programs, as well as the management of the system as a whole. They will also allow for
up-to-date information on the ability of the existing social protection system to identify and target the
poor and for quick remedial interventions. Meanwhile, the Civil Society Development Fund
managed by the Bank Group‘s Country Office in Tashkent awards 7-9 small grants annually for
social empowerment and inclusion projects implemented by civil society organizations.
Cross Cutting Result Area: Governance
71.
Given the country’s challenging governance and transparency environment, the CPS
will broaden and deepen the focus on these two areas started under the last CAS. First, it will
continue support for development of Uzbekistan‘s public finance management system, based on
international best practice and public expenditure and financial accountability (PEFA)-type
benchmarks.
Specifically, following the recently completed Country Integrated Fiduciary
Assessment (CIFA), a full PEFA assessment will be undertaken in FY12. Second, building upon the
2009 governance assessment of primary health care services and the operational work under ongoing
water supply and sewerage operations, the CPS will include activities designed to improve the
governance, management, and performance of sector and project institutions, especially in water
supply and sewerage and energy. Third, the CPS will continue policy dialogue and technical
assistance aimed at improving public access to, and the quality of basic economic, financial, and

21

social data. In this context, a recently approved $40,000 project financed under the ‗Demand for
Good Governance‘ window of the Development Grant Facility (DGF) aims to improve public
oversight of government- as well as Bank Group- financed projects in Uzbekistan through creation of
a countrywide monitoring and evaluation network of civil society organizations (CSOs).
Benchmarks for progress in data transparency include: improved accounting and reporting systems;
increased financial data disclosure; an operating external audit function, with adequate human
capacity and using international standards; and improved internal controls and effective internal audit
functions across key budget organizations.
D.

Implementing the Country Partnership Strategy

72.
Inherent in the two-track, full or limited engagement approach successfully employed
under the previous CAS is the continued need for flexibility in both program design and
implementation. There are two main reasons for this. First, although Uzbekistan has weathered the
global recession better than most countries, the still uncertain pace and scope of the global
economy‘s recovery may impact its key commodity exports and thus its medium-term growth
prospects. Second, while the authorities appear committed to the goals of their competitiveness and
diversification agenda, whether there is commensurate political will for the difficult structural
reforms required remains unclear. Thus, the lending program outlined above, in Annexes 3 and 4
and B3, and the summary of non-lending services listed in Annex B4, are both illustrative and subject
to potentially significant change, especially in the second half of the period (FY14-15).
73.
Thus, the CPS program will be reviewed annually and adapted as may be needed to
ensure its continued consistency with the authorities’ medium-term development strategy. A
CPS Progress Report in FY14 will assess the CPS‘ strategic direction, based on results agreed with
the government and reflected in the results matrix. Meanwhile, in addition to routine implementation
support and supervision of individual operations, the annual country portfolio performance review
(CPPR) process will be resumed, focusing jointly with the government on ongoing or emerging
systemic issues. Mid-term reviews of project implementation will assess any needs for restructuring
to align project development objectives with ongoing CPS priorities, to enhance linkages to
analytical and advisory services, and to implement monitoring and evaluation systems to monitor
outcomes. Most attention will be given to the six relatively new operations that are likely to have the
greatest impact on the strategy outcomes.
74.
Given the recent and anticipated increase in the size of the portfolio, implementation
support will be enhanced, in particular for procurement management. As noted earlier,
dialogue is already underway with the authorities with the aim to streamline MFERIT‘s contract
expertise process. If contract registration is not completed within an internationally accepted period,
the Bank will apply its new (January 2011) Guidelines for Procurement and declare misprocurement, as appropriate. In addition, procurement staff in the Bank Group‘s Country Office in
Tashkent is being strengthened. Meanwhile, the authorities, specifically the COM, have already
established enhanced monitoring procedures for implementation of Bank Group-financed projects.
75.
The CPS program is consistent with the Bank’s Gender Strategy and Gender Action
Plan (GAP) and seeks to promote analysis and ultimately operational activities focusing on
women’s economic empowerment. The GAP also emphasizes the demand side of the gender
equation by promoting closer operational collaboration with clients as well as expanding their
capacity to design, implement and monitor gender-sensitive policies and programs. The CPS will
address gender issues through existing and proposed new operations, capacity building, and by

22

including gender-disaggregated data in project monitoring and evaluation systems. Box 3 below
outlines the five main activities that make up the gender strategy.









E.

Box 3: CPS Gender Strategy
Project interventions—For new projects, a gender expert will develop project-specific interventions, if
analysis during social assessment indicates that the project is suitable for addressing gender issues. For
ongoing projects, incremental interventions designed to strengthen their gender focus will include the
following:
o RESP-II will include additional focus on female farmers‘ participation in project-sponsored
trainings (if necessary, by means of a quota);
o RESP-II, Drainage, and Ferghana Valley Water Resources Management will seek to involve
more women in the WUA decision-making process;
o Basic Education—the teachers‘ training component will include additional efforts to promote
gender sensitivity;
o Talimarjan Transmission—based on an ADB-sponsored gender assessment and plan of action, the
project will include gender-specific activities.
Capacity building—to help improve Bank staff and government officials‘ understanding of and sensitivity
to gender issues, team members of the 2011 ECA Gender Assessment and 2012 WDR on Gender Equality
and Development will be invited to make presentations in the Country Office in Tashkent. In addition,
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) staff will be encouraged to arrange training in gender issues by gender
experts.
CPS Progress Report—the FY14 CPS mid-term review and Progress Report will seek to provide genderdisaggregated data on all relevant ongoing and proposed operations.
CPS Monitoring & Evaluation—during implementation, a simple CPS monitoring and evaluation system
will be developed to capture and analyze the gender impact of Bank Group activities.
Development partner coordination—during CPS implementation, the Bank Group will seek to
coordinate and ultimately main-stream its gender-related activities with other development partners,
especially the ADB, UNDP and UNICEF.

Partnerships and Donor Coordination

76.
Overall, official development assistance (ODA) to Uzbekistan, never very large, remains
limited. Except for ADB, the multilateral institutions‘ exposure (including that of the Bank Group)
is very modest and there are only a few bilateral and even fewer non-governmental agencies engaged,
mainly in technical assistance. Consequently, conventional donor or development partner
coordination and the Bank‘s role are not major issues and, except for the United Nations Country
Team coordinated by UNDP in which the Bank participates, there is no formal donor-government
coordinating body or framework. Annex 4 summarizes key development partner activities by sector
and thematic area.
77.
Meanwhile, Uzbekistan’s outreach to new and re-emerging development and trade
partners in recent years has produced results. For example, investments in industry and
infrastructure by China, Korea, and Russia among others have become important factors in the
government‘s growth and development strategy. Moreover, the effectiveness and especially the
fiscal impact of these investments in terms of medium- and longer-term operating and maintenance
costs will need increasingly to be taken into account. In this latter connection, the Bank continues to
work closely with the IMF on issues related to macroeconomic stability and economic management.
At the same time, the IMF continues to provide technical assistance on improving the quality of
national statistics and data transparency.

23

F.

Monitoring and Evaluation

78.
Expected outcomes of the CPS are expressed in the attached results framework
attached at Annex 1. Based on discussions with the government and consultations with other
stakeholders, it is organized around the CPS‘ four strategic objectives as well as the governance
cross-cutting thematic result area. These objectives are then disaggregated into fourteen specific
outcomes that the Bank Group expects to influence through the CPS as well as a larger set of
intermediate outcomes or milestones that will be used to track progress periodically. The framework
also identifies the CPS lending, advisory and analytical, and technical assistance interventions that
are intended to contribute towards the achievement of CPS outcomes.
79.
While the results framework is designed to monitor progress and measure outcomes, its
application is intended to be flexible. It provides an initial sense of strategic direction for Bank
Group assistance, but should be thought of as being open for change if evolving government
priorities or external developments so warrant. Similarly, the mapping of planned financial and
analytical activities by strategic theme (Annex 4) is intended to be flexible, especially for the outer
years. For example, the detailed scope of activities related to the planned joint strategy report and
ongoing poverty monitoring will be determined annually in consultation with the government.
Overall monitoring will be annual: for macroeconomic and related outcomes, data will be obtained
from the key economic ministries; for sectoral outcomes, through project supervision missions.
These data will feed into a CPS Progress Report scheduled for FY14 and a CPS Completion Report
scheduled for FY15.

IV.

MANAGING RISKS

80.
The CPS entails risks to its implementation which will need to be mitigated and/or
carefully managed. Consistent with past experience, the proposed approach, based on proactive risk
management, includes three elements: warning signals—to detect problems at the earliest possible
stage; initial responses—to mitigate their immediate impact; and risk reduction measures—to
gradually reduce their likelihood and potential impact over time.

A.

Country Risks

81.
While the country’s economic, political and social environment is currently stable, CPS
implementation could be affected by a combination of factors. Regionally, these include
possibly: deteriorating security conditions due to the situation in Afghanistan, and increasing tensions
between Uzbekistan and its neighbors over regional issues—especially the management and use of
trans-boundary energy and water resources. Several Bank Group activities, especially its Central Asia
Energy and Water Development Program (CAEWDP), as well as focused efforts on transparency and
sharing of information about the ongoing assessment studies for the proposed Rogun hydropower
project, are intended to help mitigate this risk. Domestically, they include possible economic and
social instability due inter alia to continued levels of inequality—already a stated government
concern—exacerbated by weak public accountability and by civil society‘s limited participation in
economic and social policy dialogue. These domestic risks will be monitored continuously, as well as
in the context of the next nation-wide elections. Since these risks are in areas beyond the Bank
Group‘s mandate, staff will liaise with key bilateral agencies as well as the UN Specialized Agencies
to monitor political and security developments, and to assess their possible impact. The initial
response to any country-wide deterioration of stability would be incremental, targeted scaling-down

24

of activities. The initial response to any localized deterioration would be suspension of activities in
that locality.

B.

External Shocks

82.
Although Uzbekistan’s economy proved more resilient than most others during the
2008-09 global recession, it remains vulnerable to external shocks affecting commodity prices
and remittances. The Bank Group will therefore continue to monitor regional economic
developments and, in the event of adverse events, be prepared to adjust the scope and focus of the
program as needed. In addition, the government‘s agenda to increase competitiveness and promote
increased productivity and diversification—as well as CPS program support in these areas—
addresses this risk. The Bank Group will also monitor the country‘s vulnerability to national
disasters, given its location in a relatively high risk area according to recent assessments.

C.

Risks to World Bank Group

83.
The main risk to CPS implementation is the significant political commitment required
to confront bottlenecks currently blocking the efficient functioning of the economy and private
sector development. If this risk materialized, it would have negative implications for planned CPS
outcomes in these areas, including IFC‘s ability to carry out direct investment in the private sector
and, more generally, for planned CPS outcomes in these areas. In addition to working closely with
other development partners and stakeholders to continuously assess policy reforms supported under
specific projects, the Bank Group will also closely monitor CPS implementation. In case of adverse
developments in overall policies, projects, or reforms, the Bank will adjust its engagement, for
example by placing more emphasis on non-lending services in areas where reforms may have stalled.
These mitigation measures could include the provision of hands-on support to address capacity issues
through (e.g.) technical assistance, if requested, as well as maintaining policy dialogue with the
authorities.
84.
A second risk relates to the lack of detailed and reliable economic, financial and social
data. This impedes the assessment of economic performance and social outcomes, hinders the
preparation of economic projections, and undermines the credibility, relevance, and timeliness of
Bank Group policy advice. Specifically, the proposed Uzbekistan Vision 2030 exercise as well as
the analytical work needed to underpin the lending program will not be possible without better access
to standard economic datasets (e.g. disaggregated national accounts, fiscal and monetary accounts,
investments, etc.), improved information about government policies, and raw data on living standards
(e.g. poverty, household budget surveys). In partnership with other development partners and
particularly with the IMF, Bank Group staff will continue to work with the authorities on
strengthening statistical institutions and on information disclosure, including on publication of data in
the GFS and IFS in line with the government‘s commitments. Specifically, they will closely monitor
implementation of COM Resolution 2629 of April 4, 2011, which authorized the initiation of
preparatory work to publish economic data in the IMF‘s databases (cf. Box 1).
85.
A third fiduciary and governance risk relates to implementation delays and the use of
Bank Group resources. This includes the potential for mis-procurement as a result of the
authorities‘ price verification process. The Bank Group will continue to closely monitor fiduciary
aspects of project implementation through regular reviews and external audits. It will also keep track
of delays due to the authorities‘ project expertise and price verification system. Its response in the
event of continuing systemic delays in procurement will be to adjust the scope of its assistance
program until a resolution is reached. As for risk reduction, the Bank Group will continue its support

25

for government efforts to improve governance and, in particular, to strengthen procurement and
financial management capacity under the CPS‘ second result area. Dialogue between MFERIT, the
Ministry of Economy, and the Bank will be maintained on the issue of project expertise price
verification. In addition, the CPS will continue to identify and support demand-side governance
interventions (as part of the proposed lending activities) to promote accountability to citizens.

26

Annex 1: Results Framework for the Uzbekistan CPS FY2012-2015
National Priorities

Constraints on which the
CPS expects to focus

Outcomes to Which the CPS
Expects to Contribute

Milestones and Progress
Indicators

Bank Group
Interventions and Partners1

STRATEGIC THEME I. IMPROVING EFFICIENCY OF INFRASTRUCTURE
1.1 Sustainable infrastructure development
Improvement of
Energy: low
Initial assessment on
SPN: Enterprises Energy Efficiency
Improved energy sector
energy efficiency
quality of electricity
electricity market integration
(UZEF), Talimarjan transmission
efficiency:
supply; high energy usage
Reduced duration of
with South Asia completed and
project
Improved
per unit of GDP
outages in South West Uzbekistan
disseminated
New IBRD: Advanced electric
environmental
productivity; high losses in from 92 hours per year to 48 hours
metering project, Electricity
management
supply chain; low share of per year
Initial assessment on
Distribution, Urban Integrated project,
renewable in energy
transport sector and its impact on UZEEF II, Transport project
portfolio
Agreement on priority
safety and the environment
IDA/IBRD AAA: Energy Sector
issues in power sector and strategic completed and disseminated
strategy, Regional power market
Lack of private
plan to deal with them adopted
assessment (UAP), Transport
Private sector
investment
Knowledge sharing on
Assessment
development,
Electricity constraint to
transport international good
TFs: Cities Alliance Catalytic Fund,
including PPP
Doublefirms‘ ability to operate
practice (e.g., asset management, Transport and Logistics in Central Asia
landlocked nature of
competitively have been
construction standards,
(Trade Facilitation Facility)
Uzbekistan affects its
significantly reduced (follow-up to concessions)
IFC AS: structuring of first pilot PPP
competiveness
2008 firm-level survey (baseline)
transactions
Improvement of
IFC INV: PPP projects
transport efficiency Transport: high
Key Partners: ADB, JICA, IsDB,
Development of infrastructure
and introduction of
cost of transport; supply
CAREC, IWMI
PPPs:
sustainable
side constraints; increasing Implementation of at least
management
ecological footprint; low
one pilot PPP project the country
safety standards of
operations and
Sustainable transport:
infrastructure
Increased transport
efficiency

1

SPN: Supervision of IDA ongoing operations, New IDA: New IDA financing , New IBRD: New IBRD financing, IDA/IBRD AAA: IDA/IBRD Analytical and
Advisory Activities; TFs: IDA administered Trust Funds; IFC AS: IFC Advisory services, IFC INV: Potential IFC investment (subject to demand by partner investors)

27

National Priorities

Constraints on which the
CPS expects to focus

Outcomes to Which the CPS
Expects to Contribute

Minimum ecological
footprint of public and private
transport
Increased safety of
transport operations
1.2 Improve water management and climate change preparedness
Improved water use Inefficient use of
Improved water resources
water resources for
management:
irrigation
Area of irrigated land with
adequate water supply is increased
Inadequate
by 40,000 ha\
meteorological, climate,
and hydrological
Area of irrigated land with
information for decision
adequate drainage is increased by
making
30,000 ha
Disaster- and climate changerelated risks reduced:
Improved accuracy of
weather and seasonal river flow
forecasts; up to 90% accurate by
2016.

Milestones and Progress
Indicators

Technical and financial
and institutional support is
provided to 62 Water User
associations in seven project
districts
Procedures on
emergency situations warnings at
regional levels adopted

Bank Group
Interventions and Partners1

SPN: Central Asia Hydromet Project,
Ferghana Valley Water Resources
Management Project, RESP II, South
Karakalpakstan Drainage
New IDA: RESP II AF
IDA/IBRD AAA: Water Utility Pricing
Policy Note
Key Partners: EC, GTZ, KfW, Japan,
JICA

Increasing data
received/sent by each NMHS
daily up to 600Mb/70Mb

Improved use of
forecasts by users including
agriculture, water resources,
transport, and disaster risk
reduction
ENHANCE COMPETITIVENESS OF THE ECONOMY

STRATEGIC THEME II.
2.1. Strengthened institutions and macroeconomic environment
Better institutions
Restricted
Data transparency and data
availability
of
key
through improved
quality improved
economic, financial, and
macroeconomic
social data
Key economic data is in
management and
Key economic
compliance
with the generally
more effective and
data does not comply with

28

Key economic and social
data including CPI, National
Accounts and fiscal accounts are
published in internationally
accepted statistical periodicals

IDA/IBRD AAA: Strategy Report
"Uzbekistan Vision 2030",
Macroeconomic Policy TA, CPIAdriven Policy Dialog TA, PEFA
assessment TA, Procurement TA,

Outcomes to Which the CPS
Expects to Contribute

National Priorities

Constraints on which the
CPS expects to focus

transparent
fiscal/budget policy

the generally accepted
methodology

accepted methodology

Economic and
social development
Strategy of Uzbekistan is
not articulated in a
publicly available
document

Develop Uzbekistan
Vision 2030 based on analytical
underpinnings using lessons from
international experience

High level of
informality and state
overregulation
Fiscal and budget
data is not publicly
available
Public
procurement is inefficient

Efficiency of public
resource mobilization improved

Improved transparency
and public accountability in the
public finances through
Improved alignment
between national priorities and
budgetary allocations
Increased Treasury
coverage

Improved Public
Procurement

Milestones and Progress
Indicators
Regular and to the extent
possible joint GOU/WBG
economic research is undertaken
to inform Uzbekistan‘s Mediumterm economic and social
development strategy

Bank Group
Interventions and Partners1
ROSC in international accounting and
auditing TA

Tax risk assessment is
developed and applied in tax
administration
PEFA assessment
conducted in 2012 and 2015 and
PEFA scores for
Comprehensiveness and
Transparency (P6, P7), PolicyBased budgeting (P11 and P12),
procurement ( P19) improved in
2015 compared to 2012
Coverage of single
Treasury account expanded to the
FRD
Procurement law is
adopted, small and private
businesses access to public
procurement improved

2.2 Accelerate market reforms through enhanced competitiveness in industrial sector
Enhanced Industrial
Competitiveness

Lack of industrial
competitiveness
Weak capacity of
institutions supporting

Stronger export competitiveness
and productivity growth:
Adoption of new
instruments to support investment
in strategic industries aligned with

29

Assessment of the
constraints limiting export
competitiveness and productivity
growth in strategic industries
through Value Chain Analysis.

IDA/IBRD AAA: Industrial
competitiveness policy notes
IFC INV: Direct financing for the real

National Priorities

Constraints on which the
CPS expects to focus
industrial competitiveness
and development

Outcomes to Which the CPS
Expects to Contribute
international good practices
Increased ICT usage in
firms

Milestones and Progress
Indicators

sectors of the economy
Agreement on Industrial
competitiveness reports
recommending reforms and new
instruments to support strategic
industries reached.

STRATEGIC THEME III. DIVERSIFICATION
3.1 Strengthen the foundations for private-led diversification
Restrictive
Diagnostic assessments
Enhanced regulatory policy
Improved
business environment
in priority Doing Business areas,
frameworks and institutional
infrastructure and
hinders modernization,
including recommendations about
capacity for investment, private
institutions for
economic growth FDI and sector development and trade:
legal, regulatory and technical
enterprise sector
export competitiveness
Improved business
areas for reform.
development
environment as measured by the
Outdated quality
Doing Business indicators
Supporting
infrastructure (metrology,
implementation of reforms and
standards, technical
Legislation on standards,
reorganization of the national
regulations, quality
metrology and accreditation is
quality infrastructure institutions,
certification) limits exports aligned with minimum
including upgrading of services
of high value-added
international guidelines
used by firms in strategic
products
industries
Adherence of Uzbekistan‘s
Limited ICT
accreditation system with
Development and
infrastructure and einternational guidelines and
support to the implementation of
Government services
membership in the Metre
an action plan for ICT
Convention as a Member State or
development aligned with the ean Associate of the General
Government master plan
Conference on Weights and
Measures
3.2 Diversification in the Agricultural Sector
Increase
15% of farmers in RESP
Increased investment and
- Low agricultural

30

Bank Group
Interventions and Partners1

TFs: Korean Trust Fund ICT4D
Key Partners: Korea

IDA/IBRD AAA: Business
Environment TA, Financial Sector TA,
FSD Dialogue with CBU, Innovation
and Economic Diversification
New IDA: Private sector
competitiveness enhancement
TFs: Korean Trust Fund ICT4D; SouthSouth Experience Exchange
Key Partners: DFID, IsDB, EBRD,
USAID, GIZ

SPN: RESP II

National Priorities
productivity of
Agriculture

Constraints on which the
CPS expects to focus
productivity

- Limited financial
support available for
investments in high growth
sectors

Outcomes to Which the CPS
Expects to Contribute

Milestones and Progress
Indicators

Bank Group
Interventions and Partners1

employment in Agriculture
sector:
Improved agricultural
productivity in target areas as
measured by yield of key products
Baseline (ha/tons)-> Target
(ha/tons)
wheat 4.0
->
5.04
cotton 2.00
->
2.5
melon-gourds 11.8 ->
14.3
maize – 13.1
->
15.7
orchards–apple 4.3 ->
4.5
vineyards – 4.1
->
4.3

II project areas have adopted best
management practices on their
farms

New IDA: AF to RESP II, Horticultural
development project
IDA/IBRD AAA: Agriculture
competitiveness strategy, Horticulture
strategy

20% of PFI‘s agriculture
lending portfolio supports
development of: (i) poultry; (ii)
livestock (iii) fishery; and (iv)
horticulture sectors

Added values to the
processed products through
upgraded sorting, grading,
processing and packing
equipment

Improved capacity of the
PFIs staff by training 200 lending
officers in agricultural investment
lending
Reduced post-harvest
losses by 20% through the
establishment of cold chain
facilities & services

Fruits and vegetable
production acreages increased by
200,000 ha.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE IV: IMPROVING ACCESS TO SOCIAL SERVICES
4.1 Strengthen quality of education and health services
Improve the quality Poor quality and
Provision of learning
SPN: Health III, Basic Education II
Improved access to quality
of primary and
relevance of education
materials and school based
New IDA: Early childhood
basic education services:
basic secondary
100% of project
teacher training to preschools,
development Project
education while
Low participation preschools and Grades 1-9 grades
primary and secondary schools in IDA/IBRD AAA: Health Strategy TA
maintaining
of communities in
have and are using core set of
project schools
Key Partners: ADB, UNDP, UNICEF,
universal access
policy/decision making
teaching and learning materials [as
JICA, BC, WHO, UNICEF,
[National MDG2,
processes having to do
measured through an evaluation]
Implementation of at
Target 2]
with schooling
least one national student

31

National Priorities

Constraints on which the
CPS expects to focus
Low demand for
pre-school education
Low pre-school
enrollment in rural areas

Improve access to
Poor quality of secondary
quality health care care services:
at the primary level
and at secondary
Poor infrastructure
health care facilities and outdated diagnostic
and medical equipment at
the rayon level secondary
facilities
Inefficient
resource allocation to
rayon hospitals based on
input-based norms (bed
and staff numbers),
reflecting nominal capacity
and not the level of
services provided

Outcomes to Which the CPS
Expects to Contribute
50% of teachers at
sampled project schools where
learning materials acquired under
the project are used effectively in
classrooms
Implementation and
dissemination of results of national
student assessment through the
national media and newspapers
Improved access to health
Services:
Refurbished rayon level
project health facilities with
modern biomedical equipment
Increased proportion of
hospitals following at least 20
NCD treatment standards (Target
100% hospitals of intervention
areas)
outcome based hospital
financing piloted in Fergana oblast

Milestones and Progress
Indicators
assessment of student learning
Launch of
communication campaign aimed
at increasing demand for pre
schooling in the rural areas

At least 50 Hospitals
equipped with medical and waste
management equipment
3670 Urban polyclinics‘
doctors receiving training under
the 10-month training GP
program
Health personnel at
PHCs (6000 doctors and 57000
nurses) receiving training under
continuous professional
education
50% of targeted
population with access to a basic
package of health

Lack of quality
preventive and curative
services against NCDs

2 National Health
Accounts developed and
published

4.2 Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) and Integrated Urban Development

32

Bank Group
Interventions and Partners1

National Priorities

Increased access to
water and
sanitation

Constraints on which the
CPS expects to focus
Inadequate access
to safe water and sanitation
services in urban and rural
areas
Low capacity of
sector institutions
Inefficient WSS
sector financing

Outcomes to Which the CPS
Expects to Contribute

Milestones and Progress
Indicators

Bank Group
Interventions and Partners1

Increased household access to
safe drinking water and
sanitation services in urban and
rural areas:
Number of households
benefitting from improved WSS
service and/or from improved
municipal infrastructure service
(46,680 households with metered
WS in Syr Darya region)

Number of trained sector
personal (sector administration,
utility and municipal
management and staff) by 2013:
- 10% of BVK & SRVK staff;
- 80% of Sir Darya VK staff

2,000 & 4,000 new
households connected to public
sewerage system in Bukhara &
Samarkand respectively;

Municipal Sector
Strategy Note finalized,
disseminated and discussed at a
workshop in FY13. Submitted to
Cabinet of Ministers for
comments and endorsement.

SPN: Bukhara & Samarkand Sewerage,
Sir Darya Water Supply
New IDA:
Water Sanitation Sector Investment
Project 1 & 2
New IBRD:
Integrated Urban Project
IDA/IBRD AAA: Water Supply and
Sanitation Utility Pricing Policy Note
TFs: WPP, Cities Alliance,
Key Partners: SECO, EC, GIZ, KfW,
JICA

280,100 people with
access to improved water supply in
Sir Darya region

Enactment of action plan
derived from selected Policy
Note recommendations

Improved capacity of
targeted WSS sector and local
government institutions
4.3 Promoting social inclusion
Reduce Poverty
Weak links
Rate
between policy analysis
and policymaking Low
targeting efficiency of the
existing Social Safety Net
Antiquated
processes used by karallas
in distributing SSN leading

Better
targeting of
social
assistance:
Strengthening capacity of
government think-tank(s) for
policy research and dissemination
Developing a Proxy
Means Testing (PMT) mechanism
for targeting the poor
Developing electronic

33

-

Joint policy notes on the
outcomes Institute for Social
Research
Analytical underpinning
for PMT developed and ready for
piloting
Design of electronic
registry is developed and ready
for piloting

SPN:
New IDA: Social Safety Net
strengthening Credit
IDA/IBRD AAA: Social Policy
strengthening TA
TFs: Key Partners: UNDP, UNICEF

National Priorities

Constraints on which the
CPS expects to focus

to loss of productivity
CROSS THEMATIC AREA: GOVERNANCE
Increase the
Limited access to
efficiency of Public
economic & financial
Financial
information, and
Management
accounting and reporting
do not sufficiently ensure
transparency of financial
information
Legal &
institutional framework for
internal and external audit
below international
benchmarks
External audit
capacity not adequate for
carrying out effective
financial audits, and use of
international standards
doubtful

Outcomes to Which the CPS
Expects to Contribute

Milestones and Progress
Indicators

Bank Group
Interventions and Partners1

registry of SSN beneficiaries
Enhanced regulatory policy
frameworks and institutional
capacity for PFM:
Coordinated Public
Financial Management reform
process that is informed by good
international practice and
benchmarking
Formal adoption of Public
Sector Accounting Strategy and its
phased implementation, and based
on instructions for application of
IPSAS and supported with training
Internal control and audit
framework developed under the
WB IDF grant implemented

34

Improved accounting
and reporting system
Increased financial data
disclosure
Functioning external
audit, with adequate capacity in
numbers and skills and using
international standards
Improved internal
control with effective internal
audit functions across key budget
organizations
Legal and institutional
structures for external audit and
internal audit established

IDA/IBRD AAA: PEFA Assessment,
data sharing TA
IDA/IBRD LEN/SPN: entire portfolio
TFs: SAFE trust fund, Russian PFM
trust fund, IDF grant
Key Partners: ADB, Russia, SECO

Annex 2.

IBRD/IDA activities for FY12-FY15 (by Strategic Theme)

[TOTAL: $1,350 million—IBRD: $710 million1 - IDA16: $540 million – IDA17: $100 million2 ]
(1) BY STRATEGIC THEME
IMPROVING INFRASTRUCTURE EFFICIENCY3
Advanced Electricity Metering
Enterprise Energy Efficiency II
Electricity Distribution
Urban Integrated Development Project Unidentified
Transport Unidentified
Horticulture Pilot Project
IBRD Project Unidentified (Outer years)

IBRD
110
100
100
100
100
100
100
710

INCREASING SOCIAL EQUITY/INCLUSION 4
Alat-Karakul Water Supply
Water Sanitation Sector Investment Project 1
Early Childhood Development
RESPII—Additional Financing
South Karakalpakstan Drainage Project
Water Sanitation Sector Investment Project 2
IDA Project Unidentified (IDA171)

TOTAL

710
50
50
50
40
150
100
100
540

540

710

100
640

100
1,350

IBRD

IDA

ENHANCING COMPETITIVENESS
Microfinance/credit access

(2) BY FISCAL YEAR
FY12
Advanced Electricity Metering
Alat-Karakul Water Supply
RESPII Additional Finance

IDA

TOTAL

110

110
FY13
Enterprise Energy Efficiency II
South Karakalpakstan Drainage Project
Water Sanitation Sector Investment I

50
40
90

200

150
50
200

300

100

100
FY14
Microfinance/credit access
Early Childhood Development
Water Sanitation Sector Investment Project 2
Horticulture Pilot Project
Electricity Distribution

100
50
100
100
100
200

FY15
Urban Integrated Development Project
Transport Unidentified
IBRD Project Unidentified (Outer years)
IDA Project Unidentified (IDA171)

250

450

300

100
100

400

710

640

1,350

100
100
100

1

Overall lending amounts will depend on the IBRD's lending capacity and demand by other borrowers as well as Government demand and
performance in the course of the CPS period.
2
Subject to Uzbekistan‘s continuing IDA eligibility in FY17
3
Energy, Transport, Drainage/Irrigation
4
Education, Health, Municipal Services

35

Annex 3. Mapping of CPS Activities by Strategic Themes

Total
$1350 m
I.

IDA16
$540 m

IDA17
$100 m

IBRD
$710 m

IMPROVING INFRASTRUCTURE

Sustainable infrastructure development
Thematic focus: (i) investment financing; (ii) scaling up of ongoing successful pilot activities (Energy efficiency); (iii) support to reforms (esp. sector management, PPP)
Instruments: (i) sectoral investment loans; (ii) continuous TA throughout the period; (ii) sector reports
Proposed activities Enterprises Energy Efficiency (UZEF)
Talimarjan transmission project
Advanced electric metering project
Electricity Distribution
UZEEF II
Transport Unidentified
Urban Integrated Development Project
UAP-ES Assessment (Aka UAP 1,000)
Energy Sector strategy
Transport Assessment

IDA SIL
IBRD SIL
IBRD SIL
IBRD SIL
IBRD SIL
IBRD SIL
IBRD SIL
TA
ESW
ESW

$28 m
$110 m
$110m
$100 m
$100 m
$100 m
$100 m

FY10-FY15
FY11-FY16
FY12-FY17
FY14
FY13
FY15
FY15
FY12-FY13
FY12
FY13

Ongoing project
Ongoing project
Pipeline
Pipeline
Pipeline
Pipeline
Pipeline
Continuation of existing work

Improving water management and climate change preparedness
Thematic focus: (i) continued investment in water and sanitation; (ii) support to sectoral reforms (esp. pricing)
Instruments: sectoral investment loans
Proposed activities

Hydromet Regional Project
Ferghana Valley Water Resources Phase-I
RESP II
South Karakalpakstan Drainage
Aral Sea Initiative
Water Resource Management Strategy

IDA Reg
IDA SIL
IDA SIL
IBRD SIL
GEF
ESW

$0
$66 m
$68 m
$150 m
$50 m

FY10-FY17
FY13
FY15
FY12-FY13

36

Ongoing project
Ongoing project
Ongoing Project
Pipeline
Pipeline

II.

ENHANCE COMPETITIVENESS OF THE ECONOMY

Strengthened institutions and macro-economic environment and promoting market efficiency
Thematic focus: Maintain macroeconomic stability over the medium term
Instruments: (i) Joint Strategy report ”Uzbek Vision 2030” ; (ii) continuous dialogue during the period
Proposed activities Data sharing and transparency
Macro-economic monitoring
Joint Strategy report ”Uzbek Vision 2030”

TA
TA
ESW

Continuous
Continuous
FY12-FY13

Building on dialogue in previous period
Joint with MoE and Chamber Commerce &Industry/ Institute of Forecasting

Promoting market efficiency
Thematic focus: Increased focus on specific sectors (including petrochemicals and textile)
Instruments: analytical pieces on specific topics
Proposed activities: Industrialization policy note

III.

ESW

One a year

Detailed look at key sector/one sector a year

DIVERSIFICATION

Strengthen the foundations for private sector development
Thematic focus: (i) continued support to overall business environment reforms; (ii) support to reform of the financial sector
Instruments: (i) Technical activities on investment climate and financial sector (2/3 years); (ii) focused financial intermediation / investment projects;
Proposed activities Microfinance/Credit Access
Doing Business TA
Innovation and growth TA
Financial sector TA

IDA LEN $100 m
TA
TA
TA

FY14
Continuous
Continuous
Continuous

Pipeline
Continuation of existing PREM work
To support the reforms through the period as needed

Diversification of the agriculture sector
Thematic focus: (i) financing and micro-finance for alternative agriculture; (ii) development of the horticulture sector
Instruments: (i) ongoing projects; (ii) additional financing; (iii) one time reports on specific issue ; (iv) sector strategy report
Proposed activities RESP II
AF for RESPII
Horticulture strategy
National Infrastructure Quality

IDA SIL $68 m
IDA AF $40 m
ESW
ESW

ends March 2015
FY12
FY12
FY13

37

Ongoing Project
Pipeline / Credit Line top-up
Follow-up on earlier work on Agriculture sector diversification

IV.

INCREASING SOCIAL EQUITY/INCLUSION

Strengthen quality of education and health services
Thematic focus: (i) Improving Basic Education and Early Childhood Development quality; (ii) Improving second-level care
Instruments: (i) ongoing projects; (ii) investment financing;
Proposed activities Health III
Basic Education II
Early childhood development Project

IDA SIL
IDA SPN
IDA SIL

$93 m
$28 m
$50 m

FY11
Ongoing project
FY12-FY15 Ongoing project
FY14
Pipeline

Water Supply and Sanitation
Thematic focus: (i) Improving water supply and sanitation; (ii) Improving related public policy
Instruments: (i) ongoing projects; (ii) investment financing (APL); (iii) policy note
Proposed activities Bukhara and Samarkand Sewerage IDA SIL
Syr Darya Water Supply
Alat-Karakul Water Supply Project
Water Sanitation Sector Investment Project 1
Water Sanitation Sector Investment Project 2
Water Utility Pricing Policy Note

IDA SIL
IDA SIL
IDA SIL
IDA SIL
ESW

$55 m
$100 m
$50 m
$50 m
$100 m

FY09-FY16
FY11-FY17
FY12
FY13
FY14
FY12

Ongoing project
Ongoing project
Pipeline
Pipeline
Pipeline

Promoting social inclusion
Thematic focus: (i) scaling up welfare improvement monitoring activities; (ii) support to social safety nets reform;
Instruments: (i) continuous TA throughout the period
Proposed activities Poverty monitoring/ Analysis support
V.

TA

Continuous

Strengthen capacity for monitoring and budgeting

GOVERNANCE CROSS-THEMATIC AREA

Improve the effectiveness and efficiency of public finance management
Thematic focus: Improve procurement and financial systems
Instruments: PE and Financial Accountability (PEFA)
Proposed activities PE and Financial Accountability (PEFA)

TA

FY12

Follow-up to CIFA

38

Annex 4. Development Partner Coordination
Sector

Macroeconomic Analysis

Public finance management
Revenue/fiscal administration
Budget management
Expenditure management
Public expenditure review
Statistics
Employment and enterpreneurship
Microfinance

Diversification/Industrialization
Private sector Development

Agriculture/Fisheries

Irrigation and Drainage

Transport

Energy

Water and sanitation

Donor

Amount in
currency

Instrument*

Loan/
Grant

WB
GIZ
UNDP
IMF

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

TA
TA
TA
TA

Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant

UNDP
UNDP
ADB
UNDP
SECO
EU
IMF
ADB
ADB
EU
KfW
UNDP
WB
ADB
EU
GIZ
SECO
JETRO
OSCE
ADB
EU
GIZ
USAID
China
OSCE
SECO (Swiss)
UNDP
SECO
GIZ
JICA
KOICA
China
ADB
IsDB
EU
JICA
China
OSCE
ADB
EU
JICA
KOICA
USAID
ADB
ADB
EU
UNDP
SECO
JICA
KOICA

n.a.
n.a.
$1.0 M
n.a.
CHF 2.0 M
n.a.
n.a.
$0.1 M
$100 M
n.a.
Eur 19.8 M
n.a.
n.a.
$0.6 M
n.a.
n.a.
CHF 0.7
JPY10 M
Eur 0.6 M
$250 M
n.a.
n.a.
$25 M
n.a.
n.a.
$6.5 M
$4.0 M
CHF3.0 M
n.a.
n.a.
$2.5 M
n.a.
$900 M
$2.4 M
n.a.
$10 M
n.a.
n.a.
$1.2 B
n.a.
JPY27.2 B
$2.5 M
n.a.
$450 M
$0.2 M
n.a.
n.a.
CHF 6.5 M
n.a.
$5.3 M

TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
Proj
TA
Proj
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
Proj
TA
TA
Proj
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
Proj
TA
TA
Proj
TA
TA
Proj
TA
Proj
Proj
TA
Proj
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA

Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Loan
Grant
Loan
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Loan
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
loan
Grant
Grant
Loan
Grant
Grant
Loan
Grant
Loan
Grant
Grant
Loan
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant

39

Period
before 12
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

13
x

14
x

x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x

x

x

x
x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

15 after
x
x

Annex 4. Development Partner Coordination (Continued)
Habitat/Housing

Environment

Education

Health /others social sectors

Governance
WIS
Audit/Procurment
Fight against coruption
Public sector capacity building

Civil society

Gender

ADB
KfW
KOICA
EU
GIZ
UNDP
JICA
OSCE
GEF
ADB
IsDB
EU
KfW
UNICEF
JICA
KOICA
China
EU
GIZ
KfW
UNICEF
WHO
UNFPA
JICA
KOICA
USAID
China

$100 M
n.a.
$2.5 M
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
$7.5 M
n.a.
$5.3 M
$0.4 B
$190 M
n.a.
Eur 20 M
$20 M
$5 M
$7 M
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
$8.0 M
$42.3 M
$2.1 M
$8.9 M
$13 M
$6.5 M
n.a.
n.a.

Proj
Proj
Proj
TA
TA
TA
Proj
TA
TA
Proj
Proj
TA
Proj
TA
TA
Proj
Proj
TA
TA
Proj
TA
TA
TA
Proj
TA
TA
Proj

Loan
Loan
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Loan
Grant
Grant
Loan
Loan
Grant
Loan
Grant
Grant
Grant
Loan
Grant
Grant
Loan
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Loan

ADB
WB
UNDP
WB
UNODC
OSCE
IsDB
EU
WB
UNICEF
UNFPA
KOICA
USAID
OSCE
IsDB
EU
KOICA
USAID
ADB
UNFPA

$0.4 M
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Eur 0.1 M
$0.5 M
n.a.
$0.06
n.a.
$1.10
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
$0.1 M
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA
TA

Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant
Grant

(*) legend :
Proj: classic project
BS: budget support
T BS: targeted budget support
T A: technical Assistance
M: million
B: billion
Amounts are indicative and exchange rates may vary.

40

x
x

x
x

x
x
x

x

x

x

x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x

x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x

x

x

x

x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x
x
x

x

x

Annex 5. CAS Completion Report (CASCR), FY08-11

I.

Executive Summary

Background
CAS Program Performance
Bank Performance

II.

Progress towards Uzbekistan’s Development Goals

III.

Highlights of CAS Program Performance

Pillar 1: Enabling Environment for Shared Growth
Pillar 2: Increasing Economic and Income Opportunities in Rural Areas
Pillar 3: Strengthening Human Development & Social Protection
Pillar 4: Managing Environmental and Disaster Risks and Global Goods Provision
CAS Program Results Rating

IV.

WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE

CAS Design and Relevance
World Bank Group Performance Rating

V.

KEY LESSONS AND SUGGESTIONS

Attachments:
I.

Table 1: Summary of CAS Program Self-Evaluation

II.

Table 2: Planned Lending and Actual Deliveries

III.

Table 3: Planned Non-Lending Services and Actual Deliveries

41

I.

Executive Summary

Background

i.

The FY08-11 CAS marked the return to a standard assistance framework for Uzbekistan
following the FY06-07 Interim Strategy Note (ISN) which, owing to concerns about development
effectiveness and the country‘s governance, focused on technical assistance and minimal IDA lending for
global public goods and social services. Reflecting slowly improving Bank-client relations and the need
to calibrate different levels of activity to different degrees of government commitment, the CAS adopted a
flexible, two-track approach, defined as: full engagement, i.e. lending, analytical and advisory services,
and technical assistance, in policy areas and/or sectors of common agreement; and limited engagement,
i.e. analytical and advisory services and/or technical assistance in areas where there was no, or incomplete
consensus. The IDA15 allocation was expected to be about $375-450 million over the three years FY0911, similar to the allocation under IDA14 but significantly higher than the total $55 million actually
committed between FY04-07.
Uzbekistan‘s economy withstood the global crisis relatively well—thanks to continued high
demand for, and the prices of the country‘s commodity exports, the government‘s end-2008 fiscal
stimulus, equivalent to 4 percent of GDP, and the financial sector‘s limited exposure to world markets—
and the CAS program was thus little affected. While the number of operations approved was in line with
expectations in mid-2008, the total $533 million committed by end-FY11 was significantly higher. This
was partly due to the addition of two new energy operations late in the period. The program of analytical
and advisory activities and technical assistance was implemented largely as planned

ii.

CAS Program Performance
iii.
The Completion Report rates the achievements of outcomes foreseen in the CAS as moderately
satisfactory. First, compared to the mid-2000s, the quality and scope of the Bank‘s dialogue and
interaction with the government on macro-related policies (except for poverty) has demonstrably
improved. Moreover, a substantial program of continuing analytical and advisory activities—including a
planned country economic memorandum focused on competitiveness issues—is in place for the next two
years. On the other hand, the Bank‘s influence and role in Uzbekistan remain limited, the bar was set
deliberately low, and the authorities‘ ostensibly renewed confidence in Bank economic analysis and
policy advice has not yet translated into better access to key economic, financial and social data—nor
more generally to improved governance and transparency. Second, although IFC‘s advisory services
contributed to several regulatory improvements in the business environment, they could not be expected
to overcome long-standing systemic constraints to private sector development. Third, the program
achieved significant results on the ground in rural development and improved water resource
management, but had little apparent influence on broader agricultural policy reforms or on poverty and
regional disparity reduction goals. The human development program, on the other hand, in addition to
project-specific results, also contributed to and supported implementation of small-scale, but important
pragmatic reforms in education, health, and water supply and sanitation.
Bank Performance
iv.
CAS Design. Overall, the CAS was relevant and well aligned with the country‘s stated
development priorities, although the links between broad-based strategic country goals and CAS-specific
outcomes were sometimes tenuous or unclear. CAS outcomes, eschewing controversial or sensitive
policies or reforms, were realistic—in fact, based largely on already agreed project-specific objectives,
most were relatively undemanding and clearly intended to ensure achievement. The quality of the results
framework, however, was uneven, inconsistent, and unclear in several areas. The CAS identified five

42

critical risks to implementation, of which three—fiduciary, development effectiveness, and regional
cooperation—are ongoing and likely to continue into the next FY12-15 CAS and beyond.
v.
CAS Implementation. The flexible, dual track approach worked well, resulting inter alia in an
almost doubling of the active portfolio—from six projects totaling $266 million in FY08 to ten projects
totaling $633 million by end-FY11. Development impact, however, was modest, owing partly to the
intentionally limited policy content of lending operations, partly to the client‘s avoidance of sensitive
areas for collaborative economic and sector work (e.g. agriculture, governance, poverty), and partly to the
gradual pace and narrow scope of Uzbekistan‘s structural reforms process. Moreover, despite the
improved dialogue and closer relations, several long-standing operational and portfolio issues remain
unresolved, such as procurement, especially contract registration, implementation delays, and project
management.
vi.
Against this background, including the CAS‘ relatively modest, undemanding goals, the
Completion Report rates the Bank‘s performance in terms of both design and implementation as
moderately satisfactory.
II.

Progress towards Uzbekistan’s Development Goals

1.
Uzbekistan’s overall macroeconomic results for the FY08-11 CAS period were broadly in
line with the goals established in its first Welfare Improvement Strategy (WIS), 2007-10. With GDP
growth exceeding 8percent in both 2009 and 2010 according to official data, its economy withstood the
global economic crisis relatively well, the main impact being weaker demand for the country‘s
manufactured exports and a marked decline in migrant workers‘ remittances—about 30 percent lower
than their 2008 peak, when they were equivalent to 7 percent of GDP. Three factors together explain this
outcome: first, the continued high world demand for, and prices of copper, cotton, gas, and gold,
Uzbekistan‘s principal commodity exports, which account for 80 percent of the total; second, the
government‘s end-2008 fiscal stimulus, equivalent to 4 percent of GDP, that included tax exemptions and
reductions, increases in public sector wages, support to agriculture, commercial banks, and state-owned
enterprises, and loans from the Fund for Reconstruction and Development (FRD); and third, the
economy‘s limited exposure to international financial markets. In addition, prudent economic
management before, during, and after the global downturn helped maintain growth and stability. On the
other hand, progress towards reducing the structural distortions inherent in Uzbekistan‘s gradualist stateled development strategy—e.g. the restrictive trade régime, self-sufficiency, the underdeveloped financial
sector, the difficult business environment, was limited. Moreover, despite some advances, governance,
public accountability, and transparency remain major concerns as well.
2.
Progress towards the other country development goals supported by the CAS varied. In
particular, results for the main themes underlying the CAS program—private sector development,
increased rural incomes, strengthened human development, and improved environmental and disaster risk
management—were mixed and often unclear, owing at least partly to insufficient or poor quality data.
Regarding private sector development, for example, while the authorities report an increase in the share of
small- and medium-sized enterprises in GDP, from 42 percent in 2006 to 52 percent in 2010, there are no
official data to indicate whether the broader private sector/GDP ratio improved proportionately 1 .
Moreover, some private sector development indicators turned negative: for example, Uzbekistan‘s
relative country ranking in Doing Business fell during the period―from 138/181 in 2009 to 150/183 in
both 2010 and 2011—and its poor investment climate, specifically access to foreign exchange as well as
local currency in cash, remains a major challenge2. Thus, even though the government expects to finance
1

2

According to Uzbekistan statistical conventions, the private sector and small- and medium-sized enterprises are synonymous. The private
sector includes enterprises with less than majority private equity ownership.
Uzbekistan‘s absolute country-specific score, however, indicates modest progress over time—cf. paragraph 14 below.

43

up to two-thirds of its $47.3 billion, five-year (2011-15) industrial modernization and infrastructure
development program with foreign direct investment and/or external loans, there is scant evidence of any
real improvement in the country‘s overall business environment since 2008.
3.
As for increased rural incomes and strengthened human development, project-specific
indicators suggest continued progress in the delivery of essential social services—education, health,
and water supply and sanitation. However, there are no up-to-date reliable data available to verify the
officially reported declines in poverty, nor to show, for example, whether improved agricultural yields,
especially of cotton and wheat, are translating into increased farmers‘ incomes. Likewise, it is unclear
whether the better access to safe water and the reductions in infant and maternal mortality recorded in
IDA-financed project districts are being replicated elsewhere in the country. In fact, given the still slow
pace of reform in agriculture—with the ‗state order‘ for cotton at below market prices still firmly in
place—and also in the public education and health systems, especially in rural areas, there is anecdotal
evidence that unemployment and living standards have changed little during the period.
III.

Highlights of CAS Program Performance

4.
The overall purpose of the CAS was to support implementation of Uzbekistan’s first WIS,
2007-10. The WIS, a comprehensive medium-term development framework, sought to maintain high
rates of GDP growth and, in particular, to improve living standards, create a more competitive,
diversified, and modern economy, enhance access to and the quality of public services, and reduce interregional disparities. Linked to these country objectives, the CAS‘ framework comprised four pillars: (a)
an enabling environment for shared growth; (b) increased economic and income opportunities in rural
areas; (c) strengthened human development and social protection through better service delivery; and (d)
environmental and disaster risk management, and global goods provision.
5.
This Completion Report compares results achieved with the outcomes foreseen in the CAS,
as updated or revised in the FY10 CAS Progress Report (CASPR)3. It is based inter alia on: portfolio
implementation performance reports; the last two Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and
aide memoires of each active project and Implementation Completion Reports (ICRs) of two projects that
closed during the CAS period; interviews with selected client counterparts; and self-assessments by the
country team. Its initial findings informed the preparation of the FY12-15 Country Partnership Strategy
(CPS).
Pillar 1: Enabling Environment for Shared Growth
6.
The first pillar envisaged two broad areas of engagement, with outcomes linked to the country‘s
overall growth, poverty reduction, and macroeconomic management goals, namely: (a) institutional
support for WIS implementation, including promoting good governance; and (b) private sector
development, business environment and investment climate. Activities in these areas were facilitated by a
mix of advisory and analytical services, policy dialogue, and technical assistance.
7.
CAS support for WIS implementation focused on six pre-selected clusters of activity: (a)
macroeconomic policy formulation; (b) poverty analysis; (c) monitoring and evaluation; (d) public
financial management reform; (e) budget transparency; and (f) governance. According to the country
team‘s self-assessment, outcomes for macroeconomic policy formulation, budget transparency, and
governance were achieved and those for monitoring and evaluation and for public financial management
3

Uzbekistan: Country Assistance Strategy, FY08-11, May 14, 2008 (Report No. 43385-UZ)
Uzbekistan: Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report, May 20, 2010 (Report No. 53764-UZ)

44

were partly achieved. There was little progress as regards poverty analysis, however. These results are
discussed in more detail below.
8.
Macroeconomic policy formulation. In addition to regular advice to decision makers, technical
assistance was provided to the Ministry of Economy (MOE), the Institute for Macroeconomic Research
(IFMR), and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) to strengthen these institutions‘ analytical and forecasting
capacity through the use of new economic tools. Specific outputs included: an external debt management
manual; an assessment of budget revenues; a review of the State Tax Committee‘s organizational
structure; a guide for the publication of key economic data; a methodology for assessing the impact of
external shocks such as the recent global crisis on Uzbekistan‘s economy, using a computable general
equilibrium model (CGE) model, as well as mitigation measures and related policy dialogue; a survey of
research and development institutions to assess the constraints to their upgrading and modernization; a
methodology for assessing innovation potential in specific industrial sectors; and workshops and
roundtables for preparation of a national strategy for innovation-based development.
9.
Budget transparency. The increased frequency and expanded scope of MOF reporting during the
period contributed to enhanced budget transparency and, indirectly, improved public finance
management. Two specific results were achieved: (a) monthly and quarterly reports are now reconciled
using the unified budget classification, allowing for comparison of approved and actual budgets; and (b)
all extra-budgetary funds, except the Fund for Reconstruction and Development (FRD), are now
incorporated into the treasury system. The treasury in turn introduced the new GFSM 2001-based budget
classification for the 2011 budget cycle, albeit not yet in terms of published budget data.
10.
Governance. Dialogue on governance and anti-corruption was initiated in the context of several
anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing activities undertaken jointly with the UNODC. It
was later broadened to include data transparency, banking system reforms and, more recently, industrial
policies. Specific outcomes included: Uzbekistan‘s signature of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption in August 2008; Uzbekistan‘s ratification of the OECD Istanbul Action Plan in March 2010;
and the creation of a national anti-corruption strategy working group tasked with developing an action
plan and assessing—jointly with OECD—the country‘s institutional capacity for combating corruption.
Meanwhile, an assessment of the accountability, efficiency, and transparency of primary health care
services was completed in mid-2009 as planned.
11.
Monitoring and evaluation. A WIS monitoring and evaluation framework was developed and
partially implemented, specifically the provision of hardware, software, and MoE staff training, including
a September, 2008 study tour to Vietnam. In addition, a database of over 170 improved education and
health indicators was prepared and integrated into the framework, financed by a small IDF grant to the
MOE and the Ministries of Education and Health. However, the monitoring and evaluation unit is not yet
formally incorporated into the MOE, nor is the framework integrated into other core ministries.
Moreover, monitoring and evaluation units at the regional and district levels also need further capacity
building.
12.
Public financial management reform. Agreement was reached on a joint PEFA assessment that
will be used to benchmark Uzbekistan‘s public finance management (PFM) system. Meanwhile,
technical assistance was provided to support continued implementation of the MOF‘s treasury reform in
two phases with the following outputs: (a) a draft instruction establishing the accounting framework and
a draft unified chart of accounts consistent with international public sector accounting standards and
aligned with the new GFSM 2001-based budget classification; and (b) an accounting framework for
budget organizations, as well as the training of 50 staff.
13.
Poverty analysis. There was no change in the authorities‘ policy regarding access to primary
household budget survey data. Therefore, technical assistance for the newly established Institute for

45

Social Research focused on providing analytical support, knowledge sharing, and the organization of
twinning arrangements between WIS working groups and overseas research institutes. Meanwhile,
although a multiple indicator cluster survey (MICS) covering 20,000 households was formally launched
in 2010, with UNICEF support, it will not be completed until September, 2011. Analysis of the results of
this MICS is expected to provide some indication of trends in poverty-related outcomes.
14.
CAS support for private sector development, business environment, and the investment
climate was provided almost entirely by IFC. Advisory services, comprising four projects totaling
almost $4.5 million (including Central Asia and Azerbaijan regional projects), promoted improvements in
the business environment and financial sector. IFC‘s long-standing investment climate advisory project
assessed the impact of proposed regulations affecting businesses and simplifying tax administration. In
addition to advisory work on leasing and housing finance, a recently launched regional financial markets
infrastructure advisory project focuses on the further development of credit information sharing systems
and formal risk management education and certification.
15.
IFC’s private sector development work comprised analytical and advisory services in five
areas: (a) improved business environment (as measured by Doing Business); (b) public-private
partnerships (PPPs); (c) leasing and housing finance; (d) tax administration; and (e) credit information
sharing. According to the IFC team‘s self assessment, outcomes for leasing and housing finance and for
improved business environment were achieved; and those for tax administration, credit information
sharing, and PPPs were partly achieved. Regarding the business environment, although Uzbekistan‘s
relative country ranking in Doing Business fell during the period, an alternative so-called ‗change score‘
that measures country-specific progress in absolute terms points to modest technical improvements over
the past five years. These include: a 25 percent reduction in building permit fees; a new, simplified tax
code, and reduced tax rates; a 30 percent reduction in mandatory business inspections; and, adoption of a
regulation for cameral (off-site) control of businesses. Despite these positive results, the two main
obstacles to an improved business environment and investment climate―limited access to foreign
exchange as well as cash local currency―remain essentially unchanged since 2008. As for PPPs,
between October 2009-2011, the Ministry of Health worked with IFC under a financial advisory services
agreement for a proposed partnership involving medical diagnostic centers; in the end the Ministry of
Health decided not to pursue this PPP scheme until a more complete health care reform is implemented.
In addition, memoranda of understanding have recently been signed with Uzkommunkhizmat (UzK), the
national utilities agency, and with the city of Tashkent for pilot partnerships in utilities and solid waste
management respectively. In IFC‘s view, prospects for completing this PPP agenda are good, albeit not
during the current CAS.
16.
IFC invested $8 million in two financial sector projects during the period. This modest
outcome, although an increase over the preceding (ISN) period, reflected the constraints affecting the
country‘s private sector. A $3 million credit line to Uzbek Leasing is financing medium-term leases for
industrial equipment and machinery for small- and medium enterprises (SMEs). A $5 million debt and
equity financing to Hamkorbank, one of the country‘s few private banks, is accompanied by advisory
services to strengthen management information systems (MIS), human resources, risk management and
corporate governance practices. IFC portfolio clients in the financial sector provided almost 40,000 loans
to small and medium-sized enterprises during 2008-2009 and held outstanding MSME portfolios of over
$500 million at end-2009. Nonetheless, the country‘s relatively low private sector/GDP ratio, the small
amount of private foreign direct investment, and IFC‘s own modest portfolio are together evidence that
Uzbekistan‘s business environment and investment climate still require significant improvement.
Pillar 2: Increasing Economic and Income Opportunities in Rural Areas
17.
To support government efforts aimed at increasing economic and income opportunities in rural
areas, reducing poverty, and lessening regional disparities—and consistent with the WIS‘ focus on rural

46

development and improved water resource management—the CAS relied on four ongoing operations: two
Rural Enterprise Support Projects (RESP)—I & II, the Drainage, Irrigation & Wetlands Improvement
Project, and the Fergana Valley Water Resources Management Project. Together, these were expected to
produce three related outcomes: (a) increased yields of corn, cotton, wheat, fruits and vegetables; (b)
enhanced farmers‘ access to credit and other financial services in seven provinces; and (c) strengthened
capacity of water users‘ associations.
18.
Based on recent ISRs and the ICR for RESP-I, all four projects‘ contributed directly or indirectly
to achievement of these outcomes. For example, the Drainage, Irrigation & Wetlands Improvement
Project enhanced the quality and potential productivity of 100,000 ha of land by investment in improved
drainage and irrigation facilities. Likewise, in RESP-I districts, cotton and wheat yields increased on
average by 15 percent and 27 percent respectively; farmers‘ access to credit and other financial services
expanded significantly; and the capacity and viability of water users‘ associations, based on
hydrographical rather than administrative boundaries, is now stronger. Whether these higher yields
translated into increased rural incomes, however, is less clear: the ICR asserts that they helped reduce
poverty, but offers no evidence. Although cotton farmers in RESP-I districts were allowed to sell their
‗above quota‘ output outside the national ‗state order‘ system—an opportunity explicitly designed to help
increase their incomes significantly—the delay in issuing the enabling decree, the practical obstacles to
‗above quota‘ sales (virtually all cotton ginneries remain government-owned or controlled), and the small
scale of the pilot scheme together meant that its results were inconclusive. At the same time, analyses of
projects in other (non-RESP) districts suggest that farmers‘ incomes remain constrained by the longstanding systemic barriers to technological change and agricultural reform, such as continuing
governmental controls over cropping patterns and the supply of inputs such as fertilizers and seeds, as
well as other policies and practices that stifle innovation and risk taking. Thus, although CAS outcomes,
actual and prospective, contributed to achievement of two of this pillar‘s three country goals—increased
agricultural productivity and enhanced sustainability of irrigation and land improvement—their influence
on farmers‘ incomes and, more broadly, their impact on poverty reduction in rural areas are uncertain.
Finally, a water sector investment planning study that defined a methodology for prioritizing individual
irrigation and drainage investment projects was completed in mid-2009 as planned.
Pillar 3: Strengthening Human Development & Social Protection
19.
To strengthen human development and social protection, the CAS targeted three broadly-defined
sub-sectoral outcomes: (a) increased provision of safe water and sanitation; (b) improved health indices,
specifically for infant and maternal mortality; and (c) enhanced basic education and learning, measured by
the adoption of quality enhancing techniques, materials, and participatory practices. It supported
government efforts in these three areas through five ongoing projects, two of which were completed
during the period, as well as three new operations, supplemented by focused analytical and advisory
services.
20.
Improved Provision of Safe Water and Sanitation. CAS outcomes for increased provision of
safe water and sanitation―measured by improved supply reliability, enhanced water quality, energy
efficiency, cost recovery, and customer satisfaction under the now completed Bukhara and Samarkand
Water Supply Project―were fully achieved. However, institutional development efforts to strengthen the
two water utilities through a performance-based service contract with an international operator failed,
with the ICR rating both project development objectives and Bank and borrower performance moderately
unsatisfactory. Nevertheless, experience gained under this project helped inform a less ambitious design
for the Bukhara and Samarkand Sewerage Project approved in FY10. Moreover, a Municipal Services
Sector Study and a Water Supply and Sanitation Strategy Note helped sustain policy dialogue on
investment and policy reform priorities and support preparation of three new projects (Syr Darya Water
Supply, Alat-Karkul Water Supply, and Karakalpakstan Sewerage), of which one (Syr Darya Water
Supply) was approved in late-FY11.

47

21.
Improved Health Indices. Since the mid-1990s, reforms in Uzbekistan‘s public health system
have focused on restructuring primary health care—specifically training of general practitioners,
upgrading of rural clinics‘ infrastructure and equipment, and expansion in the scope of services
provided—and establishing an emergency care network. These changes and other structural and health
financing reforms supported by the 2nd Health Project, now nearing completion, have resulted in
increased utilization of services and improved patients‘ satisfaction. They have also encouraged health
system efficiency, as patients shift to lower-cost, outpatient services, and helped re-orient facilities
towards local needs and improved accountability. The recently approved and much larger 3rd Health
System Improvement Project will provide support for district hospital services improvement, primary
health care development, and the quality of secondary health care, for ongoing health financing and
management reforms, and for institutional strengthening for non-communicable diseases prevention and
control. Meanwhile, although an intended CAS result—to increase the proportion of pregnant women
receiving antenatal care during the first trimester—was not achieved, neither this result nor the planned
CAS outcome—to reduce infant and maternal mortality further—were a particular focus of the CAS
program, which was obviously concentrated more broadly on human and physical infrastructure
investments, health financing and management reforms, and institutional development. Progress in these
areas under the 2nd Health Project and as reflected in the ambitious scope of the 3rd Health System
Improvement Project was evidently satisfactory.
22.
Improved Basic Education and Learning. In 2007, Uzbekistan spent 7.5 of its GDP and 25
percent of its budget on education—well above the OECD average—with resources until 2004
concentrated mainly on measures to upgrade secondary vocational education. Since then, there has been a
shift in focus to general education, specifically the School Education Development Program, 2004-09,
which—coterminous with the Basic Education Project (BEP)-Phase 1—has supported rehabilitation and
reconstruction of about 8,500 schools, provision of furniture, science and technology equipment and other
learning resources, including teacher training, and increased teacher salaries. This focus on improved
human and physical resources and the quality of education, as well as financing and structural reforms,
produced positive changes in line with intended CAS results and outcomes. For example, per capita
financing was introduced nationwide in 2010; standardized assessments of student learning for 4 th and 8th
graders have been implemented nationwide; and 85 percent of BEP-Phase 1 project schools now have
functioning school boards—the target for 2011. Meanwhile, BEP-Phase 2, approved in June 2009, builds
upon and extends the capacity created under BEP-1. It also combines targeted interventions to poor, rural
schools with interventions designed to encourage broader, systemic education reform. CAS outcomes for
improved basic education and learning were thus achieved.
Pillar 4: Managing Environmental and Disaster Risks and Global Goods Provision

23.

The fourth pillar originally provided for a variety of analytical, advisory, and technical assistance
activities in five areas: weather forecasting, adaptation to climate change, renewable energy, carbon
finance, and communicable diseases. During the FY10 CASPR process, these were reduced to three:
improved energy efficiency; reduced greenhouse gas emissions; and improved environmental and disaster
risk management. At the same time, an energy efficiency project was added to the program.
24.
Improved Energy Efficiency. Having declared the need to improve the energy efficiency of
industrial enterprises as one of its key priorities, the government requested urgent IDA assistance for a
pilot project support implementation of the necessary policy measures and, in particular, to finance
investments in energy savings equipment and technology through three commercial banks. Thus, a $25
million Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises operation—the first WBG operational commitment in
Uzbekistan‘s energy sector—was added to the CAS program and approved in mid-2010, although one
year later (mid-2011) it has still not yet been signed. If this pilot is successful, it is planned to develop a
more ambitious operation, with a much larger credit line and the addition of more financial
intermediaries.

48

Reduced Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Dialogue on Uzbekistan‘s participation in the Global Gas
Flaring Reduction Partnership (GGFR) and Carbon Financing Mechanisms continues. Uzbekneftegaz, the
national oil and gas company, confirmed its participation in the GGFR Partnership for 2010-12, aiming to
reduce gas flaring from its oil production. A possible Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) Gas Flare
Reduction Project under the Kyoto Protocol is also under preparation.

25.

26.
Improved Environmental and Disaster Risk Management. An energy sector vulnerability to
climate change study has been initiated. A regional workshop took place in 2009 to launch regional
disaster risk management (DRM) reports and to initiate the recently approved Central Asia regional
hydro-meteorological program. Technical capacity was built in inventorying obsolete pesticidecontaminated burial sites; inventories and risk assessments were carried out; and recommendations for
remediation were prepared for two priority burial sites. Finally, at the regional level, an independent
assessment of the regional impact of Vakhsh River Basin development was initiated.
CAS Program Results Rating
27.
The Completion Report rates the achievements of outcomes foreseen in the CAS as
moderately satisfactory. First, compared to the mid-2000s, the quality and scope of the Bank‘s dialogue
and interaction with the government on macro-related policies (except for poverty) has demonstrably
improved. Moreover, a substantial program of continuing analytical and advisory activities—including a
planned country economic memorandum focused on competitiveness issues—is in place for the next two
years. On the other hand, the Bank‘s influence and role in Uzbekistan remain limited, the bar was set
deliberately low, and the authorities‘ ostensibly renewed confidence in Bank economic analysis and
policy advice has not yet translated to better access to key economic, financial and social data—nor more
generally to improved governance and transparency. Second, although IFC‘s advisory services
contributed to several technical improvements in the business environment, it could not be expected to
overcome the country‘s systemic constraints to private sector development. Third, the program achieved
significant results on the ground in rural development and improved water resource management, but had
little obvious influence on broader agricultural policy reforms or on poverty and regional disparity
reduction goals. The human development program, on the other hand, in addition to project-specific
results, also contributed to and supported implementation of small-scale, but important pragmatic reforms
in education, health, and water supply and sanitation.

IV.

WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE

28.
Reflecting slowly improving Bank-client relations and the need to calibrate different levels
of engagement to different degrees of government commitment, the CAS adopted a flexible, twotrack approach. This was defined as: (a) full engagement, i.e. lending, analytical and advisory services,
and technical assistance, in policy areas and/or sectors of common agreement exemplified by strong
government commitment and a successful Bank track record; and (b) limited engagement, i.e. analytical
and advisory services and/or technical assistance in areas where there was no, or incomplete consensus on
goals and where a road map of policies, programs, and sequencing remained to be agreed.
29.
The IDA15 financial envelope was expected to be in the range $375-450 million over the three
years FY09-11, similar to the allocation under IDA14 but significantly higher than the total $55 million
actually committed between FY04-07. Lending was to focus on investments in: (a) public services
affecting rural and urban populations directly that supported implementation of sector-specific reforms;
and (b) activities that reinforced Uzbekistan‘s contribution to the global goods and climate change agenda
and the promotion of regional cooperation. At the government‘s request, two significant adjustments
were made at the time of the FY10 CAS Progress Report: the addition of three new operations in energy;

49

and, the resumption of IBRD lending up to $250 million for two of these three operations. Non-lending
activities were to focus on key sector and thematic areas.
30.
Eight operations totaling $533 million were approved during the period. Water supply and
sewerage $143 million) and energy ($135 million) together accounted for 52 percent of the total, followed
by agriculture and water resources management ($134 million, or 25 percent) and education and health
($121 million, or 23 percent). In terms of thematic priorities, strengthening human development and
social protection received half of total commitments, with four operations totaling $264 million.
Meanwhile, two operations totaling $134 million supported increasing economic opportunities in rural
areas and two totaling $135 million the energy efficiency element of the environmental and disaster risk
management and global goods provision pillar. Thus, CAS outcomes in terms of number of operations
were broadly in line with expectations in mid-2008, but significantly exceeded in terms of amounts
committed, with lending of $291 million in FY11—by far the largest to Uzbekistan in any single year.4
This was partly due to the addition of two new energy operations in FY10-11, including the $110 million
IBRD loan for Talimarjan Transmission—the largest sector investment loan to Uzbekistan to date. Table
2—Planned Lending and Actual Deliveries, FY08-11—compares originally planned and actual lending.

CAS Design and Relevance
31.
Overall, the CAS was relevant and well aligned with the country’s stated development
priorities—although the links between broad-based strategic country goals and CAS-specific
programmatic outcomes was sometimes tenuous or unclear. However, the flexible, two-track approach
was effective in helping ensure client commitment and ownership and facilitated program adjustment
during implementation as intended. Planned outcomes, eschewing controversial or sensitive policies or
reforms, were realistic—in fact, given that some were based on already agreed project-specific results,
they were relatively undemanding and clearly intended to ensure achievement. In the circumstances, the
fact that some were not, or only partly achieved is disappointing. The quality of the results framework
was uneven, inconsistent, and unclear in several areas. Five critical risks to CAS implementation were
correctly identified, of which three—fiduciary, development effectiveness, and regional cooperation— are
ongoing and likely to continue into the next FY12-15 CAS and beyond.
32.
Operationally, the dual track approach worked well, resulting in an almost doubling of the
active portfolio during the period—from six projects totaling $266 million in FY08 to ten projects
totaling $633 million by end-FY11. Policy impact, however, appears modest—owing partly to the
intentionally limited policy content of lending operations, partly to the client‘s avoidance of sensitive
areas for collaborative AAA (such as agriculture, governance, poverty), and partly to the gradual pace and
narrow scope of Uzbekistan‘s structural reforms process. Moreover, despite the improved dialogue and
closer Bank/IDA relations, key long-standing issues remain unresolved—e.g. data access, quality, and
transparency; procurement (including contract registration); implementation delays; and project
management.
33.
Design of new projects/programs. RESP II and three new water supply and/or sewerage
operations took into account lessons learned from preceding ICRs (RESP-I and WSSP), especially
institutional development experience. Moreover, the potential for more programmatic approaches to
(e.g.) future water supply and health operations, as well as education (ongoing), is under consideration.
At the same time, the Bank‘s project cycle and the government‘s investment approval processes are still
not well aligned, leading to long delays in signing, effectiveness, and initial implementation. Similarly,
procurement remains subject to significant delays, partly due to the government‘s contract
registration/price verification procedures, which also contravene Bank Procurement Guidelines. The
4

Bank/IDA lending during the preceding 14 years (FY94-07) totaled $654.1 million, i.e. an annual average of $47 million, of which $599.1
million was committed between FY94-03 and $55 million between FY04-07.

50

rapid increase in portfolio size and complexity during the period make resolution of these two longstanding generic issues even more urgent.
34.
Relevance, quality, and dissemination of knowledge-based activities. Given the satisfactory
outcome of analytical and advisory services and technical assistance under the first growth pillar (except
for poverty analysis), knowledge-based activities were evidently highly relevant, of appropriate quality,
and timely (e.g. just-in-time notes)—and driven by client demand. Linking these activities explicitly to
the implementation of public investments (e.g. water supply and sanitation, health) or the resolution of
particular policy reform issues (e.g. public financial management, private sector development)—as
requested by client—ensured ownership and impact. However, access to, and the quality of key
economic, financial, and social data remain problematical—despite apparent progress stemming from the
2010 CPIA process and the authorities‘ recently indicated readiness to provide data for publication in the
IMF‘s International Finance Statistics (IFS)—and progress towards broadening the governance and
transparency agenda and dialogue was limited. On the other hand, a priori agreement on the purpose and
scope of planned knowledge-based activities guaranteed their relevance in terms of client interest.
35.
Responsiveness to changing country circumstances, priorities and demands. The flexibility
built into the CAS design was in the event fully exploited during the FY10 mid-term progress review
(CASPR) process. At the government‘s urgent request, three new energy operations were added to the
program and, with CFRCR‘s agreement, limited lending of up to $250 million on IBRD terms was
approved. The results matrix was also revised and updated.
36.
Effectiveness of overall donor assistances. Overall, official development assistance (ODA) to
Uzbekistan, never very large, remains limited. Except for the ADB, the multilaterals‘ exposure (including
that of the Bank) is very modest and there are only a few bilateral or non-governmental agencies engaged,
mainly in technical assistance. Consequently, conventional aid coordination and the Bank‘s role are not a
major issue. On the other hand, the growing impact of emerging new partners such as China, Iran, Korea,
and Russia—especially the effectiveness and fiscal impact of their burgeoning investments in industry
and infrastructure—will need increasingly to be monitored and taken into account. In this connection, it
is unclear to what extent the aid efficiency and effectiveness agenda prescribed by the 2005 Paris
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and, more recently, the 2008 Accra Agenda for Action is being
addressed by the small donor community in Tashkent, including by the Bank.
37.
Effectiveness of dialogue and business relations with authorities. Compared to fraught Bankclient relations earlier in the 2000s, especially during the FY05-07 Interim Strategy Note (ISN) period, the
policy dialogue and business dealings have improved steadily since 2007-08, one obvious measure of
which is the CAS‘ overall moderately satisfactory outcome. However, CAS indicators and goals were
modest by design and, despite the enhanced dialogue and relations, several long-standing generic issues—
ultimately impeding the effectiveness of Bank Group assistance—remain unresolved. Moreover, despite
best efforts, dialogue on regional issues, especially energy and water, remains difficult and ineffective.
38.
Effectiveness of risk mitigation. Despite progress in mitigating some fiduciary risks—e.g. the
ongoing public financial management technical assistance activities—procurement and other risks to
development impact remain high and are likely to continue. On the other hand, the authorities‘ proactive
efforts towards end-2008 to mitigate the consequences of the global financial crisis—and the Bank‘s
intellectual support to the related macroeconomic policy dialogue—were evidently effective. Risks to
regional cooperation remain, however, especially those relating to energy and water resources which may
have indeed worsened. The proposed Central Asia Energy-Water Development Program (CAEWDP) is
designed to manage and mitigate, if not reduce these longer-term risks.

51

World Bank Group Performance Rating
39.
Taking into account the CAS’ relatively undemanding objectives, the Completion Report
rates Bank Group performance as moderately satisfactory. This outcome mirrors the country‘s
moderately satisfactory progress towards its development goals. Relatively strong performing areas
included macroeconomic management, education, health, water supply and sanitation. Relatively weak
performing areas included agriculture, governance, transparency and financial and private sector
development. Eight operations totaling $533 million were approved during the period, of which three
totaling $291 million (55 percent) in FY11 alone—by far the largest annual commitment to date. Except
for poverty analysis and the private sector, analytical and advisory activities by the Bank were
implemented largely as planned. Portfolio performance remained moderately satisfactory. These
outcomes, including the resumption of limited IBRD lending in FY11, evidently validated the efficacy of
the CAS‘ two-track approach.

V.

KEY LESSONS AND SUGGESTIONS

40.
The FY08-11 CAS was prepared against the background of gradually improving relations,
following the transitional assistance framework under FY06-07 ISN which had effectively limited the
program to technical assistance and minimal lending for global goods and social services. During this
period of virtual hiatus but also of reflection on the Bank Group‘s experience in Uzbekistan since the
early 2000s—including the ineffective FY02-04 CAS—several systemic conclusions were drawn. They
included the following: (a) that policy dialogue is effective only when demand-driven, specific, and
clearly articulated—a finding that applies in many countries, but especially so in Uzbekistan; (b) that
despite the challenging, often problematical policy environment, positive outcomes are still possible with
appropriately designed, client-driven activities; (c) that investment projects are in general more effective
‗entry points‘ for policy dialogue and, ultimately, for encouraging reform than separate analytical and
advisory activities or technical assistance; and (d) that to address the country‘s limited capacity for project
implementation, renewed and systematic attention needs to be paid to several generic issues, such as the
country‘s public procurement process and project management.
41.
These conclusions informed the design and scope of the FY08-11 CAS and the outcomes
recorded in this Completion Report—especially those relating to the first and third pillars—have clearly
validated their accuracy and relevance. Looking ahead, three additional issues emerge from experience
since mid-2008: (a) that the Bank‘s project cycle and the government‘s process for approving investment
projects are still not well aligned, causing significant delays in signing, effectiveness, and initial project
implementation—the Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises operation being the most recent
example; and (b) that the long-standing ‗price verification‘ process of the Ministry of Foreign Economic
Relations and International Trade—not a legal, but a compliance and transparency issue—requires early
resolution, especially given the planned expansion in Bank/IDA lending during the next few years; and
(c) that the relevance, timeliness, and value of the Bank‘s economic analysis and policy advice—both
macro and sector-specific—remains constrained by the limited availability and poor quality of
Uzbekistan‘s key economic, financial and social data. Action to address these three issues will be an
important prerequisite for effective and efficient implementation of the next FY12-15 CPS.

Annexes:
Table 1—Summary of CAS Program Self-Evaluation
Table 2—Planned Lending and Actual Deliveries, FY08-11
Table 3—Planned Non-Lending Services and Actual Deliveries, FY08-11

52

CASCR Annex 1
Table 1: Summary of CAS Program Self-Evaluation1
PILLAR I: ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR SHARED GROWTH

CAS Outcomes and
Outcome Indicators

(a)

Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that contributed to
Outcome

(a) Institutional support for WIS implementation and Promoting Good Governance (6)
Macroeconomic
policy
formulation informed by
analytical research and
international experience,
showing ability to respond
adequately to internal or
external shocks

Achieved―(a) FY10 CPIA process facilitated dialogue
on debt management, tax policy & administration, nonbanking financial institutions, and data transparency; (b)
TA strengthened macroeconomic analytical capacity
related to mitigating impact of global crisis, and
introduced analytical tools
related to growth and
innovation.







GOU adopts techniques
consistent with international practice for Household Budget Surveys and
Labor Force Surveys

Not achieved―preparation of Multiple Indicator Cluster
Survey (MICS) underway since early 2010 (with
UNICEF support), but execution under way only since
2011. Progress towards enhancing quality of poverty
analysis (for WIS II) limited to WBG analytical support.

 Dialogue on Poverty and Social
Protection (TA)

GOU establishes M&E
system to assess WIS
implementation

Partly achieved―WIS monitoring framework developed
in Ministry of Economy (MoE), but not yet integrated
into other ministries. M&E unit established, but not yet
formally included in MoE. Database of over 170 M&E
indicators created in MoE and in Ministries of Education
and Health.

 WIS implementation support
(TA)
 WIS Monitoring and Evaluation
(IDF/TF)

1

Data and assessments as of end-FY11

53

Economic monitoring (TA)
CPIA Policy Dialogue (TA)
Vulnerability Assessment (TA)
Innovation & Growth (TA)
Financial Sector Policy Dialogue
(TA)

Lessons and Suggestions for new
CAS

Public financial management
reform process
benchmarked by PEFAtype assessments

Partly achieved―Ministry of Finance agreed to conduct
first PEFA self-assessment with WBG methodological
support, but agreement on independent review as well as
results validation and disclosure pending. WBG (and
IMF) continued support for implementation of treasury.

 PEFA Self Assessment (TA)
 External and Internal Audit
(IDF/TF)

Increased transparency in
public resource utilization,
measured by publication
of
summary
budget
execution reports

Achieved―not by publication of summary budget
execution reports, but through more regular budget
reporting (monthly and quarterly) and greater
comprehensiveness (e.g. all extra-budgetary funds, except
Fund for Reconstruction & Development incorporated in
treasury system). Treasury system adopted GFSM 2001based budget classification in 2011.

 CPIA Policy Dialogue (TA)
 Public Sector Management
Support (TA)

Progress in dialogue on
governance,
including
gradual extension from
sector- specific to broader,
common issues

Achieved―CPIA policy dialogue broadened to include
data transparency, banking system reforms, and industrial
policy. Uzbekistan signed UN Convention Against
Corruption in 2008, ratified OECD‘s Istanbul AntiCorruption Action Plan in 2010, and set up working
group to draft national anti-corruption strategy

 Dialogue on Governance
Health Sector (TA)
 CPIA Policy Dialogue (TA)
 AML/CFT (TA)

in

Partnerships: IMF, UNDP, ADB

(b) Private Sector Development, Business Environment, and Investment Climate (6)
Improved overall business
environment, as measured
by annual Doing Business
surveys

Partly achieved―although its relative country ranking
fell from 138/181 in 2009 to 150/183 in 2010 & 2011,
Uzbekistan‘s ‗change score‘ of 0.18 (on a scale of 00.54), which measures progress in absolute terms since
2006, ranked it 22 out of 87 countries for which ‗change
scores‘ were calculated.

 Benchmarking through Doing
Business (TA)
 Private sector development
dialogue (TA)
 ROSC Dissemination (TA)

Strengthened
insurance
regulation and supervision
to promote and secure
sound, stable insurance
market
Increased private participation in infrastructure
projects

Not achieved―

 Strengthening
supervision—FIRST
grant (TF)

Partly achieved―pilot PPP for medical diagnostic
centers under preparation, Presidential decision pending
since
February,
2011.
MOUs
signed
with
Uzkommunkhizmat September 2010 and Tashkent
Municipality April 2011 for pilot water supply & solid

 IFC/PPP Advisory
 Introduction of PPP Support

54

(TA)

insurance
initiative

waste management PPPs
Leasing and housing finance sectors developed in
line with international best
practice

Achieved―value of lease financing increased from $265
million in 2007 to over $770 million in 2009. Law on
Realtors‘ Activities adopted and appraisal criteria for
housing finance drafted, publicly discussed, and approved
by Appraisers‘ Associations. Mortgage lending training
program, mortgage borrowers‘ guide, and mortgage best
practices developed

Improved system for
credit information sharing
as measured by Doing
Business indicator and by
increased number of credit
reports issued
Simplified tax administraion

Partly achieved―credit information sharing increased
by 1%. Adoption of law On Sharing Credit Information
expected to facilitate increased coverage

Partly achieved―new Tax Code effective January 2008.
Discrepancies, mainly linguistic, between Uzbek and
Russian texts of Tax Code eliminated by amending law
approved December 20, 2009

 IFC Advisory

 CPIA Policy Dialogue (TA)
 IFC Advisory
Partnerships: IMF, EBRD

PILLAR II: INCREASE INCOME AND ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES IN RURAL AREAS (3)

CAS Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that contributed to
Outcome

Increased productivity of farming
in area totaling 2 million ha, as
measured by higher yields of
cotton, wheat, potatoes, fruits,
vegetables, silage corn

Partly achieved―
 100,000 ha provided with improved irrigation
and drainage, of which 50,000 with water table
up to 2 m below surface
 Cabinet of Ministers decree allows RESP II
project farmers to sell ‗above state quota‘ cotton
within project area
 State procurement price for cotton increased
37% between 2009-10

 Drainage,
Irrigation
and
Wetlands Improvement Project
(SPN)
 Rural Enterprise Reform
Project ―RESP II (SPN)
 Policy Dialogue on
Agriculture (TA)

55

Lessons and Suggestions for new
CAS

Enhanced farm access to financial
services in 7 regions, as measured
by 500 new microcredit lines

Enhanced capacity and financial
viability of Water Users‘
Associations
(WUAs),
as
measured by:
 Increased maintenance conducted by WUAs Baseline: 30%
Target: 45%
 Increased
fee
collection
Baseline: 15%
Target: 30%
 Financial & institutional support to 84 WUAs

Achieved:
 RESP II participating banks finance
agricultural machinery, greenhouses, equipment
and materials for development of orchards,
vineyards, animal husbandry, poultry and
fisheries
 RESP II participating banks disbursed $15.7
million to 185 beneficiaries to date
Partly Achieved:

 Rural Enterprise Reform
Project ―RESP II (SPN)

 Rural Enterprise Reform
Project ―RESP II (SPN)

 International consultant selected to design and
supervise civil works
 RRA and SDC consultants completing
financial and economic analysis of WUAs,
with fee collection one of the main issues
under review.
 Financial & institutional support provided to
re-structure 84 administratively managed
WUAs
into
62
canal-level
management/hydrographic units

PILLAR III: STRENGTHEN HUMAN DEVELOPMENT & SOCIAL PROTECTION THROUGH BETTER SERVICE DELIVERY

CAS Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that contributed to
Outcome

Lessons and Suggestions for new
CAS

(a) Improved provision of water & sanitation (1)
Improved access to safe, water
and sanitation in Bukhara and
Samarkand project areas, as
measured by:
(a) Reliable water supply:
Baseline(2007): Bukhara—
87%; Samarkand—48%
(b) Enhanced water quality:

Achieved―

 Access to reliable water supply increased to
98% in project areas (exceeding targets)
 103 km of pipe replaced in Bukhara and 126

56

 Bukhara-Samarkand
Water
Supply Project (SPN)
 Bukhara-Samarkand Sewerage
Project (SPN)
 Water Sector Policy Note
(ESW)
 Water Sector Dialogue (TA)






Project design should be simple in a
low-capacity context
Projects
should
be
restructured/amended
to
reflect
changes in project designs or
implementation arrangements
Frequent TTL transitions should be
avoided

Baseline (2007): % of
samples failing quality tests in
Bukhara—8%;Samarkand—
40%
Target (2011):<5%
(c) Strengthened financial viability, as measured by
improved collections of water
tariff:
Baseline (2007): Bukhara—
67%; Samarkand—44%
Target(2011):
Bukhara—
87%; Samarkand—80%



km in Samarkand
 Shokhrud Water Treatment plant rehabilitation
completed and operational
 Mulyon water reservoir completed and
operational
 Water quality sampling and testing program in
place in both Bukhara & Samarkand
 Water quality improved in project areas―only
3% of water samples tested failed chlorine
residual standards (exceeding <5% target)
 Billing system installed in vodokanals (water
utilities) in both Bukhara & Samarkand
 Collection rates improved―to 86% and 89% in
Bukhara and Samarkand respectively (achieving
targets)







(b) Improved health indices (2)
Enhanced access to quality health
care, as measured by:
(a) increased use of primary
health care services―% of
pregnant women receiving
antenatal care in first 12
weeks
Baseline (2007)— 85%
Target (2011)—95%
(b) % of CRHs using case-based
financing
Baseline (2007) : 0%
Target (2011): 100%
(c) % of public health expenditures on primary health
and out-patient care
Baseline (200)―43%
Target (2011)—50%

Not achieved―

Reduced health risks from global
pandemic through

Partly achieved―

 Deterioration in utilization of antenatal care,
and in levels of anemia in fertile women

 Initial steps in pilot Ferghana oblast, but no
hospitals actually using case-based financing to
date

 2nd Health Project (SPN)
 National Flour Fortification
Project (TA)
 Health System Improvement
Project(LEN)
 Health and Education M&E
and
Capacity
Building
(IDF/TF)
 Social
Sectors‘
Public
Expenditure Review (ESW)

 % of public health expenditures on primary
health care increased to 47% in 2009 (and per
capita by $38 compared through 2009)

 Central Asia
Project (SPN)

57

HIV/AIDS

International consultants may provide
valuable services
Civil works oversight obligation by
the Borrower is critical and should be
built into the project contracts
Monitoring should be adapted to
client‘s capacity; M&E plans and
collection of baseline data should be
completed by project appraisal
Fiduciary and procurement capacity is
essential to success of project
implementation

(a) Improved HIV/AIDS prevention & control, as measured
by:
% of HIV-positive children
born to HIV-positive mothers
Baseline (2007)―60%
Target (2010)―85%
% of HIV-positive pregnant
women
receiving
ARV
prophylaxis
Baseline
(2007)―90%
Target (2010)―100%
% of HIV-positive women
receiving ARV treatment
voluntarily:
Baseline (2007)―70%
Target (2010)―100%
(b) Improved
seasonal
flu
prevention & control, as
measured by:
% of at-risk population
vaccinated
Baseline(2007)― 50%
Target (2010)―100%
# of AI diagnostic tests
annually on animal and
human samples

 100% coverage of HIV+ pregnant women with
ARV treatment.
 1,128 professionals trained in
Consumption Harm Reduction Program

Drug

 45 trainers and 298 chief epidemiologists
trained to provide training on HIV/AIDS for
general practitioners
 243 mahalla leaders in five pilot regions
trained in sensitizing population on HIV/AIDS
prevention
 132 HIV/AIDS laboratory staff trained in
HIV diagnostics quality assurance and control




Country framework developed for dealing
with potential avian influenza outbreaks and
pandemics
Human, institutional, physical capacity for
dealing with potential avian influenza
outbreaks strengthened
Increased public awareness about humananimal interface, not only for avian and
pandemic influenza preparedness, but also
for food safety and food security, poverty
reduction, and equitable growth

(c) Improved basic education and learning (1)

58


Avian Influenza Control
and Human Preparedness and
Response Project

Partnerships:
ADB,
USAID, WHO, UNICEF

FAO,

 Basic Education Project
– Phase 1 (SPN)
 Basic Education Project
–Phase 2 (SPN)
 Education AAA

Schools adopt quality enhancing
techniques, materials and participatory practices as measured
by:

Achieved―

(a) % of schools with core set of
educational materials available
Baseline (2007): 10%
Target (2011): 80%

100% of project institutions (pre-schools and
Grades 1―4) received core set of educational
materials―the former comprising
53 items totaling $1.9 million and the latter
comprising 55 items totaling $4.5 million

(b) % of retrained teachers in
project schools
Baseline(2007): 5%
Target (2011): 70%

All teacher trainers have been trained on
SBTT―94 facilitators for schools and 71 for
preschools as well as 600< school and preschool
principals

(c) % of project schools with
active boards
Baseline (2007): 75%
Target: (2011):

100 % of project schools have active boards
National standardized test for grades 4 and 8
implemented

Partnerships:
ADB,
UNDP, UNICEF, SECO,
KfW, JICA, JBIC

PILLAR IV: ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT, DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT, AND GLOBAL GOODS PROVISION (4)

CAS Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
Enhanced awareness of energy
savings & sources of renewable
energy in selected remote areas,
as measured by # of equipped
public service buildings in remote
areas

Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and NonLending Activities that
contributed to Outcome

Partly achieved―
 Energy Efficiency workshops held for
commercial bank loan officers and
enterprise staff in light industry, textiles,
building materials, electrical equipment
 Metering strategy was reviewed by
international expert

59

 Talimarjan Transmission
(LEN)
 Energy Efficiency for
Industrial
Enterprises
(SPN)
 Municipal
Governance
(TA)

Lessons and Suggestions
for new CAS

Reduced
greenhouse
emissions, as measured by:
 Emissions:
Baseline (2004): 121 m.
CO2
 Intensity:
Baseline (2004): 2,686
CO2 per mln. 2000 ppp
GDP

gas

tons

tons
US$

Optimal adaptation strategies for
managing risks to energy sector of
changing
climatic
hazards
established

Partly achieved―
 Nine Clean Development Mechanism
(CDM) projects registered at UNFCCC
Secretariat between 2009-2011
 Uzbekneftegaz endorsed Global Gas Flaring
Reduction Partnership and its Voluntary
Standard for Global Gas Flaring Reduction,
and became Partner of GGFR
 Associated Gas Recovery Plan (AGRP)
prepared and presented, September, 2010
Partly achieved―
 Three workshops for over 100 energy sector
professionals held on Climate Vulnerability,
Risk and Adaptation Assessments
 Recommendations for improving climate
resilience of energy sector developed and
proposed to government

Analysis and prioritization of
obsolete pesticide contaminated
sites initiated

60

 Uzbekneftegaz Associated
Gases Recovery Project
(Carbon Fund)
 Global
Gas
Flaring
Reduction
Partnership
(TA)

 Agriculture vulnerability to
climate change (regional
ESW/TA)
 Central Asia Hydromet
(LEN)
 Central Asia Energy-Water
Development Program
(TA)
 Energy vulnerability to
climate change (ESW)
Partnerships: ADB, UNDP,
USAID, ICARDA, IWMI,
SDC/SECO, KfW

 Funding for preparation of CDM project
components should be supported by
investments in project implementation

CASCR Annex 2

Table 2: Planned Lending and Actual Deliveries (FY08-11)
CAS PLANS (05/14/2008)

STATUS (06/30/2011)
US$ (M)
IBRD

US$(M)

IDA

Rural Enterprise Support—Phase II

IBRD

IDA

68 Cr. 44330 approved 06/12 /08

68

68

68

2008
Subtotal

2009

Ferghana Valley Water Resources Mgt.
Basic Education―Phase II

40 Forwarded to FY10
25 Cr. 45980 approved 06/23/09

Subtotal
Subtotal: FY2008-09

2010

2011

Subtotal

65
133

CAS PROGRESS REPORT PLANS (05/20/2010)
Bukhara & Samarkand Sewerage
Ferghana Valley Water Resources Mgt.
Energy Efficiency Facility for Industrial Enterprises
Subtotal
Syr Darya Water Supply
Talimarjan Transmission
170
Health System Improvement
Alat-Karakul Water Supply
Advanced Electricity Metering
80

28

Subtotal
Subtotal FY2008-09

28
96

STATUS (as of 06/13/2011)
55 Cr. 46330 approved 08/04/09
66 Cr. 46480 approved 09/24/09
25 Cr. 47450 approved 06/17/10
146
Subtotal
108 Cr. 48690 approved 03/01/2011
Ln. 80090 approved 03/15/2011
93 Cr. 4896 approved 04/07/2011
12 Forwarded to FY12
Forwarded to FY12

55
66
25
146
88
110
93

Subtotal
Subtotals FY2010-11:

250
250

213
359

Subtotal
Subtotals FY2010-11:

110
110

181
327

TOTALS FY 2008-11:

250

492

TOTALS FY 2008-11:

110

423

61

CASCR Annex 3

Table 3: Planned Non-Lending Services and Actual Deliveries (FY2008-11)
CAS PLANS (05/14/2008)
Governance Assessment of Health Sector

2008

Hospital Sector Reform
Health and Nutrition Review
Water Sector Investment Planning Study

2009

2010

Advice on Development of Treasury System
Accounting and Auditing (ROSC)
Private/Financial Sector Dialogue
Welfare Improvement Strategy (WIS) TA
Governance Assessment of Municipal Services
Growth and Poverty Dialogue TA
Assessing Vulnerability―Phase 1
Public Sector Management Support TA―Phase 1
PROGRESS REPORT PLANS (03/31/2010)
Advice on Development of Treasury System
Assessing Vulnerability―Phase 2

Municipal Development and Governance
Growth and Innovation (TA)
CPIA Policy Dialogue
Financial Sector Development Policy Dialogue
Private Sector Development Policy Dialogue

STATUS (06/30/2011)
Report No. 44530-UZ―Assessment of Primary Health Care Reform:
Transparency, Accountability, and Efficiency―issued 05/20/2009
Policy Note completed 06/30/2008
Regional situational analysis (KYR, TAJ, and UZB) completed 03/08/11, jointly
with UNICEF
Report—Methodology for Ranking Irrigation Infrastructure Investment
Projects—sent to Ministry of Economy 06/09/09
Advisory TA provided to Ministry of Finance during FY08-09
ROSC—Accounting and Auditing sent to Ministry of Finance 04/02/10
Ongoing
Ongoing―Institute of Social Research capacity development
Completed
Completed―Unified Chart of Accounts (Treasury) instructions submitted to
Ministry of Finance 06/20/09
STATUS (as of 06/30/2011)
Advisory TA to Ministry of Finance
Completed—e.g. estimating impact of global crisis using a CGE model; designing
fiscal anti-crisis measures; methodology to assess innovation potential in selected
industries, etc.
Ongoing FY10-11
Ongoing FY10-11
Completed
FIRST TA preparation mission (insurance) visited Uzbekistan 04/09
Draft report—Role of National Quality Infrastructure in Uzbekistan’s

62

Municipal Governance TA
Public Sector Management Support TA―Phase 2
Insurance Sector Development
Public Expenditure Review
Basic & Pre-School Education―Policy Note
Fruit and Vegetables―Policy Note
Country Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (CIFA)
Innovation and Growth TA
2011

Municipal Governance TA
Audit Firms Review Follow-up TA
UAP-ES Assessment TA

Modernization Strategy—discussed at in-country workshop 01/19/11
Report―Improving Water Supply and Sanitation Services Delivery through
Better Customer Relationship Management―delivered 06/25/10
Unified Chart of Accounts (Budget Organizations) submitted to Ministry of
Finance 09/20/10
Forwarded to FY12

Forwarded to early FY12
Completed―
Contributed to 2011 Uzbekistan Innovation Fair and international conference on
Innovation and SME development, Tashkent, April 2011
Collection and analysis of data for water utilities‘ performance benchmarks
underway
Ongoing

63

Annex A2: Uzbekistan - Country at a glance

Uzbekistan at a glance

10/31/11

Uzbekistan

Europe &
Central
Asia

Lower
middle
income

28.2
447
1.4
37

404
23,549
0.3
64

3,811
31,898
1.2
41

35.9
1,270
2,910

2,746
6,793
12,609

8,846
2,321
4,784

8.5
7.0

-5.8
-6.1

7.1
5.9

46
77
67
57
..

4
9
70
19
..

..
..
68
43
24

100
99
100
99

99
97
100
98

87
74
109
105

82
67

95
89

86
50

1980

1990

2000

2010

..

62

186

190

..
..
..

0
1
0

9
82
36

32
20
10

..
..

0.5
3

1.4
8

0.6
7

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

..
..

3.1
4.0

25.0
47.3

7.2
18.5

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

..
..

0.0
119

236.6
100

1,586.5
221

Key Development Indicators
(2010)
Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)
GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)
(most recent estimate, 2004–2010)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2008):
Germany
Japan
United States
Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

a

Long-Term Economic Trends

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–10
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

16.0
..

20.5
13,361

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

32.8
33.0
22.1
34.3

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

..
..
..

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

..
..
..

24.7
13,760

28.2
38,974

2.5
..

1.8
-0.2

1.3
7.1

34.4
23.1
9.4
42.5

19.3
32.8
13.1
47.9

..
..
..
..

0.5
-3.4
0.7
1.1

6.4
4.8
2.5
9.0

61.4
25.4
32.2

55.4
18.7
22.9

51.9
17.6
24.9

..
..
..

..
..
-2.5

..
..
10.4

28.8
47.8
6.7

24.6
21.5
24.5

31.2
28.3
31.6

..
..

-3.7
-7.4

17.5
18.0

(% of GDP)

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2010 data are preliminary. Group data are for 2009. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2009.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

64

Uzbekistan
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2010

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

2,935
2,696
422

10,841
7,805
1,134

216
1.6

2,612
6.7

..

..

1,273

14,579

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

36.8
34.8
29.4

32.5
22.4
31.5

Overall surplus/deficit

-2.5

2.2

Current account balance
as a % of GDP
Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)
Reserves, including gold
Central Government Finance

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

..
..

..
..

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

2009

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

87.3

..

7

66

..

..

64
7.6
..

63
7.7
..

647
59.6

608
..

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

4.8

4.3

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

0.8

1.3

2,058

1,849

2000

2009

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

217
31
5
12

284
5
32
15

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

0
0
0

83
28
0

8
8
2

6
6
1

1

1

10
0

0
0

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)
Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

4,633
886
–

5,938
965
–

33.7
26.0

15.2
7.0

75
0

1,628
0

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

World Bank Group portfolio
(US$ millions)

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Tax rates
Access to/cost of financing
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2010

–
–
–

15
11.9
78

2000

2010

..
..

18.1
16.0

0.2
..

4.2
..

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2010 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

65

10/31/11

Millennium Development Goals

Uzbekistan

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)
Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition

Uzbekistan
1995

2000

2009

<2
..
..
..

..
..
..
18.8

42.3
27.5
9.2
7.9

46.3
27.2
7.1
4.4

78
..
101
100

..
98
92
100

..
96
88
100

88.0
92
104
99.8

94
46
..

..
44
6

98
43
7

98.3
..
18

79
65
84

75
62
91

71
59
99

38
34
98

..
..
..

..
98
56

24
96
68

30
100
65

0.1
68
36

0.1
..
34

0.1
..
50

0.1
130
50

94
51
..
..
5.3
0.9

..
..
..
..
4.4
0.8

..
..
7.6
..
4.8
0.8

87
100
7.7
1.9
4.3
1.3

6.8
0.0
0.0
..

6.8
0.0
0.0
..

6.7
0.2
0.5
..

6.7
59.1
16.9
3.1

1990

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)
Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)
Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

70

100

125

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

60

100
75

50

75

40
50

50

30

25

20

25
0

10
2000

2005

2009

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2009

2000

2005

2009

Primary net enrollment ratio (..)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Uzbekistan

Europe & Central Asia

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

66

Fixed + mobile subscribers

Internet users

Annex B2: Uzbekistan - Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
As Of Date 10/17/2011

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2009

2010

2011

2012

6
3.6
0.0
0.0
16.7
15.9
17.4

8
2.7
12.5
4.2
25.0
15.4
22.9

10
2.5
10.0
4.0
20.0
10.3
13.8

10
2.8
10.0
4.0
20.0
10.3
2.5

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
11
2
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
425.8
93.6
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
30.0
0.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
43.3
0.0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

67

Annex B3(a): Uzbekistan - IBRD/IDA Program Summary1

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal year
2012

2013

2014

2015

Proj ID

US$(M)

Alat-Karakul Water Supply Project

50.0

Advanced Electricity Metering Project

110.0

RESP - Additional Financing

40.0

Result

200.0

Enterprise Energy Efficiency II

100.0

South Karakalpakstan Drainage Project

150.0

Water Sanitation Sector Investment Project 1

50.0

Result

300.0

Microfinance/credit access

50.0

Early Childhood Development

100.0

Water Sanitation Sector Investment Project 2

100.0

Horticulture Pilot Project

100.0

Electricity Distribution

100.0

Result

450.0

Urban Integrated Development Project

100.0

Transport Unidentified

100.0
100.0

IBRD Project Unidentified (Outer years)
1

IDA Project Unidentified (IDA17 )

100.0

Result

400.0

Overall Result

1

a

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

H
H
M

M
M
M

M
M
M

M
M
H

H
H
M
M
M

H
M
M
M
M

H
H
M
M

M
M
M
M

1,350.0

Subject to Uzbekistan‘s continuing IDA eligibility in FY17

1

Overall lending amounts will depend on the IBRD's lending capacity and demand by other borrowers as well as Government demand and
performance in the course of the CPS period.

68

Annex B3 (b): Uzbekistan - IFC Investment Operations Program
2008
Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
Finance and Insurance
Wholesale and Retail Trade
Total

0

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity
Loan
Total
0

69

2009

2010

2011

4.25
4.25

5.20
5.20

0.45
0.45

70.59
29.41
100

100

100

100

100

61.54
38.46
100

100

100
100

100

Annex B4: Uzbekistan - Summary of Non-lending Services
Product

Completion FY

Recent Completions
Energy Dialogue TA
Ferghana Valley TA
Municipal Sector Review
Poverty Assessment
Private and Financial Sectors TA
Programmatic PER
Promoting Carbon Finance
PRSP TA
Tashkent CDM Forum
Hospital Policy Note
Poverty
PSD/FSD Policy Dialogue
Governance Assessment
FSD Policy Dialogue
ROSC A&A
Debt and Tax Reforms
Uzbekistan WSS Strategy
Water Sector Investment Planning Study
Advice on Development of Treasury system
Assessing Vulnerability (TA)
Assessing Vulnerability 2
FIU Workshop in Tashkent, Uzbekistan
FSD Policy Dialogue
Mun. Sector Development &Governance
PSD Policy Dialogue
Uzbekistan Municipal Governance TA
CIFA
Dialogue on Pov/Social Safety Nets
PSM Support
FSD Policy Dialogue
Private Sector Development Policy
Underway
CIFA Phase 2 - Dissemination & Follow up
CPIA Policy Dialogue
EE Strategy for Industrial Enterprises
FIRST UZ Streng. Insurance Spn.
Growth and Innovation
UAP-ES Assessment
UZ Doing Businesss Reforms
Water Utility Pricing
Country Economic Memorandum
Industrialization Policy Note
PEFA
Agriculture Competitiveness Strategy
Poverty Monitoring/analysis Support
Planned
Water Resource Management Strategy
Transport Assessment
Strategy Report "Uzbekistan Vision 2030"
Poverty Monitoring/analysis Support
National Infrastructure Quality
Industrialization Policy Note
Poverty Monitoring/analysis Support
Industrialization Policy Note
Poverty Monitoring/analysis Support
Industrialization Policy Note

Cost (US$000)

Audience a

Objective b

2007
2007
2007
2007
2007
2007
2007
2007
2008
2008
2008
2008
2008
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011

105
111
124
565
57
130
9
487
14
102
58
42
435
55
154
154
54
299
61
157
69
25
71
85
63
106
110
84
63
38
80

GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
Bank
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

2012
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012

20
178
22
71
408
34
83
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

2013
2013
2013
2013
2013
2013
2014
2014
2015
2015

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV
GOV

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

____________
a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

70

Annex B6: Uzbekistan - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services

2005

Actual
2006
2007

2008

Estimate
2009

2010

Projected
2011
2012

2013

100
28
23
49

100
26
27
46

100
24
32
44

100
21
31
48

100
20
33
47

100
19
33
48

100
18
39
43

100
18
38
45

100
17
37
45

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

71
18
3
15

75
18
3
15

76
21
3
18

72
25
3
21

74
26
3
23

72
25
3
21

75
25
4
21

76
24
4
20

75
25
5
21

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

38
29

37
31

40
37

44
41

36
36

31
28

30
30

30
30

32
32

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

29
34

25
28

24
28

28
34

26
29

28
32

25
30

24
29

25
30

14308

17031

22308

27934

32818

38974

46114

53344

57239

530

600

720

900

1100

1280

1570

1820

2040

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 97
prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income

7.0
7.0

7.3
7.3

9.5
9.5

9.0
9.0

8.1
8.1

8.5
8.5

8.3
7.5

8.0
5.8

7.8
4.7

Real annual per capita growth rates (%,
calculated from 97 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption

5.8
3.4

6.0
8.3

8.1
5.2

7.1
3.8

6.2
5.7

7.0
3.8

7.7
12.7

6.8
5.5

6.5
2.8

5416
4757
4101
3310
1315
658
1949

6326
5377
5364
4008
963
733
1550

8851
7692
8150
5798
701
1224
1629

12158
10811
11393
8606
765
1980
2432

11679
10495
11698
8376
-19
475
878

12163
10841
11029
7805
1134
1705
2612

13830
12302
13694
8996
136
595
2626

16092
14244
16204
10893
-113
623
2619

18141
16058
18123
12378
19
448
2523

88
-223
16
-239
-1065

194
-371
-81
-290
191

734
-208
-9
-199
0

711
-108
38
-146
922

838
-248
246
-494
411

1628
-569
270
-839
-2559

1418
1011
1275
-264
-1219

1410
2135
2119
16
-1686

1303
2448
2031
417
-1638

-748

-1564

-2155

-3958

-1879

-1112

-3835

-4477

-4635

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd

71

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices) e
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure

30.8
25.7
5.1
5.4

31.4
26.5
4.9
4.4

31.7
27.1
4.5
4.0

35.7
28.6
7.0
3.5

33.8
30.9
2.9
3.4

32.5
31.5
1.0
3.4

34.7
31.9
2.8
4.1

35.0
31.0
4.1
4.3

35.2
30.9
4.3
4.6

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)

14.4
54.2

15.4
39.0

16.7
46.9

17.3
35.6

18.5
39.9

19.4
34.6

20.1
27.1

21.6
29.9

24.3
34.4

100.0
103.3
77.6

100.0
106.6
85.3

100.0
110.6
84.1

100.0
119.2
85.3

100.0
122.2
94.5

98.0
104.8
96.1

99.8
111.0
93.5

102.3
119.9
93.6

103.0
128.9
88.2

6.5
21.4

6.8
21.5

6.8
24.0

7.4
19.9

7.8
20.8

7.2
18.5

7.7
13.3

7.5
11.8

6.9
11.0

Price indices( YR97 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

72

Annex B7: Uzbekistan - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

2005

Total debt outstanding and

Actual
2006
2007

2008

Estimated
2009

2010

2011

Projected
2012

2013

4282

4031

3923

3983

4909

5938

8661

10836

13249

-242

-371

-208

-108

128

818

1011

2235

2448

787

851

753

692

618

965

1517

1560

1408

TDO/XGSb

69.8

57.3

39.6

27.6

37.5

43.1

48.8

52.7

57.5

TDO/GDP

29.9

23.7

17.6

14.3

15.0

15.2

18.8

20.3

23.1

TDS/XGS

12.8

12.1

7.6

4.8

4.7

7.0

8.5

7.6

6.1

Concessional/TDO

37.1

39.2

40.8

44.4

37.0

38.5

39.0

50.0

56.6

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)

a

Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators (%)

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public

4.9

5.1

6.7

8.2

10.1

9.7

10.9

10.0

8.6

18.3

17.2

17.0

19.2

21.6

27.1

30.5

29.5

26.0

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

299

316

317

313

284

249

221

182

141

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

11

26

43

55

83

236

343

583

677

DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)

d

Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)

d

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

73

Annex B8(a): Uzbekistan - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
CAS Annex B8 - Uzbekistan
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

Closed Projects

13

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

130.1
6.3
165.2
222.9
295.3
229.1

Total Undisbursed (Active)

512.1

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

512.1

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P107845
P112719
P009127
P118737
P110538
P051370
P113349
P109126
P111760
P119939
Overall Result

Basic Educ - Phase Two
Bukhara & Samarkand Sewerage Project
Drainage, Irrig & Wetlands Imprvmt
Energy Eff - Indust Enterprises
Ferghana Valley Water Resources Mgt
Health 2
Health System Improvement Project
Rural Enterprise Support Project II
Syrdarya Water Supply Project
Talimarjan Transmission Project

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

MS
MS
S
MU
S
MS
S
S
S
S

MS
MS
MS
MU
MS
MS
S
S
S
S

2009
2010
2003
2010
2010
2005
2011
2008
2011
2011

74

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions
IBRD

35

110
145

IDA

Undisb.

28
55
25
25
65.544
40
93
67.96
88

27.7
53.1
11.4
26.6
58.3
3.1
93.6
38.6
89.8
110.0
512.1

487.504

Orig. Frm Rev'd

8.7
8.7
8.4
3.3
8.3
1.2

-0.2

8.5

47.1

-0.2

Annex B8(b): Uzbekistan - IFC Committed and Outstanding Investment Portfolio
(In USD millions)
Committed
Commitment FY

Institution

2001

SEF Parvina

2001/ 2007/ 2010/ 2011
1996/ 2001/ 2003/ 2009
Total Portfolio

LN

ET

Outstanding

QL + QE

TOTAL

LN

ET

QL + QE

TOTAL

-

-

0.09

0.09

-

-

0.09

0.09

SEF Hamkorbank

3.13

2.98

-

6.10

3.13

2.98

-

6.10

Uzbek Leasing

2.01

0.54

-

2.55

1.31

0.54

-

1.85

5.14

3.52

0.09

8.74

4.44

3.52

0.09

8.04

As of September 30, 2011

75

Annex C. Uzbekistan Country Financing Parameters

76

55°E

To
o
Atyrau

60°E

65°E

70°E

KA
KAZ
ZA
A KH S TAN
TAN
AZ
Aral
Sea

45°N

45°N

2001 level of Aral Sea
1990 level of Aral Sea

r
Da

1960 level of Aral Sea

U s t y u r t
P l a t e a u

ya

Muynak

K A Z A K H S TA N
K

K A R A K A L PA K S TA N
Amu

y

z

y

l

Dary

200 Kilometers

o

l

TASHKENT
TASHKENT

Namangan

TASHKENT
TASHKENT

Syr
D

y

Gagarin

DZHIZAK
JIZZAKH

a

U KK H
HO
ARA
BB U
O
Bukhoro
Bukhara

Zer
a

Navoi

Kokand

Guliston

To
o

Andizhan
Fergana

To
o
Kashi

FERGANA

Jizzakh
Dzhizak

v shan

KY R GY Z
R E PU
PUB
B LLII C

Bishkek
NAMANGAN
ANDIZHAN
ANDIJON

SYRDARYA
SYRDAR

Muruntau

40°N

40°N

SAMARKAND
Samarkand

TU R K
KMENISTA
MENISTA N
MENISTA
60°E

KASHKADARY
YA
A
Qarshi

UZ B EKI S TA N

Adelunga Toghi
Toghi
(4301 m)

To
o
Qyzylorda

ya
ar

150 Miles

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

To
o
Qyzylorda

r

100

n
T u r a

L

N
VO
O II
NO
AV

Da

50

150

Urgench

w

m

Uchkuduk

a
100

u

Amu

0

50

K

d

n

a

Nukus

KHOREZM
0

UZBEKISTAN

Syr

To
o
Mar
Mary

To
o
Khorugh

TAJI
AJI KI S TAN
TAN

Denau

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

SURKHANDARYA

OBLAST (VILOYATI) CAPITALS
NATIONAL CAPITAL

TTermiz
ermiz
er
miz

RIVERS
MAIN ROADS

MARCH 2009

PAKI
AK IS
S TAN
TAN

A F G H A N I S TA N

OBLAST (VILOYATI) BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
65°E

70°E

IBRD 33508R

o
To
Kabul

RAILROADS

