Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 57989-CL

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE
FOR THE PERIOD FY11-FY16

Public Disclosure Authorized

January 11, 2011

Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
The International Finance Corporation
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
This document is being made publicly available prior to Board discussion. This does not imply a presumed outcome.
This document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated document will be made publicly
available unless otherwise decided by the Board.

The date of the last Country Partnership Strategy was April 24, 2007

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of January 5, 2011)
486.82 Pesos = US$ 1

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 – December 31

IBRD
Vice President:
Pamela Cox
Director:
C. Felipe Jaramillo
Task Team Leader:
Livia Benavides

Vice President:
Director:
Task Manager:

IFC
Thierry Tanoh
Paolo Martelli
John Barham and
Gonzalo Arauz

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA

Analytic and Advisory Activities

IBRD

AFP

Administradora de Pensiones (Pension Fund
Administrator)
Adaptable Program Lending

ICR

Access to Information
Acceso Universal con Garantías Explícitas (Universal
Access with Explict Guarantees)
Crédito con Aval del Estado (State–Guaranteed
Student Loan Program)
Country Assistance Strategy
Encuesta de Caracterización Socioeconómica
Nacional (National Socioeconomic Characterization
Survey)
Chile Crece Contigo (Chile Growth with You)
Central Government
Central Government Entities

IDF
IFC

International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Implementation Completion and Results
Report
Information and Communication
Technology
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation

IMF

International Monetary Fund

JSP
LAC

Joint Studies Program
Latin America and the Caribbean

M&E
MIC
MIDEPLAN
MKB

CPI
CPS
CPSCR

Comisión Nacional de Energía (National Energy
Commission)
Comisión Nacional del Medio Ambiente (National
Commission for the Environment)
Consumer Price Index
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report

Monitoring and Evaluation
Middle-Income Country
Ministerio de Planificación (Ministry of
Planning)
Mercado de Capitales del Bicentenario
(Bicentennial Capital Markets Agenda)
Ministry of Public Works

CPSPR

Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report

PIRDT

DIPRES

Dirección de Presupuestos (Budget Directorate)

PISA

DPL

Development Policy Loan

PMDT

EU
FBS
FCPF
FDI

European Union
Fee-Based-Service
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
Foreign Direct Investment

PMG
QER
R&D
RGES

FEES

Fondo de Estabilización Económica y Social (Social
and Economic Stabilization Fund)

SEGPRES

FONASA

Fondo Nacional de Salud (National Health Fund)

SFLAC

FRP

Fondo de Reserva de Pensiones (Pension Reserve
Fund)

SIAF

FSAP

Financial Sector Assessment Program

SICEX

FY

Fiscal Year

SIGFE

GDP
GEF
GOC
HOI

Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Government of Chile
Human Opportunity Index

SME
TAL
TOR
WBG

APL
ATI
AUGE
CAE
CAS
CASEN

CCC
CG
CGE
CNE
CONAMA

ICT

MPW
MSMEs
MW
OECD

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Megawatt
Organization for Economic Co-Operation
and Development
Programa de Infraestructura Rural para el
Desarrollo Territorial (Rural
Infrasctructure Program for Territorial
Development)
Programme for International Student
Assessment
Plan Marco de Desarrollo Territorial
(Territorial Development Framework)
(Enhancement Management Program)
Quality Enhancement Review
Research and Development
Régimen de Garantías Explícitas de Salud
(Regime of Explicit Health Gurantees)
Ministerio de la Secretaría General de la
Presidencia (Ministry General Secretariat
of the Presidency)
Spanish Trust Fund for Latin America and
the Caribbean Region
Sistema de Innovación Agroalimentario y
Forestal (Sub-system of Agro-Food and
Forestry Innovation)
Sistema Integrado de Comercio Exterior
(Integrated System of Foreign Trade)
Sistema de Información para la Gestión
Financiera del Estado (Integrated Financial
Management System)
Small and Medium Enterprise
Technical Assistance Loan
Terms of Reference
World Bank Group

TABLE OF CONTENTS
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
CHILE
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY …………………………………………………………….………………..……….

i

I.

INTRODUCTION .……………………………………………………….………..…….......................

1

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT …………………………………………………….……….…………………

1

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.

Political Context ….…………………………………………………..………...…..…………..……………..
Recent Economic Developments ………………………...……………………………………………….…..
Poverty Profile and Trends …………………………………...……………………………………………....
Economic Prospects ………………………………………………...………………………………………...
Development Challenges and Opportunities ……………………………..……..............................................
Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy ……………………..……………….…..........................

1
2
4
6
9
14

BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY …………………………………...............................

17

A. Lessons Learned from previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback ………………………..…….......................
B. Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy ………………………………….……………………….
C. Expected Results and Program of Lending and Non-Lending Activities ……………...…………………….
• Result Area 1: Public Sector Modernization ………………………………….…..……………………..
• Result Area 2: Job Creation and Improving Equity ………………………..……….……………………
• Result Area 3: Promoting Sustainable Investments ………………………………………..…………….
D. Implementing the Country Partnership Strategy ………………………………………………………..…….

17
18
20
20
22
24
26

IV.

27

III.

MANAGING RISKS

A. Country Risks ……………………………………………………………………….………………………..
B. External Shocks …………………………………………………………………..…………………………..
C. Risk to the World Bank Group ………………………………………...……………………………………..

27
28
28

Tables
Table 1: Key Economic Indicators ………………………………………………………………………………...
Table 2: Economic Prospects …………………………………………………...…………………………………
Table 3: Chile’s Development Agenda’s Targets for 2010-2014 …………………………………………………
Table 4: Indicative Work Program ………………………………………………………………………………...

3
8
14
19

Boxes
Box 1: Chile’s response to the financial global crisis …………………………………………………….……….
Box 2: Government’s plan to finance the earthquake reconstruction ………………………………………….….

4
5

Annexes
Annex 1: Chile Country Partnership Strategy FY11-FY16 - Results Framework: Ongoing and Confirmed
Program ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………
Annex 2: Chile CPS Completion Report ………………………………………………………………………….
Annex 3: Chile at a glance ………………………………………………………………………………………...
Annex 4: Chile Selected indicators of bank portfolio performance and management ……………………………
Annex 5: Chile Social Indicators ………………………………………………………………………………….
Annex 6: Chile: Key Economic Indicators ………………………………………………………………………..
Annex 7: Chile – Key Exposure Indicators ………………………………………………………………………..
Annex 8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) ………………………………………………………….
Annex 9: Chile Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio ……………………………………

29
32
65
68
69
70
72
73
74

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Chile is an upper middle income country with one of the most politically stable systems in
Latin America, strong institutions and a solid record of economic growth during the last
two and a half decades. President Sebastián Piñera took office on March 11, 2010, ending 20
years of continuous governments led by the Concertación, a coalition of center-left parties.
Despite the differences in political stance, President Piñera is committed to the continued support
of the core policy framework established by previous governments, while also promoting
reforms to boost growth and tackle poverty and inequality.
The success of Chile’s economy can be attributed to continuity in sound macro policies, an
open trade regime, and a business-friendly environment. Successful macro policies include
the adoption of an inflation targeting regime and countercyclical fiscal policies. Fiscal policy
sustainability has been enforced by a fiscal rule that insulates public spending from fluctuations
in the price of copper and the business cycle. This policy framework allowed for a vigorous
countercyclical response to the 2008/09 global financial crisis, which cushioned the blow from
the sharp reduction in trade volumes and export prices. As a result of the continued reduction of
barriers to trade, the establishment of free trade agreements with many of its main trading
partners, and a strong business climate environment, Chile has managed to make trade and
investment key engines of growth.
Chile faces two key challenges going forward: declining growth performance and high
inequality. Chile's growth has slowed down from an average of 7.6 percent during the period of
1986-1997 to 3.5 percent in the period of 2000-2009. Productivity growth has been trending
downward through much of the last decade and overall investment levels have also declined
since the late 1990s. The second challenge relates to the need to tackle inequality. While Chile
has made substantial progress in reducing poverty (15 percent in 2009), the average income of
the richest 20 percent of Chileans was 12 times that of the poorest 20 percent in 2009.
The new Government of Chile has launched an ambitious development agenda which sets
the basis for the country's ultimate goal of achieving high-income developed status by 2018.
The three strategic areas that the Government of Chile plans to emphasize during 2010-14 are: i)
achieving greater competitiveness, including the modernization of the state; ii) improving job
creation and job quality; and iii) promoting investment. In addition, the government is committed
to other important reforms aimed at strengthening social policies and protecting the environment.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) builds on the successful experience of the prior
World Bank Group strategy in Chile. The strong institutional framework, a stable economy,
and the relatively advanced development level facilitate an engagement in which the Bank’s
value added lies mainly in the knowledge agenda. In a context of low financing needs and
abundant access to capital markets at low spreads, Chile’s demand for Bank services
concentrated on the provision of technical assistance and other knowledge products in areas in
which the Bank has a comparative advantage and can support the country’s drive to achieve its
development goals. Moreover, for the Bank, this is an important two-way investment, as Chile’s
development experiences of the past decades are highly valued among other clients and

i

continued engagement should allow for important spillovers into World Bank work in other
countries, as well as deepening South-South exchanges.
This CPS aims to support the Government of Chile's vision of eradicating extreme poverty
by 2014 and becoming a developed country by 2018. This support will be carried out through
focused intervention in specific themes that have been distributed into three results areas that
broadly coincide with the government's development agenda: (i) Public Sector Modernization,
(ii) Job Creation and Equity Improvement, and (iii) Promoting Sustainable Investments.
The Strategy includes a flexible program to be carried out mainly through demand-driven
studies and a small lending and grant portfolio. The CPS would span 6 years, subject to
continued stable macroeconomic environment and Chile’s continued status as a client country.
The bulk of the knowledge work will be delivered through studies structured around a Joint
Studies Program funded jointly by the Bank (US$400,000 per year) and the Government of Chile
(up to US$800,000 per year), with the possibility of additional just-in-time assistance through
fee-for-service. In addition, the Bank will continue providing some limited financing for
projects where the Bank’s support adds value in the implementation of policies in selected areas.
The International Finance Corporation (IFC) will continue to seek investments in Chile in
order to support investments in those areas where the Corporation can provide value
added. The main objective will be to foster greater entrepreneurship in advanced fields or in
developing innovative business models in a narrow range of sectors. Investments will be
focused initially on tertiary education, vocational training, infrastructure and energy, and
financial services.

ii

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This document describes the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) with Chile for
FY11 to FY16.1 The CPS has been designed to respond to the demand from the new
Government of Chile (GOC) in tackling its main goals through strategic knowledge activities
(analytical work and technical assistance) in areas in which the Bank can provide value to a
sophisticated middle-income country (MIC), and a small lending program for implementation
support in selected areas. For the Bank, this is an important two-way investment, as Chile’s
development experiences of the past decades are highly valued among other clients and many of
its current challenges should allow for important spillovers into World Bank work elsewhere.
This CPS provides a summary of the country context and current challenges, the GOC’s
proposed plan, lessons learned from the previous CPS and the proposed strategy for the World
Bank Group in Chile.
II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. Political Context
2.
The Government of President Sebastián Piñera took office on March 11, 2010, after
twenty years of different governments held by the Concertación, a coalition of center-left
parties. President Piñera campaigned on a platform that reflects the challenges of an upper MIC
like Chile which has enjoyed nearly three decades of uninterrupted growth and rising levels of
welfare for the majority of its citizens, putting it at the top of the Latin America and the
Caribbean (LAC) rankings and into the exclusive list of Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) members. His platform focused on carrying out substantial public
sector reforms in order to reduce unemployment, poverty and inequalities, and to boost
investment levels.
3.
President Piñera was elected in a second round run-off in January, 2010, although
his center-right coalition (Coalición por el Cambio) did not obtain a Congressional majority
in the legislative elections held in December 2009. Chile has a presidential political system
with a bicameral legislature. The constitutional presidential term is four years and immediate reelection is not allowed. The Coalición obtained 16 of the 38 seats in the Senate (the upper
house), compared with 19 for the Concertación, and 57 seats in the 129 seats of the Chamber of
Deputies (the lower house). The next Presidential and legislative elections will be held in
December 2013.
4.
Chile has built strong democratic institutions during the past two decades based on
an efficient civil service and good governance. This solid institutional platform has allowed
Chile to successfully withstand two large adverse shocks since 2008—the global financial crisis
and the devastating earthquake of February 2010. Chile’s resilience has been underpinned by its
strong policy framework and public management. President Piñera, a highly successful
businessman, has committed to continue with most aspects of the core policy framework

1

The prior CPS, which covered FY07 to FY11, was discussed at the Board in June 2007. The CPS Progress Report
was submitted to the Board in October 2009.

1

sustained by the center-left coalition during its two-decades in power. Despite changes in the
governing coalition, tensions between the new government and the parties of the Concertación
are unlikely to affect political and social stability due to Chile’s strong institutions.
B. Recent Economic Developments
5.
Chile has been among the best performing economies in LAC since 1985. As a result
of this accomplishment, income per capita was US$9,809 in 2009, the highest among the larger
economies of the region. A vibrant private sector, substantial job creation and strong social
programs have also led to rising welfare levels and declining poverty rates. Only 15 percent of
Chileans were under the poverty line in 2009, one of the lowest rates in the region.
6.
The long term success of the Chilean economy is explained by the continuity of
strong macroeconomic policies, an open trade regime and a business-friendly environment.
On the macro front, the policy framework has been based on an inflation targeting framework
and countercyclical fiscal policies. Fiscal policy sustainability has been enforced by a fiscal rule
that insulates public spending from fluctuations in the price of copper and the business cycle.
Chile committed to a Central Government (CG) structural balance target of 1 percent of GDP
since 2000. This commitment was complemented by the 2006 Fiscal Responsibility Law, which
channels fiscal surpluses into two investment funds, the Pension Reserve Fund (FRP) to meet
rising pension commitments from 2016 onwards; and a Social and Economic Stabilization Fund
(FEES). 2 Economic growth has been sustained in great part by growing exports, a result of a
sustained trade policy framework of low tariffs and trade barriers, the approval of free trade
agreements with partners such as the U.S., European Union (EU), China, and Mexico, and a
strong business climate environment. 3 A pending challenge is the diversification of the
composition of exports, as copper continues to dominate Chilean shipments, accounting in 2009
for over 50 percent of the total value of exports.
7.
There have been concerns about some loss in growth dynamism over the past
decade. While the Chilean economy has grown at a dynamic average pace of 5.4 percent since
1985, there has been a noticeable slowdown in the past decade, with growth averaging only 3.5
percent in the 2000-09 period. This deceleration has occurred despite global economic
developments exceptionally favorable for Chile since the early 2000’s such as the rapid growth
in international trade and higher prices for copper and other key exports. Observers attribute this
decline in growth levels to a decline in productivity and to some reduction in overall investment
levels.
8.
The global financial crisis affected the Chilean economy strongly starting in the
second half of 2008, but the economy’s resilience was demonstrated with the vigorous
rebound that took place in 2010. In the second half of 2008, the economy slowed down, as
global demand for Chilean exports declined and the terms of trade deteriorated (see Table 1).
2

The FEES replaces the Copper Stabilization Fund. During periods of adverse terms of trade shocks, the resources of the FEES
will be available to maintain fiscal spending.
3

Chile’s business environment is among the friendliest in LAC, ranking consistently among the top countries regularly in the
Doing Business indicators as well as in several other business environment and competitiveness rankings.

2

Real GDP growth slowed to 3.7 percent in 2008 while economic activity contracted by 1.5
percent in 2009. The vigorous fiscal stimulus financed by the savings accumulated in previous
years of high copper prices (see Box 1), along with substantial monetary easing, supported an
early recovery of economic activity starting in the last quarter of 2009. However, disruptions
related to the devastating February 2010 earthquake (see Box 2) led to a decline in growth by 1.5
percent in the first quarter of 2010. However, economic recovery resumed forcefully in the
second quarter of 2010, when GDP registered a 6.5 percent quarterly expansion. Driven by
reconstruction-related expenditures and investment, Chile’s economy is expected to grow by
about 5 percent in 2010 and to recover further in 2011.
Table 1: Key Economic Indicators.

Chile: Key Economic Indicators
in percent, unless otherwise stated
Est.
National Accounts
GDP growth
Domestic demand growth
Population (millions)
Balance of payments
Current account (% of GDP)
Trade balance (% of GDP)
Exports of goods (% of GDP)
Imports of goods (% of GDP)
Net international reserves (US$ bn)
Net international reserves (% of Short term external debt)
Terms of trade (deterioration -)
External indicators
Total external debt (% of GDP)
Inflation
Annual change in CPI (eop)
Fiscal (Central government)
Overall balance (% of GDP)
Structural balance (% of GDP)
Public debt (% of GDP)
Copper reference price ( US¢/lb)

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

6.0
7.5

5.6
10.4

4.6
6.8

4.6
7.6

3.7
7.6

-1.5
-5.9

5.0
13.4

16.1

16.3

16.5

16.6

16.8

17.0

17.1

2.2
10.0
34.0
24.0
16.0
214.9
22.1

1.2
9.1
34.9
25.8
17.0
239.2
11.1

4.9
15.5
40.0
24.5
19.4
208.5
32.2

4.6
14.6
41.4
26.8
16.9
152.9
3.7

-2.1
5.2
38.9
33.7
23.2
155.3
-14.0

2.6
8.6
33.2
24.6
25.4
145.1
2.9

-0.7
7.3
34.4
27.1
25.4
145.1
12.6

45.8

38.4

32.7

34.4

37.6

45.8

38.6

2.4

3.7

2.6

7.8

7.1

-1.4

3.7

2.1
1.0
36.1
130

4.6
0.9
34.9
167

7.7
0.7
25.7
305

8.2
1.0
28.8
323

4.3
-0.4
27.3
316

-4.4
-3.3
27.7
234

-1.7
-4.1
26.2
315

Note: (Est.) Estimations.
Source: Banco Central de Chile, DIPRES, World Bank and IM F staff estimations.

3

Box 1. Chile’s response to the financial global crisis
Fiscal Policy
November 2008 Fiscal stimulus package of $1.15 billion and January 2009 Fiscal stimulus package of
US$4 billion included:
• Increase in public spending by 1 percent of GDP, mostly for infrastructure, human capital
investment, and a lump sum transfer to poor families;
• Temporary tax rebates in the amount of 1 percent of GDP to ease firm financing constraints;
• Re-capitalization of the state-owned copper company, Codelco, for US$1.0 billion;
• Labor and social policies included in this package target:
• Extension of the coverage period for unemployment insurance and increases in subsidy level
• Introduction of a subsidy on youth employment
• Increased coverage under Chile Solidario
• One-time $60 subsidy per dependent child for vulnerable families
Monetary Policy
Fast-paced monetary easing: Central Bank cut interest rates by 775 bp from 8.25 percent in January
2009 to 0.50 percent in July 2009.
Complementary Policies (Iniciativa Pro Crédito):
In March 2009 authorities proposed administrative measures aimed at boosting credit and competition
in the financial system; these measures were projected to expand credit to the private sector by some
US$3.6 billion at limited fiscal cost. Measures included:
• Provision of additional room for insurance companies to participate in domestic loan markets;
• Boosting financial options to people and businesses by expanding the size and operations eligible
for government-sponsored credit programs and guarantees;
• Elimination of capital gains taxes on new bond issuances.
Source: World Bank staff.

C. Poverty Profile and Trends
9.
Throughout the last twenty years, extreme and moderate poverty have been falling
in Chile. Indeed, Chile led the LAC region in poverty reduction in the 1990-06 period. Moderate
poverty decreased from 19 percent in 2003 to 14 percent in 2006 at the national level whereas
extreme poverty diminished from 5 to 3 percent. While poverty within indigenous groups
(estimated population of 700,000) has also had a downward trend, still, about 30 percent of the
households represented by these groups were living below the poverty line in 2008.4
10.
The 2009 information from the household survey suggests a small increase in
poverty. The most recent household survey (CASEN, 2009) reveals a small increase of the
poverty rate to 15.1 percent and that for extreme poverty to 3.7 percent. Results indicate a more
rapid rise in urban areas than in rural areas. There has been a growing debate about the quality
of these statistics and the government is reviewing the methodologies used to estimate the
number of poor in Chile.

4

Poverty and Inequality among Ethnic Groups in Chile, Claudio A. Agostini, Philip H. Brown, and Andrei Roman,
http:www.economia.uahurtado.cl/pdf/publicaciones/inv205.pdf.

4

Box 2. Government’s plan to finance the earthquake reconstruction
Chile was hit by a massive 8.8 magnitude earthquake in the early hours on 27 February 2010, which
claimed about 300 lives, displaced about 2 million and caused significant damage to private property and
public infrastructure. The epicenter was located in waters off the southern coastline, close to the city of
Concepcion and 200 miles south of the capital Santiago. Coastal areas were also impacted by a tsunami
and several strong aftershocks (up to 5.9 on the Richter scale). The coastal regions of Maule and Biobío
were the hardest hit.
Estimates of Reconstruction Costs
Reconstruction costs have been estimated at around US$29.7 billion. Infrastructure costs are estimated at
US$21.0 billion, while damages to the industry and retail sectors are projected at US$5.3 billion. The
estimated GDP loss is about US$7.6 billion. The authorities estimated that the government’s share of the
reconstruction costs would be around US$8.4 billion (4 percent of GDP) over 2010-2013.
Government’s plan to finance the reconstruction
On March 19, 2010, the finance minister, Felipe Larraín, indicated that the reconstruction would be
financed through a combination of sources in order to mitigate adverse effects on the exchange rate and
interest rates. The “Reconstruction Fund” is being financed from the following sources:
• Insurance reimbursements;
• Improved efficiency and reallocation of spending. The Government plans budget reallocations worth
US$700 million;
• Bond issuance. In July 2010 Chile issued two 10 year global bonds for about US$1.5 billion.
• FEES: The government would also use savings (sovereign wealth fund) to pay for reconstruction cost
and finance the fiscal shortfall. 5
• Temporary tax increases: In order to raise revenue for reconstruction, the government established a
tax on cigarettes. Temporary tax increases would help avoid an undue compression of spending in the
near term, and would be combined with a productivity- enhancing reduction in the stamp tax on
financial transactions and some tax breaks for small and medium size enterprises. In this regards, the
Congress recently approved a government proposal to raise taxes to mining companies, which would
raise about US$1 billion over three years to help fund earthquake reconstruction and the GOC’s
education and health programs.
Source: World Bank staff.

11.
Income inequality is still high, though social expenditure plays an important role in
reducing disparities. In spite of sound economic growth and targeted policies like the Chile
Solidario Program, no significant changes in income inequality have occurred since the 1990s.
The average income of the richest 20 percent of Chileans was 12 times that of the poorest 20
percent in 2009, a small change from the ratio of 13 times recorded in 1990. However, a number
of government programs (such as direct transfers, health and education subsidies) continue to
supplement the income of poor families. The ratio falls from 12 times to 7 times in 2009, once
these interventions are taken into account.

5

As of the first quarter of 2010, the Economic and Social Stabilization Fund (FEES) had an allocation of US$ 11.3 billion.

5

Chile is a LAC leader but lags behind OECD standards regarding the Human
12.
Opportunity Index (HOI). 6 Chile leads the ranking of HOI among 19 LAC countries regarding
a common set of five very basic services: sixth grade completion on time; school attendance of
children aged 10-14; access to sanitation; access to water, and access to electricity. In some of
these areas, the level attained by Chile in 2006 was below the level more developed OECD
countries achieved decades ago. For example, the HOI for completing sixth grade on time for
Chile in 2006 was below the HOI for the US in 1960, prior to the civil rights movement in this
country. Similarly, the HOI for access to sanitation in Chile in 2006 was below the HOI for the
US in 1970. Regarding more demanding opportunities Chile’s HOIs in educational achievement
are well below all 10 European and North-American OECD countries included in a comparative
exercise.
13.
Studies show that Chile has made substantive progress on gender equity in terms of
opportunities, the law and voice, but it lags in access to employment, income, and
participation in political decision processes. Thus, even though women and men have the
same number of years of schooling (11.7 for the age group 25-39), women make up only 37
percent of the labor force and their average wage is only 67 percent that of men. Only 26 percent
of women in the lowest income quintile in Chile participate in the job market as compared to 57
percent in the highest quintile. In 2009, women occupied only an average of 12.6 percent of all
the seats in the legislative as compared to 21.5 percent average in the LAC Region. During the
tenure of President Michelle Bachelet, a gender parity policy led to a substantial increase in
female staff, especially in higher level positions in the Government. More recently, the Chile
Crece Contigo program provides access to childcare for the women in the bottom two quintiles
who are currently working, searching for work or studying.
D. Economic Prospects
14.
Chile’s economy has proven to be more resilient than other emerging market
economies in LAC and elsewhere and is recovering rapidly from the effects of the global
crisis. This greater resilience is linked to Chile’s robust macroeconomic framework, which rests
on three, mutually re-enforcing, pillars: (i) a responsible and predictable fiscal policy based on a
transparent fiscal rule; (ii) a monetary policy conducted by an independent central bank which
uses an inflation targeting regime (CPI target of 3.0 percent with a tolerance of +/- 1 percent),
complemented by a floating exchange rate; and (iii) a solid financial system. In the short-term,
growth and domestic demand is likely to be boosted by consumer and investment confidence and
the reconstruction program, as well as the recovery in copper prices and export volumes.
15.
But Chile is not immune to economic shocks and some vulnerabilities persist. Even
though many new export products have emerged in recent years and the destination of shipments
has been diversified, copper revenues still account for a large share of merchandise exports (over
50 percent in 2008-09 due to high international prices) and more than 30 percent of its imports
are oil, fuels and food. Economic performance therefore continues to be affected by relative
6

The HOI measures the percentage of available opportunities needed to ensure children’s universal access to basic services and
their allocation based on the equality of opportunity principle. The HOI ranges from 0 (absolute deprivation) to 100
(universality). Molinas, Paes de Barros, Saavedra, and Giugale (2010). "Do Our Children Have a Chance? The 2010 Human
Opportunity Report for Latin America and the Caribbean". Conference Edition. Washington, DC: World Bank.

6

changes in commodity prices. In addition, as an attractive investment destination and given the
large liquidity in international money markets, Chile, like other leading emerging markets, may
suffer from excessive capital inflows in the short term that could put pressure on the exchange
rate and affect the competitiveness of some tradable sectors. Furthermore, even if the fiscal
position of the government remains strong due to a low public debt profile and a cushion of over
US$15 billion worth of copper boom savings, a change of financing constraints could affect
private sector ability to repay its external debts.
16.
The scenario described below focuses on the short and medium-term outlook. It
incorporates the impact of the 2008-09 crisis as well as the effects of the February 2010
earthquake, the economic recovery from 2010 and prospects for the global economy as well as
recent Central Bank foreign exchange position policy measures (see Table 2). The CPS baseline
macro projections are summarized as follows:
•

Growth and inflation. Given the strong economic recovery underway, real GDP is
expected to expand by 5 percent in 2010, reach 6 percent in 2011 and converge to 4.5
percent in the long-run. Private consumption and private and public investment, are
expected to sustain domestic demand growth in the short-run. After a sharp contraction
in industrial production in March 2010 (-17.4 percent annually) reflecting the impact of
the earthquake, manufacturing activity has shown signs of recovery since May 2010
(with an average annual rate of 4.3 percent during May-August). The rapid recovery of
domestic demand has boosted imports and contributed to some domestic inflation. With
diminishing spare capacity in the economy, inflation is expected to rise to about 3.7
percent by the end of 2010, and to return to the 3 percent medium-term target in 2011 and
beyond.

•

Fiscal accounts. After posting primary fiscal surpluses between 2003 and 2008, the
Central Government overall fiscal deficit reached 4.4 percent of GDP in 2009, mainly
due to increased spending associated with the countercyclical fiscal stimulus and falling
copper and non-copper revenues. With the rebound in growth and higher copper prices,
public finances recovered slightly in 2010. The deficit is expected to narrow to 1.7
percent of GDP, reflecting a recovery in tax revenues from both the mining and nonmining sectors and lower current expenditure due to the end of several temporary
stimulus measures adopted in 2009. The central Government deficit is expected to
decline to 0.6 percent of GDP in 2011 and return to almost a balance by 2014. The
structural deficit is targeted to converge to 1 percent of GDP in 2014.

•

External accounts. The external current account is projected to shift from a surplus of
2.6 percent of GDP in 2009 to a deficit of 0.7 percent of GDP in 2010 and 2.0 percent of
GDP in 2011, as net import growth strengthens. In the long-term the current account
deficit is expected to stabilize at around 2.5 percent of GDP. Foreign Direct Investment
(FDI) is expected to increase in the short and medium-term. Gross international reserves
reached US$25.4 billion in 2009, 9.5 percent higher than in 2008 and are expected to
increase by US$ 12 billion during 2011 as a result of the recently announced program to
strengthen foreign exchange liquidity, and remain stable during the remaining projection
period, as the Central Bank maintains its flexible exchange rate regime.

7

•

Monetary accounts. Monetary policy has moved to a tightening stance since June 2010,
as financial conditions eased and credit growth resumed. In October 2010, Chilean
policy makers raised the benchmark rate (from 2.5 percent to 2.75 percent) for the fifth
straight month as the economy’s recovery fueled concern that consumer price inflation
this year may exceed Central Bank targets. Further monetary tightening may involve
tradeoffs in an environment of high international liquidity and strong appreciation
pressures on the Chilean peso. After depreciating by 17.6 percent in 2008, Chile’s real
exchange rate appreciated during 2009 by 15.6 percent and by another 3 percent in 2010.
Moreover, the nominal exchange rate has appreciated by 27 percent during 2009-2010
(17 percent since the end of June) reaching $466.05 pesos per dollar in January 4,
prompting the Central Bank to launch a massive program of dollar purchases aimed at
strengthening its foreign exchange liquidity and reducing appreciation pressures on the
peso. Starting January 5 and until December 2011 the Central Bank will gradually buy an
additional U$12 billion, following a similar policy used two years ago when the peso
reached $465.8 against the dollar. The Central Bank will sell bonds to drain the
equivalent amount of cash from the economy. The Central Bank announced that it will
purchase US$50 million a day from Jan. 5 to Feb. 9 and will announce further plans later.
Table 2: Economic Prospects
Chile: Economic Prospects
in percent, unless otherwise stated
Est.

Proj.

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

National Accounts
GDP growth
Domestic demand growth

-1.5
-5.9

5.0
13.4

6.0
6.9

4.6
5.9

4.5
5.0

4.5
4.7

Population (millions)

17.0

17.1

17.3

17.5

17.6

17.8

2.6
8.6
33.2
24.6
25.4
145.1
2.9

-0.7
7.3
34.4
27.1
25.4
145.1
12.6

-2.0
8.3
35.2
26.9
37.4
214.0
4.6

-2.1
7.8
36.1
28.3
37.4
214.0
-2.4

-2.3
6.3
35.0
28.7
37.4
214.0
-4.1

-2.3
5.0
33.4
28.4
37.4
214.0
-4.2

External indicators
Total external debt (% of GDP)

45.8

38.6

35.1

32.6

30.9

29.1

Inflation
Annual change in CPI (eop)

-1.4

3.7

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Fiscal (Central government)
Overall balance (% of GDP)
Structural balance (% of GDP)
Public debt (% of GDP)
Copper reference price ( US¢/lb)

-4.4
-3.3
27.7
234

-1.7
-4.1
26.2
315

-0.6
-3.0
25.4
327

-0.5
-2.5
24.0
330

-0.4
-1.8
22.6
299

-0.2
-1.0
21.3
270

Balance of payments
Current account (% of GDP)
Trade balance (% of GDP)
Exports of goods (% of GDP)
Imports of goods (% of GDP)
Net international reserves (US$ bn)
Net international reserves (% of Short term external debt)
Terms of trade (deterioration -)

Note: (Est.) Estimations. (Proj.) Projections.
Source: Banco Central de Chile, DIPRES, World Bank and IM F staff projections.

8

The recovery under way is likely to extend into the medium term, but Chile is not
17.
immune to economic shocks and the economy remains vulnerable. Current projections
suggest that over the long-term the economy will settle on a growth rate of 4.5 percent per year.
However, relative changes in commodity prices and the pace of the global recovery exert a
strong effect on economic activity. Excessive capital inflows can also exert strong appreciation
pressures on the Chilean currency that could affect export incentives. Chile’s track record of
timely and well structure economic policy suggest that the country will be able to tackle these
issues successfully. However, in order for the economy to grow at a higher rate, 6 percent as
expected by the incoming government, the authorities face several challenges that are discussed
next.
E. Development Challenges and Opportunities
18.
Chile's substantial development achievements have led to new challenges that the
country is currently facing in order to boost economic growth and eliminate extreme
poverty. Primary challenges to achieve this vision are related to increasing competitiveness and
opportunities for all through public sector reforms, creating new employment opportunities and
improving the quality of jobs, and increasing investment, particularly in infrastructure by
promoting private sector financing as well as direct investments. In addition, the Government is
committed to strengthening social policies that target the poor and protecting the environment.
Public Sector Modernization
19.
Chile faces two fundamental challenges in the public sector. The first set of
challenges arises from public sector rules and performance that constrain greater competitiveness
and productivity in the private sector. The second refers to the need to improve the quality and,
to a lesser extent, the coverage of public services. Given that Chile has already made progress
on both fronts, the country faces the challenge of introducing reforms that are of a higher
complexity than those implemented in prior generations. In addition, the public sector reforms
will be subject to tighter transparency criteria under the country's Access to Information legal
and institutional framework.
20.
Despite strong macroeconomic fundamentals, fairly efficient public sector
management, and sophisticated business sector, a sustained 6 percent growth in the longterm calls for conditions that foster productivity growth. Chile remains the most competitive
country in LAC (top 30th most competitive economies in the world, according to the Global
Competitiveness Report)7, but the country lags, according to this Report, with respect to the most
advanced nations in several areas that include innovation potential, availability of skilled
workforce, dynamism of competitive markets, and efficiency of public management. Educational
attainment rates have increased significantly, but quality remains weak (Chile ranked 101st for
primary education and 45th for higher education and training at the Global Competitiveness
Report). The delivery of public services are relatively good compared with other LAC
economies, but challenges still persist in the areas of accountability of public institutions,

7

Global Competitiveness Report 2010-12.

9

efficiency of performance management systems, and decentralization. On the financial sector,
Chile faces challenges to broaden and deepen its domestic capital market in order to facilitate
investment, while preserving sound financial regulation.
21.
Chile enjoys relatively good public services, when compared to neighboring
countries, but there is a perception that better services could be delivered with the same
resources. In order to improve the provision of public services the following challenges need to
be addressed: (i) the need for strengthening accountability of public institutions, in particular
public services, through improved and publicly available monitoring and evaluation systems; (ii)
the review of the overall existing performance management system; and (iii) the need to
decentralize to lower levels of government and the division of responsibilities in the servicedelivery chain. While the Government aims to work on the various public services, it has
identified the health sector as the first one to be addressed. A first take in this sector shows that
while there is adequate financial protection, there seem to be some systemic problems in the
health sector. These include: (i) quality and readiness of the health information system; (ii) the
need to make the Health Superintendency more independent; (iii) design and implementation of
an adequate monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system and, (iv) improvement of the National
Health Fund (Fondo Nacional de Salud, FONASA) in carrying out its main objective of financing
health services.
Job Creation and Equity Improvement
22.
Despite significant improvements in poverty reduction through social policy, high
inequality and low social mobility remain a challenge. The current administration approach to
this challenge is to increase the country’s attention on the quality of education from early
childhood to tertiary education and job skills training as a basis to raise competitiveness. To do
so, it will build on the reforms introduced by previous administrations. These efforts are already
showing results as Chile improved its ranking between 2006 and 2010 in mathematics, reading,
and science in basic education according to the Programme for International Student Assessment
(PISA). Further efforts will help Chile close the gap with the bulk of OECD countries.
23.
Chile has embarked on a number of bold reforms aimed at improving the quality
and increasing the relevance of the education system. At the pre-school, primary and
secondary levels, the new General Education Law and the Proposal on the National Education
Quality Assurance system include: i) major institutional reforms to establish system-wide
quality assurance and to provide additional public funds to schools serving low-income students;
ii) the establishment of a teacher performance evaluation system, mandatory for municipal
school teachers, and improvements to teacher preparation and in-service professional
development; and iii) the launch of an information and communication technology (ICT) core
strategy to improve the quality of education through the application of digital technologies.
Moving ahead, the challenge is to implement the new organizational framework set out in the
General Education Law, assuring key functions and their distribution across public agencies. In
particular, the Law calls for the creation of two institutions that still remain to be launched: The
Agency of Education Quality, to evaluate student and school performance, and the
Superintendency of Education, to ensure school compliance with statutory regulations.

10

At the tertiary level, Chile has expanded student finance, refined its accreditation
24.
system and expanded its use of performance-based financing, but efficacy and
sustainability still remain a challenge. The country has an innovative loan program (the Law
of the Preferential School Subsidy) aimed at improving learning of low-income students by
providing additional resources to the schools that serve them and holding those schools
accountable for learning outcomes. However, a substantial portion of resources continue to be
allocated based on historical arrangements, rather than performance-based criteria. Finally, the
Chilecalifica program has developed the basis for a national system of certification of labor
competencies and established a foundation for a Lifelong Learning System with the objective of
raising the skill level of the labor force and aligning the provision of training to changing labor
market demands. In all these programs, an evaluation of the experience so far in light of the
lessons from international experience can help improve the efficacy and sustainability of these
initiatives.
25.
Pioneering public policy reforms have resulted in the gradual establishment a
System of Social Protection. The limited improvement in poverty and stagnation of inequality
during the 1990’s motivated reforms that included the launching of Chile Solidario in 2002, laws
relating to Pension Reform, the institutionalization of the Integrated System of Social Protection
and Chile Crece Contigo, improvements in unemployment insurance and the creation of an
employment subsidy scheme. An important additional institutional innovation has been the
Integrated System of Social Information, a national computerized technological platform that
registers stores and processes information on socioeconomic conditions of the priority target
population of social programs, services and transfers at the local level. The new government
envisions bringing to scale a broader approach to social protection which will focus on risk
mitigation for the most vulnerable.
Promoting Sustainable Investment
26.
Substantial investments in infrastructure are foreseen to support the higher rate of
economic growth. The challenge for Chile is to maintain the quality of infrastructure, one of the
most developed in Latin America. The estimate is that over the coming year the investment in
infrastructure will amount to around US$20 billion in all sectors critical to economic growth:
transport, energy, water and sanitation, and agriculture. Most of these investments will be
undertaken by the private sector through concessions. In addition, public investment of around
US$6 billion will go to those areas where concessions are not viable, particularly in rural areas.
27.
Adequately linking areas of production and processing with export gateways
remains a major challenge owing to Chile’s geography (6,500 km length and approximately
175 km width). To enhance its multimodal transport system, Chile plans to modernize its
logistics system and remove existing bottlenecks. This modernization process will probably
involve substantial private sector participation through the current concessions model, which has
shown to be successful.
28.
Chile has begun to address the challenges of urban congestion, traffic safety, and
transport related air quality problems. In 2007, the GOC initiated the Transantiago project to
transform Santiago's public transport system from a relatively informal and fragmented service

11

provision sector to a professionally operated integrated city-wide network, with the ultimate
purpose of reducing traffic congestion and providing greater access to public transportation.
Implementation of the project met serious start-up problems and today efforts continue to reduce
the system’s deficit in the city through measures that improve efficiency and include reducing
costs, curbing fare evasion, continuing with fare increases or finding other financing sources,
such as revenues from a possible congestion charge or other pricing instruments. Aside from
large cities, such as Santiago, challenges range from marginally regulated public transport
service provision, fragmented and informal sector, lack of adequate services in off-peak and
night periods, to a very old and polluting public transport fleet.
29.
Chile’s well functioning energy sector has supported the rapid growth of the
economy, but the sector remains a source of vulnerability for the economy. The
privatization and liberalization of its electricity sector in the 1980s set the foundation for a
competitive energy sector, which is often used as a model for other countries. However, the
Chilean energy sector’s heavy dependence on imported fossil fuels (oil, natural gas and coal)
raises concern about energy security and the vulnerability of the economy. Investments in
hydropower can help reduce vulnerability and meet growing demand, given the considerable
potential of the country. According to projections made by the Comisión Nacional de Energía
(CNE), more than one-third of the capacity expansion by 2020 can be delivered by conventional
hydroelectricity projects. Still, one of the main challenges in the development of hydroelectric
power plants will be the increased competing demands for scarce water resources.
30.
While the Government can continue to rely on the private sector for major
infrastructure investments, the public investment planning agenda is expected to focus
more on rural regions with high poverty levels. Some of these regions were heavily affected
by the earthquake and the tsunami in February 2009 where reconstruction continues. However,
the highest obstacle to reach these rural communities is the traditional economic evaluation of
individual infrastructure projects. Furthermore, the prioritization of these investments remains
weak as most of the investment in infrastructure is allocated through sectoral agencies that often
do not respond to local and regional priorities. There has been some progress in this regard
through the territorial developing planning approach under the development of Territorial
Development Planning Frameworks (PMDTs). The government has implemented five
Frameworks to date, covering investments in roads, water and sanitation, and energy.
31.
Chile is highly exposed to extreme natural events as earthquakes, tsunamis and
floods. To manage this disaster risk is one of the most important issues that Chile faces in terms
of sustainable development. The impact of the 8.8 magnitude earthquake on February 27, 2010
induced important changes and adjustments for the Government’s agenda. In this context, the
GOC is developing an agenda based on the lessons learned from the last earthquake to cover
disaster risk management issues, which include: hazard and risk assessment projects, early
warning systems, risk reduction policies integrated in land use planning, and development of
regional and local capacity.
32.
Chile seeks to regain its foothold as an important player in global agro-food
markets. After a propitious insertion into the global markets, the initial dynamism of the agrofood sector fizzled during the last decade contributing to the decline in productivity growth of

12

the overall economy. To reverse the trend and generate a productive transformation in the
Chilean economy, the Government has launched a growth strategy, which assigns a central role
to innovation. As part of that strategy, priority is given to realizing the potential of the sector
through the Sub-system of Agro-food and Forestry Innovation (Sistema de Innovación
Agroalimentario y Forestal - SIAF). In the long term, Chile expects that the proposed measures
will lead to increased private sector investment in research and development in the agro-food
sector.
33.
Management of natural resources in Chile faces difficult trade-offs that are being
accentuated by climate change. Efforts at conciliating economic growth with environmental
criteria and the sustainable management of natural resources has proven difficult in Chile and
today the country is facing critical challenges in water resources management, growing pollution,
land degradation and erosion combined with uncertainties of climate change. In addition, the
country lacks legislative instruments to regulate environmental protection and preservation thus
leading to potential conflicts between different interest groups.
34.
The current legal and institutional framework for environmental issues is based on
the Environmental Impact Assessment System established in 1997. Most of the sector
agencies have relied on the National Commission for the Environment’s (CONAMA) instruments
such as Environmental Impact Studies 8 which are needed to design appropriate mitigation
measures to reduce the adverse environmental impacts of projects. In addition, in January 2009,
CONAMA presented the National Climate Change Action Plan, for 2008-2012, as a reference
framework for climate change impact analysis, vulnerability, adaptation and mitigation. The
Action Plan envisions construction of local climate change scenarios by Chile’s Meteorological
Center, in collaboration with universities and research centers in the country. An important
objective of the Action Plan is to establish the level of vulnerability of water resources, and to
define the options for their effective use.
35.
However, as the claims on water grow, institutional changes in water resources
management and overall environmental issues are foreseen. The pressure placed by energy
and agriculture as well are urban areas will require revisiting the national water resources policy
and strategy, possibly implementing new approaches based on basin management that
effectively address the multipurpose uses of water. Already, the concept of hydrographical basin
management has been adopted and, as noted above, climate change will be factored in when
developing alternative scenarios to evaluate the impact of policies on sustainability.
36.
Chile has made recent progress in improving air quality in rapidly growing urban
sectors, but challenges remain on health and air pollution issues, particularly in the
Santiago Metropolitan Region. Recent policy changes regarding the use of quality of fuels
have contributed to reduce the quantity of emitted sulfur from mobile and fixed sources. National
laws on environment and air quality have become stricter. Furthermore, air contaminants and
new laws for vehicles have been enacted, thus placing Chile close to developed countries such as

8

A full Environmental Impact Study is required for projects which pose potential adverse impacts on health, natural resources,
entail resettlement of population, are located near protected areas or have a high potential of affecting the scenic value of an area
or could potentially alter areas of high cultural or historical value.

13

the United States and the EU. Air pollution prevention and control in the Metropolitan Region
has resulted on selected contaminant emissions and the number of health emergencies due to air
pollution exposure. Still, general emission laws for industrial processes and for toxic air
contaminant sources (except arsenic in copper smelting) are still missing. In addition,
monitoring efforts on air quality and emission inventories are only applied for the main cities and
in the zones near the copper smelting plants.
F. Government Priorities and Medium-Term Strategy
37.
Upon taking office in March 2010, the new Government’s foremost priority was
focused on the emergency and reconstruction response to the massive February 27th, 2010
earthquake. The Government’s immediate response was to restore order and security in the
area, distribute food among the victims and establish field hospitals. Through the winter
response stage, 70,000 temporary houses were constructed and 23,000 cash grants were
distributed for repairing and reconstructing urban housing units. Another 60,000 cash grants
were allocated for employment creation. The earthquake had devastating effects on public and
private infrastructure. The Chilean authorities estimated that the government’s share of the
estimated total reconstruction costs of about US$30 billion would be in the order of US$8.4
billion (4 percent of GDP) over 2010-13. 9 Under the current stage of the reconstruction plan
called Levantemos Chile, the government will finance the reconstruction of about 200,000
homes, continue with the cash grant program for repairing and rebuilding, and finance the
reconstruction of public infrastructure works, such as water and sanitation systems, port
facilities, airports, and public buildings.
38.
On November 2010, the government launched an ambitious development agenda for
Chile, called Chile País Desarrollado 10, which sets the goal of achieving high-income
developed country status by 2018. The government has set clear targets for the period 2010-14
(Table 3), in order to place the country on a higher level of long-term development path. In
addition, the government has established as a long-term goal to eradicate extreme poverty by
2014.
Table 3: Chile’s Development Agenda’s Targets for 2010-2014

Targets
Growth

•
•
•
•

Average GDP growth of 6 percent for the period 2010-13
Increase investment from 21.4 percent to 28 percent of GDP by 2014
Increase research and development (R&D) investment from 0.4 percent to 0.6 percent of
GDP by 2013 and to 0.8 percent by 2018
Create 100,000 new enterprises for the period 2010-13

Employment

•
•

Create 200,000 new jobs on average annually between 2010-14
Labor training for 5 million workers between 2010-13

Source: Government of Chile, Chile País Desarrollado: Más oportunidades y mejores empleos (November 2010)

9

IMF Article IV, September 2010
Agenda Chile País Desarrollado: Más Oportunidades y Mejores Empleos
http://www.hacienda.cl/documentos/doc/agenda_chile_pais_desarrollado.pdf
10

14

According to the GOC's agenda, the three strategic areas that the Government of
39.
Chile plans to emphasize during 2010-14 are: i) achieving greater competitiveness,
including the modernization of the state; ii) improving job creation and job quality; and iii)
promoting investment. In addition, the government is committed to other important reforms
aimed at strengthening social policies and protecting the environment.
40.
In the area of boosting competitiveness for productivity growth, the government’s
agenda makes a strong emphasis on state modernization as a cross-cutting commitment
focused on building a public administration that would better support a high-level
economy. Chile’s current main challenge in this area is to improve competitiveness and
efficiency in the provision of public services towards better services to citizens and investment
facilitation. The government has established a series of actions to remove bottlenecks at the
public administration and strengthen accountability of public institutions. As part of this, the
GOC has proposed better control systems, a stronger civil service, efficient procurement
processes, effective corporate governance, and reformed state-owned enterprises. The public
sector reform would also encompass a decentralization process that would devolve management
of public services to the sub-national levels while ensuring clear definition of responsibilities and
accountability mechanisms.
41. In addition to state modernization, the GOC seeks to improve the country’s
competitiveness through capital market reform, trade facilitation, innovation, better
business environment, and market competition. On capital markets, the government has
announced a comprehensive reform aimed at strengthening the financial sector’s institutional
framework—improving market access for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and developing
new markets and financial products to reduce financing costs. 11 On trade facilitation, the
government plans to implement the Integrated System of Foreign Trade (SICEX) –which will
allow simplifying the import and export procedures—,conduct market assessments to take full
advantage of its free trade agreements, and introduce measures to increase the country’s export
capacity and efficiency to compete in new markets. The GOC has also announced incentives to
promote R&D investment, several measures to ease businesses, and new regulations for the
fisheries and agricultural sectors.
42.
In the area of job creation and job quality, the government’s efforts will be focused
on fostering job opportunities and enhancing labor skills and productivity through
improvements in the quality of education and a strong labor training program. The Piñera
administration announced a new wave of reforms aimed at refocusing the curriculum on basic
math and communication skills, strengthening evaluation and improving incentives for teacher
and student performance. Special attention is given to reducing disparities in quality and access
to education services and in improving the social protection policy for children. In particular, in
the area of early child development, the government will continue to enhance early childhood
development through the Chile Crece Contigo program, expanded child care services, and an
improved nursery education system. At the tertiary education level, the GOC will emphasize
incentive schemes for students, educators, and institutions to improve management and results

11

All the reforms are included in the Bicentennial Capital Markets Reform (MKB). For more information visit:
http://www.gobiernodechile.cl/informa/2010/05/06/agenda-mercado-de-capitales-del-bicentenario.htm

15

based on standards, and will foster equity in the provision of scholarships and grants. The overall
program also includes training programs for educators and better information systems for
graduate students to access to relevant labor market data. On labor, the government aims at
reforming the labor capacity building program through voucher programs and improved labor
intermediation systems to improve the quality and relevance of the training programs. The GOC
will also promote better coordination, negotiation processes, and dialogue between employers
and employees and will conduct a study to elaborate a methodology for minimum wage
adjustments.
43.
In the area of investment promotion, the government will seek to improve the
business climate to attract higher levels of private sector investment, including FDI, in
strategic sectors. The program will include tax incentives (e.g. reinvestments of earnings), tax
cuts to reduce financial costs to SMEs, elimination of bureaucratic obstacles to accelerate private
investment, and review of regulation to promote FDI and concessions in strategic industries,
such as energy. In the long-term it is expected that about US$50 billion would be invested in the
mining sector, particularly in exploration. On the public investment side, the government has
committed to promote investment in infrastructure (e.g. roads, irrigation, ports and airports) of
about US$14 billion between 2010 and 2014, which includes US$8 billion in concessions and
US$6 billion in public investment by the Ministry of Public Works.
44.
In addition to the development agenda launched in October 2010, the government’s
strategy also emphasizes social and environmental policies. In order to help eradicate poverty
and reduce excessive inequalities by 2018 the government proposes to create a national
minimum income transfer program (Ingreso Etico Familiar) that rationalizes existing transfers,
and a new law to redesign the Ministry of Planning (MIDEPLAN) into a Social Development
Ministry, reinforcing its role in the administration, coordination, supervision, and evaluation of
the system of integrated social protection policies. Finally, to ensure the long-term environmental
sustainability of growth, the government’s efforts will be focused on ensuring a successful
implementation of the new institutional framework as well as key policies and regulations to
address key environmental challenges. The newly created Ministry of Environment will play an
important role in developing policies and environmental assessments for investment projects, and
in strengthening the Superintendence for the Environment. The government plans to issue new
regulations to protect natural areas and biodiversity, modernize the management of natural
resources, promote renewable energy, ensure standards on quality of air and water, control
transport emissions, and effectively manage solid waste. In addition, the government will
conduct assessments to find options to adaptation to climate change and propose mitigation
strategies specifically in energy, agriculture, transport, mining, and industry. Some of these
actions respond to commitments that Chile has taken to address climate change as a new member
of the OECD.

16

III. BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
A. Lessons Learned from previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback
45.
A key lesson from the previous CPS was that a results framework for a CPS must
allow the partners to measure the direct contribution of the program. Linking the impact
and contribution of the program to progress towards long-term development goals makes it very
difficult to assess the World Bank Group contribution in Chile, particularly as this contribution is
financially small and covers only selected areas. Thus, the results framework should focus on
outcomes at a lower level than broad development goals.
46.
The CPS design should be consistent with a flexible approach. The flexible character
of the previous CPS program worked well. The success of the Joint Studies Program, with
annual programming responding to emerging priorities is perhaps the best example of flexibility,
contributing timely inputs to government policy decisions. Fee based services are another
example of demand driven cooperation that has worked well. The challenge for the design of the
CPS is to embed flexibility within a structured partnership framework. A continuous dialogue on
the areas of engagement is necessary, and should include periodic updating of the program to
reflect new activities and their expected contribution. In addition, mechanisms are needed to
assure the quality of the services provided and products delivered as well as an accurate
recording of the results achieved.
47.
The Bank should continue making headway in the use of country systems when the
risk associated with governance and public finance management in countries are low like
they are in Chile. The Bank has relied on country systems for budget preparation and
execution, as well as accounting through the country's integrated financial management system
(SIGFE); and external audit through the Supreme Audit Institution (Contraloria General de la
Respública). Financial management performance in active projects has been satisfactory. At the
same time, incompatibilities between procurement requirements under World Bank guidelines
and national procurement regulations may have impacted implementation of some project
components. Thus, the Bank should use the limited number of projects during the CPS to work
closely with the client to build better understanding of the Bank's policies and guidelines. While
Chile is not included in the use of country systems pilot in procurement, the Bank will continue
to work with Chile on continuous improvement of national system (including reliance on
components of the system, such as use of framework agreements in CHILECOMPRA instead of
shopping).
48.
Find a way to share Chile’s development experience and lessons. Future WBG
engagement in Chile should focus on creating mechanism that help channel successful
experiences in the transformation that has gone into turning the country into a high middle
income country as well as the current efforts to meet the challenges to move to developed
income status. In this regard, continued Bank Group involvement with Chile is a two-way
investment that has allowed important spillovers into WBG work in other countries in areas such
as results-based budgeting, social protection and tertiary education reform.

17

The stakeholder consultation also offered some important inputs for the preparation
49.
of this CPS (see Annex 3). There is a generalized vision that the country needs to improve
competitiveness and achieve sustainable growth, while reducing inequities and poverty.
Stakeholders identified that a key factor to achieve this vision was the quality of education and
the development of adequate labor skills. There was also great concern in terms of protecting the
environment, particularly the country's scarce water resources, seeking a balance between the
expansion of the mining sector and energy industry and sustainable development. Stakeholders
also identified that, even though the GOC has done much in terms of reforms, a new stage of
state modernization and decentralization is needed in order to achieve more efficient use of
resources and ensure voice and accountability at the various levels of government.
50.
The client survey, carried out between June and July 2010, also produced similar
results. Overall, they identified quality of education as a priority, followed by the need to foster
innovation and knowledge. In terms of perception, clients value most the Bank's technical
advice and knowledge, asking for greater engagement in the country in this area. Respondents
were mainly from government agencies (39 percent) followed by private sector (20 percent) and
academia (19 percent).
B. Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy
51.
The CPS aims at supporting the Government of Chile's ambitious vision of
eradicating extreme poverty by 2014 and becoming a developed country by 2018. Given
that both IBRD and IFC interventions under this CPS will be limited in scope and focused in
those areas where they can provide value added to the Country, the contributions will be very
specific. The bulk of IBRD assistance will be provided through knowledge activities funded
both through the yearly JSP and Fee-Based-Services. A small portfolio of new lending
operations is planned where GOC is requesting implementation support in selected areas.
52.
IFC will continue working in Chile with the objective of fostering greater
entrepreneurship. The Corporation will seek investments in companies that are operating in
advanced fields or developing innovative business models in a narrow range of sectors, such as,
tertiary education, vocational training, infrastructure and energy, and financial services. IFC also
hopes to support cross-border investments by Chilean companies in neighboring countries or in
other developing countries, given the difficulties many face in sourcing risk-mitigation products
and in raising local financing.
53.
The Bank Group will carry out activities for which the government or the private
sector have expressed explicit demand either through knowledge work or lending. These
activities are grouped under three results areas addressing Public Sector Modernization, Creation
of Jobs and Improving Equity, and Promoting Sustainable Investments. The first results area,
Promoting Public Sector Modernization, covers a share of the Government's Competitiveness
strategic area, and concentrates in those aspects where the Bank can provide value added. The
second results area, Creation of Jobs and Improving Equity, contributes activities under the
Government's strategic area of improving job creation and job quality, but adds the vision on
social protection. Finally, the third Results area, Promoting Sustainable Investments, contributes
to the Government's strategy on promoting investment, and includes support on environment, in

18

order to contribute inputs to the country's vision on environmental protection. The actions under
these three results areas reflect the current dialogue with the country and, in those cases where
activities are knowledge based, deliverables are those planned for FY 2011. New activities will
be planned for each fiscal year, in agreement with the GOC. In other cases, timing of
deliverables and results will depend on the life of the project. Table 4 provides a summary of
ongoing loans and grants, as well as the initial proposed package of activities under this CPS.

Table 4: Indicative Work Program
Areas of
Intervention
Public Sector
Modernization

Job Creation and
Improving Equity

Promoting
Sustainable
Investment

Current Portfolio
• Public Expenditure
Management II SIL,
US$24.8 million
• Strengthening Chile’s
Council for
Transparency IDF
• Strengthening the
Transparency and
Accountability of the
Judiciary IDF

• Infrastructure for
Territorial Development
SIL, US$50.3 million
• Social Protection TAL
Additional Financing,
US$3.0 million
• Ministry of Public
Works TAL, US$11.7
million
• Santiago Urban
Transport TAL, US$4.8
million
• Urban Transport System
redesign for a model city
in Chile SFLAC
• Institutional
Strengthening of Mining
Sector for Indigenous
Peoples Inclusion IDF

Joint Studies Program
(FY11) and FBS*
• Assessment of the
Performance Management
Incentives
• Assessment and
Recommendations on the
Decentralization Law
• Insurance Sector Review
• Improvement in the
Health Sector Financing
• Strengthening of the
Monitoring and
Evaluation System for
Social Programs FBS
• State-Guaranteed Student
Loan Program

• Water Resources
Assessment
• Financing Instruments to
Finance Urban Transport
Projects FBS
• Review of Challenges and
Response of the Agri-food
and Forestry Innovation
Systems FBS

Proposed Lending **
• Social Sectors and
Public Policies TAL,
US$20 million (FY12)

• Tertiary Education
Financing for Results
APL II , US$100
million (FY12)
• Social Sectors and
Public Policies TAL,
US$20 million (FY12)
• Infrastructure Project,
US$80 million (FY12)

* Partial list for FY11, more studies are likely to be commissioned on the second half of the FY.
** Amounts are tentative

19

C. Expected Results and Program of Lending and Non-Lending Activities
Result Area 1: Public Sector Modernization
54.
The CPS program aims to support the Government’s vision of a modern, more
efficient, effective and accountable public sector capable of facilitating increased
competitiveness and poverty reduction. The Bank expects to provide value added, mainly
through studies and grant financing, in five areas: (i) improving performance and public
financial management; (ii) increasing transparency; (iii) strengthening M&E systems; (iv)
strengthening of the financial system and capital markets regulation and (v) boosting the
efficiency of resources in the public sector, especially in the health sector. Other priority areas in
the government’s state modernization agenda may be included in the future, where the Bank has
strong expertise, such as public sector investment.
1.1

Performance and Public Financial Management

55.
The GOC intends to further develop its performance management systems by
providing adequate instruments and incentives that should lead to more effective and
transparent regulations and management of public resources. The existing performance
management system is a complex initiative, involving different instruments, systems and
institutions. These instruments include those directly linked to human resources management,
such as the Enhancement Management Program (PMG) and the collective agreements, which
define a relevant portion of personnel expenditures through variable pay. Other instruments
focus on improving effective management of public budget funds, such as monitoring and
evaluation, ex-ante and ex-post evaluation of investments and of public policies, comprehensive
expenditure and impact evaluations, institutional balance scorecards, strategic definitions linked
to the Presidential priorities, the performance agreements of the Sistema de Alta Dirección, and
the work being started by the Delivery Unit at SEGPRES.
56.
The GOC has requested the Bank to continue assisting through the Joint Studies
Program (JSP), in this area with a focus on: (i) the development of an updated financial
management system that can rapidly aggregate and consolidate financial and accounting
information, aligning monitoring and financial indicators, so that budget formulation and
execution can be evaluated and monitored; (ii) an assessment of current incentives schemes
linked to results in the public administration and recommendations on incentives and
mechanisms to improve management and accountability; (iii) an evaluation on current
decentralization processes and recommendations to improve management, accountability and
results at the municipal level; and, (iv) assessment of institutional and individuals incentives for
the provision of health and education services and recommendations on improving efficiency in
both sectors.
1.2

Transparency

57.
The GOC continues to place great emphasis on transparency as part of the
modernization of the public sector, and the adoption of the Access to Information Law
(August 2008) is a significant step in this direction. The Bank will continue to support the

20

improvement of transparency and accountability of Chilean public institutions, through two
Institutional Development Fund (IDF) Grants, by strengthening the recently established Council
for Transparency, supporting the implementation of the Access to Information (ATI) legislation,
and strengthening the transparency and accountability of the Judiciary. In particular, World Bank
engagement will focus on four areas: (i) strengthening the Council for Transparency’s oversight
role through facilitating access to peer knowledge and good practices from ATI oversight bodies
of OECD countries; (ii) developing ICT platforms in order to respond to information requests at
the municipal level; (iii) improving records management practices in the Chilean public
administration; and (iv) strengthening the capacity of the Supreme Court, in particular its
communications office, to design and implement a change management and communications
program built on transparency and integrity.
1.3

Strengthening M&E systems

58.
The current government has assigned MIDEPLAN greater responsibility in
monitoring and evaluating public sector performance with the creation of a specialized
Monitoring and Evaluation Unit. MIDEPLAN has initiated the work program by identifying
program objectives, target population, functions, progress, and outcomes. Based on this
information, a specific agenda for the Ministry will be developed that could also provide input to
other central government units such as the Presidency or Dirección de Presupuestos (DIPRES).
The World Bank will provide advice, through a proposed fee-based-service (FBS) in this process
and potentially support in the development of methodologies that would lead to making
programs more efficient and responsive to the mandate of MIDEPLAN. Finally, the FBS intends
to develop the scorecard for the programs as well as other evaluation methodologies that the
Ministry would identify as needed.
1.4

Strengthening of the financial system and capital markets regulation

59.
The current administration has set the deepening of the capital markets as a
priority supported by a broad strategy articulated in the "Agenda Mercado de Capitales del
Bicentenario", (Bicentennial Capital Markets Agenda, MKB) The World Bank will provide
support to the authorities, initially, on advice in the areas of risk-based supervision in the
insurance sector. In addition a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) will be delivered
jointly with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in FY11. The FSAP results and
recommendations will identify potential areas of further cooperation.
60.
Chile’s strong and well-managed banks tend to compete for business among blue
chip corporations and middle- upper-income retail clients. They have largely neglected the
needs of small and medium enterprises. In order to address this gap, IFC will continue exploring
partnerships with banks and non-banks to provide lines of credit for small companies or lowincome groups. IFC may also provide innovative solutions for this market segment, such as
short-term financing products to overcome working capital limitations.

21

1.5

Efficient use of resources in public services

61.
The GOC aims to achieve greater efficiency in the provision of public services. The
Government has requested the Bank to focus in the health sector in the initial phase of the CPS.
Chile has reached almost universal coverage of prioritized health services and its health
indicators are equal or superior to countries with similar or larger levels of health spending. The
major health sector reforms during recent years focused on reducing barriers to access through
the increase in the number of health problems protected under the guaranteed insurance benefit
plan (in Spanish, Acceso Universal con Garantías Explícitas, AUGE, also called the Regimen de
Garantias Explicitas de Salud, RGES), from an initial 14 health problems in 2005 to 56 for the
period 2007 -2009. The goal was to reach 80 health problems guaranteed during 2010. Thus, the
health sector is subject to new demands which are posing a challenge to the efficient use of
resources in the provision of the multitude of services which are characteristic of this sector. The
Bank, through the JSP, will assist the Government in analyzing the incentives structure in the
Chilean Health System and evaluating whether policy objectives are adequately financed.
Specifically, an assessment will be carried out of the management tools that are available for the
purchasing of health services in the National Health Fund (FONASA) and the accompanying
information systems that support the purchases made by this institution. Support to implement
the required reforms may be provided through a new Technical Assistance Loan.
Result Area 2: Job Creation and Improving Equity
62.
This result area would support the GOC's objective of reducing economic and social
inequality in Chile through enabling the emergence of economic opportunities in high value
added activities and promoting human capital development. To this end, the Bank would
initially address the following requests from the Government through lending and studies: (i)
improving quality, financing, and equitable access to tertiary education services; (ii) improving
the social protection system for the poor; and (iii) increasing the access of rural population to
markets for their products.
2.1

Improving Access and Quality Education

63.
Chile has embarked on an ambitious path of reform of its education system at all
levels. The Bank will support the efforts to implement the recent reforms to improve quality
assurance and efficiency of education and promote the articulation from secondary to tertiary and
onward to the economy. The proposed Technical Assistance Loan for strengthening the Social
Sectors and Public Policies would finance implementation of the existing policies on education.
64.
The GOC is placing greater emphasis in finding efficient and innovative ways to
finance an equitable access to tertiary education. The Bank will support these efforts,
through the JSP, by evaluating the State-Guaranteed Student Loan Program (CAE, Crédito con
Aval del Estado), which has been operating since 2006. The CAE aims at increasing equity in
enrollment, supporting qualified students from lower income brackets to increase their likelihood
to access tertiary education. In addition, CAE aims at increasing quality of tertiary education
services. The Budget Office (DIPRES) at the Ministry of Finance has requested Bank support in
evaluating the program to formulate recommendations for its improvement going forward. The

22

Bank assistance will focus on evaluating the effects of the CAE program on improved tertiary
education’s coverage and equity and accessing its financial sustainability.
65.
A new lending operation will further focus on increasing quality through further
improvements to the accreditation system and through greater reliance on performancebased financing. The objective is that accreditation “reaches down” to influence teaching and
learning practices in the classroom. The intended institutional changes would seek to empower
institutions in defining its mission and goals to then be held accountable for reaching them, while
encouraging diversity in institutional missions among institutions.
66.
IFC pioneered investments in private education in Chile and has replicated this
approach elsewhere in Latin America, particularly in Colombia and Brazil. IFC has
detected continued demand for investments in Chilean institutions that focus on adult education
and technical training. IFC’s approach is either to provide direct financing to support these
colleges’ expansion projects; or to support student loan programs focused on low-income and
middle class students by funding financial institutions or universities that offer these loans.
2.2

Improved Social Protection System for the Poor

67.
Chile has undertaken a substantial reform in its social protection system through
the Chile Solidario and the Chile Crece Contigo (CCC) programs, which targets delivery of
basic social services to the poor. The Bank will continue supporting the effective
implementation and monitoring of the results of these and other key social protection policies
and programs, as well as the management of the system as a whole. This support will be
provided through the recently approved additional financing for the Social Protection Technical
Assistance Project, and the new Technical Assistance Loan. Areas for support include: the
development, including pilot evaluation, of the new minimum income program proposal (ingreso
ético familiar); the transformation of MIDEPLAN into a Social Development Ministry; capacitybuilding for municipalities to support the strengthening of their management in areas related to
the social protection system and an assessment of this activity plus other technical assistance
being provided by MIDEPLAN to local governments; follow-up of the results of the changes
being introduced to the psychosocial support provided by the Puente program to families (group
sessions and differentiated strategy based on family characteristics; continued support and
assessment of the results of the implementation of the local employment service for Chile
Solidario participants and the new programs for the elderly, homeless, and families with
incarcerated members; evaluation of the implementation of CCC and its integrated intervention
strategy. One of the interventions within CCC is expanding childcare facilities (meeting ageappropriate standards) so as to guarantee these services for any mother who is either studying or
working. Initial results show that this intervention is having a positive impact on providing poor
women access to the labor market. In a related initiative, the World Bank is collaborating with
the Government on an impact evaluation of the parental education intervention within CCC, for
which access to additional grant financing has been secured.

23

2.3

Increased Access of Rural Population to Public Services and Markets

68.
The Government of Chile remains committed to the expansion of infrastructure
services to rural areas to address poverty and income inequality. The previous Government
of Chile sought the Bank as a source of strategic advice in designing new approaches to rural
infrastructure and territorial development. The Bank responded with the Infrastructure for
Territorial Development Project that is working on the effective and productive use of
sustainable infrastructure services by poor rural communities in selected territories and in
strengthening the capacity of participating agencies to implement territorially-based, demandresponsive and multi-sectoral approach to rural infrastructure. Among the 31 territorial
development framework plans (PMDT) that have been prepared under the PIRDT, 10 of these
plans include indigenous communities as beneficiaries. The infrastructure services include water
supply, sanitation, roads, ICT and electricity. Based on the positive results thus far, discussing
between the authorities and the Bank are underway on a possible follow-up operation in this
area.
Result Area 3: Promoting Sustainable Investments
69.
The CPS would support the GOC’s objective of facilitating investments in the
productive sectors and improving regulations in the use of natural resources, particularly
water. The Bank will continue or initiate activities, in response to requests for support in: (i)
improving the design of the regulatory framework and of the overall investment planning system
in the infrastructure and productive sectors to identify the most productive projects, (ii)
financing private sector investments, and (iii) developing recommendations on options for
regulating the sustainable use of natural resources, with a particular focus on water, which is
becoming a major limiting factor to productivity in various sectors.
3.1

Strengthening Regulations and Further Development of Productive Infrastructure

70.
Chile has in place one of the most advanced systems for concessions to build and
manage infrastructure (encompassing roads ports, railroads, bridges, tunnels, reservoirs),
but the regulatory framework needs to be revised in order to provide incentives for further
investments. At the regional level, the Bank will continue to assist the GOC in putting in place
a sustainable and integrated approach to the planning of infrastructure, establishing service
standards as well as model contracts and procedures that promote competition and assign risks
appropriately, developing integrated project management processes, developing a regulatory
framework that increases consumer confidence in service provision, and the legal and
organizational separation of the areas of planning, contracting, execution and regulation in
infrastructure provision. At the urban level, the Bank will continue and initiate activities related
to the development and implementation of transport modeling tools, and identifying new urban
transport financing mechanisms involving the private sector.
71.
In response to the country’s exposure to extreme natural events, the GOC is
developing an agenda to strengthen disaster risk management institutions. The Bank has
secured a grant to support the government in the development of a remote damage assessment
system which would assist government agencies in responding fast to a natural disaster.

24

While the agro-food industry has evolved substantially during the last decades,
72.
private sector investment in research and development has been very limited. The Bank is
currently supporting the Ministry of Agriculture, through a FBS, in developing an
implementation framework for the 2030 Rural Chile strategy in the Agro-food and Forestry
sectors, as well as in the context of core principles, which will be valuable during the design and
implementation of the institutional, operational, instruments and governance changes needed in
order to increase private sector participation in research and development in this area.
3.2

Support to Private Sector Investments

73.
IFC will remain closely engaged in Chile’s renewable energy sector, but will take a
more selective approach to investing. Increasingly, the Corporation expects to focus on runof-the-river hydro units that minimize impacts on surrounding communities and the
environment; in developing innovative financing structures for energy projects; supporting
energy efficiency projects either directly with major clients or by partnering with financial
institutions to channel financing to smaller companies; and developing and expanding new
energy sources such as solar and geothermal sources by drawing on its experience elsewhere in
the LAC region and globally.
74.
IFC will continue to seek investment opportunities in Chile, particularly in
companies that operate in advanced fields or are developing innovative business models.
IFC has developed new short-term facilities designed to meet the needs of often undercapitalized
small and mid-market firms, by improving their cash flows and by introducing them to more
sophisticated financial products. In addition, the Corporation plans on supporting cross-border
investments by Chilean companies in neighboring countries or in other developing countries, by
helping address the difficulties many companies face in sourcing risk-mitigation products and in
raising local financing.
3.3

Sustainable use of Natural Resources

75.
The Bank would assist the GOC in addressing the challenges in water resources
management. As the demand for water increases from various sources, the government foresees
a review of its institutions for water allocation and water markets. Discussions are underway for
the Bank to help revisit the national water resources policy and strategy and develop options for
new approaches based on basin management to effectively address the multipurpose uses of
water.
76.
In addition, the Bank will continue providing assistance in support of GOC's efforts
in ensuring sustainable growth. Through grant financing mechanisms the Bank will support the
GOC in the following activities: (i) an IDF grant that will contribute to the Ministry of Mining's
efforts to strengthen the dialogue between the private sector and the indigenous communities in
order to promote sustainable mining investments; (ii) provision of technical assistance to develop
Chile's Readiness Preparation Proposal under the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF); (iii)
a GEF grant for the development of a national incentive program for mainstreaming sustainable
land management planning and practices; and, (iv) two Emission Reduction Purchase

25

Agreements linked to afforestation and reforestation of degraded land and to a hydropower
project.
D. Implementing the Country Partnership Strategy
This CPS spans a six year period, with a possible extension, subject to a stable
77.
country environment and the continued membership of Chile as a client country. The
significant continuity both in the structure and areas of engagement of the Bank in Chile
throughout the years justify the longer time-span. As mentioned before, the engagement would
be mainly through the JSP, with the GOC initially funding two thirds and the Bank one third of
the activities. Bank financing is justified due to the important learning by staff and the potential
spillovers into other client countries that work in Chile is likely to continue to yield. The JSP
will be negotiated on a yearly basis, with the possibility of additional studies being agreed to
mid-way through the year. The Bank expects to continue to fund approximately US$400,000 per
fiscal year, with the Government contributing intially up to US$ 800,000 in order to ensure that
the demand for studies are fully met. Fee-Based-Services would be used for additional studies
that the GOC requests outside of the JSP framework, for shorter term GOC priorities which may
not have as high spillover effects. In terms of lending, an indicative envelope of US$600 million
for the six year period would be expected, with a current proposed pipeline of US$200 million
approximately for fiscal years 2012-2013. Three loans have been identified in areas in which the
Government deems the Bank can add value through medium term involvement in design and
implementation of key programs.
The CPS program is flexible in order to enable the Bank's response to a
78.
sophisticated client that demands just-in-time assistance, mostly in knowledge intensive
areas. Thus, the results framework includes Bank activities which are mainly studies (under the
FY10 Joint Studies Programs and Fee-Based-Services), in addition to six ongoing projects and
three proposed technical assistance operations. Indicators are relatively low-level, under the three
results areas, and reflect measurable deliverables. The results framework will be used as a
monitoring tool and will be updated on a yearly basis, based on a joint program review with the
GOC. In addition, a Progress Report will be prepared and submitted mid-way through this CPS
period.
79.
In order to ensure adequate quality and compliance with Bank policies, studies to be
carried out under the JSP or under FBS schemes will have an internal review system. The
internal review will include the same cycle as Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAAs), i.e.
approval of Terms of Reference (TOR), Quality Enhancement Review (QER), and Decision
meetings, including peer reviews, prior to final submission to the client.
80.
Investment lending will continue on a limited basis and upon demand by the
Government. In general, no major changes are expected in terms of implementation processes,
given the satisfactory performance of the portfolio during the previous CPS. Overall, Chile
scores high on public financial management, which is supported by strong adherence to clear set
of rules, dedicated and qualified staff and strong management, which ensures not only
compliance with rules and procedures, but also accountability. Therefore, the Bank will continue
to rely on country systems for budget preparation and execution, as well as accounting through

26

SIGFE and external audit through the Supreme Audit Institution (Contraloria General de la
República). Additionally, the Bank expects to continue using Bank and IDB financial reports
directly issued from SIGFE. In the area of procurement, the Bank-financed projects
progressively rely on the parts of the system (see para 47). The Bank will continue to work with
counterparts to help strengthen the national procurement processes.
81.
Finally, the Bank will continue supporting knowledge sharing activities between
client governments and Chile. While Chile is not formally part of the South-South Knowledge
Exchange Platform, several experiences have proven useful for other Bank clients. For example,
Chile’s world class experts in partial credit risk guarantees have helped to design Bank lending
operations in two IDA countries in LAC – Nicaragua and Haiti. The Bank has facilitated
numerous study tours and knowledge exchanges under the previous CPS in areas such as resultsbased budgeting, social protection and tertiary education reform. The Bank team expects to
continue facilitating this knowledge exchange during this CPS period.
IV.

MANAGING RISKS

82.
Given the strong economic and institutional framework in Chile, risks are low to
moderate for the implementation of the proposed CPS. Foreseen potential risks are due
mainly to financial and natural causes. The following sections discuss each of the main risks
including the risk to the Bank Group.
A. Country Risks
83.
The political and social contexts in Chile are very stable, as evidenced by the smooth
governmental transition, and the successful social programs implemented in the country.
Still, there are some risks of political and social upheaval due to continued levels of inequality
observed in Chile and the discontent of the small but significant indigenous population in the
country. These risks could increase if the country’s energy program, focusing on water and
aeolic energy, does not consider the needs and demands from indigenous and environmental
groups. President Piñera, in his statement to Parliament (May, 2010), included a plan to address
these challenges.
84.
The 2010 fiscal pressures due to the February earthquake may continue during
12
2011. However, the government is not expected to have problems in closing fiscal gaps as
savings in sovereign wealth funds accumulated during the copper price boom remain substantial
and there is room for additional issues of public debt in both local and international markets.
The authorities’ goal to return to structural fiscal balance by 2014 will be challenging, implying
significant expenditure restraint over a number of years.
85.
Chile is prone to natural disasters, particularly earthquakes and tsunamis, as it is
located in a highly seismic area. Floods and extreme temperature exposure are also common
threats, though often less damaging. The experience from the February 2010 earthquake shows

12

The authorities estimated that the public share of the reconstruction cost would be in the order of US$8.4 billion (4percent of
GDP) over 2010-2013.

27

that the country can emerge from these shocks relatively well thanks to strong institutions and
financial resources. Furthermore, the recent experience has left a number of lessons on the
logistics of rapid response that are being currently being incorporated in the Government’s
contingency strategy to respond fast to the needs of affected and vulnerable populations.
B. External shocks
86.
While financial market turbulences in September 2008 were felt across all emerging
market economies, Chile’s economy proved more resilient than others. This greater
resilience is linked to Chile’s solid macroeconomic policies and a solid financial system.
87.
Chile will continue to be vulnerable to external shocks as it is heavily dependent on
copper exports and oil imports. Commodity exports are currently approximately 65 percent of
the share of total merchandise exports. The national agenda to increase competitiveness and
promote increased productivity and diversification addresses this risk.
C.

Risk to the World Bank Group

88.
The delivery of a flexible, focused and timely support to a MIC country such as
Chile is a challenge to the Bank. In order to meet demands, the Bank's technical expertise and
advisory services will have to continue to be cutting-edge, and responsive to the fast changing
needs of a sophisticated client.

28

Annex 1: Chile Country Partnership Strategy FY11-FY16
Results Framework: Ongoing and Confirmed Program
GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGIC PILLAR: ACHIEVING GREATER COMPETITIVENESS
RESULT AREA I – PUBLIC SECTOR MODERNIZATION
Institutional Outcomes in
the Government’s Action
Plan that the CPS will
support
 Improving performance
and public financial
management



Increasing transparency



Strengthening monitoring
and evaluation systems





Strengthening financial
system and capital markets
regulation

Boosting the efficiency of
resources in the public
sector

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS program
 Inform policy debate on a new model of performance management incentives, including an
assessment of management tools to improve institutional performance accountability mechanisms to
align incentives to staff at all levels.
 Upgraded Financial Administration System (SIGFE) used by most (90 percent) of the Central
Government Entities (CGE) that currently use SIGFE.
 Financial and public expenditures information from CGE updated online and consolidated in SIGFE
on a timely manner.
 Aggregated municipal financial and public expenditures information available at the central level
within 30 days.
 Financial and expenditure information of 100 municipalities available through the system.
 Inform policy debate on proposals to improve management and accountability mechanisms in
education and health sectors.
 Strengthen the design and implementation of health, education, and social protection policies and
programs.
 Implementation of the Access to Information legislation.
 Strengthened oversight role of the Council for Transparency.
 Improved record management practices in the public administration.
 Strengthened capacity of the Supreme Court to design and implement a change management and
communications program built on transparency and integrity.
 Design of scorecard methodology and pilot test of scorecard methodology for selected social
programs.
 Methodologies for evaluation of social programs developed.
 Assessment of the draft bill to enhance the regulatory framework and supervision of the insurance
sector.
 Inform policy debate on legislative reform to advance effective risk based supervision in the insurance
sector in Chile.
 Assessment of the financial sector and regulatory development since 2004.
 Inform policy discussions on pension funds incentive structure, SME financing, and bank and
insurance regulation and supervision.
 Potential hybrid financing and innovative financial instruments by IFC.
 Inform policy debate on individual and institutional incentives scheme in the provision of health
services and review of procurement management and information systems in the health sector.

29

Instruments and Partners

Assessment of the Performance
Management Incentives (JSP, FY11)
DIPRES
Public Expenditure Management II (SIL,
FY08-FY13)
DIPRES – SIGFE
Chile's Decentralization Agenda (JSP,
FY11)
SUBDERE
Social Sector and Public Policies (TAL,
FY12-FY15)
DIPRES
Strengthening Chile’s Council for
Transparency (IDF, FY10-FY13)
Council of Transparency
Strengthening the Transparency and
Accountability of the Judiciary (IDF, FY11FY14) - Supreme Court
Strengthening of the Monitoring and
Evaluation System for Social Programs
(FBS, FY11) - MIDEPLAN
Insurance Sector Review (JSP, FY11)
Ministry of Finance

FSAP (joint assessment with IMF, FY11)
Ministry of Finance & Central Bank
Potential IFC financing support
Improvement in the Health Sector Financing
(JSP, FY11)
DIPRES - Ministry of Health

GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGIC PILLAR: IMPROVING JOB CREATION AND JOB QUALITY
RESULT AREA II – JOB CREATION AND IMPROVING EQUITY
Institutional Outcomes in the
Government’s Action Plan
that the CPS will support
 Improving quality,
financing, and equitable
access to tertiary education
services

 Improving the social
protection system for the
poor

 Increasing the access of
rural population to basic
public services and markets

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS program
 Extension of Performance Contracts to all subcategories of tertiary education institutions (both public
and private universities, professional institutes, and centers for technical education).
 Increased accountability for quality through broadening of performance-based funding model linked
to targeted indicators.
 Enhanced equity and improved access through more options for students from low-income
backgrounds and through improved remediation of skills in tertiary education.
 Impact assessment of the state-guaranteed student loan program on improved tertiary education’s
coverage and equity.
 Inform policy debate on the future public financial obligation and potential cost-effectiveness of the
intervention, and provide recommendations for improvements going forward.

 Implementation of the new minimum income proposal (Ingreso Etico Familiar).
 Improved targeting system for social programs and enhanced monitoring and evaluation capacities at
MIDEPLAN.
 Assessment of Chile Solidario and Chile Crece Contigo programs’ results.
 Strengthen the design and implementation of social protection policies and programs.
 Increase the effective and productive use of sustainable infrastructure services by poor rural
communities as evidence in:
 Rural infrastructure projects approved through the new integrated economic evaluation of
MIDEPLAN
 Increased use of transportation services along rehabilitated road infrastructure in the area of
influence of the Bank financed project
 Increased use of electricity and sustained access and effective use of water and sanitation services
for economic activities in the area of influence of the Bank financed project
 Economic activities promoted through the use of the financed infrastructure and pre-investment for
productive activities.

30

Instruments and Partners

Tertiary Education Financing for Results
Project (APL 2nd phase, FY12 – FY16)
MECESUP
Potential IFC financing support to tertiary
education institutions

State-Guaranteed Student Loan Program
(CAE) (JSP, FY11)
Ministry of Finance
Potential IFC financing support to student
loan programs for low-income population
Social Protection (TAL additional
Financing, FY11 – FY12)
MIDEPLAN
Social Sector and Public Policies (TAL,
FY12-FY15)
DIPRES
Infrastructure for Territorial Development
(SIL, FY05-FY12)
SUBDERE

GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGIC PILLAR: PROMOTING INVESTMENT
RESULT AREA III – PROMOTING SUSTAINABLE INVESTMENT
Institutional Outcomes in the
Government’s Action Plan
that the CPS will support
 Strengthening regulations
and further development of
productive infrastructure



Support to private sector
investment



Sustainable use of natural
resources

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS program

Instruments and Partners

 Increased share of projects administered with an integrated project management approach.
 Enhanced competition in bidding processes for concession contracts.
 Inform policy decisions on the best strategy for sustainable and integrated approach to infrastructure
planning.
 Improvement measures for the public transport system for Metropolitan Santiago implemented.
 Information on payment obligation to public transport operators available in real time.
 Assessment of a model city (Talca) for the reconstruction of urban transport systems of other cities in
the area hit by the earthquake.
 Inform policy debate on recommendations on public transport service organization, transport
infrastructure, technological solutions, and management of transport operations in Talca.
 Inform policy debate on feasible options of financial instruments for the Chilean urban transport
projects.
 Improve regulatory and institutional framework for concessions.
 Strengthen public investment planning to facilitate foreign trade.
 Improve foreign trade logistics and competitiveness.
 Remote damage assessment contributes to the Government’s reconstruction plan for the areas affected
by the earthquake and tsunami of February 27 th, 2010.
 Assessment of long-term challenges and responses of the agri-food and forestry innovation subsystems (AFFIS).
 Inform policy debate on building a vision for Chile’s rural, agri-food and forestry sectors towards
2030.
 Increased innovative renewable energy investment and energy efficiency projects.
 Support to Chilean companies, particularly those operating in advanced fields or developing
innovative business models.
 Analytical review of property rights administration and water market structure.
 Impact assessment of economic incentives and subsidies on water resources sustainability.
 Inform policy debate on best strategy to address short-term and medium-term challenges on water
resources management.
 Strengthened dialogue mechanisms between the private sector and the indigenous communities on
sustainable mining investment.
 Strengthened capacity of the Ministry of Mining’s staff on managing consultations.
 Technical assistance to develop Chile’s Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP), including preparing
the national REDD strategy.
 Development of a national incentive program for mainstreaming sustainable land management
planning and practices in order to combat land degradation, conserve biodiversity of global importance
and protect vital carbon assets.
 Purchase of carbon emission reductions linked to renewable energy-based electricity production and
afforestation and reforestation of degraded land.

Ministry of Public Works Institutional
Strengthening (TAL, FY08-FY14)
Ministry of Public Works
Santiago Urban Transport (TAL, FY06FY12) - Transantiago
Urban Transport System redesign for a
model city in Chile (SFLAC, FY11-FY12)
Ministry of Transport
Financial Instruments to Finance Urban
Transport Projects (FBS, FY11)
Ministry of Planning
Infrastructure
(Investment
Operation,
FY12-FY16) - Ministry of Public Works
Remote Sensing Damage Assessment
(SFLAC, FY10-FY11)
Ministry of National Assets
Review of challenges and response of the
agri-food and forestry innovation systems
(FBS, FY10-11)
Ministry of Agriculture – Foundation for
Agriculture Innovation (FIA)
Potential IFC financing support

31

Water Resources Assessment (JSP, FY11)
Ministry of Public Works
Institutional Strengthening of Mining
Sector for Indigenous Peoples Inclusion
(IDF, FY10-FY13) - Ministry of Mining
Chile FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant
(FCPF, FY10-FY12) - Ministry of
Agriculture
Sustainable Land Management (GEF,
FY11-FY18) - Ministry of Agriculture
Quilleco Hydroelectric Project
(PCF, FY11-FY13) - COLBÚN, S.A.
Chile Securitization and Carbon Sinks
Project (BioCarbon Fund, FY11-FY13) Fundación Chile

Annex 2: CHILE CPS COMPLETION REPORT
1.
This Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report (CPSCR) provides an evaluation
of Bank Group assistance to Chile for FY07-FY10. The Joint IBRD and IFC Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Chile (Report No. 38691-CL) was presented to the Board on June
14, 2007. A Joint IBRD and IFC CPS Progress Report was submitted to the Board in September
2009 (Report No. 50878-CL).
2.
This CPSCR was prepared using as background information the CPS, the CPS Progress
Report, the latest Implementation Status Reports (ISR) for ongoing projects in the Bank’s Chile
portfolio, Implementation Completion and Results Reports (ICR) for loans that closed during the
CPS period, Aide-Memoires of annual meetings with the Government to evaluate and prioritize
assistance under the Joint Studies Program (JSP), and selected studies carried out during the CPS
period. Since the CPS Progress Report was prepared about one year prior to this completion
report, this CPSCR draws heavily on the information in the Progress Report.
I.

Background

Overview
3.
The FY07-FY10 CPS was developed to meet the changing needs of a highly successful,
globally integrated MIC committed to both growth and social equity, and to help the country
realize its goal of convergence with OECD income levels and living standards through faster
growth and greater equality of opportunities. As such, it presented the Bank Group with a
complex set of challenges that confront, and will continue to confront, many of its MIC clients.
Economic. Chile consolidated a stable and successful economy since the late 1980's.
4.
Following an economic slowdown in response to the economic and financial crises of the late
1990s, Chile’s growth accelerated to around 6 percent in each of 2004 and 2005, and then fell
back to 4 percent in 2006, attributable in part to higher oil prices, one-off shock in the copper
mining sector and the effects of an appreciating peso. By the time the CPS was prepared, Chile
was the fastest growing economy in the LAC region, with an annual per capita growth rate of 4.1
percent over the fifteen years following the return of democracy. At the time of the CPS, external
financing conditions were highly advantageous for emerging markets in general and Chile in
particular, as reflected in its investment grade bond rating.
5.
Social. Since 1990, poverty in Chile had been cut by more than half, from 40 percent to
an estimated 15-18 percent in 2006. Thanks to the Government’s social expenditures, which
were designed to tackle inequality, the ratio of total income of the richest 20 percent to the
poorest 20 percent fell from 14 to 7.6. Still, about 2.5 million Chileans remained poor and the
country continued to struggle with high inequality.
6.
Political. In March 1990, following 17 years of military rule, Chile reestablished
democratic governance with the inauguration of President Patricio Aylwin, the first of four
successive presidents of the center-left coalition of parties known as Concertación, that included
President Michelle Bachelet who was inaugurated as Chile’s first woman president in March

32

2006. The Concertación played a crucial role in Chile’s transition to democracy through its
effective handling of sensitive political and human rights issues and its highly consensual
approach to economic management. In early 2005, a constitutional reform was approved,
shortening the presidential term from six years to four, and prohibiting the immediate re-election
of a president. As a result, President Bachelet came to office with a smaller window of
opportunity than her predecessors. During her first year in office, the Government had launched
several Presidential and other high-level commissions on a range of issues, including pension
reform, innovation, childhood development and education (and had asked the Bank to contribute
to a number of these).
7.
Governance. Chile’s strong macroeconomic fundamentals and outward looking trade
policies had been accompanied by reforms in governance that have progressively increased
efficiency and transparency, and given Chile a well-deserved reputation for “clean” and effective
government.
8.
Outlook/Challenges. At the time the CPS was prepared, Chile’s macroeconomic
prospects were considered strong, with the Government projecting that real GDP growth would
stabilize at about 5.3 percent per annum. Public savings had grown to a point where Chile was a
net creditor, and the Government’s credibility as a debt issuer in international markets was high.
The Government’s track record with pursuing counter-cyclical fiscal policies allowed it to
counterbalance adverse shocks, and thereby reduce macroeconomic instability and ensure the
sustainability of social expenditures. Chile’s growth was seen as having the potential to be
higher than projected if the Government were to continue fostering policies that encouraged
innovation, enhancing educational quality and attainment for all Chileans, and providing
adequate physical infrastructure for growth and improved competitiveness. Additional steps to
improve the functioning of labor and capital markets, and strengthen the competition framework,
areas in which the Bank had been working with the Government, would support investments in
knowledge, human capital and infrastructure.
9.
In its first year in office, President Bachelet’s administration had faced several domestic
challenges. These included calls for greater investment of the copper windfall in social services,
protests by secondary school students demanding better education, demands for wage increases
by miners, threats of strikes by teachers and health workers demanding pay hikes, and protests
and threats of a strike by transit workers upon the roll-out of the Transantiago urban transport
system.
The Government’s Longer Term Strategic Goals
10.
President Bachelet’s Programa de Gobierno defining theme was that of making Chile
more competitive and equitable by reducing barriers to opportunity—the goal of Growth with
Equality of Opportunity. The Program aimed to accelerate growth, expand global commercial
linkages, improve education, safeguard natural resources, and strengthen competitiveness while
addressing acute and longstanding social problems.
11.
The Program’s five core themes relating to growth and equality of opportunity included:
(i) Social Policy, including issues of equity of access to education and education quality, health

33

coverage to strengthen social protection, and reform of social security to broaden coverage and
provide a minimum pension to all; (ii) A Development Leap: Promoting Innovation,
including innovation to enhance productivity and environment and environmental management
for sustainable growth and health concerns; (iii) Quality of Life: Infrastructure, including
increasing access to public services especially housing, providing safe, efficient and clean
transport and boosting competitiveness and job creation; (iv) New Citizen Compact, including
transparency and modernization of government within the context of regional development; and
(v) Ending Discrimination, not only for ethical reasons, but for the economic and social
development of the country.
Strategic Objective of the CPS, FY2007-2010
12.
The strategic objective of the CPS was to support Chile’s efforts to converge with OECD
income levels and living standards by: (i) accelerating sustainable growth, and (ii) increasing
equality of opportunity. The CPS program focused on core areas of the Government agenda and
where the World Bank Group was well positioned to assist innovation, infrastructure and public
services, public sector management, sustainable development and the environment, improving
education, and social protection.
13.
The IFC program supported the Government’s development vision and complemented
the Bank’s interventions by filling the gaps in access to long-term financing by SMEs and microenterprises and for low-income housing and education and infrastructure. The IFC was
particularly interested in addressing high impact areas by leveraging its structured finance
products, providing technical assistance and advisory services, and through its traditional product
lines, both with direct investments and through wholesaling. The IFC identified infrastructure,
and more specifically, energy as the main area of increased Bank Group coordination.
14.
The CPS described the rationale for continued World Bank support to the country. First,
addressing poverty and inequality, which remained acute, was critical for Chile to join the ranks
of OECD countries. Second, the Government continued to value World Bank engagement
through a flexible mix of financial and advisory services. Third, responding to the Government’s
request for continued engagement would test the Bank’s ability to deliver just-in-time knowledge
services and facilitate global experience and know-how within the framework of a project or
through non-lending services. Finally, Chile’s record of economic reform provided valuable
lessons to share with other Bank member countries.
15.
The proposed program included a mix of lending and technical assistance. An indicative
lending program of up to US$250 million consisted of investment and development policy loans.
Technical assistance was to be delivered mainly through a fee-for-service joint studies
framework arrangement that would move beyond the case-by-case, ad-hoc approach toward an
arrangement that would allow greater certainty in planning and financing, be cost effective to the
client, and administratively flexible. The studies program would be agreed upon annually,
including the products and services to be provided, and a time-line for their delivery.
16.
The CPS built on intensive consultations that took place through Policy Notes, a
Development Policy Review and discussions in preparation for the CPS. In many cases, the

34

Bank’s dialogue was developed as part of its participation in high-level Presidential
Commissions that involved substantial citizen involvement. The Bank also carried out a Client
Survey, and planned to follow up on its findings in order to strengthen its interventions in Chile.
Identified Risks
17.
The CPS pointed out that Chile’s objective of converging to OECD income levels was
ambitious and subject to risks that included domes, external and implementation. Three
domestic risks were considered. First, political tensions, including the weakening of the
cohesion within the Concertación could lead to a slowing of the reform process and reduce trend
growth. Second, there were high expectations that the Government would use part of the copper
windfall to fund new social programs, possibly threatening the fiscal sustainability of the reform
process. Finally, the CPS considered that Chile’s growth prospects could be held back by
relatively slow productivity growth since it lagged substantially behind OECD economies with
respect to innovation capacity, human capital and labor force participation, and the challenges its
geography presented for infrastructure development.
18.
The main risk factors for the economy were seen as being external, including a possible
slowdown in global markets combined with weak copper prices, increased global risk aversion
and/or an escalation of regional instability, and possible disruptions in the energy supply and
high oil prices. As a small open economy, Chile was seen as sensitive to regional and global
developments and shifts in demand from its major trading partners. While Chile had been
successful in reducing exposure to financial contagion and diversifying its export base, its
economy remained vulnerable to commodity price shocks and in particular to copper prices. The
country’s strong record of performance and coherent development strategy were seen as
mitigating factors. Successive governments had implemented policies to strengthen social
cohesion, reduce Chile’s macroeconomic vulnerability and improve the policy instruments
available to respond to shocks. As a result, most of the risks were evaluated to be low or
moderate.
19.
The CPS identified two risks to the World Bank Group. First, delivering on a strategy
of flexible, focused and fast support to a sophisticated MIC like Chile would put the Bank’s MIC
strategy to the test. The Bank would need to provide cutting-edge technical expertise and
advisory services, establish new financing arrangements that would facilitate timely negotiations
and rapid response, and manage the complex incentives emanating from the twin objectives of
maintaining client demand for its knowledge services while ensuring the highest standards in its
analytical work with respect to quality standards and objectivity. A challenge to the IFC’s ability
to deliver on strategic focus areas was identified as the high levels of liquidity, at times
generating mispricing of risks and preventing the materialization of innovative structures,
especially in structured finance.
Lessons
20.
Lessons from the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) Completion Report for the FY02FY06 CAS were considered in formulating the Bank Group’s FY07-FY10 CPS. These included:
(i) a flexible CPS is an appropriate way to structure the Bank’s program in Chile; (ii) the Bank

35

should acknowledge that country strategy outcomes primarily reflect the efforts of the
Government and the country given the difficulty of identifying with specificity the contribution
of Bank interventions to overall country outcomes; (iii) the high value of the Bank’s analytical
engagement, illustrated by the extent of the Government’s demand that resulted in a program of
AAA that exceeded by far original plans; (iv) the Bank should focus on streamlining its
contracting and procurement requirements and should incorporate country systems to the extent
possible; and (v) the Bank should continue to work closely with other international agencies in
its program of assistance to Chile.
Results Framework Proposed in CPS
21.
The CPS acknowledged the expected difficulty of developing a results framework that
specified expected linkages between the Bank’s interventions and Chile’s long-term
development goals, especially in view of the flexible program of support that was being
proposed, the relatively small scale of the Bank’s financial support, and the nature of the Bank’s
evolving role as a knowledge partner. The “real-time” basis of the support the Government was
requesting, often as direct input to it policy process, was seen as making ex-ante identification of
inputs and results difficult.
22.
As a result, the CPS sought to meet the core objective of a results-based CPS by
presenting a results framework that would evaluate progress according to three distinct
dimensions. First, since the CPS was driven by the Government’s Program, its evaluation would
be based on how effective the Government was in achieving its development vision, as
determined by a select set of country development goals. These development goals were
specified as: (i) accelerating convergence with OECD income levels; (ii) improving quality of
education; (iii) providing effective protection against poverty; and (iv) transforming Chile into a
knowledge economy. Second, the knowledge products—the core of the CPS that were expected
to contribute to the policy process—would not be linked to country outcomes, but rather be
judged on criteria of their quality, relevance and sustainability. Finally, the results framework
would evaluate the CPS’ limited investment projects supported by the Bank by their specific
project indicators and the overall portfolio performance.
23.
The program was relevant to the challenges of the country. The selective approach
towards supporting the country’s development strategy, concentrating in those areas in which the
Government sought external knowledge and experience, and in which the Bank Group was
positioned to provide assistance, responded to the Government’s request for flexibility in
approach. Similarly, the CPS’ strong focus on the provision of client-prioritized knowledge
services, a limited program of financial assistance through new lending in selected areas, coupled
with an expansion of IFC’s investment activity in targeted areas was tailored to the
Government’s needs for Bank assistance, that place strong emphasis on knowledge. The risks
that eventually materialized during the CPS implementation period were mostly identified in
advance, i.e., the risk of an economic slowdown and a possible political risk. Chile also suffered
an additional risk that had not been identified in the CPS, the risk of a natural disaster in the form
of a massive earthquake that struck the country on February 28, 2010.

36

On the other hand, the results framework was inadequate as country indicators were quite
24.
broad and the Bank program itself was not accompanied by output/outcome indicators that
would allow for an objective evaluation of the CPS contribution. Furthermore, the fact that the
Bank program was very small, precluded the team of any possible attribution with respect to
country achievements.
II.

Achievement of Country Development Goals

25.
This section describes efforts by the Government to achieve each of the Country
Development Goals. Chile made solid, sustained progress towards its Country Development
Goals as described in the CPS. However, it is difficult to evaluate and appreciate the extent of
the country’s performance towards achieving these goals on the basis of the specific Government
targets selected in the CPS to measure progress, either because of the manner in which they were
formulated, the periodicity of the data collection, or lack of specificity in the indicators to be
used.
Country Development Goal 1: Accelerate Convergence with OECD Income Levels
Government target: GDP growth above 5 percent

26.
Chile made progress towards accelerating convergence with OECD income levels, but
did not meet the 5 percent growth target. Chile’s real GDP increased 4.6 percent p.a. in 2006
and in 2007. In the second half of 2008, growth started to deteriorate as the global financial
crisis deepened and copper prices declined. Despite a substantial stimulus program that included
monetary easing, increased public spending, targeted labor and social policies, temporary tax
rebates and administrative measures aimed at boosting credit and competition in the financial
system, among other measures, real GDP growth slowed to 3.7 percent in 2008 and economic
activity contracted by 1.5 percent in 2009. Economic recovery was further disrupted, but not
derailed, by a massive earthquake in February 2010. Growth declined by 1.5 percent in the first
quarter of 2010, but economic recovery resumed forcefully in the second quarter of 2010, when
GDP registered a 6.5 percent quarterly expansion. Driven by reconstruction and investment,
Chile’s economy is expected to grow by about 5 percent in 2010 and to recover further in 2011.
27.
While Chile did not meet the stated goal of 5 percent growth, the average growth attained
(approximately 3.3 percent) is a good result considering the two significant external factors that
hit the country, that is, the financial crisis and the earthquake. The earthquake led to a
substantial demand of fiscal funds (the estimated cost being approximate US$29.7 billion),
which thanks to strong institutions and fiscal capacity, the country was able to meet. Also,
achieving the 5 percent goal would have involved significant growth in total factor productivity,
including substantial interventions in innovation. As discussed in Section I, the Government was
not able to fully implement an innovation system that would allow for the economy to converge
with OECD income levels.
Country Development Goal 2: Improve Quality of Education
Government Target: Align international test scores (PISA) with Chile’s per capita GDP

37

Government Progress towards Country Development Goal 2
28.
The CPS established a target to measure Chile’s progress toward education outcomes in
terms of aligning test scores (PISA) with Chile’s per capita GDP. The latest 2009 results
presented in the graphs below reflect substantial progress. Chile’s mean PISA performance in
2009 is slightly below what would be predicted based on its GDP per capita (PPP). Importantly,
among countries where between 40 percent and 60 percent of students performed below Level 2
in 2000, Chile reduced that proportion by the largest amount: between 2000 and 2009 the
percentage of low performers in Chile dropped by more than 17 percentage points.

Average Pisa vs. GDP per capita
at PPP
90,000
80,000
70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0
300

350

400

450

500

550

600

29.
The Government has launched several reforms to address the Government’s priority
objective of raising education quality and equity, with the goal of enabling the education system
to replace socioeconomic origins as the key factor in children’s futures. The Preferential School
Subsidy, approved by Congress in February 2008, introduces and extra per-student subsidy for
students from disadvantaged backgrounds. A new General Law of Education that redefines the
rights and duties of education sector participants, and establishes the State’s responsibility to
assure that all schools provide quality education was approved by Congress in 2009. Two
proposals were embedded in that Law. The first would establish an education quality assurance
system by introducing two new agencies to oversee the quality of schools (the Agency for
Education Quality), their financial management and budgetary practices, and their compliance
with the rules that apply to them (the Superintendency of Education). The second proposal
reforms the institutional framework for the administration of public schools and proposes to
introduce the National Education Service, a central government agency that would implement
education policies and programs, and provide technical-pedagogical support to publicly financed
schools (which can be managed by the public or private sector).

38

Country Development Goal 3: Provide Effective Protection against Poverty for Chileans
across the Income Spectrum
Government Target: Chile Solidario: extend social assistance to a broader class of poor; Plan
Auge: increase access to health services; increase illnesses covered; Pension: provide universal
minimum pension
30.
The Government has made substantial progress in its goal of increasing equality of
opportunity and reducing the vulnerability of the poor, in part by developing further its social
protection system through: (i) the continued operations and improvements in Chile Solidario,
designed to support extremely poor families and other vulnerable individuals (including older
adults living alone, the homeless, and children of prisoners); and (ii) the recent extension of the
system to cover young children through a new program, Chile Crece Contigo (Sistema de
Protección Integral a la Infancia – Integrated System of Protection for Young Children).
31.
The primary and largest target group for Chile Solidario is indigent families with the aim
of incorporating roughly 40,000 families a year, although this target can be adjusted upwards or
downwards depending on economic conditions in the country. As of December 2009, 370,000
families participated in the program. The expected outcomes from Chile Solidario are a decline
in the share of households below the extreme poverty line, higher coverage of existing social
protection policies and programs among the extreme poor, and improvements in the design and
operation of public services to better address the needs of this group. The program and its
management have also been reformed, including the targeting instrument. As a result, a
substantial share of the population was re-registered by April 2007
32.
The primary target group for Chile Crece Contigo is children under 4 years of age, with a
set of services ranging from those with universal access, others for children born in the public
health system, others for children of families in the bottom 40 percent of the welfare distribution,
and yet others available for those at risk. Chile Crece Contigo represents an important expansion
of social protection, including access to improved pre-natal care and delivery for users of public
health services and the provision of a child allowance for the bottom 40 percent of households.
As of the end of 2008, 473,000 children under the age of 2 had been incorporated into Chile
Crece Contigo. During 2009, children up to the age of 4 were being incorporated. In the case of
Chile Crece Contigo, the expected outcome would be better developmental outcomes of young
children, particularly those from poor families, thereby helping to improve the equality of
opportunity in the country.
33.
Plan Auge, a regime of explicit health guarantees, was introduced in 2005, as an
important vehicle for strengthening social protection. The Government has gradually increased
the number of illnesses covered by Plan Auge from 26 when the program was created, to 56 by
2007 and to 66 by July 2010, and recently announced measures to improve the quality of the
services provided and service delivery.
34.
Following the recommendations made by the Pension Reform Advisory Council
established in March 2006, Chile’s Congress in 2008 approved a law containing far-reaching
reforms to Chile’s pension system. Building on Chile’s system of private pension funds, the

39

reforms broaden coverage and provide a minimum pension to all Chileans, including those that
cannot contribute to a private pension account. Key features include a basic universal old-age
and disability pension and a minimum pension to all Chileans aged 65 or more; credits to women
in their individual accounts to compensate for childbearing years, subsidies to young, poor
workers, mechanisms to support and protect customers of the pension fund administrators regime
(AFP), and the institutional changes needed to put into effect the new benefits and requirements,
which are being phased in gradually.
Country Development Goal 4: Transform Chile into a Knowledge Economy
Government Target: Close gap with OECD on innovation indicators
35.
In an effort to establish the conditions favorable to transform Chile into a knowledge
economy, in January 2008, the National Innovation Council for Competitiveness presented the
National Innovation Strategy, which provides a comprehensive plan to foster innovation in Chile
over the following 12 years. The three pillars of the strategy focus on (a) increasing substantially
the number of individuals that will have completed tertiary education by 2021, (b) developing a
strong and sustainable science and technology platform by supporting increased and competitive
funding, greater collaboration of research institutions with the productive sector, and an
increased number of high quality researchers, (c) fostering research and development by private
enterprises.
36.
Implementation of the strategy began with increased budgetary allocations innovation,
including expenditures in undergraduate tertiary education. Today Chile fares very well when
compared to other countries in the Region, but lags severely OECD countries. According to the
Global Competitiveness Report 2010-2011, Chile has substantial availability of scientists and
engineers (rank 24/139), but the quality of scientific research institutions still remains relatively
low (55/139) and the capacity for innovation is still a challenge (59/139). Furthermore, Chile
has not moved significantly in these rankings when compared to the report for 2007-2008. The
most worrisome trend, however, is the slowdown in the growth in total factor productivity.
III.

Assessment of Bank Assistance

37.
This section evaluates Bank assistance to Chile under the framework of the four Country
Development Goals. Given that there were no outputs or outcomes against which the program
could be measured, and under the advice of OPCS, the team prepared a Results matrix that
focuses on outputs, thus allowing for an ex-post assessment of the Bank's contribution (see
Appendix 1).
Goal 1: Accelerate Convergence with OECD Income Levels

38.
The various Bank Group activities supporting economic growth included work on
infrastructure and public services, public sector strengthening, and sustainable development and
environment. The variety of instruments included investment and development policy loans,
financial and technical support from Global Programs, grants under the IDF, studies and

40

advisory services under the fee-for-service and Joint Studies Program (JSP), and IFC
investments.
39.
The support for infrastructure and public services included four loans and a GEF Grant.
Key results included the institutional overhaul of the Ministry of Public Works (MPW) DPL
(closed) and accompanying TAL (ongoing)) to improve the efficiency in the use of public
resources and increased transparency, competition and citizen participation in the contracting and
concession of public works. Specifically, the Bank program provided advice on (a) the drafting
of a new Concessions Law, now in place, (b) the development of performance standards for high
and low volume roads; and (c) improving competitiveness and monitoring concession services.
40.
In the area of urban transport, the Bank supported the implementation of the urban
transport reform program through technical assistance and financing provided through the
Santiago Urban Transport TAL (ongoing) and the Sustainable Transport and Air Quality for
Santiago GEF (closed FY10). The TAL has completed a study on organizational improvements,
an Action Plan to mitigate negative effects on street vendors, a study to develop a methodology
to analyze the economic and financial standing of bus operators, and a series of pilot projects to
improve the quality and efficiency of the system. The results of these studies are assisting the
GOC in resolving critical issues that are still being faced by Transantiago, linked to management
of the system and its finances. Information on the impact of Transantiago on air quality is
available: greenhouse gas emissions were reduced by an estimated 98,975 tons between 2006
and 2009, a decline of 10.5 percent.
41.
Following the Regional Development Study in FY08, the Bank has supported Chile’s
territorial development initiatives through the ongoing Infrastructure for Territorial Development
Project. This project has contributed to the prioritization of infrastructure investments based on
the economic development potential of a territory and through an innovative participatory
planning process. So far, 29 territorial development plans, or PMDTs, have been prepared, and
works are under implementation. The Government will use this tested approach to include new
Regions, particularly those affected by the earthquake.
42.
IFC’s support in energy contributed to the government’s sustainable development and
environmental aims through the financing of innovative renewable and thermal energy projects.
IFC invested $213.8 million for its own account in four energy projects since 2007 and
mobilized an additional $382.8 million from third party investors for a total $596.5 million.
These investments have increased renewable generating capacity by 220 Megawatt (MW), as
well as pioneering new technologies and financing tools for the industry.
43.
Bank assistance for public sector strengthening continued through the now completed
Integrated Financial Management Project (or Sistema Integrado de Gestion Financiera del
Estado, SIGFE), and a follow-on project, Integrated Financial Management System Project II
(SIGFE II) approved in FY08. Under the first project, SIGFE was implemented in 159 out of
190 government agencies within the central government.
With Bank assistance, a
comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system was developed by the Budget Office
(Dirección de Presupuestos, DIPRES) to assess the expenditure management efficiency of 178
government agencies, where 91 government programs were assessed between 2002 and 2006.

41

SIGFE allowed for the multi-year budget scenarios and available real-time budget information
online to decision makers. The follow-up Project (SIGFE II), under implementation, is currently
implementing the municipal financial management module in 120 municipalities. In addition, an
important program of technical assistance was delivered under the fee-for-service and the Joint
Studies Program. A Study of Public Policy Evaluation Agencies was carried out to review
international experience with evaluation of public policies, as input to the next steps for
consolidating the Chilean system of results-based financing and monitoring and evaluating
public expenditures. A series of joint studies reviewed and evaluated Chile’s experience with its
Management Improvement Programs, PMG. This study was welcomed by the GOC who
requested a follow-up study recommending implementation mechanisms for the proposed
restructuring (to be delivered under the new CPS).
44.
Bank Group assistance for sustainable development and environment was integrated into
the design of the projects and investments financed by both the Bank and the IFC and described
above. Additional assistance was provided by channeling resources from global programs,
including GEF, and the Prototype Carbon Fund. These included the Sustainable Transport and
Air Quality Project for Santiago (GEF), and Quilleco Hydropower Project (PCF). An
Environmental Compliance Strategy, carried out under the framework of the Joint Studies
Program (FY09), developed a methodology to optimize the use of resources allocated to review
compliance with environmental regulations and develop indicators on the efficacy and efficiency
of policies and actions to guarantee compliance with those regulations. Chile’s goal of becoming
an important global actor in agricultural markets was supported first with a joint study that
analyzed public agricultural agencies (research, forestry, natural resources), complementing
another that is developing a strategy for agricultural innovation.

Goal 2: Improve Quality of Education

Extensive Bank support in the Education sector included eight studies, two IBRD loans,
45.
and two IFC loans. Under the Joint Studies Program, the Bank provided and continues to
country reform initiatives described in Section II.
46.
The analytical work on the Design of Education Institutions informed key policy
decisions on institutional change, most notably the establishment of the Superintendency of
Education and the Quality Evaluation Agency, whose responsibility is to oversee a quality
assurance system. The Bank also carried out stand-alone Sector Work on Education Quality
Assurance and on tertiary education systems in a specific region of the country (Bio Bio). CPS
analytical work assisted in developing the baseline for the monitoring and evaluation of the
Preferential School Subsidy. The Joint Studies Program gave priority support to education
through studies that covered: Higher Education, Foreign Scholarships, Early Childhood
Education Institutions, Information and Communications Technology in Schools, and follow-ups
to the first phase of both the School Preferential Subsidy and Design of Education Institutions
studies. Analytical work on education has been carried out jointly with OECD, thus informing
Chile of the gaps with regard to the OECD community.

42

Additional CPS results include assisting the GOC in laying the foundation for an
47.
articulated, and extended learning, and training system, with the participation of the private
sector. The now completed Lifelong Learning and Training Project (or Chile Califica) supported
(a) the establishment of Contigo Aprendo, a literacy program targeting young adults and illiterate
adults that benefited about 100,000 adults between 2003 and 2009 and (b) the design of the
National Labor Competency Certification System, established by law in 2008, that aligns
training with labor demands of key sectors and benefits about 100,000 individuals with certified
training.
48.
The CPS assisted Chile in improving the accountability of the tertiary education system
as a foundation for greater effectiveness of public funds. With the support of the Tertiary
Education Finance for Results Project already five universities are operating under performance
agreements resulting in an increase of 60 percent in the number of students enrolled in national
PhD programs between 2005 and 2009. In addition, the percentage of undergraduate students
studying under accredited programs, or in the process of being accredited, increased from 25
percent in 2006 to 45 percent in 2009, and efforts to decrease dropout rates surpassed
expectations.
49.
Lastly, the CPS, through the IFC, financed two tertiary education providers. The IFC
invested 6.9 million to support refurbishment of facilities in Universidad Diego Portales, a forprofit college, and provided two loans (for a total of $ 49.3 million) to Duoc, a foundation which
offers technical training. Most of Duoc’s students are from middle- and lower-income families.
The two clients together enrolled 61,800 students in calendar year 2009, of whom 41 percent
were women.
Goal 3: Provide Effective Protection against Poverty for Chileans across the Income
Spectrum

50.
Bank’s support to increase equality of opportunity and reduce the vulnerability of the
poor contributed to the scaling-up of the social protection system and first efforts to evaluate its
impact. After supporting under the Social Protection Technical Assistance Project the
implementation of Chile Solidario since it was first established in 2003, under this CPS the Bank
contributed to the work of the Presidential Commission that outlined Chile Crece Contigo, a
program that is now in place and has been rolled out at the municipal level, under the recently
approved Additional Financing for the Social Protection Technical Assistance Project. Through
both of these instruments and related support, the Bank has assisted with the impact evaluation of
ongoing Chile Solidario.
51.
Under the CPS the Bank assisted the government in the development of a conceptual
framework to analyze its policy on specialized health human resources. The ongoing multiphase Health Human Resources Study, under the Joint Studies Program, has presented a gap
analysis of supply and demand for medical specialists in the public health sector for the 20092012, and has identified a set of alternative policy options for reducing or eliminating those gaps.
The third phase of the Study is undertaking an analysis of the explicit and implicit incentive
system in the health system, and their consistency with desired policies. On pensions, the Bank

43

provided non-lending technical assistance for supervision of pension funds through the FIRST
Initiative (Financial Sector Reform Strengthening Initiative).
52.
IFC is supporting protection against poverty through its role in financing SMEs. IFC
made one investment in a financial services company during the CAS period, achieving a
substantial increase in financing for a sector that traditionally struggled to obtain loans from
conventional banks. Factorline, a factoring provider focused on the SME sector, made 4,800
SME loans totaling $430 million in 2007-2009. It also financed micro, small and medium
enterprises (MSMEs) with $11 million in loans in 3,800 transactions. IFC has supported
Factorline with two projects during the CAS period for a total $30 million. IFC made a $15
million equity investment in 2007, followed by a$15 million A Loan in 2009.

Goal 4: Transform Chile into a Knowledge Economy

53.
The CPS program contributed to the development of an effective innovation system and
improvement in the stock of human capital through the Science for the Knowledge Economy
Project. Efforts under this project jointly with parallel efforts by the government and the private
sector have contributed to increase the number of PhD graduates and of PhD scholarships
awarded, the private share of total research and development expenditures, and the number of
patent applications, of researchers inserted in industry and of research consortia.
54.
The CPS program helped develop the governance framework for the National Innovation
Council for Competitiveness and make available international experience through several standalone Fee-for-Service technical studies. An on-going fee-based service is assisting the Ministry
of Agriculture foster innovation through performance contracts for Public Sector Technological
Institutes of the Ministry of Agriculture to facilitate their access to public funding.
Continued Bank assistance through lending came to a halt when the incoming
55.
government (2010) cancelled the Innovation for Competitiveness Project approved in FY08.
Reportedly, in this decision the government weighted high the cumbersome Bank procedures
that slow down project implementation.
Overall Evaluation of Bank Outcomes
56.
The CPS Completion Report rates the contribution of the World Bank Program to the
achievement of outcomes as satisfactory. The Bank Group was supportive of Chile’s efforts in
several of the priority areas the Government had identified for assistance and, in general,
delivered the proposed program. The assistance was of particular significance in contributing to
an improvement in the quality of education and in expanding the quality and coverage of social
assistance. The assistance in public sector development also contributed substantially to reforms
that led to improving effectiveness in public sector management.

44

IV. Results Assessment: World Bank Group Performance
57.
The overall evaluation of the World Bank Group Performance is rated as satisfactory. As
described in greater detail below, the Bank performed very well in the knowledge and advisory
services, while performance was weaker in the area of lending.
Evaluating the Bank’s Knowledge and Advisory Services
58.
A central feature of the FY07-10 CPS was the provision of just-in-time knowledge
services in priority areas selected by the Government as needed to support its development
strategy. For Chile, this meant not only greater access to the Bank’s expertise in priority areas,
and a larger and more responsive program of advisory services, but also facilitation of access to
global experience, especially from OECD countries. The Bank’s knowledge and advisory
services were to be provided through three vehicles: the Bank’s traditional program of economic
and sector work, a fee-for-service program responding to short, just-in-time products requested
by sector ministries, and through a new mechanism that was to be established, the Joint Studies
Program (JSP). The JSP was to be established and formalized through an annual work program
agreement, detailing the products and services to be provided, and a time-line for their delivery,
while including flexibility to add and modify deliverables during the year. The services under
the JSP could include non-lending technical assistance and studies, and the Government and the
Bank would agree on the pricing of products and details on the financing to be provided by each
party.
An agreement between Chile and the Bank establishing the JSP was formalized in mid59.
2008. Since its establishment, a total of 21 studies have been prepared in priority areas selected
by the Government, through its National Budget Office (DIPRES) that was designated as the
official interlocutor for purposes of prioritizing and agreeing to specific studies. Appendix II
presents a summary of the studies that have been carried out or are being carried out in FY11
under the JSP. The CPS proposed that knowledge products, although not linked to country
outcomes, per se, would rather be judged on criteria of their quality, relevance and sustainability.
60.
Quality. A joint evaluation of the JSP was carried out with the Government in March
2009. The Government’s overall conclusion of this evaluation, which reviewed the performance
of the Program since its inception was that the program was effective and that all of the agreed
tasks had been carried out satisfactorily, achieving the objectives that had been set forth in each
case. The evaluation sought to define more precisely the strategic objectives that the
Government and the Bank aimed for under the JSP. The following general principles were
agreed for studies to be included under the JSP in the future: (i) the studies should concentrate
on topics that focus on institutional development and reform in the medium term; (ii) the topics
should have an important knowledge focus; (iii) they should reflect public policies at a broader
level than purely sectoral ones; and (iv) they should concentrate in areas where the Bank has a
comparative advantage in knowledge. In all, the studies that had been carried out at the time of
the evaluation met these general principles, even though the JSP’s strategic objectives had not
been precisely defined when it was established. To ensure this strategic approach, DIPRES
strengthened its role in coordinating, prioritizing and selecting study proposals since the first two
studies under the JSP had not benefitted from this coordination. In all, this evaluation highlights

45

the high degree of commitment on the part of the Government, both through DIPRES and at the
sectoral level, the good response on the part of the Bank’s technical teams, combined with
flexibility and good quality, and the relationship that developed among all of them, which in the
end led to developing strong technical collaboration that went way beyond the specific,
individual studies. The evaluation confirms that all of the studies met their objectives, and were
of high quality. At the same time, it highlights the importance of flexibility as a feature of the
JSP, allowing minor adjustments to reflect changes in priorities. The evaluation confirms that
the JSP has allowed the Bank to increase considerably the amount of resources available for
studies and advisory services, and has reduced the transaction costs related to carrying them out.
Finally, the JSP has provided a coordinated framework of the Bank’s knowledge and advisory
services carried out jointly with the Government, and as a result has led to greater efficiency in
the use of resources and a more important contribution to the country’s development objectives.
61.
Relevance. The topics upon which the Government requested Bank knowledge services
are all directly related to its development goals, and have provided an important input to policy
formulation and institutional reform efforts, as described in Section II of this CPSPR.
62.
Sustainability. The Government’s demand for knowledge services remains strong.
Currently, six new studies are programmed, and it is expected that demand will continue.
63.
Evaluation of Knowledge and Advisory Services. The Bank’s Joint Services Program,
and other vehicles of knowledge and non-lending technical assistance have provided an
important vehicle for providing Chile with access to the knowledge and access to global
experience that it requires as an input to priority policies and institutional reforms that it has
adopted. The quality and relevance of the JSP and other vehicles, as judged by the Government,
is very high. The joint nature of the studies carried out has had an important institutional
strengthening impact that goes well beyond the individual studies that are prepared. Demand for
the Bank’s knowledge services remains high. The evaluation of the CPS in this aspect of the
Bank’s assistance rates performance in the area of knowledge and advisory services as Highly
Satisfactory as the studies have had a substantial contribution on the policy decision-making
process in Chile.
Project Results
64.
New Lending. The CPS proposed a very limited program of new lending from FY07 to
FY09, consisting of four loans for a total of US$85.5 million, of which three were investment
loans and one a DPL, and the possibility of additional lending in the amount of US$85 million
for a then unidentified project. The four identified projects were approved during the CPS period
(Appendix III). The CPS Progress Report further identified new lending for FY10 in the amount
of US$13 million for two projects: an Additional Financing Loan for the Social Protection
Technical Assistance Project (US$3 million) and a Tertiary Education Project (US$10 million).
Of these, only the Additional Financing was approved in FY10; processing of the Tertiary
Education Project was delayed to FY11. The US$30 million loan for the Promoting Innovation
and Competitiveness Project, approved in FY08, was subsequently cancelled in FY10 when the
new Administration reconsidered its priority of external borrowing for the Project.

46

IFC’s investments in Chile doubled during the period covered by this CAS. Investments
65.
totaled $776.6 million in 15 projects, of which 80 percent was channeled to four power projects.
The Corporation mobilized $392.8 million in additional financing for clients through its B Loan
program, alongside $383.9 million in loans and equity investments for its own account. IFC
financed 13 projects during the previous four-year period for a total $370.7 million.
66.
The CPS called for IFC investments in four strategic areas: energy, tertiary education,
specialized financial mechanisms to support SMEs, and low-income housing finance. IFC was
able to deliver in three of these areas. It was unable to enter the low-income housing market.
Nonetheless, it was able to support the government’s energy and environmental policies with a
substantial infrastructure program that focused on renewable energy projects. IFC also completed
two transactions supporting a private, not-for-profit higher education provider. The Corporation
was also able to enter the highly competitive Chilean financial industry to support a pioneering
non-bank focused on SMEs that often lack financing on competitive terms.
67.
Portfolio Level. The Bank’s lending portfolio in Chile was and continues to be small,
but generally well performing, and focused exclusively in those areas where the Government felt
that the Bank’s support through a lending instrument was desirable. The investment portfolio at
present consists of five operations with a total commitment of US$105.3 million net of
cancellations and an amount of US$44.3 million remaining undisbursed. Table 3 below presents
a summary of the main portfolio indicators over the CPS period.
Table 3: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
CPS Period
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment

FY06

FY07

FY08

FY09

FY10

9

7

8

7

6

3.5

2.2

2.9

3.5

4.2

0
0.0
0
0.0
21.1

14.3
24.1
14.3
24.1
10.9

12.5
2.1
25.0
14.9
18.1

14.3
2.5
14.3
2.5
20.8

33.3
30.8
33.3
30.8
16.0

Yes
679
75

Yes
730.9
104.4

Yes
857.2
107.2

Yes
1,127.7
161.1

No*
976.1
162.7

Number of Projects under Implementation

Average Implementation Period
percent of Problem Projects by Number
percent of Problem Projects by Amount
percent of Projects at Risk by Number
percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio ( percent)
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the Year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

* The CPPR for FY10 was postponed to August 2010 in response to the GOC's request given that staff was not
available because of the earthquake and the change in government administration.

47

Two issues stand out as affecting more than one project in the portfolio: procurement
68.
and slow disbursements. Several projects faced problems with the use of the central purchasing
system of Chile, ChileCompra, and some stringent requirements of Bank procurement rules. The
Bank worked with Chile to agree on procurement arrangements that made possible, to some
extent, the use of ChileCompra in Bank-financed projects. The adoption by the Bank of revised
procurement guidelines in FY2011 is expected to greater facilitate the use of ChileCompra. The
other issue that affected several loans was that of low disbursements, due mostly to Chile’s
strong fiscal position and ability to finance projects without the use of the corresponding Bank
loans.
69.
All of the projects that exited the portfolio during the CPS period were evaluated as either
Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory by IEG (Appendix IV).
70.
Individual Project Level. Individual project progress towards the accomplishment of
their development objectives is presented, by project, in Appendix V. By and large, project
implementation proceeded well and all of the projects are making progress towards the
accomplishment of their objectives.
71.
Evaluation of Project Results and Portfolio Performance. Despite solid progress towards
expected project outcomes, portfolio performance in general was affected by several factors,
especially toward the end of the CPS period. First, the focus on systemic reforms, especially in
infrastructure, turned out to be more problematic (e.g., Transantiago) and subject to factors
beyond the control of the executive (e.g., the Ministry of Public Works’ Organic Law). Second,
the earthquake in Chile in early 2010 resulted in a redirection of the Government’s priorities
towards addressing critical infrastructure rehabilitation and other issues. Finally, the government
transition, also in early 2010, led to a reprioritization of the Government’s requests for external
financing, with the result that financing for the follow-on to a highly successful Innovation
project was canceled before implementation started. Still, while affected by transient issues, by
most comparisons, project implementation and portfolio performance in Chile has traditionally
been exceptionally good, and the project results generally satisfactory or highly satisfactory.
Perhaps what this means is that there is a need to search for a better indicator by which to
measure the overall impact of Bank lending and portfolio supervision that reflects the results
achieved through ending assistance. The evaluation of the CPS in this aspect of the Bank’s
assistance rates performance in the area of project results and portfolio performance as
Moderately Satisfactory overall, although there are specific projects for which a much higher
rating would be justified.
V. Lessons and Recommendations
72.
The results framework for a CPS must allow the partners to measure the impact and
the contribution of the program. The emphasis that the CPS under review placed on linking the
impact and contribution of the program to progress towards long-term development proved
misplaced because the World Bank Group in Chile is financially small and covers only selected
areas. In these circumstances, the contribution of the program to development outcomes is
limited, difficult to determine and highly conditional on events or decisions that the program
does not control or influence. The Completion Report effort to retrofit the results framework
shows that the focus should be on outcomes lower level than development goals. Hence, the
48

results framework for the next CPS should focus on lower level impact indicators that best
capture the contribution of the program, which is likely to become even more focused on
knowledge products.
73.
Make the CPS design consistent with a flexible approach. Flexible aspects of the CPS
program worked well. The success of the Joint Studies Program, with annual programming
responding to emerging priorities is perhaps the best example of flexibility contributing timely
inputs to government policy decisions. Fee for services are another example of demand driven
cooperation that has worked well. The implementation of CPS under review shows that a
knowledge intensive program can help the authorities advance institutional reform initiatives,
like was the case in transportation, social assistance, education, public financial management and
innovation. As these aspects become dominant, the challenge for the design of the CPS will be to
embed flexibility within a structured partnership framework. Meeting these challenges will
require a continuous dialogue on the areas of engagement with a periodic updating of the
program to reflect new activities and their expected contribution. In addition, mechanisms are
needed to assure the quality of the services provided and products delivered as well as an
accurate recording of the results achieved.
74.
The Bank should make greater headway in the use of country systems when the risk
associated with governance and public finance management in countries are low like they are
in Chile. The limited headway in the use of countries in higher middle income countries
artificially limits the capacity of the Bank to establish closer country partnerships through
lending. It is advisable therefore that the Bank uses the limited number of coming projects
during the next CPS to work closely with the client to better reflect the situation of a country like
Chile fixing procurement and other financial management arrangements. Effective solutions that
enable an effective implementation of projects with due consideration for Bank procurement
policy will not only increase the effectiveness of Bank interventions but will serve to open
options for future engagement.
Find a way to share Chile’s development experience and lessons. Future WBG
75.
engagement in Chile should focus on creating mechanism that help channel the Chilean
successful experiences in the transformation that has gone into turning Chile into a high middle
income country as well as the current efforts to meet the challenges to move to developed
income status. In this regard, continued Bank Group involvement with Chile is a win-win
proposition as the transfer of Chile’s experience in results-based budgeting, social protection and
tertiary education reform shows.

49

Appendix 1a: Chile Country Partnership Strategy FY07-FY10
Results Matrix as of June, 2010
GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT GOAL I: ACCELERATE CONVERGENCE WITH OECD INCOME LEVELS
RESULT AREA I – INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC SERVICES

Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s
Action Plan that the CPS supported

Outputs of the CPS program

Instruments and Partners

 Efficient use of public resources and
increased transparency, competition and
citizen participation in the contracting and
concession of public works

 Support to the Ministry of Public Works (MPW)’s Reform and the
elaboration of Competitiveness Plans for all regions in Chile
 Support to draft the new Concessions Law, approved by Congress in
January 2010
 Web-based system to monitor 21 road concessions according to quality
indicators is operating.
 A draft law to create a Metropolitan Transport Authority was
submitted to Congress
 Transantiago improved the air quality in Santiago city: greenhouse gas
emission were reduced by 10.5 percent between 2006 and 2009
 A study to design an Action Plan to mitigate Transantiago’s negative
effects on street vendors is close to completion and a study on
organizational improvements for Transantiago is ongoing
 A study to develop a methodology to analyze the economic and
financial standing of bus operators was completed.
 Pilot projects developed to improve the quality and efficiency of the
transport system
 Regional development study supported territorial development
initiatives
 29 territorial development plans (PMDTs) have been prepared and
works are under implementation.

Ministry of Public Works (DPL, FY07FY08)

 Efficient and sustainable urban transport
system for Metropolitan Santiago

 Increased effectiveness and productive use
of sustainable infrastructure services

 Promotion of innovative renewable and
thermal energy projects

 IFC investments have increased renewable generating capacity by 220
MW, as well as pioneering new technologies and financing tools for the
industry

50

Ministry of Public Works (TAL, FY08FY14)
Ministry of Public Works
Santiago Urban Transport (TAL, FY06FY12)
Sustainable Transport and Air Quality for
Santiago (GEF, FY04 – FY10)
Transantiago

Infrastructure for Territorial Development
(SIL, FY05 – FY12)
SUBDERE.
IFC invested and mobilize from third party
investors a total of US$596.5 million in
energy projects since 2007.

RESULT AREA II – PUBLIC SECTOR STRENGTHENING

Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s
Action Plan that the CPS supported
 Strengthened public financial management,
budget formulation and execution,
transparency, and accountability

Outputs of the CPS program
 SIGFE was implemented in 159 out of 190 government agencies
within the central government
 178 agencies and 91 government programs were evaluated between
2002 and 2006 on their expenditure management efficiency using
monitoring and evaluation tools developed by DIPRES
 A study on Public Policy Evaluation Agencies as input to consolidate
Chile’s system of results-based financing, monitoring, and evaluation of
public expenditures.
 A programmatic studies on public sector management delivered to
inform policy debate
 Assessment of Chile’s social security reform management

Instruments and Partners
Public Expenditure Management (SIL,
FY03-FY07)
Public Expenditure Management II (SIL,
FY08-FY13)
DIPRES - SIGFE
Public Policy Evaluation Agencies Phases I
& II (JSP, FY09-FY10)
Improvement of Public Sector Services
Phases I & II (JSP, FY09-FY10)
Management of Chile’s Social Security
Reform (JSP, FY10)
DIPRES

RESULT AREA III – SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND ENVIRONMENT

Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s
Action Plan that the CPS supported
 Sustainable management of natural
resources

Outputs of the CPS program
 Ongoing project aimed at providing financial support through a
market-based mechanism for private investment in the power sector
that reduce global greenhouse gas emission.
 Transantiago improved the air quality in Santiago city: greenhouse gas
emission were reduced by 10.5 percent between 2006 and 2009
 A methodology to optimize the use of resources allocated to review
compliance with environmental regulations
 Indicators on the efficiency of policies and actions to guarantee
compliance with regulations developed.

51

Instruments and Partners
Quilleco Hydropower Project (PCF, FY11FY13)
COLBÚN, S.A.
Sustainable Transport and Air Quality for
Santiago (GEF, FY04 – FY10)
Environmental Compliance Strategy (JSP,
FY09)
CONAMA

GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT GOAL II: IMPROVE QUALITY OF EDUCATION
RESULT AREA IV – IMPROVE QUALITY OF EDUCATION

Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s
Action Plan that the CPS supported
 Strengthened education quality assurance
system

Outputs of the CPS program

Instruments and Partners

 Analytical support to contribute to education reform aimed at creating
a new institutional education system, including the establishment of
the new agencies for education quality assurance the Superintendence
of Education and the Quality Evaluation Agency
 Joint Bank–OECD assessment of the tertiary education system in the
Bio Bio Region to inform policy discussions on potential
contributions of the tertiary education to the regional private sector
development and innovation capacity.

Management Models and Development of
New Education Institutions in Chile (JSP,
FY09-FY10)
Tertiary
Education
and
Regional
Development Strategy for the Bio Bio
Region (Joint Study with OECD, FY10)
Government of the Region of Bío Bio; Innova Bío
Bío; The Regional Council for Science and
Technology (CORECYT)

 Technical assistance to implement the education quality assurance
institutional reform
 Analytical support to inform key policy decisions on institutional
change related to tertiary education systems (e.g. unequal access,
marked segmentation, inflexible curricula, financing practices, and
governance and management systems) and recommendations to
improve it .
 Joint Bank–OECD assessment of the foreign scholarship program
Becas Chile and recommendations to going forward delivered.
 Assessment of the global evidence and Chile’s current service delivery,
institutional arrangements, quality assurance, financing, and sector
coordination in Early Child Development (ECD) policies
 Analytical support to provide recommendations on policy options
regarding the use of Information and Communications Technologies
(ICT) in primary and secondary education.
 Life-long learning policies and training
systems launched

 Technical assistance to establish the foundation for an articulated,
extended lifelong learning and training system to benefit illiterate
adults
 Support to the Contigo Aprendo, a literacy program targeting young

52

Technical
Collaboration
for
the
Implementation and Evaluation of the
School Preferential Subsidy (JSP, FY09FY10)
Review of Tertiary Education System in
Chile (Joint OECD Study, FY09)
A Review of Chile’s Higher Education
Scholarships Program (Joint Study with
OECD, FY10)
Institutional Framework for Early Child
Development in Chile (JSP, FY10)
ICT Policy in Chilean Primary and
Secondary Education (JSP, FY10)

Lifelong Learning and Training – Chile
Califica (SIL, FY02 – FY10)
Ministry of Education, National Employment
and Training Agency, Fundacion Chile



 Improved accountability of tertiary
education system to enhance effectiveness
of public funds








adults and illiterate adults which benefited 100,000 adults between
2003 and 2009.
Support to the design of the National Labor Competency Certification
System, which benefited about 100,000 individuals with certified
training
Five universities are operating under performance agreements aimed
at stimulating institutional effectiveness in critical areas
Students enrolled in national PhD programs increased by 60 percent
between 2005 and 2009
Undergraduate students in accredited programs or in the process of
being accredited increased from 25 percent to 45 percent between
2006 and 2009.
Support to refurbish the Universidad Diego Portales’ facilities.
Increased enrolment rates of students from middle- and lower-income
families through student loan programs.

Tertiary Education Finance for Results
Project (1st Phase APL, FY06 – FY10)
Mecesup

IFC invested US$6.9 million in a tertiary
education institution and provided US$49.3
million for a student loan program
Universidad Diego Portales & Duoc

GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT GOAL III: PROVIDE EFFECTIVE PROTECTION AGAINST POVERTY FOR CHILEAN ACROSS THE
INCOME SPECTRUM
RESULT AREA V – ENHANCING SOCIAL PROTECTION POLICIES

Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s
Action Plan that the CPS supported
 Increased access to safety nets and to
social services for the poor

Outputs of the CPS program

Instruments and Partners

 Support for expanding Chile Solidario, designed to support extremely
poor families and other vulnerable individuals, and Chile Crece Contigo,
the Integrated System of Protection for Young Children.

Social Protection (TAL, FY04-FY10)
MIDEPLAN
Health Human Resources Study Phases IIII (JSP, FY09-FY10)

 Multi-phase Health Human Resources Study provided conceptual
framework to identify and remove gaps in the delivery of the health
services.
 Technical Assistance on reforming the regulatory and supervisory
framework for pension funds that emphasizes efficient risk
management
 Assessment of the equality of opportunity conditions at national and
sub-national level in Chile

53

FIRST Chile Risk-based regulation of
pension funds (TA, FY07-FY10)
Index of Equality of Opportunity (ESW,
FY09)

GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT GOAL IV: TRANSFORM CHILE INTO A KNOWLEDGE ECONOMY
RESULT AREA VI – FOSTERING INNOVATION

Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s
Action Plan that the CPS supported

Outputs of the CPS program

Instruments and Partners

 Effective innovation systems and qualified
human capital in the science and
technology sector

 Increased number of PHD graduates from 144 to 222, private share
of total R&D expenditures from 34.4 percent to 48.1 percent, research
consortia from 5 to 8, and PHD scholarships to 575.

Science for the Knowledge Economy (SIL,
FY03-FY07)
National Commission for Science and
Technology (CONICYT)

 Technical assistance to NICC provided strategic proposals to improve
mechanism for facilitating technology commercialization and
technology transfer to enterprises in Chile.

Fostering Technology Transfer and
Commercialization (JSP, FY10)
National Innovation Council for Competitiveness
(NICC)
Review of challenges and response of the
agri-food and forestry innovation systems
(FBS, FY10-FY11)
MINAGRI
Promoting
Innovation
and
Competitiveness Project (SIL, FY09-FY10)
– Project was CANCELED 1/
Ministry of Finance

 Ongoing study on policy strategy to incentive agri-food and forestry
innovation systems to be delivered in FY11.

1/ This project was canceled in July 2010 by Government’s request.

54

Appendix II: Chile – CPS Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries
(FY2007-FY2010)
CPS Plan (April 24, 2007)
FY

Project

IBRD (US$m)

Status in CPS Progress Report
(September 29, 2009)
13
Status
IBRD (US$m)

Ministry of Public Works Strengthening DPL

30.0

Actual

30.0

Ministry of Public Works Strengthening TAL

5.5

Actual

11.7

Integrated Financial Management System (SIGFE) II

20.0

Actual

24.8

Innovation and Competitiveness APLII (follow up to
Science and Knowledge Economy)

25.0

Actual14

To be Determined

85.0

No lending in FY2009

2007

2008

2009
Subtotal
FY2007-2009

165.5 15
CPS Progress Report Plan
(September 29, 2009)
Social Protection TA Additional Financing

3.0

Tertiary Education Financing APL2

10.0

30.0
0.0
96.5

June 30, 2010
Actual

3.0

2010
Subtotal
FY2010

13.0

Total
FY2007-FY2010

3.0
99.5

13

Actual, Dropped or Forwarded to a different FY.
Name of the Project was changed to Promoting Innovation and Competitiveness
15
The CPS also proposed an amount of US$85 in lending to be determined for FY2010.
14

55

Appendix III: Chile – Planned Nonlending Services and Actual Deliveries
Joint Annual Studies Program
Areas of Bank
Support

FY2009

FY2010

Innovation

Planned
FY2011
Institutionalizing
Agroindustrial Innovation
An analysis of public sector
agencies responsible for
agroindustrial innovation
(research, forestry and natural
resources), and the design of
an institutional strategy to
promote innovation.

Infrastructure
Services

and

Public

Public Sector Management

Sustainable
Development
and Environment

Education

Public
Policy
Evaluation
Agencies
A comparative study on the
international experience in
agencies responsible for
evaluating public policies

Public
Policy
Evaluation
Agencies, Phase 2
A continuation of Phase 1, with
recommendations regarding
application of international
experience to the Chilean
context.

Gestion de La Calidad PMG
An evaluation of the
Government’s Programas de
Mejoramiento de La Gestion en
los Servicios Públicos (PMG),
and an international seminar to
present results.

Gestion de La Calidad PMG,
Phase 2
An Executive Summary for
disseminating the PMG and a
report containing and analysis of
quality management, together
with recommendations for the
design of a next phase.

Environmental
Compliance
Strategy
The design of a strategy that
combines positive incentives
and enforcement mechanisms to
ensure an adequate adherence
of key productive sectors to
environmental priorities and
regulations.
Higher
Education
Report
w/OECD
A critical input in defining the
médium-term strategy for
higher education in Chile.

Preferential School Subsidy
The development of a

Modernizacion de La Gestion
Púbica
An analysis of management of
information technology in the
reform of pension
administration.
MINIAGRI Review
A review of the Public
Technological Institutes attached
to the Ministry of Agriculture.

International
Institutional
Models for Early Childhood
Education
An international comparison of
the institutional framework for
early childhood education in
Chile and in México, New
Zealand and Sweden.
International Best-Practice in

56

Gestion de La Calidad PMG,
Phase 3
Insurance Sector Review

Water Resources Study

System Analysis of Tertiary
Education Student Financial
Support
Analysis of existing student
aid grant and loan programs
and their efficiency and
efficacy
in
promoting
equitable access to tertiary
education. Recommendations
will help consolidate and

monitoring and evaluation
system that will support impact
evaluation for the newly
established preferential school
subsidy introduced for students
from socioeconomically
disadvantaged backgrounds.

Programs to Increase Access to
Computers
A survey of international
experience with programs to
increase access to computers.

Design of Education
Institutions
The design of a new
institutional structure for the
educational sector that will
address challenges such as
improving quality and ensuring
an efficient use of the increased
funding for primary and
secondary education

Design of Education Institutions,
Phase 2
A continuation of Phase 1,
providing an in-depth analysis at
the design and implementation
of quality assurance systems in
selected OECD systems, and
drawing lessons for Chile

Índex of Equity of Opportunity
A diagnostic of the equality of
opportunity conditions at the
national and sub-national level
in Chile.
Health Human Resources Study
A gap analysis of the various
medical speciallties to ensure a
proper supply of specialists in
the public health system.

student

aid

Preferential School Subsidy,
Phase 2
Refinement of methodology to
evaluate the impact of the
Preferential School Subsidy
Program and apply it to observe
first-year effects of the program.
Foreign Scholarship
w/OECD

Social Protection

streamline
programs.

Review

Bio Bio Tertiary Education
Review w/OECD
Health
Human
Resources,
Phases 2 and 3
A continuation of Phase 1.
Phase 2 consists of an analysis
of gaps between supply and
demand for medical specialists
in Chile. Phase 3 consists of an
analysis of implicit and explicit
incentive in the health system,
their coherence and consistency
with the policy objectives, and
their sustainability in light of the
market conditions in the short
and long term.

57

Improvements
Financing

in

Health

Appendix IV: Ratings for Projects that Exited the Portfolio during CPS Period
Project

Outcome Rating

Risk to DO
Rating

Bank
Performance

Borrower
Performance

Satisfactory

Moderate

Satisfactory

Satisfactory

Moderately
Satisfactory

Significant

Moderately
Satisfactory

Moderately
Satisfactory

Satisfactory

Moderate

Satisfactory

Satisfactory

IEG

Satisfactory

Moderate

Satisfactory

Satisfactory

Lifelong Learning
and Training

Satisfactory

Moderate

Satisfactory

Satisfactory

NA

NA

NA

NA

Moderately
Satisfactory

Moderate

Moderately
Satisfactory

Moderately
Satisfactory

NA

NA

NA

NA

Moderately
Satisfactory

Moderate

Moderately
Satisfactory

Moderately
Satisfactory

IEG

NA

NA

NA

NA

the

Satisfactory

Low or
Negligible

Satisfactory

Satisfactory

IEG

Moderately
Satisfactory

Negligible to Low

Satisfactory

Satisfactory

MPW DPL

IEG

Public
Expenditure
Management I

IEG

Santiago
Urban
Transport DPL

IEG

Sustainable
Transport Air
Quality for
Santiago

Science for
Knowledge
Economy

58

Appendix V: Areas of Engagement: Ongoing, Agreed and under Consideration
At the time of the CPS Consideration, and actual during period (FY2007-2010)
Proposed in CPS

Proposed Áreas of
Cooperation
Innovation and
Business Climate

Country Development
Goals
Transform Chile into a
knowledge economy.
Follow lead of other
resource rich and open
countries, Finland, New
Zealand and Australia.
Diversify beyond exports
of copper, and other
commodities to software
and knowledge.

Portfolio and Lending

Ongoing
Science for the
Knowledge Economy
(APL I)

Actual during CPS Period
FY2007-2010

AAA/non-lending
technical advice

Portfolio and Lending

Agreed w/Government
Institutionalizing
Agroindustrial Innovation

Ongoing
Science for the Knowledge
Economy (APL I) – Closed
on March 31, 2007

Agreed w/Government
Innovation and
Competitiveness

New Lending
Promoting Innovation and
Competitveness (FY2008)

AAA/non-lending technical
advice
ESW
FFS
Governance
of
National
Innovation System (FY2008)
Credit
Reporting
System
(FY2008)
Fostering Technology Transfer
(FY2009)
CORFO Evaluation of Foreign
Investment Program (FY2010)
JSP
Other NLTA

Infrastructure and
Public Services

Increase access of all
Chileans to public
services and boost
competitveness.
Housing: By 2014
ensure adequate housing
for all families.
Transport: Build a
system that is more
accessible, efficient and
clean.
Energy: Establish
greater energy

Ongoing
Infrastructure for
Territorial Development
Transantiago Urban
Transport TA
Sustainable Transport and
Air Quality (GEF)
Quilleco Hydropower
(GEF)

Agreed w/Government
Contingent Liabilities and
Transport Concessions
(FFS)

Ongoing
Infrastructure for
Territorial Development
Transantiago Urban
Transport TA
Quilleco Hydropower
(GEF)
Hornitos (GEF)
Chacabuquito Hydropower
(GEF)

ESW
Regional Development Study
(FY2008)
FFS
Advisory Services for Study of
Railroad (FY2008)
JSP
Other NLTA

Hornitos (GEF)
Chacabuquito

New Lending
Ministry of Public Works
Strengthening DPL
(FY2007)

The IFC is financing
renewable energy with

59

Proposed in CPS

Proposed Áreas of
Cooperation

Public Sector
Strengthening

Country Development
Goals

Portfolio and Lending

independence, by
reducing barriers to
investment and through
the use of alternative fuel
sources.

two projects already in
portfolio and a solid
pipeline of conventional
and non-conventional
renewable energy projects

Continue
modernization of the
state for better service
to the citizen.
Reduce the
concentration of Power
in Santiago, give
greater voice and
participation to
citizens, and empower
local governments to
respond to local
challenges.

Agreed w/Government
Institutional
Strengthening: Ministry
of Public Works (DPL)
Institutional
Strengthening: Ministry
of Public Works (TA)
Ongoing
Integrated Financial
Management System
Project (SIGFE)
Juvenile Justice (IDF)
Agreed w/Government
Integrated Financial
Management System
Project (SIGFE) II

AAA/non-lending
technical advice

Actual during CPS Period
FY2007-2010
Portfolio and Lending

AAA/non-lending technical
advice

Ministry of Public Works
Strengthening TA
(FY2007)

Ongoing
Risk Based Financial
Sector Oversight
Framework (FFS, FIRST)
(i) Implementing RiskBased Supervision in the
Securities Industry
(ii) Roadmap for
Strengthening Solvency
Control in the Insurance
Industry
(iii) Risk-Based
Regulatory and
Supervisory Framework
for Pension Funds
Managing Financial
Assets of the State (FFS)
Agreed w/Government
Regional Development
Strategy for the Tarapaca
(I) and Arica-Parinacota

60

Ongoing
Integrated Financial
Management System
project (SIGFE) – Closed
on June 30, 2007
Juvenile Justice (IDF) –
Closed on February 9 2010
New Lending
Integrated Financial
Management System
Project (SIGFE) II
(FY2008)
Strengthening Chile’s
Council for Transparency
for Improved Transparency
and Accountability (IDF)
(FY2010)

ESW
FFS
Management of Financial Assets
(FY2008)
Evaluation of Management
Enhancement Programs
(FY2008)
JSP
Public Policy Evaluation
Agencies (FY2009)
Gestión de la Calidad PMG
(FY2009)
Public Policy Evaluation
Agencies, Phase 2 (FY2010)
Gestión de la Calidad, Phase 2
(FY2010)

Proposed in CPS

Proposed Áreas of
Cooperation

Country Development
Goals

Portfolio and Lending

AAA/non-lending
technical advice

Actual during CPS Period
FY2007-2010
Portfolio and Lending

(XV) regions (ESW)
Impact Evaluation of
Chile’s Management
Enhancement Program
TA (FFS)

Sustainable
Development and the
Environment

Education

Develop a policy
framework that is
compatible to economic
growth, protection of
natural resources, and
greater social equity.
Agriculture: Support the
Government’s dual
objective of becoming
the tenth largest
agricultural exporter
while achieving
inclusion of médium and
small farmers.
Environment: Implement
a concept of sustainable
development.

Improve quality
education.

of

Ongoing
Sustainable Land
Management Project
(GEF)
Sustainable Transport and
Air Quality for Santiago
(GEF)
Reduction of Ozone (MP)

Under Consideration
Credit Reporting System
(JSP)
Under Consideration
Capacity Building for
Civil Society
Organizations to
Contribute to
Development Planning

Under Consideration
National Biodiversity
Cluster (GEF)
Development of
Ecological Services
Market (GEF)
Climate Change
Adaptation in Water
Resource Management
(GEF)
Biodiversity in
Infrastructure Planning:
Biodiversity Cluster
(GEF)
Ongoing
Tertiary Education

AAA/non-lending technical
advice
Modernización de la Gestión
Pública (FY2010)
Other NLTA
Global Cat Mutual Bond Risk
Model (FY2009)

Ongoing
Sustainable Land
Management Project (GEF)
– Closed on December 31,
2007
Sustainable Transport and
Air Quality for Santiago
(GEF) – Closed September
30, 2009
Reduction of Ozone (MP) –
Closed on June 30, 2007

Risk-based Insurance Supervision
(FY2009)
ESW
FFS
JSP
Environmental Compliance
Strategy (FY2009)
MINIAGRI Review (FY2010)
Other NLTA
Remote Sensing Damage
Assessment (FY2010)
PCB Decommissioning and
Disposal Plan (FY2010)

New Lending
Quilleco Hydropower
Project (PCF)
Under Consideration
Review of higher

61

Ongoing
Tertiary Education Finance

ESW
Education Quality Assurance

Actual during CPS Period
FY2007-2010

Proposed in CPS

Proposed Áreas of
Cooperation

Social Protection

Country Development
Goals

Portfolio and Lending

Enable the education
system to replace
socioeconomic origins as
the key factor in the
future of children.

Finance for Results
(APL I)
Lifelong Learning and
Training Project

Provide effective
protection against
poverty for Chileans
across the income
spectrum.

Ongoing
Social Protection TA
Capacity Development for
Legal Practicioners in
Gender Equality (IDF)

Chile Solidário: extend
social assistance to a

AAA/non-lending
technical advice

Portfolio and Lending

AAA/non-lending technical
advice

education w/ OECD (JSP)
Non-lending technical
advice on Reform of
Ministry of Education and
Superintendency (JSP)

for Results

(FY2007)

(APL I)

FFS

Lifelong Learning and
Training Project – Closed
on December 31, 2009

JSP
Higher Education Report
w/OECD (FY2009)
Preferential School Subsidy
(FY2009)
Design of Education Institutions
(FY2009)
International Institutional Models
for Early Childhood Education
(FY2009)
International Best-Practice
Programs to Increase Access to
Computers (FY2010)
Design of Education Institutions,
Phase 2 (FY2010)
Preferential School Subsidy,
Phase 2 (FY2010)
Foreign Scholarship Review
w/OECD (fy2010)
Bio Bio Tertiary Education
(FY2010)
Other NLTA

Under Consideration
Non-lending TA on
evaluation of Chile Crece
Contigo (JSP)
Continued Impact
Evaluation of Chile
Solidário (JSP)

Ongoing
Social Protection TA –
Closed on December 31,
2009
Capacity Development for
Legal Practicioners in
Gender Equality (IDF) –
Closed on July 18, 2007

ESW

62

FFS
JSP
Índex of Equity of Opportunity
(FY2009)
Health Human Resources Study

Proposed in CPS

Proposed Áreas of
Cooperation

Country Development
Goals

Portfolio and Lending

AAA/non-lending
technical advice

Actual during CPS Period
FY2007-2010
Portfolio and Lending

broader class of the poor.
New Lending
Social Protection TA
Additional Financing
(FY2010)
Institutional Strengthening
of Mining Sector for
Indigenous Peoples
Inclusion (IDF) (FY2010)

Plan Auge: ubcrease
access to health services;
increase illnesses
covered.
Pension System: provide
universal minimum
pension.

“Under Consideration” signifies that there were ongoing discussions with the relevant ministries at the time the CPS was prepared.
ESW – Formal ESW
FFS – Fee for Service
JSP – Joint Studies Program
NLTA – Non-lending Technical Assistance

63

AAA/non-lending technical
advice
(FY2009)
Health Human Resources Study,
Phases 2 and 3 (FY2010)
Other NLTA
Gender Equity in Private Sector
(FY2009)
Pension Fund Supervision TA
(FY2010)

Appendix VI: Reference Documents

Country Partnership Strategy for Chile, 2007-2010, Report No. 38691-CL
Implementation Completion and Results Report:
 Institutional Strengthening of the Ministry of Public Works Development Policy
Loan, Report No. ICR00001064 dated June 29, 2009
 Sustainable Transport and Air Quality for Santiago (GEF), Report No. ICR00001317
dated March 24, 2010
 Lifelong Learning and Training Project, Report No. ICR1390 dated September 3,
2010
 First Public Expenditure Management Project, Report No. 0000629 dated December
7, 2007
 Santiago Urban Transport Programmatic Development Policy Loan, Report No.
ICR0000631 dated August 11, 2009
 Science for the Knowledge Economy, Report No. ICR0000491 dated September 26,
2007
Project Appraisal Documents for ongoing projects
Implementation Status Reports for ongoing projects
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report for the Republic of Chile, Report No. 50878CL dated September 29, 2009
Aide Memoires/Letters to the Government dated July 16, 2008 (with reference to portfolio
review), December 15, 2008 (with reference to JSP), undated (with reference to 2008 review
of JSP), June 4, 2009 (with reference to 2008 JSP) and undated (with reference to 2009
review of JSP).

64

Annex 3

Chile at a glance

1/11/11

Key Development Indicators

Chile

(2009)

Latin
America
& Carib.

Upper
middle
income

Age distribution, 2008
Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

17.0
1.0
89

566
20,422
1.1
79

993
48,659
0.9
75

160.6
9,470
13,430

3,865
6,826
10,496

7,352
7,405
12,763

-1.5
-2.5

4.3
3.1

4.1
3.2

<2
2
79
7
1

8
17
73
20
4

..
..
71
20
..

99
99
108
103

92
90
118
114

95
92
111
110

96
96

93
79

95
84

756

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)
GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34
15-19
0-4
6

4

2

0

2

4

6

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2003–2009)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1990

1995

Chile

Net Aid Flows

(US$ millions)

Net ODA and official aid

1980

1990

2000

2009

-11

104

49

73

-6
-5
0

20
6
6

22
9
-2

20
9
7

0.0
-1

0.3
8

0.1
3

0.0
4

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

35.1
28.8

40.9
22.3

4.5
4.6

-1.4
4.2

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

39.0
..

304.9
..

539.5
100

559.6
172

Top 3 donors (in 2008):
Germany
France
Spain

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)
Long-Term Economic Trends

2000

2007

Latin America & the Caribbean

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
95

05

GDP

GDP per capita

1980–90 1990–2000

2000–09

(average annual growth %)

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

11.2
27,572

13.2
31,982

15.4
75,404

17.0
163,669

1.7
8.1

1.6
6.6

1.1
4.1

5.9
3.5
3.4
2.9

2.2
4.4
-0.6
8.8

6.2
6.3
7.3
9.0

8.0

..
..
9.5

5.5
4.8
7.7

12.3
5.6

9.4
11.7

5.6
10.5

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

7.3
37.4
21.5
55.3

8.7
41.5
19.6
49.8

5.9
37.0
18.7
57.1

3.3
42.1
12.7
54.6

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

70.7
12.5
21.0

63.4
9.9
23.4

64.5
12.2
21.4

59.8
13.4
19.0

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

22.8
27.0
13.5

33.5
30.1
22.0

31.5
29.7
19.9

38.1
30.4
21.6

-3.3
-0.7

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2008.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

65

Chile
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2009
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services
Current account balance
as a % of GDP

19,210
18,466
1,400

53,736
42,428
12,907

Voice and accountability

-897
-1.2

4,218
2.6

Regulatory quality

Political stability

Rule of law

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

13

Reserves, including gold

15,110

4

Control of corruption

25,371

0
2009

Central Government Finance

2000

(% of GDP)

Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

21.3
16.3
18.6

20.1
14.6
19.8

Overall surplus/deficit

-0.7

-4.4

..
15

40
17

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

25

50

75

100

Country' s percentile rank (0-100)
higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

Technology and Infrastructure
Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

2000

2008

18.4

..

43

109

3.4

6.2

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment

(US$ millions)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)
Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

37,261
6,173
–

71,646
15,283
–

49.4
24.6

43.8
20.1

4,860
-427

12,702
316

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)

IMF, 0

IBRD, 200

IDA, 2

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

3.9

4.3

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

6.2

7.0

World Bank Group portfolio

Bilateral, 211

Short-term,
14,910

18.8

52,607
..

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

Other multilateral, 591

56,020

21
21.8

12.6

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

Composition of total external debt, 2008

20
21.3
..

1,700

2000

1,851
2009

(US$ millions)

Private, 48,383

US$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Access to/cost of financing
Labor regulations
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2009

–
–
–
2000

80.1
7.5

808
48
115
70

215
29
14
6

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

7
0
1

1
0
1

139
123
5

559
240
149

37

13

57
0

10
0

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account

27
6.9
31
2009

..
..

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

27.1
25.4

MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

128.0

6.9

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

66

1/11/11

Millennium Development Goals

Chile

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Chile

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
4.4
..
3.4
..

1995

2000
<2

2008

3.5
..

4.1

..
98
83

94
95
91

35

100
36
11

99
37

11
9
97

<2
19.9
3.5

..

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

..
..
78
..

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

101
35
..

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

22
18
97

16
13
97

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

56
..
56

40
100
..

0.1
38
120

0.2
27
110

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

77

<2

17.0

..
..

0.5

99

..

101
8

99

15

9
7
92

29

26

100

100
58

..

0.3

0.3
19
100

90
84
20.5
..
2.6
6.3

92
88
20.9
..
3.0
7.0

94
92
21.3
..
3.9
6.2

6.6
0.1
0.0
0.9

12.6
1.4
0.3
3.3

21.4
22.1
16.6
9.2

11
130

96
96

21.8

18.8

4.3
7.0

21.0
88.1
32.5

14.1

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125

100

120

100

..

100
75

75

80

50

60

50

25

40
25

0

20
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary education

Chile

Latin America & the Caribbean

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

67

Fixed + mobile subscr ibers

Internet users

1/11/11
01/11/11

Annex 4
Chile
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 11/25/2010

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2008

2009

2010

2011

9
3.1
11.1
2.0
22.2
14.5
17.8

8
3.8
12.5
2.4
12.5
2.4
21.4

6
4.2
33.3
30.8
33.3
30.8
24.3

5
5.0
20.0
11.1
20.0
11.1
22.5

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
46
4
48.6
3,176.4
8.7
0.0
9.6
0.0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

68

Annex 5

Chile Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2002-08

Latin
America
& Carib.

Uppermiddleincome

12.1
1.6
82.6
2.7

14.4
1.8
84.4
2.4

16.8
1.0
88.4
1.9

566.1
1.2
78.6
2.2

949.3
0.8
74.8
2.0

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

1,420
15
16

4,330
68
83

9,370
117
106

6,768
123
..

7,852
121
..

..
..
..

55.2
3.5
59.4

52.0
4.1
56.8

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
3.8

..
2.7

3.7
3.4

3.4
3.6

3.5
4.6

..
..
..

89
90
88

94
95
94

94
93
93

94
94
93

..
..
..

92
99
57

95
98
72

91
97
73

94
98
82

92
99
..

97
94
..

92
96
1

93
91
4

93
92
4

72
69
75

75
72
78

79
76
82

73
70
77

71
68
75

23
27

13
16

7
9

20
23

19
23

218
120
..
..

169
85
..
100

129
64
16
100

192
104
130
90

210
127
110
95

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 23 April 2010.

69

Annex 6
Chile - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

2004
100.0
4.6

Actual
2005
2006
100.0
4.4

2007

100.0
4.0

Estimate
2009

2008

100.0
3.8

100.0
3.5

100.0
3.3

Industry

39.9

42.0

47.1

47.3

43.9

42.1

Services

55.6

53.5

48.9

48.9

52.6

54.6

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

70.8
19.3
2.3
17.0

69.3
21.2
1.8
19.3

64.9
19.0
2.0
17.1

65.5
19.8
2.3
17.4

71.0
24.4
..
..

73.2
21.4
..
..

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

40.8
31.6

41.3
32.8

45.8
30.7

47.2
33.2

44.8
40.9

38.1
30.4

Gross domestic savings

29.2

30.7

35.1

34.5

29.0

26.8

Gross national savingsc

22.2

23.4

24.9

25.1

23.2

21.6

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 03 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income

95,653

118,250

146,773

164,315

170,850

163,669

4,970

5,940

6,890

8,160

9,400

9,380

6.0
14.2

5.6
9.8

4.6
16.3

4.6
6.0

3.7
-5.1

-1.5
-0.2

4.9
5.9
6.1

4.4
6.0
6.2

3.5
5.9
6.0

3.6
5.9
5.9

2.7
2.9
3.6

-2.5
0.8
-0.1

Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB

38,554
32,520

48,401
41,267

66,511
58,680

76,934
67,972

77,249
66,464

62,242
53,735

Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

29,715
22,935
8,839
1,072
2,074

38,248
30,492
10,153
1,783
1,449

44,362
35,900
22,149
3,406
7,154

53,980
44,031
22,953
3,123
7,488

69,273
57,617
7,976
2,924
-3,653

49,335
39,754
12,907
1,616
4,218

5,610
13,547
-105
13,652
-21,422

4,801
15,836
-196
16,032
-20,370

5,127
24,390
51
24,339
-34,674

9,961
21,520
6
21,514
-42,183

7,194
29,811
-129
29,940
-26,907

4,719
29,654
..
..
-36,943

191

-1,716

-1,997

3,214

-6,444

-1,648

9.2

8.6

15.1

14.0

4.7

7.9

14.9
74.4
15.0
20.0

4.7
32.6
10.7
21.3

2.2
54.7
5.1
11.5

6.9
16.9
5.3
17.5

-0.5
-9.0
2.8
15.0

-4.6
-18.4
-10.0
-17.9

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 03 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR03 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

70

Chile - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator
Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure

2004

Actual
2005
2006

Estimate
2008

2007

Projected
2009

22.1
16.8
5.3
5.3

23.9
16.1
7.8
7.7

25.9
15.1
10.8
10.7

27.0
15.4
11.7
11.6

25.7
17.1
8.6
8.6

20.1
19.8
0.3
0.3

72.4
8.2
119.3

69.9
9.6
138.1

66.3
11.5
209.4

68.5
14.1
111.4

77.5
17.6
188.9

75.7
0.2
-236.1

Price indices( YR03 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index

149.8
164.9
90.9

181.6
179.5
101.2

252.6
188.8
133.7

273.7
197.4
138.7

268.8
225.3
119.3

227.8
188.0
121.2

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

86.9

91.9

96.7

95.2

97.3

95.2

2.4
7.5

3.7
7.6

2.6
12.4

7.8
5.5

7.1
0.3

-1.4
4.2

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

71

Annex 7
Chile - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

2005
45,446

Actual
2007

2006
48,052

56,443

Estimated
2010

2008

2009

64,297

71,646

58,105

Projected
2012

2011
52,579

46,135

2013
40,501

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)

2979
7,688

347
13,793

3830
11,552

0
2,023

0
1,672

0
1,676

0
1,467

0
1,337

0
1,004

(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb

84.7

63.4

62.2

71.1

94.2

..

..

..

TDO/GDP

38.4

32.7

34.4

37.6

43.8

..

..

..

TDS/XGS

14.3

18.2

12.7

2.2

2.2

..

..

..

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.3

IBRD DS/public DS

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Preferred creditor DS/public

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

#DIV/0!

Concessional/TDO

..

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d

0.4
289

0.0
346

0.0
354

0.2
200

0.0
215

..
170

..
121

115

108

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

IDA TDO (US$m)d

3.8

3.1

2.4

1.7

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

72

Annex 8
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 11/25/2010

Closed Projects

70

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid

74.66
9.67
479.92
1,036.97
554.58
1,046.64

Total Undisbursed (Active)

30.61

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

30.61

Difference Between

Active Projects
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Project ID

Project Name

P103441
P076807
P086689
P082037
P102931
Overall Result

CL Public Expenditure ManaS
CL-Infrastructure for Territor S
CL-Santiago Urban Transpo MS
CL-Social Protection TA LoaS
CL-TAL Min of Public WorksMU

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

S
S
MS
MS
MU

2008
2005
2006
2004
2007

73

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions
IBRD

24.8
50.26
4.8
13.71
11.7
105.27

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

6.283289
7.549276
3.310638
2.9925
10.47645
30.61216

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0.5099559
7.5492762
3.3106379
-0.0075
9.3097856
20.672156

-4.89413
1.289305
9.443119
5.838295

Annex 9

International Finance Corporation - CHILE
Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio
Amounts in US Dollar Millions as of December 31, 2010
Commitment

Institution

Fiscal Year

Short Name

2010/ 2011

Bc Internacional

2009/ 2010

CTA
Chilempack

2007/ 2010

Duoc

LN

ET

QL + QE

Cmtd - IFC Cmtd - IFC

Cmtd - IFC

GT

RM

ALL

ALL

LN

ET

QL + QE

GT

RM

ALL

ALL

Cmtd - IFC Cmtd - IFC Cmtd - IFC Cmtd - Part Out - IFC Out - IFC Out - IFC Out - IFC Out - IFC Out - IFC Out - Part

-

-

-

47.3

-

47.3

-

-

-

-

47.3

-

47.3

-

100.0

-

-

-

-

100.0

225.0

73.5

-

-

-

-

73.5

165.3

-

-

-

-

29.3

-

-

21.5

0.2

-

-

-

-

-

0.1

0.1

-

-

0.2

50.8

-

7.8

-

-

2.8

-

10.6

-

-

15.0

13.8

-

-

-

28.8

15.0

13.7

-

-

-

28.7

2007/ 2009

Hidromaule

5.3

-

3.5

-

-

8.8

9.8

5.3

-

3.5

-

-

8.8

9.8

2006

La Higuera

31.8

-

10.0

-

-

41.8

102.1

31.8

-

10.0

-

-

41.8

102.1

2008

La Confluencia

83.0

-

-

-

-

83.0

125.0

83.0

-

-

-

-

83.0

125.0

2006

Lignum

-

2.7

-

-

-

2.7

-

-

2.7

-

-

-

2.7

-

2009

Norvind

29.9

-

-

-

-

29.9

29.9

29.9

-

-

-

-

29.9

29.9

2005

Proa II

-

1.6

-

-

-

1.6

-

-

0.2

-

-

-

0.2

-

2004

San Vicente

3.8

-

-

-

-

3.8

-

3.8

-

-

-

-

3.8

-

2005/ 2008/ 2009/ 2011 Factorline

2003
Total Portfolio

-

TFSA

-

1.6

-

-

-

1.6

-

-

1.6

-

-

-

1.6

-

U.Diego Portales

-

-

-

1.6

-

1.6

-

-

-

-

1.5

-

1.5

-

298.0

19.6

13.5

70.4

250.0

18.2

13.5

51.6

0.2

74

401.6

491. 7

0.1

333.4

432.0

IBRD 33386R
85°W

80°W

75°W

70°W

PERUTacna
To

XV

Iquique

I

Desert

Tocopilla

CHILE

60°W

BO LIVIA
To
Uyuni

ountains
es M

cama

And

Atta

Arica

65°W

To
La Paz
To
Corque

20°S

Calama

II

Antofagasta

PA R AGUAY

To
Salta

To
Tolar
Grande

25°S

25°S
To
Fiambalá

Copiapo

PAC I F I C OC EAN

Nevado Ojos
del Salado
(6,880 m)

III

Vallenar

La Serena

REGIONS OF CHILE
Ovalle

I. TARAPACÁ

30°S

To
Rodeo

IV

30°S

II. ANTOFAGASTA
IV. COQUIMBO

VI. LIBERTADOR GENERAL
BERNADO O’HIGGINS

Talca
Concepcíon

VII. MAULE

VII

Chillán

VIII

VIII. BIO BÍO
IX. LA ARAUCANÍA

UA

RM. REGIÓN METROPOLITANA
DE SANTIAGO

Y

To
Bardas
Blancas

A RGENT INA

35°S

To

Victoria Las Lajas

X. LOS LAGOS

IX

Temuco

XI. AISÉN DEL GENERAL CARLOS
IBÁÑEZ DEL CAMPO

Valvidia

XIV

Osorno

XII. MAGALLANES Y DE LA
ANTÁRTICA CHILENA

Puerto
Quellión

* Regions approved by cabinet and
parliament, will become effective
on October, 2007.
This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Puerto Aisén

Coihaique

XI
Puerto
Yungay

C HI LE

40°S

AT LA NT I C
O CEA N

Moun

X

XV. ARICA-PARINACOTA*

To
Nahuel Huapí

tains

Puerto Montt

XIV. LOS RÌOS*

Andes

40°S

UG

SANTIAGO

RM
VI Rancagua

V. VALPARAÍSO

35°S

To
Villa Nueva

V

Valparaíso

UR

III. ATACAMA

To
Paso
Río Mayo

45°S

0

200

0

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
REGION CAPITALS

XII

NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

400 Miles

50°S

Strait of
Magellan
To
San Sebastián

Punta
Arenas

RAILROADS

200

To
Río Gallegos

Manatiales

MAIN ROADS

600 Kilometers

400

FALKLAND ISLANDS (ISLAS MALVINAS)
A DISPUTE CONCERNING SOVEREIGNTY OVER THE
ISLANDS EXISTS BETWEEN ARGENTINA WHICH CLAIMS
THIS SOVEREIGNTY AND THE U.K. WHICH ADMINISTERS
THE ISLANDS.

REGION BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
80°W

75°W

70°W

Cape Horn
65°W

60°W

55°W

50°W
JUNE 2007

