Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 61315 - PL

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF POLAND
FOR THE PERIOD 2009-13

May 9, 2011

Poland Country Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

REPUBLIC OF POLAND
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective as of February 2011)
Currency Unit
US$1.00
2.8 PLN
EUR 1.0
3.97 PLN
FISCAL YEAR
July 1 - June 30
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

AAA
BGK
CPS
CPSPR
CEB
CEM
DPL
EC
EIB
EU
FBS
FDI
FSAP
GDP
GEF
GNI
IBRD

Analytical and Advisory Activities
State Development Bank
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy
Progress Report
Council of Europe Development
Bank
Country Economic Memorandum
Development Policy Loan
European Commission
European Investment Bank
European Union
Fee-based Services
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Sector Advisory Program
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Gross National Income
International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development

Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

IFC
IFIs
IMF
MIC
OPFs
PARSP
PCF
PER
PISA
PPPs
SCAP
SCHD
SME
TA
VAT

International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institutions
International Monetary Fund
Middle Income Countries
Open Pension Funds
Post Accession Rural Support
Project
Prototype Carbon Fund
Public Expenditure Review
Programme for International
Student Assessment
Public Private Partnerships
Subnational Cooperation Action Plan
Strategy for Human Capital
Development
Small and Medium Enterprises
Technical Assistance
Value-added Tax

Philippe Le Houérou
Peter Harrold
Thomas Blatt Laursen

The CPS Progress Report was produced by a core team led by Thomas Laursen under the overall
guidance of Peter Harrold. The preparation of the CPS Progress Report has been a team effort, which
included involvement of Kaspar Richter, Ewa Korczyc, Janet Dooley, Emilia Skrok, Anna Bokina,
Elisabetta Capannelli, Radoslaw Czapski, Gary Stuggins, Charles Griffin, John Pollner, Iwona Warzecha,
Alberto Rodriguez, Nina Arnhold, Leszek Kasek, Kirsten Propst, Natasha Kapil, Jan Rutkowski,
Valentina Martinovic, Katarzyna Popielarska, and Cathy Summers, as well as other Poland Country Team
members. The team is grateful for the cooperation on this with Government officials.

Table of Contents
1

Introduction .....................................................................................................................1

2

Recent Political and Economic Developments.................................................................2
2.1 Political Developments................................................................................................2
2.2 Economic Developments..............................................................................................2

3

Program Implementation and Progress Towards Results ..............................................3
3.1 Program Implementation .............................................................................................3
3.2 Progress towards Results ............................................................................................6
Pillar 1: Social and Spatial Inclusion ......................................................................................6
Pillar 2: Public Sector Reform ...............................................................................................7
Pillar 3: Growth and Competitiveness ....................................................................................7
Pillar 4: Regional and Global Public Goods ...........................................................................7

4.

Modifications to the CPS and Critical Partnership Issues ..............................................8
4.1 New Themes ................................................................................................................8
4.2 The General Program .................................................................................................8
4.3 Subnational Engagement .............................................................................................9
4.4 FBS Business Development .........................................................................................9
4.5 Graduation ............................................................................................................... 10

5.

Risks............................................................................................................................... 10
Annex 1: Poland: 2009-13 CPS Results Matrix .................................................................... 11
Annex 2: CPS PR Pillars and Themes FY11-13 ................................................................... 20
Annex 2b: CPS PR: Tentative Program FY11-13 ................................................................. 21
Annex 3: Subnational Cooperation Action Plan (SCAP) 2010-2012 ..................................... 22
Annex 4: Summary of Recent Key Strategic Analytical Work .............................................. 24
Annex 4a: Transition to Low-Emissions Economy in Poland ................................................ 24
Annex 4b: Poland Transport Policy Note—Toward a Sustainable Land Transport Sector ...... 25
Annex 4c: Poland Public Expenditure Review Analysis of Social and Public Wages ............. 26
Annex 4d: Europe 2020 Poland--Fueling Growth and Competitiveness through Employment,
Skills, and Innovation. ......................................................................................................... 27
Annex 5: Poland at a Glance ................................................................................................ 28
Annex 6: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ..................... 31
Annex 7: IBRD/IDA Program Summary .............................................................................. 32
Annex 8: IFC Investment Operations Program ..................................................................... 32
Annex 9: Summary of Analytical and Advisory Assistance .................................................. 33
Annex 10: Poland Social Indicators ..................................................................................... 34
Annex 11: Key Economic Indicators .................................................................................... 35
Annex 12: Key Exposure Indicators ..................................................................................... 37
Annex 13: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio ........................ 38
Annex 14: Portfolio (IBRD/IDA/Grants).............................................................................. 39

Tables and Boxes
Table 1. CPS PR 2011: Planned Versus Actual Program (FY09 June-FY11) ..............................5
Box 1. Subnational Engagement in Poland: Strategy and Experience …….……………………..4
MAP (IBRD 33467R)

POLAND
CPS PROGRESS REPORT
This CPS Progress Report (CPSPR) comes at a critical juncture for Poland, as it is about to
assume the Presidency of the European Union (EU). Central to the Bank’s program for the next
two years is achieving convergence with European living standards, particularly at the
subnational level. As such, this CPSPR maintains a strong focus on helping Poland make the
most of its EU membership. It aims to assist Poland in strengthening national and subnational
institutions and capacity. The CPSPR proposes a substantial program of knowledge and
advisory service to be delivered in part through fee-based service (FBS), complemented by a
lending program at around US$1 billion per year, expected to gradually decline. The
International Finance Corporation (IFC) will selectively seek opportunities to invest in
renewable energy and climate-friendly projects. This CPSPR also places a greater emphasis on
bolstering Poland as a global partner, not necessarily for just financing but for the knowledge
Poland can share with the region and the rest of the world. In this respect, the Bank will also
support Poland in its emerging role as a donor, and during its EU Presidency.
1

INTRODUCTION

1.
This CPSPR assesses implementation of the Bank’s 2009-13 CPS at mid-term. The
CPS was presented to the Bank’s Board in July 2009. The CPS comprises four pillars: (i) Social
and Spatial Inclusion; (ii) Public Sector Reform; (iii) Growth and Competitiveness; and (iv)
Regional and Global Public Goods. The CPS was foreseen as a flexible tool to support the
Bank’s work in Poland, in line with the strategy for middle income countries (MIC). The CPS
noted that while the Bank was a secondary partner to the EU, the Bank could continue to add
significant value to Poland’s development and convergence agenda for the years to come, while
the active policy dialogue and technical cooperation would also add value to the Bank through
enhancing its knowledge to the benefit of other client countries in the region and beyond. It was
thus a clear win-win partnership.
2.
The CPSPR finds that implementation of the Partnership so far has been broadly
successful though in some areas progress has been slower than hoped for. Notably, the
EUR3 billion Development Policy Lending (DPL) lending program, supporting policy reforms in
the areas of public finance, social sectors, and private sector development, was completed as
envisaged in June 2010, and the first operation supporting climate change mitigation —an Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy DPL—is being delivered as planned (though in a higher
amount) along with this Strategy update. Further, the envisaged Analytical and Advisory
Activities (AAA) program for FY10-11 has been fully delivered, including core strategic and
innovative studies on Poland’s transition to a low-emissions economy, employment, skills, and
innovation (Europe2020), transport policy, and public expenditures. There has also been
significant progress in developing subnational and FBS business, though the planned loan to
Warsaw City (as well as the other non-sovereign operation—a credit line for small and mediumterm enterprises (SMEs) through the Polish Development Bank (PKO) could not be delivered
and important obstacles remain to developing these new lines of business (see Box 1). The
possibility for scaling up FBS remain constrained by the Polish procurement law for competitive
tendering of advisory services, and the tight fiscal situation, unless mechanisms are further
developed to utilize the EU Structural Funds to engage the Bank for technical assistance.

1

2
2.1

R ECENT P OLITICAL AND E CONOMIC D EVELOPMENTS
Political Developments

3.
On April 10, 2010, a tragic plane crash near Smolensk in Russia changed the
political landscape in Poland. The disaster took the lives of 96 people: political, military and
religious leaders, including the President of Poland, Mr. Lech Kaczynski and the First Lady, the
President of the National Bank of Poland, as well as several Presidential officials,
parliamentarians, the heads of all the Armed Forces and the head of the General Staff, a number
of heads of other central institutions, as well as a number of respected Poles such as the former
head of the Polish Government in Exile. Following presidential elections in 2010, Mr. Bronislaw
Komorowski, the former Speaker of Parliament, became the new President of Poland. Prime
Minister Donald Tusk leads a stable and popular majority government.
4.
In the second half of 2011, general elections will take place and Poland will take on
the Presidency of the EU. General elections are scheduled for October 2011. In July 2010,
Poland’s Council of Ministers adopted a document provisionally outlining the plans of the Polish
Presidency. These will evolve in line with consultations and the final priorities will be
announced in June 2011. General priorities include Internal Market, Relations with the East,
External Energy Policy, Common Security and Defense policy, the EU 2014-19 Financial
Perspectives, and Intellectual Capital.
2.2

Economic Developments

5.
Poland has shown remarkable resilience to the global financial crisis and in 2009 it
was the only EU country to avoid a decline in economic activity. Poland grew by 1.7 percent,
while the EU declined by 4.2 percent. Poland’s economic slowdown was muted for a number of
reasons: (i) the relatively large domestic economy and limited exposure to the decline in world
trade; (ii) the flexible exchange rate regime; (iii) limited vulnerabilities in Poland’s banking
system due to slower credit growth than in other Central and Eastern Europe countries; and (iv)
the Government’s appropriate policy responses during the crisis. In 2009, Poland became a highincome country with a Gross National Income (GNI) of US$12,260.1
6.
Poland remained one of the fastest growing EU countries in 2010. Real Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 3.8 percent in 2010. While growth in 2009 was mainly
due to the positive contribution from net exports, growth in 2010 was driven by domestic factors.
The decline in private investment was largely compensated by a double-digit expansion in public
investment, stimulated in particular by use of EU funds. Inflation marginally exceeded the target
range of 1.5-3.5 percent in the first three months of 2011 for the first time since September 2009,
but is expected to drop below the 3.5 percent upper threshold towards the end of the year.
7.
Growth is expected to stabilize at around 4 percent over the next few years. The
recovery is expected to be driven by improving global conditions and revived credit growth, with
investment also supported by EU funds and improved corporate profitability and consumption
supported by declining unemployment. These factors are set to compensate for the impact of
fiscal consolidation, the end of the restocking cycle, and a declining contribution from net
exports. With domestic demand gaining strength, inflation is expected to increase from 2.6

1

(2009) Atlas Method (upper middle income US$3,946 – US$12,195; high income, US$12,196 or more). The EU
average is US$35,351.

2

percent in 2010 to 3.5 percent in 2011 and decline to 2.8 percent in 2012. The external current
account deficit is expected to remain at less than 4 percent of GDP, adequately financed by
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows and EU funding. The main upside risk to economic
prospects is a stronger-than-expected recovery in the EU, aided by buoyant growth in emerging
markets.
Downside risks include a larger-than-expected growth reduction from fiscal
consolidation, and a reversal in global capital flows in view of the large purchases of government
securities from nonresidents during the last year.
8.
Fiscal consolidation is among Poland’s main economic policy challenges. The general
government deficit doubled to 7.2 percent of GDP in 2009 from 3.6 percent of GDP in 2008, in
part due to fiscal relaxation measures of about 2 percent of GDP. In 2010, fiscal policy continued
to support recovery and the general government deficit increased to 7.9 percent of GDP. The
Government aims to reduce the fiscal deficit to 5.6 percent of GDP in 2011 and to 2.9 percent of
GDP in 2012. This would bring Poland’s general government deficit in line with the reference
value of 3 percent of GDP referred to in the Treaty.2 The reduction in the general government
deficit is influenced by three factors: limits on discretionary expenditure growth to one percent
over inflation (now reflected in legislation); a 1 percentage point value-added tax (VAT)
increase; and a planned reduction in the contribution rate to private Open Pension Funds (OPFs)
from 7.3 percent to 2.3 percent of gross wages which would reduce the fiscal deficit by about 1.2
percent of GDP by 2012. The cyclical rebound is expected to reduce social expenditures,
including on unemployment benefits, and improve tax collection.
9.
Public debt is projected to remain at sustainable levels. Strong economic recovery,
steady exchange rate appreciation, fiscal consolidation, better public sector cash management,
stepped-up privatization and strengthened public debt thresholds at local level s are projected to
be sufficient to maintain public debt below national and EU thresholds.
10.
In January 2011, Poland renewed and increased to US$30 billion a Flexible Credit
Line Arrangement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). This was a further
important signal of confidence in the Polish economy.
3
3.1

PROGRAM I MPLEMENTATION AND PROGRESS T OWARDS R ESULTS
Program Implementation

11.
The 2009 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) provided a good framework for
cooperation during FY09-11, and the Bank’s support during the crisis and for Poland’s
longer term development agenda was highly valued. The strategic pillars of engagement
remained relevant, and the macro-oriented and flexible partnership proved well-suited to help
Poland mitigate the impact of the crisis while promoting reforms to support longer-term growth.
The partnership between Poland and the Bank has continued to strengthen, as it has become clear
to the clients that the Bank is not only an important potential source of financing, but also a
critical source of global knowledge and expertise. Poland’s pragmatic attitude towards the Bank
and other International Financial Institutions (IFIs) served it well during the crisis, with Poland

2

The EU is set to decide in June 2011 on a more flexible approach, under the excessive deficit procedure, to
Member States which have implemented systemic pension reforms. As a result, reducing the general government
deficit to 3.5 percent of GDP would be sufficient in the future to consider the abrogation of the excessive deficit
procedure for Poland in light of Poland’s second pillar pension reforms from the late 1990s.

3

becoming one of the largest borrowers from the Bank and gaining outside support for critical
policy reforms, while paving the way for a lasting, mutually beneficial knowledge partnership.
12.
The CPS envisaged an increasing emphasis on subnational engagement and FBS
delivery, but despite some progress, important obstacles remain to developing these lines of
business. In particular, hurdles were encountered in responding to interest in borrowing by
subnational governments, and development of FBS was constrained by the Polish Procurement
Law which generally requires competitive tendering for advisory services (see Box 1). These
challenges are further discussed in Section 4.
13.
The envisaged lending program was partially delivered. The cornerstone of the
lending program, the EUR3 billion DPL program which cut across most of the strategic pillars of
engagement, was delivered in a full and timely manner. However, the planned non-sovereign
projects (Warsaw City Sustainable Transport and PKO BP Small and Medium Enterprise (SME)
Credit Line) did not materialize despite strong client interest. Notably, the Bank’s sovereign
guarantee requirement was met by demands for similar treatment from other key financing
partners, notably the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the Council of Europe Development
Bank (CEB), which would increase central government debt levels and raise borrowing costs.
BOX 1. S UBNATIONAL ENGAGEMENT IN POLAND: S TRATEGY AND E XPERIENCE
World Bank cooperation with subnational entities in Poland is guided by the Subnational Cooperation
Action Plan (SCAP) developed by the Bank with local experts and partners in 2010 (see Annex 2 for
further details). The document proposes a strategic approach to subnational engagement and constitutes the
basis for Bank activities in this field. The main objective of the SCAP is to support sustainable socioeconomic development of Polish regions and cities, in particular those with low levels of income, through
knowledge-based services and financial cooperation.
Based on the past and current efforts to engage with subnational governments, the Bank has identified
four priority strategic areas: (i) transport sector; (ii) regional development; (iii) public finance; and (iv)
social sectors. World Bank assistance is to be provided primarily through analytic and advisory services,
where possible on a fee-for-service or cost-sharing basis. Selective financial support to individual selfgovernments or through a financial intermediary is also being pursued to help lesser-developed subnational
governments cofinance EU programs and gain access to market financing.
Warsaw and the capital region of Mazowieckie, where the Bank has good contacts and technical and
administrative capacity is high, were targeted during FY10-11 in an initial pilot phase. While the
planned loan to Warsaw City did not materialize, the Bank carried out TAs, through a FBS arrangement, for
Mazowieckie and is currently implementing another with the Lubelskie region. Contacts have also been
established with some other subnational partners.
FBS business development has been limited by the Polish procurement law which does not provide
explicit possibility for sole-sourcing of Bank or other IFI advisory services. Currently the Bank’s own
resources have been combined with client funding. In other cases, the Bank has been engaged based on the
uniqueness of the services it provided. As discussions with the European Commission proceed to clarify that
its members can sole-source Bank advisory services there will be greater possibilities for this line of business
going forward as the Government has stated its clear intention to increase use of FBS.
Subnational lending has to date been affected by the Bank’s guarantee requirements and associated
fiscal and borrowing cost implications as well as pari-passu requirements—in the case of Warsaw
City—from other IFIs, notably the EIB and CEB. Efforts are ongoing to explore lending through the state
development bank (BGK) or to individual cities where the EIB and CEB are not main financial partners.

4

Table 1. CPS PR 2011: Planned Versus Actual Program (June 09-June 11)
FY09
Plan
DPL 2

FY10
Status

1.25

√

Plan
1.3

Warsaw City

FY11

Status
LENDING
0.5
Dropped
0.5
Dropped

PKO BP Credit Line

Plan

Status

City 2

0.25
0.3

Climate Change 1

1.25
√
1.3
2.25
1.3
ANAYTICAL AND ADVISORY ASSISTANCE
√
Lubelskie/Lubin AAA
DPL Education TA
(FBS/ongoing)
√
Energy ESW
Mazowieckie PER
(ongoing)
√
Mazowieckie Transport
Transport/railways
FBS
ESW

N/A
√ EE and
Renewable
Energy DPL

1.1

DPL 3
Total

1.25

1.3

PBB TA

√

Poznan
CC
Housing
Fin TA
(FBS) 1/

√

CC CEM
Low Emissions Study
Ministry of Economy FBS
Ministry of Regional
Development FBS
Min of Infrastructure FBS

√(FY11)
√(FY11)
Dropped

PER

Dropped
√

DPL Health/SP TA
Warsaw City Policy Notes

√(FY11)
√

Transport Policy Note
Regional Devel TA 1/

√

0.55

Postponed

Financial Reporting
TA (FBS/ongoing) 1/
Europe 2020 ESW 1, 2/
Financial Sector TA

√
√

1,3/

Public Finance TA 1,4/

√
√

ROSC (BCP/IAIS) 1/

Amounts in US$ billions; √ Completed. 1/ Not planned in CPS; 2/ Case-study related to regional work;
cooperatives; 4/ Tax expenditures; micro-modeling

1.1

3/

Regulation of savings

14.
The planned AAA program was fully delivered and very well received by the client
despite some delays owing inter alia to the complexity of the work. The core strategic
diagnostic work delivered during the first half of the CPS included an update of the Public
Expenditure Review (PER), a Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) on Transition to a LowEmission Economy, a Policy Note on Sustainable Land Transport, and a study on Employment,
Skills, and Innovation (see Annex 4 for a summary of these studies). Moreover, the Bank
undertook additional strategic work and responded ―just-in-time‖ to a number of unforeseen
client demands. Since 2009, several AAA that were not planned as part of the CPS were
delivered (see Table 1). Several of these additional activities were fee-based (using Polish budget
funds, EU funds, and bilateral funds) marking some progress in this area both at central and
subnational government levels. FBS activities included areas such as transport planning, housing
finance regulation, business regulatory reform, and innovation systems. The ongoing Financial
Reporting Technical Assistance (TA) Program for 2010-2015 in the amount of US$10 million
(among the largest in the Bank; funded through the Swiss Contribution to the enlarged EU) is
enhancing institutional and regulatory capacity building for corporate sector financial reporting
and auditing in Poland. The AAA program was well-received by the government, both in terms
of adding important value to the analysis and discussion of key current policy issues and in terms
of timely and effective response to evolving client demands.
15.
The current portfolio is not at risk and performance has been broadly satisfactory
despite some delays in implementation. The active portfolio consists of seven operations
amounting to US$471 million, of which US$183 million remain undisbursed. Of these projects,
three are investment loans, one is a Global Environment Facility (GEF) project and three are
Prototype Carbon Fund (PCF) renewable energy projects. A EUR750 million Energy Efficiency

5

and Renewable Energy DPL is being presented to the Board along with this CPSPR. The Odra
River Flood Protection Project has experienced some delays due to the technical complexity of
the preparatory work but procurement for major construction works is now underway. The PostAccession Rural Support Project also experienced delays due to constraints on counterpart funds,
but the Social Inclusion component is complete and the small KRUS modernization component
is due for completion this year. The third Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Project has been
largely successful though the small component on institutional strengthening has been difficult to
implement. In the energy sector, the GEF Energy Efficiency Project was partly delivered to plan
albeit a component is being restructured, and two of the three PCF alternative energy projects
have been successful.
3.2

Progress towards Results

16.
Progress at mid-term towards achieving the results targeted in the CPS has
generally been good, especially in areas where the program has been fully delivered .
However, it is challenging to identify results that could be uniquely linked to the Bank’s program
given the macro-oriented nature of the program and because the Bank is a relatively small
partner compared with EU institutions. Some of the results are thus higher order. Poland’s most
notable achievement during the CPS period was that it weathered the international crisis well and
was the only country in the EU that avoided recession. The main reasons for this were discussed
in the macro section, but the Bank played an important role in helping preserve confidence in
Poland through its relatively positive (and in retrospect correct) assessment of Poland’s
macroeconomic situation compared to other IFIs, rating agencies, and investment banks, through
advocating the differences between Poland and the other more vulnerable countries in the region,
and through its timely approval of the EUR3 billion DPL program which was an important
financial contribution but even more important signal of confidence in Poland.
Pillar 1: Social and Spatial Inclusion
17.
Poland made good progress on labor market and social sector issues supported by
the DPL program. Despite the crisis and slowdown in growth, labor force participation and
employment rates increased from 2008 to 2010, especially for older workers. This was
stimulated by tightening of early retirement privileges, a new program (50+) to raise employment
of older workers, less generous unemployment benefits, and more flexible working arrangements
during the crisis. In education, outcomes continue to be commendable with the Program for
International Student Assessment (PISA) scores stabilizing on a comparatively high level while
government approved important further reforms in higher education.3 In health, there was
progress in implementing a voluntary program converting public hospitals to corporate entities
under the Commercial Code. In pensions, progress is being made through reducing early
retirement privileges and bringing uniform pensions more in line with the main pension system,
while harmonizing and raising retirement ages, linking indexation purely to inflation, and
removing privileges for farmers and disabled remain important (as highlighted in the PER) but
controversial. Poland also moved forward on its regional development agenda. While regional
income disparities have been increasing since EU accession, EU funds absorption has been
strong in the last couple of years at both national and subnational levels. The Post Accession

3

PISA reading scores slightly decreased from 2006 to 2009 though Poland is still the regional leader in CEE. The
math score continues to be slightly below OECD average, while the science score is now above OECD average.

6

Rural Support Project (PARSP) project contributed importantly to strengthening social inclusion
in poor communes and raising awareness among key stakeholders.
Pillar 2: Public Sector Reform
18.
Public sector reform was affected by the international crisis and sharp slowdown in
growth but important measures were taken with support from the DPL and associated
AAA program. The fiscal deficit and debt increased substantially thus delaying euro adopti on,
though this policy response was broadly appropriate. Fiscal consolidation is starting in 2011,
supported by strengthened fiscal institutions. The Government has amended the Public Finance
Act to introduce medium-term and performance-based budgeting and limit the growth of
discretionary budgetary spending, including on wages as recommended in the PER. The
Government is working on legislation to introduce multi-year binding expenditure ceilings,
tighten fiscal rules for local governments, and integrate uniformed services into main pension
system. Accompanied by increased infrastructure spending, social and public finance
management reforms are helping improve the quality and efficiency of public finances.
Pillar 3: Growth and Competitiveness
19.
Poland has continued to make progress towards strengthening the environment for
private sector growth, including through enhancing transport infrastructure—one of the
key bottlenecks to growth—though important challenges remain. Poland has stepped up its
road infrastructure investment program, but as noted in the Bank’s Transport Policy Note, it will
be important to ensure continued financial sustainability in the roads sector. Also, Poland needs
to upgrade its rail infrastructure and make this a more competitive transport alternative, as well
as making better use of inland waterways, including, reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The
private sector will need to play a greater role in infrastructure, and the legal and regulatory
framework for Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) has been strengthened in this regard.
Measures have also been taken to improve the general business environment through further
deregulation, for example the Law on Delivery of Services in the context of the EU Services
Directive. The cost of SME start ups has been reduced by about 20 percent in the last couple of
years and red tape has been cut through streamlining of business legislation. Outstanding
challenges include starting a business, property registration, paying taxes, enforcing contracts,
and protecting investors. Complementing reforms in basic and higher education, Poland has
taken steps to improve its innovation systems and is continuing to work with the Bank on this
and its human capital development strategy.
Pillar 4: Regional and Global Public Goods
20.
Progress in improving energy efficiency and mitigating climate change is by nature
difficult to measure over the short term, but some important measures have been taken.
Poland adopted a new energy efficiency law to improve efficiency by 1 percent per year in
private buildings in the next decade. This action is a cornerstone in the Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy DPL that is being considered by the Board in conjunction with this CPSPR.
Poland’s Thermo Modernization Fund will play a key role in funding the needed investments .
Work is also under way to increase co-generation in energy production. Poland is now
participating in international emissions trading under the Kyoto protocol . The Bank’s recent
technical and macro-modeling work in this area has been well received and will form a good
basis for further analysis. Poland’s transition to low-emissions economy is technically and
financially feasible over the longer run to 2030, with energy efficiency offering the highest
returns in this area over the next decade.

7

21.
Recent severe floods have demonstrated that Poland needs to strengthen water
management and flood protection. Priority so far has been the Odra River, supported by a
Bank project, and works are expected to start this year following some delays. Attention is now
shifting to the Vistula River, and catastrophe risk insurance is being studied based on a recent
Bank report assessing mechanisms for financial and fiscal management of such risks.
22.
Poland has been successful in preserving financial sector stability during the
financial crisis. Going forward, there will be a Financial Sector Advisory Program (FSAP) in
2012, and the Bank has stated its readiness to provide support in the context of Poland’s
upcoming EU Presidency on the new EU post-crisis regulatory and supervisory architecture.
4.

MODIFICATIONS TO THE CPS AND C RITICAL P ARTNERSHIP I SSUES

23.
The CPS remains valid and only minor modifications are called for in the
remainder of the period. The Government is interested in a continued and broad-based
engagement with the Bank.4 The partnership will remain centered around the existing strategic
pillars but will increasingly be coordinated around Poland’s EU role. Focus will also remain on
engaging subnational governments and expanding provision of advisory services on a fee basis
in core areas of Bank expertise. Further attention will be given to helping Poland continue
developing its increasingly important regional and global role, including through sharing its
development experience and expanding its donor functions. Poland’s upcoming EU Presidency
offers an important opportunity in this regard, including because of the importance Poland
attaches to the Eastern Partnership, given the Bank’s long experience in these countries.
4.1

New Themes

24.
Given that Poland is an EU Member State and that the EU is Poland’s key external
partner, the Bank’s approach will increasingly be EU oriented. New themes include Making
Europe work for Poland; Policy Reforms for Europe2020 and Convergence; and Complementing
the EU Agenda (see Annex 2 for how the existing pillars map to these themes). While there is no
change in strategy, the idea is to place Bank engagement and work more clearly within the
broader framework of complementarity and support of the European Commission’s (EC)
program in Poland, and to use these themes as filters to select AAA and lending operations.
Already, major Bank activities and reports are being discussed with the EC and other IFIs.
4.2

The General Program

25.
The program for the remaining two years envisages delivery of the range of Bank
services while strengthening the knowledge partnership and supporting Poland’s emerging
donor role.5 The indicative lending amount is intended to be maintained at the current level of
around US$1 billion per year in FY12-13, of which about 40 percent is presently expected to be
in the form of DPLs in support of the Government’s ongoing policy reform agenda. However,
overall lending amounts will depend on how government demand and performance evolves over
the remainder of the CPS period, and on IBRD's lending capacity and demand from other
borrowers. The DPLs are expected to support Poland’s fiscal consolidation agenda, including
through strengthening fiscal rules at both central and subnational government levels, improving
the efficiency of public administration, and rationalizing social spending while maintaining

4
5

See paragraph 30 for a discussion of graduation issues for Poland.
The flexible 2009 CPS specified lending through FY12 and AAA through FY11, to be updated at progress report.

8

strong social service delivery. In addition, the program includes as a key strategic priority
lending to targeted subnationals (see below), and aims to introduce the new Results-Based
Lending instrument—most likely in the energy or transport sectors. The Bank is also ready to
provide support through a variety of instruments to the Government as it seeks to extend its flood
prevention work beyond the Odra River to the Vistula River. This diversified lending strategy
allows for sufficient flexibility to respond to client demand, though we would not envisage major
substitutability between the DPLs and subnational lending.
26.
Building on recent core diagnostic work, analytic and advisory services to the central
government would focus on follow-up TA and other forms of implementation support. In the
public sector reform area, the public finance work is expected to be extended to public
administration reform. The Bank’s work on land transport and skills/innovation would also be
continued, including through technical assistance in support of the development of the Strategy
for Human Capital Development (SHCD) for Poland. In the energy sector, the Bank will follow
up on the low-emissions modeling work and could support further development of alternative
energy. The IFC will selectively seek opportunities to invest in renewable energy and climatefriendly projects in Poland where its participation brings significant additionality. Recent
financial sector work might be expanded to support Poland’s alignment with the new EU
financial regulatory and supervisory framework. Finally, but importantly, the Bank will support
Poland’s emerging donor role, including in the context of its EU Presidency in the second half of
2011.
4.3

Subnational Engagement

27.
Going forward, the Bank’s subnational engagement will target lesser-developed
regions especially in Eastern Poland. This work will be guided by the Subnational
Cooperation Action Plan (see Box 1 and Annex 2). In line with the Bank’s poverty mandate,
focus will be shifted to lesser-developed regions and cities, notably in Eastern Poland, where
technical, administrative, and financial constraints are more severe and the Bank can add
significant value in support of their convergence process while complementing the work of EU
financial institutions. Based on the Bank’s work with the Mazowieckie region and ongoing
collaboration with the Lubelskie region and City of Lublin, as well as consultations with other
potential subnational partners, it appears that the Bank can play a useful role in areas such as
public finance and debt management, land and property asset management, transport planning,
hospital restructuring, development of PPPs, and regional development strategies.
28.
Bank support could be provided through lending and AAA. The program foresees a
two-stage process, with the first stage lending aimed at providing fungible resources to help
finance subnational programs and projects and helping clients prepare for accessing capital
markets, and the second stage aimed at supporting clients in going to the market (including
potentially with the use of Partial Credit Guarantees). The precise modalities for providing Bank
financial support have not yet been finalized but could take the form of a credit line administered
or guaranteed by the State Development Bank BGK.
4.4

FBS Business Development

29.
Given the Bank’s declining administrative budget in Poland, continued strong
demand for Bank analytic and advisory services at both central and subnational
government levels, and the mutual desire to strengthen the knowledge partnership, Bank
AAA will increasingly have to rely on cost-sharing and FBS. Some progress has been made in

9

developing this line of business, with FBS projects concluded or in the pipeline with both levels
of government. While these activities will likely continue to be opportunistic, they are confined
to areas of the Bank’s broader strategic engagement and focused mainly on institution building
where the Bank’s expertise can add most value to the benefit of all partners. Other requests for
FBS would be contingent on the need for critical Bank expertise. However, there are two key
constraints to expanding FBS. The Polish procurement law generally requires competitive
tendering for advisory services, although there are exceptions if only one provider exists for a
given service or if there is a grant element involved. Second, the current fiscal constraints means
that clients have limited resources of their own to pay for Bank services and will have to rely
mainly on the very large amount of technical assistance resources available under EU funds.
Under these circumstances, and also because FBS need to have a critical size in order to be
efficient, FBS is unlikely to become the dominant business line in the next few years, but its
growth and increased frequency is important as we prepare for the next phase of the Partnership.
4.5

Graduation

30.
Formal consideration of graduation will be taken up in the next CPS. Poland remains
interested in access to a range of Bank services, including lending. While Poland has now
crossed the high-income country threshold and has access to international capital markets
(though spreads remain elevated), institutions require further strengthening, not least at the
subnational level. However, Poland expects that access to lending should be gradually reduced
and that AAA services should increasingly be provided by FBS rather than fully on the Bank’s
budget. The next CPS would therefore see lending further reduced or phased out and a new
knowledge partnership phased in. This would be reviewed in particular at the time of the future
euro adoption, which may provide good indications of the maturity of Poland’s institutions given
the prominent role Poland would play in the euro-zone. Poland does not wish to see ―graduation‖
in terms of an end to the much valued knowledge partnership.
31.
Support to Poland as an International Partner. The Bank is helping Poland share its
successful development experience with other countries, and will deepen this work with Poland
in the next few years to develop its aid infrastructure and strategy to support its emerging donor
role (e.g., participation in international aid conferences, policy dialogue on aid agenda, and
knowledge sharing of Polish officials and experts in development aid). As Poland continues to
grow, it accepts its obligation to increase its responsibilities in this area, including with the Bank.
5.

R ISKS

The FY09 13 CAS identified several risks which remain relevant. First, the reform
momentum has in some important areas been less than hoped for, and this is likely to continue
until elections in October 2011. The EU Presidency will also place a heavy burden on
administrative capacity. Further, policy-making remains fragmented, though the period from
2012 offers an excellent window of opportunity for accelerating outstanding reforms. Second,
while Poland has weathered recent international and regional financial and economic turbulence
well, it remains vulnerable to further deterioration in the international environment, euro-area
banking and debt problems, and potential reversal of recent sizeable portfolio inflows. Adhering
to its ambitious fiscal consolidation strategy will be important in this uncertain environment. In
addition to these risks, the CPSPR proposes to build future business using approaches that have
only partially worked due to procurement and sovereign guarantee issues. This can be high risk high reward, but the risk is contained through the diversified lending and AAA program.
32.

10

Annex 1: Poland: 2009-13 CPS Results Matrix
CPS Pillar 1: Social and Spatial Inclusion
1: Social Sector Reform
Government objectives:
 Implement EU Lisbon agenda to make Poland a competitive knowledge-based economy with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion.
(Implement Europe 2020 strategy to make Poland a competitive knowledge-based economy with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion)
 Modernize the social security system (including through reforming some of the incomplete components of the pension design, increasing the
efficiency of public spending on social assistance for the poorest households)
 Strengthen educational outcomes and improve the responsiveness of the educational system to the changes in the job market, and achieve efficient and
accountable educational system.
 Introduce additional voluntary health insurance, improve the management of healthcare establishments and exercise control over the medical services
quality (eliminate hospital debt for ongoing operations, improve resource allocation in the health sector and among hospitals, encourage cost-saving
technical change in hospitals and improved response to payment incentives)
 Improve the condition of social infrastructure
CPS objectives: to help improve labor supply incentives and enhance labor market competitiveness, achieve efficient and accountable education system, improve
efficiency in allocation and use of resources in the health sector.
Original
Revised
WB program (Italics indicate not
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Progress To Date
planned in CPS)
Labor Market, Social Assistance Labor Market, Social
Labor Market, Social Assistance and
Labor Market, Social Assistance
and Pensions:
Assistance and Pensions:
Pensions:
and Pensions:
•Increase in employment/working
• Help Govt achieve its objective Employment rate for population 15-64
Lending:
age population ratio to 60% by
to increase employment rate
remained stable at around 59.3% from
•DPL1-DPL3 (FY9-10)
2012 and in labor force
from 60% (2010) and labor
2008 to 2010 despite the increase in
AAA:
participation rate of population
force participation rate of
unemployment due to the crisis.
• Public expenditure review on
aged 55-64 to 33% by 2010 and in population aged 55-64 from the Employment rate for population 55-64
PFM, public wages and social
proportion of unemployed who
current level of 37% in 2010.
increased from 31.6% in 2008 to 34% in
sector (ESW) (FY10)
receive job search assistance and
2010.
•Fueling Growth and
vocational counseling to 30% by
•LFP rate increased from 63.8% (15-64)
Competitiveness in Poland
2010.
and 33.3% (55-64) in 2008 to 65.6% and
Through Employment, Skills, and
36.7% respectively in 2010.
Innovation (ESW) (FY11)
•Qualitative field research on
Measures taken:
coverage and leakage in social
•Implementation of the government
assistance (TA) (FY10)
program to enable increasing labor force
•Assessment of plans to encourage
participation of older workers, known as
and regulate child care facilities for
“50+” (PL2 prior action)
children under 3 years of age to
•Parliament adoption of the law on

11

•Policy options for the
restructuring of farmers’ pension
system.

•Policy options for bringing
special-scheme pensions in line
with the main pension system
identified and implementation
started. Increase in minimum
years of service to qualify for
pension for police/military from
15 years to 20 years, and the
introduction of the minimum
retirement age of 50.

Education:
•Successful implementation of
higher education reform; better labor
market outcomes for the young.

Education:
•Successful implementation of
higher education reform, in
particular: implementation of
pro-quality financing system,
including financial support for
entities which obtain the status of
National Leading Scientific
Center (Krajowy Naukowy
Osrodek Wiodacy, KNOW); free

employment promotion and labor market
institutions, pursuant to which the level of
unemployment benefit is reduced after
three months in order to encourage the
unemployed to seek a job immediately after
their registration.
•Adoption of regulation of Temporary
Work Agencies to enable more employers
to use TWA services
•Parliament adoption of law on childcare
to improve incentives for women to
participate in the labor market and enable
more flexible forms of child care facilities,
•Government resolution to increase
amount of means-tested child benefits by
average forty percent (PL3 prior action)
• Adoption of law on foster care to move
from institutional to household-based care.
•Enactment of the law on bridging
pensions reducing the number of people
eligible for early retirement from 1.7
million to 300,000 (PL2 prior action)
•Enactment of law on reducing
contribution fees charged by PTE to OPF
members from 7 to 3.5 percent (PL3 prior
action)
•Preparation of draft legislation on uniform
pensions to bring pensions for uniform
services more in line with the main pension
system.
Education:
•Completed legislative work on Act: Higher
Education Law, which envisages, among
other solutions: implementation of proquality financing system, including financial
support for entities which obtain the status of
National Leading Scientific Center (Krajowy
Naukowy Osrodek Wiodacy, KNOW); free
of charge education on second and more
faculty in a public university for students,

12

improve incentives for women to
participate in the labor market (TA)
•Training for government officials
on World Bank simulation tool for
pension reform (PROST) (TA)
(FY10)

Education:
Lending:
•DPL1-DPL3 (FY09-11)
AAA:
•Regional conferences on higher
education reform (TA) (FY10)
•Policy advice on linkages between
science curricular and development
of human capital for research,

•Improved student learning
outcomes in Math, Science and
Reading in PISA 2009 and increased
participation rates in pre-primary
and upper-secondary education.

of charge education on second
and more faculty in a public
university for students, who
receive Rector’s scholarship for
best students; precise definition
of the catalogue of free of charge
educational services provided to
students by tertiary schools.
•Increased pre-school
participation rates among
children aged 5 years from the
2008/09 level of 74.8%.

Health:
•Improved efficiency of hospitals
and rationalized service delivery
network to allow reallocation of
resources towards primary and
preventive care.
•Debt of corporatized hospitals
reduced to 7.5% of total annual
revenues by December 2010.

Health:
•Improved efficiency of hospitals
and rationalized service delivery
network through implementation
of DRG system. By end-2010,
90% of hospitals to be covered by
DRG system.
•60 hospitals corporatized under
Commercial Code by end- 2010.

who receive Rector’s scholarship for best
students; precise definition of the catalog of
free of charge education services provided to
students by tertiary schools.
•Average PISA score increased marginally
from 500 points in 2006 to 501 in 2009
(math performance unchanged at 495,
reading score declined from 508 points to
500, and science increased from 498 to 508).
•Enactment of law to initiate compulsory
pre-primary program for 5 yr-olds (Grade 0)
starting from 2011/12 and begin
implementing on a voluntary basis in
2009/10. The same law initiates a
compulsory school program for 6 yr-olds
from 2012/13 (PL2 prior action). Enrollment
rate of 5-yr olds increased from 57.8% in
2007 to 74.8% in 2008/09.
Health:
•DRGs fully implemented in 2010.

•Data not yet available but planned central
government transfers to support restructuring
of hospitals on track.

2: Regional Development
Government objectives:




1.
2.
3.

Improve the condition of technical infrastructure (National Development Strategy 2007-2015 – Priority 2)
Support to regional convergence of Eastern Poland as defined in NSRF 2007-13
Regional development and raising of territorial cohesion (National Development Strategy 2007-2015 – Priority 6)
New National Strategy for Regional Development 2010-2020; Regions, Cities, Rural sets following objectives:
increase competitiveness of regions ( through reducing persistent underutilization of growth potential)
reduce development disparities between and within regions.
strengthen governance (multi-level governance).

13

science and technology (TA) (FY10)
•Policy notes on enhancing teacher
performance and assessing the
quality of educational services at
higher education institutions (ESW)
(FY10)
•Fueling Growth and
Competitiveness in Poland Through
Employment, Skills, and Innovation
(ESW) (FY11)

Health:
Lending:
•DPL1-DPL3 (FY09-10)
AAA/ TA:
•Paper on fiscal implications of
demographic change on long-term
care (ESW)
•Workshop on PPP in health sector
for Mazowieckie voivodship (TA)

CPS objectives: to provide advisory, technical and financial assistance in supporting internal convergence, including financial assistance in the context of Eastern
Poland Operational Program.
Revised
WB program (realized/Italics indicate
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Progress To Date
not planned in CPS)
•Improved capital investment
•Improve planning and debt and asset •Significant progress with the adoption Lending:
planning and debt management in
management, as reflected by Bank
of various laws streamlining the
•Planned subnational credit line
major cities (support for alleviation staff assessments of medium-term
investment process on public roads,
through BGK or loans to selected
of urban infrastructure bottlenecks, debt management strategies for
improving public-procurement
lesser-developed subnationals
including climate change agenda)
selected bigger cities.
procedures and aligning Polish
(FY12/13)6
legislation on environmental protection
• More strategic allocation of EU
•Increase technical capacity of
rules with EU. Cost-benefit analysis of AAA:
funds
selected regional governments to
projects has been strengthened,
•WDR 2009 discussions and follow-up
design and improve strategy design,
including in transport infrastructure
activities (TA) (FY09/10)
planning and implementation, and
making it easier to prioritize projects.
• Subnational Cooperation Action Plan
reduce development obstacles in key
2010-2012 (internal document)
•Improved utilization of EU funds
economic sectors at regional level
•Poland absorbed all EU funds
(FY09/10)
through capacity building and coreflected in a positive assessment of
available for 2004-06 (by the end of
•Public Expenditure Review of
financing
the European Commission on
2009 as allowed) and advanced
Mazowieckie Voivodship on capital
Regional Operational Programs
absorption of funds for 2007-13 (about investment planning, spending and
• Improving understanding of
derived from regional development
60 percent of funds available have been debt management; also provides
tradeoffs in regional policy
strategies.
already contracted).
assessment of the broad policy mix for
regional development within the
•Development of new national strategy region (ESW). (FY10)
for Regional development in line with
•Strategic planning of development,
new EU approach.
rehabilitation and maintenance of
regional roads in Mazowieckie
Voivodship (TA; FBS) (FY10)
•Warsaw City policy notes on Public
Transport Financial Sustainability,
Metropolitan Institutions, and Public
Land and Property Asset Management
(ESW; part of loan preparation)
(FY09/10)
•Support for Regional Development
Strategy (FY12/13)
•TA for Land and Property Asset
Management for 1-2 major cities, of
which one is Lubelskie (FY13)

6

Warsaw City Project planned in CPS was cancelled.

14

CPS Pillar 2: Public Sector Reform
1: Public Finance
Government objectives:
 Implement task-budgeting, in particular 3-year task-based planning (and continue other institutional reforms to make the budget more transparent,
predictable, and performance-oriented over the medium term)
 Improve public finance sector efficiency and public funds management; reduce fiscal deficit to enable a secure and sustainable fulfillment of the
convergence criterion and euro adoption in Poland by 2012. (Implement fiscal consolidation strategy to enable a secure and sustainable fulfillment of
the convergence criteria by 2012/13 for euro adoption in Poland)
CPS objectives: To assist the Government in improving Public Financial Management systems
Original
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
•Increased effectiveness and
efficiency of public spending
through introduction of
performance-based budgeting
•Improved prioritization between
various types of expenditures and
greater control of public finances in
the context of fiscal constraints
imposed by euro adoption plans.

Revised
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
•No change

• Improved prioritization between
various types of expenditures and
greater control of public finances in
the context of fiscal constraints
imposed by euro adoption plans, as
assessed by the EU of Poland’s
convergence programs.

Progress To Date
•Enactment of new Public Finance Act
in 2009 to strengthen transparency,
efficiency and quality of budget process
through medium-term fiscal framework
and performance-based-budgeting,
enhanced debt safety procedures,
strengthened control and internal
budget audit, and increased budget
transparency through consolidation of
some budgetary units and separate
budgeting of EU funds.

•Help Government to achieve its

In addition, government has made
progress in public finance through:
•Amendment to Public Finance Act to
improve liquidity management,
introduce a fiscal rule on discretionary
expenditures, make fiscal impact
assessment of new legal initiatives
compulsory and introduce a VAT
increase if debt-to-GDP exceeds 55%.
•2011 state budget incorporates fiscal
consolidation measures, including a
freeze in the central govt wage bill and
a 1 percentage point increase in VAT.
•Parliament approval of law to
rationalize employment in state budget
units and other public entities in 2011–
13 to reduce employment by 10%

15

WB program (realized/Italics
indicate not planned in CPS)
Lending:
•DPL1-DPL3 (FY09-10)
AAA:
•PER on PFM, public wages and
social sector (ESW) (FY10)
•EU10 fiscal study on performancebased, medium-term budgeting
(ESW)
•Public Expenditure Review of
Mazowieckie voivodship (ESW)
(FY10)
•Tax expenditure workshop (TA)
•Social spending incidence analysis
(TA)

fiscal deficit target of “close to” 3
percent of GDP in 2012 through
strengthening its fiscal responsibility
framework (indicator: introduction of
permanent fiscal rule for the Central
Government).

relative to Q2 2010.
•Fiscal deficit increased to 7.9% of
GDP in 2010 but is targeted to decline
to 5.6% of GDP in 2011 and 2.9% of
GDP in 2012.

CPS Pillar 3: Growth and Competitiveness
1: Transport Infrastructure Development
Government objectives:
 Provide transport and other infrastructure appropriate for the needs of modern economy
 Create favorable regulatory and institutional environment for entrepreneurship, innovation and investment in transport
 Improve financial sustainability of the transport sector
 Improve the condition of technical infrastructure
CPS Objectives: To provide support in developing and rehabilitating infrastructure to enhance private investment and productivity growth.
Revised
WB program (realized/Italics
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Progress To Date
indicate not planned in CPS)
•Contribution to the strategy for
•Contribution to the strategy for
•Transport Sector Strategy is under
Lending:
transport sector development (incl. transport sector development
preparation by Min of Infrastructure as
• Two road rehabilitation loans
climate change agenda).
(including climate change agenda and part of the Natl Development Strategy.
completed in 2009 and a third one
medium long-term financing).
•Improved transport infrastructure
under implementation (closing in
•Natl Motorway and Expressway
and road safety.
FY12)
program
progressing
resulting
in
over
•% of roads in good condition
750
km
of
motorways
in
operation
and
AAA:
•Increased efficiency of transport
improved from 49% (2005) to 60%
further
500
km
under
construction
• Land Transport Policy Note (ESW)
and reduced negative impact on the and adequately maintained (2013)
Percentage of national roads in good
(FY11)
environment.
condition increased from 52 to 58%
• Mazowieckie region strategic
•A system of strategic and
from 2008-2010).
transport planning (ESW/TA; FBS)
operational planning and
Decline in road fatalities from 5500
(FY10)
management program for the
(2008) to 3900 (2010).
• Warsaw City sustainable transport
•Improved
system
of
strategic
and
development and preservation of
policy notes (ESW) (FY10)
operational
planning
at
central
and
•Special govt program of financial
roads infrastructure; improved legal
subnational
levels
and
programs
for
support to subnational roads since 2009
framework and institutional
development/ rehabilitation of land
(PLN 1 billion/ year). Progress in
capacity for preparation,
transport infrastructure.
adoption of sustainable urban transport
implementation and monitoring of
strategies in a number of big cities
transport infrastructure projects.
•Improved legal framework and
(including Warsaw & Poznan).
•Contribution to development of
institutional capacity for preparation,
system of high speed passenger
•Railway sector reform aimed at
implementation and monitoring of
railways in Poland, including
improving competitiveness and
infrastructure projects.
technical, environmental,
financial sustainability of railway sector
economic/ financial aspects and
delayed. Feasibility study analyzing
potential involvement of private
high speed railway potential in Poland
sector partners.
is underway (financed by EU).

16

•Increased involvement of private
sector partners in maintenance and
development of infrastructure and
provision of public sector services.

•Improved legal framework for private
sector involvement in infrastructure
adopted in 2009 (law on concessions in
construction and services; PPP law).
2: Private Sector Development

Government objectives:
 To provide favorable regulatory and institutional environment for entrepreneurship, innovation and investment.
CPS objectives: to assist in improving business regulations in Poland and provide Government with global best practice in this area.
Revised
WB program (realized/Italics
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Progress To Date
indicate not planned in CPS)
•New business regulations
• Regulatory reforms facilitating
•Enactment of Law on Delivery of
Lending:
developed in line with global best
business start-up, operations and
Services enhancing international
•DPL1-DPL3 (FY09-10)
practices.
licensing, and other business-to-govt
competition in services in line with
AAA:
requirements (taxes, closures, trade),
global best practice (EU Services
• Improving the business regulatory
have been made showing a reduction
Directive).
environment in five Doing Business
in time, cost and transactional steps.
areas, where Poland lags behind the
Indicators: cost of obtaining business
• Govt approval of bill on Reduction of most: starting a business, property
licenses reduced by at least 20% from
Administrative Barriers for Citizens and registration, paying taxes, enforcing
current levels (currently 122% of per
Entrepreneurs, which cuts red tape in
contracts, and protecting investors
capita income), and time to register
almost 90 different pieces of legislation, (TA; FBS) (FY11)
property and close a business reduced
reduces number of licenses and permits,
• Innovation TA (FY11-12)
by 20% to ≈120 days and below 2.5
lowers administrative fees, and
years, respectively, by 2012.
eliminates need for formal certificates
of evidence in favor of voluntary
• Programs to promote business
•The cost of SME registration and
declarations in contacts with public
innovation made more effective via
start-up and of obtaining licenses is further R&D resource allocations to
administration. Reduction in the SME
reduced by 20% to below PLN
start-up cost to about PLN 8,000
such programs as measured by an
10,000 by 2010.
(including paid-in capital).
increase in public R&D to GDP ratio
from 0.68%; R&D for business/GDP:
0.19%7 (2009); and orienting these
towards commercialization of products
in several sectors (indicator: patent
applications submitted to US patent
office increased from 8.91 per million
inhabitants (2009)), as well as
increasing R&D institute linkages with
the business community.

7

As reported by Eurostat

17

CPS Pillar 4: Regional and Global Public Goods
1: Energy and Climate Change
Government objectives:
 Comply with international and EU long-term policies on climate change mitigation and preserve energy security to households and enterprises (Ensure
adequate energy supplies while meeting environmental targets, including climate protection; and comply with international climate policies and
targets of the EU energy and climate change package 20-20-20)
 Seek, elaborate and implement environment-friendly solutions (e.g. low-emission, energy-efficient material-saving production (National Reform
Program for 2008-2011 – Innovative Economy Priority Measure 6)
 Using innovation in terms of environmental protection (National Reform Program for 2008-2011 – Innovative Economy Priority Measure 6)
 Improvement of the condition of the technical infrastructure, incl. protection against natural disasters, in particular against floods and their effects, incl.
activities of a legal and organizational character (National Development Strategy 2007-2015 – Priority 2e)
 Reduce the energy intensity of the Polish economy to the EU-15 level by 2030
CPS objective: to assist the Government in the area of mitigation and adaptation of the Polish economy to the challenges of climate change.
Revised
WB program (realized/Italics
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Progress To Date
indicate not planned in CPS)
•Integrated climate change strategy •Improved energy efficiency (9%
•Parliament adoption of energy
Lending:
to minimize costs and maximize
saving in final energy consumption in
efficiency law. (EE DPL action)
•GEF Energy Efficiency project
potential benefits, given various
2008-2016)8. Progress in 2013
(restructured).
carbon mitigation scenarios.
measured by issuance of tradeable
•Three ―greening‖ PCF projects in
white certificates and their associated
Stargard, Walbrzych and Puck.
•Increased public and private sector energy efficiency obligations.
•Energy Efficiency/Renewable
investments in energy efficiency in
Energy DPL (FY11)
buildings.
• Help Govt meet its target of 11% of
•Govt submitted National Renewable
•Odra River Basin Project
final energy from renewable energy
Energy Plan to the EC through a
•Poland participates in the system
sources by 2013 from 8% in 2009.
Council decision of December 7, 2010, AAA:
of international emissions trading
thereby detailing its commitment of at
•Transition to a low-emissions
under the Kyoto Protocol;
least 15.5% of renewable energy use by economy (ESW) (FY11)
implementation of ―greening‖
2020. The Govt increased use of
programs supported by the
biomass and windpower 7-fold from
revenues from the sale of assigned
2004-2009.
amount units (AAUs).
• Increased use of cogeneration to
decrease total energy use. Indicator:
•Govt provided incentives to increase
Cogeneration 17% of total electricity
share of cogeneration through issuance
supply by 2013 from 16% (2009).
of Ordinance on Heat Tariffs of
September 17, 2010 (EE DPL action).
• Install 200,000 Smart Meters.
•Govt issued draft Regulatory
Statement covering all key areas of

8

Government committing only to the 2016 target, which is beyond the CPS period.

18

•Systems for flood/natural disaster
insurance, preparedness and
mitigation; spatial planning in flood
plains. Protection of people and
property in Odra River Basin
against floods of 1997 magnitude
by 2013.

implementation of Smart Meters and
through the SOE Energa has initiated
implementation (EE DPL action)

•No change

•Too early to assess

2: Financial sector stability and development
Government objectives:
 To safeguard the stability of the financial sector, including through strengthened domestic and pan-European regulations, improve access to
financing, reduce financial exclusion, and promote capital markets development
CPS objective: To support the Government in safeguarding the stability and promoting the development of the financial sector
Revised
WB program (realized)/Italics
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Expected Outcomes/Outputs
Progress To Date
indicate not planned in CPS
• Implementation of EU and G20
• PFSA approved a new
AAA/ TA:
mandated regulatory initiatives
recommendation to tighten criteria for
• Credit union supervision
resulting in increases of bank core
local and foreign currency consumer
(ESW/TA) (FY11)
capital and counter cyclical loss
lending
• ROSC (BCP/IAIS) (FY11)
reserves; improved supervision from
• Financial Sector Advisory TA
• The level of deposit guarantee was
FY11 ROSC from baseline:
raised from EUR50,000 to EUR100,000 (FY12)
Capital/Asset ratio: 13.8%; Non
in line with EU legislation.
performing loans: 8.8%; Loss
• Parliament adopted new legislation,
Provisions/Non-performing loans:
currently under review by the Supreme
54.6% (Dec 31, 2010)
Court, subordinating credit unions to
• Increased capital market integration the supervisory powers of the PFSA,
with pan-European securities
reducing systemic risks.
markets and improved risk
management of private pension assets
• Improved capacity to oversee and
supervise credit unions in Poland’s
regional banking services from
baseline: Delinquent/Total Loans:
12.7%; Net Profit/Asset ratio: -0.2%
(March 31, 2010)
Note: Text in italics denotes changes/additions from original CPS

19

Annex 2: CPS PR Pillars and Themes FY11-131, 2/
Pillar/Theme
Pillar 1: Social and
Spatial Inclusion

 Social sectors reform
 Regional development

Making Europe Work for Poland
Regional Development Strategies
Strengthening Subnational Inst & Capacity
Lending
AAA
-Municipal credit
-Municipal finance
lines (FIL)1/ (B)
ESW/TA (strategic)
-Subnational Transport
-Subnational Reg Dev
strategies / PERs (FBS)

Policy Reforms for Europe 2020 and
Convergence
AAA
Strategy for Human Capital Dev TA

Pillar 2: Public Sector
Reform

 Public finance management
 Public admin / governance

Pillar 3: Growth &
Competitiveness

 Transport infrastructure
development
 Private sector development

Pillar 4: Regional and
Global Public Goods

 Climate change and energy
 Financial sector stability

Financial Sector Regulation

Transport Policy & Inst Reform
Lending
AAA
Energy / Transport RBL Roads/rail reform TA
(C)
(FBS)
PSD: Innovation and Skills
AAA
Innovation TA
(ongoing; FBS)
PSD: Business Envir & Deregulation
AAA
Doing Business TA
(FBS)
Sustainable Energy Efficient Growth Climate
Change
Lending
AAA
-Odra River (ongoing)
-Low-Emissions
-GEF Energy Efficiency
CEM follow-up
(ongoing)
-Energy efficiency
-Energy Efficiency
studies (ongoing)
/Renewable Energy
-Water/flood mgt TA
DPL
(FBS)
-IFC
-Financial Reporting
TA Program 20102015 (ongoing)

1/ Subject to confirmation following general elections in October 2011.
2/ Excludes regional work that generally includes Poland. A: Very likely; B: likely; C; possible

20

Complementing the EU Agenda
Social Sector Reforms
Lending
AAA
DPL series
-Social Inclusion TA
(closed)
(FBS)

Public Sector Reform: PFM / PAR
Lending
AAA
-PARSP (ongoing) -PFM TA (ongoing)
-Public finance/
-Admin reform TA
Admin Reform
(FBS)
DPLs (A)
Transport Policy & Inst Reform
Lending
Roads Rehab &
Maint (ongoing)

Annex 2b: CPS PR: Tentative Program FY11-13 1/ 2/
LENDING

$

FY

AAA

FY

Theme 1: Making Europe Work for Poland
Municipal credit line (FIL)1(B)
Municipal credit line (FIL)2 (B)

500
250

FY12
FY13/14

Municipal finance ESW/TA
Subnational transport ESW
Subnational RDS/PER (FBS)

FY12
FY12
FY12/13

Theme 2: Policy Reforms for Europe 2020
and Convergence
Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy DPL
Energy/transport RBL (C)

1000

FY11

500

FY12/13

Innovation TA (ongoing; FBS)
Strategy for Human Capital
Development TA
Energy efficiency studies
(ongoing)
Doing Business TA (FBS)
Low-emissions CEM follow-up
TA
Roads/railways reform TA (FBS)
Financial Reporting TA Program
2010-2015 (ongoing)

FY11
FY12
FY11
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY16

Theme 3: Complementing the EU Agenda
PF/Adm Reform DPL1 (A)
PF/Adm Reform DPL2 (A)

500
250

Memo: total lending (mill. $)
FY09
2500
FY10
1250
FY11
1000
FY12
1250
FY13
750
1/ Subject to confirmation following general elections in October 2011.
2/ Excludes regional work that generally includes Poland. (A): Very likely; (B): likely; (C): possible

21

FY12
FY13

Public finance TA (ongoing)
Administrative reform TA (FBS)
Social Inclusion TA (FBS)

FY11/12
FY12
FY12

Annex 3: Subnational Cooperation Action Plan (SCAP) 2010-2012
Background
1. Over the past couple of years, the World Bank has been increasing its cooperation with
subnational governments in Poland. This reflects a number of factors: (i) subnational governments are
responsible for important social service delivery and infrastructure functions and account for a substantial
share of public spending; (ii) many regions lag significantly in their economic development relative to the
national average and are therefore major recipients of EU financial aid; (iii) regions are responsible for
their own development programs, and many cities also undertake longer-term development planning; and
(iv) subnational governments often also have less-developed institutional and technical capacity as
compared to the central government.
2. Initial efforts to engage subnational partners focused on the capital city, Warsaw, its surrounding
region, Mazowieckie, as these are among the most developed and sophisticated subnational governments
and often serve as pilots and examples for other subnational governments. Recently the cooperation was
expanded to Lubelskie Voivodeship, one of the least developed regions in Eastern Poland.
3. Looking ahead, World Bank cooperation with subnational entities in Poland will be guided by
the Subnational Cooperation Action Plan for Poland for 2010-2012. The document proposes a
strategic approach for development of subnational cooperation in Poland and constitutes the basis for the
Bank’s activities in this field over the next two to three years.
Objectives
4. The main objective of the SCAP is to support sustainable socio -economic development of
subnational governments in Poland through innovative knowledge-based and financial cooperation
with regional and municipal authorities. The goal is to be achieved by providing unique, world class nonprofit expertise which may be combined with flexible, responsive and tailor -made financial support. This
objective is fully in line with the priorities of the government National Development Strategy 2007-2015.
Proposed actions
5. Given its mandate, the World Bank aims to target regions and cities with relatively low levels of
income. The extent of previous cooperation with the Bank and good institutional contacts, available
financing, and political stability are also important considerations. The World Bank sees the following
regions and cities as priority: Lublin and Lubelskie region, Rzeszów and Podkarpackie region, Białystok
and Podlaskie region, Wrocław and Dolnośląskie region, Warminsko-Mazurskie, and Katowice and
Śląskie region.
6. The World Bank has identified the following as priority service areas, based on an assessment of
needs/demand, value-added and uniqueness of services, and capacity to deliver, though this list is nonexhaustive and can evolve over time.
 Infrastructure: public transport including metropolitan transport, regional / municipal strategies of
transport development; roads management, (including innovative PPPs);
 Regional development: regional development strategies, territorial and urban development/planning,
municipal land and property asset management; brownfields redevelopment, monitoring and
evaluation of EU funds;
 Public finance: Municipal financial and debt management, subnational Public Expenditure Reviews,
Performance-Based Budgeting; and
 Social sector: health sector, education, labor market (including innovative PPPs).
Sources of financing and modalities of cooperation

22

7. The assumption of the SCAP is to provide development support to regions / cities, mainly
through analytic and advisory services, most likely on a fee or cost-sharing basis. However,
financial support is not excluded.
8. In addition to regular Bank budget resources, the Bank’s analytical and advisory work could be
covered from the following financing sources: (i) Polish public funds; (ii) EU funds; and also possibly
from (iii) bilateral grants; and (iv) international financial institutions (IFI) loans.
9. However, regardless the origins of funding, due to its unique character, the Bank cannot enter
into competitive bidding for its services. While the Polish Procurement Law does not clearly exempt
the Bank from competitive bidding for advisory services (as it does for lending), the provisions and
published opinions does allow for this both due to the presumed uniqueness of services provided and the
special procedures of the Bank that prevent it from entering into competitive bidding. In parallel with the
Polish Procurement Law, the Law on Rules of Development Policy provides for a special procedure to
select of partners for joint implementation of a number of EU co-financed projects, namely the
―partnership agreement (project)‖. In this case, public procurement rules do not apply, i.e., there is no
need for competitive bidding.
Current experience and main conclusions
10. AAA. Recent and ongoing support includes fee-based service agreements with two Polish
regions: (i) Mazowieckie Voivodship in: (a) improving strategic planning of development, rehabilitation
and maintenance of regional roads on a fee-basis and (b) Public Expenditure Review covered by the WB
grant; and (ii) Lubelskie Voivodship ongoing assistance in analyzing of current and future development
of the Region and in reviewing and advising on Regional Development Strategy, provided on a costsharing basis with EU funding involved.
11. Despite some progress made in this area, a primary concern and one of the main stumbling
blocks in developing FBS is Polish procurement law constraining sole-sourcing the Bank. Given the
lack of systemic approach to procurement, it is treated on a case-by-case basis, so far effectively only by
combining FBS with Bank's own resources so that Bank’s advisory services are exempted from the Polish
procurement law. Another possibility would be to sole source the Bank, however, a prerequisite is a solid
justification of uniqueness of Bank's services.
12. Subnational Lending. The most promising avenue for subnational lending could be a line of credit
operated by BGK (Bank Gospodarstwa Krajowego). However, a sovereign guarantee requirement, as
well as modality of such an instrument and determining Polish government support for subnational
lending still remain issues. Although IL for Warsaw infrastructure investments was put on hold as it has
triggered pari passu clauses with other IFIs (which could also be a case for some other Po lish cities)
support to specific subnational governments may be also tested, most likely using BGK as intermediary.
Critical success factors
13. Successful operationalization and implementation of SCAP for Poland will depend on the
Bank’s ability to match real priorities and needs of subnational partners with its own strong
commitment. Critical internal success factors reinforcing the Bank’s engagement include the following:
- Availability of highly qualified technical staff for project identification, implementation and quality
assurance, ideally combining both global and local expertise;
- Effective project management and handling of relationships with clients, preferably by locally based
Bank staff project coordinators.
14. However, effective realization of SCAP will also greatly depend on factors on a client side. The
following external determinants are crucial for successful implementation of SCAP:
- Capacity of counterparts to define development programs, identify needs and areas for Bank assistance;
- Establishment of close cooperation with the Bank and client responsiveness in order to facilitate the
Bank to carry out advisory services;
- Continuity and stability of counterparts.

23

Annex 4: Summary of Recent Key Strategic Analytical Work
Annex 4a: Transition to Low-Emissions Economy in Poland
This report, part of the World Bank’s series of low -carbon growth studies, aims to assess how
Poland can move to a low-emissions development path without sacrificing growth and employment.
The report notes that:


Poland can cut its greenhouse gas emissions by almost a third by 2030 by applying existing
technologies, at an average cost of €10 to 15 per ton of carbon dioxide equivalent abated.



Costs to the economy will peak in 2020; but by 2030, the shift towards low emissions will augment
growth. Overall, this abatement will lower GDP by an average one percent through 2030 from where
it otherwise would have been.
 The economic cost in output and employment of Poland’s required abatement by 2020 under EU rules
is higher than for the average EU country; and the restrictions on emissions trading between sectors
aggravate that cost.
 The energy sector currently generates near half of Poland’s emissions; but the transport sector — with
precipitous growth and the need for behavioral change in addition to the adoption of new technologies
— may end up posing the tougher policy challenge.
A low-emissions growth path appears to be particularly difficult for Poland. Poland’s economy
remains today among the least emissions-efficient in the EU, and the country is a European and global
outlier with more than 90 percent of its electricity generated from locally-abundant coal. Yet, as an EU
member, Poland must comply with EU energy and climate policies. O ver the next few decades, Poland
faces the test of catching up to EU income levels while simultaneously becoming less dependent on
abundant domestic coal for energy needs.
The switch to low-emissions energy supply, end-user energy efficiency measures, and transport
policy will be the central pillars of Poland’s low-emissions strategy. The power sector, as the dominant
source of today’s emissions, necessarily must be addressed, but the sector’s large investment costs raise
financing challenges while long lead times guarantee that its structure will shift only slowly. With lower
capital costs and earlier returns, energy efficiency measures hold out the promise of relatively low cost
abatement that works directly to delink emissions from growth, the essence of a low-emissions economy.
Yet, the transport sector may prove the most challenging to hold emissions growth within the EU target
since most technological solutions are already in place, leaving policymakers with only behavioral
solutions — such as getting people out of their cars and onto public and non-motorized transport— that are
much more complicated to implement.
Poland’s transition to a low-emissions economy by 2030 seems to be affordable. However, capturing
the full package of technologically feasible and economically sensible abatement measures requires
coordinated and early action by the government. With an ambitious approach, Poland can aim to reduce
its GHG emissions by about one-third by 2030 (relative to 1990) at manageable cost to incomes and
employment. Similarly, meeting the EU targets for 2020 appear generally feasible for Poland at
manageable cost as well, albeit likely more challenging for less energy-intensive sectors such as transport
than for sectors that are covered by EU-wide carbon trading.
The report has already made an impact. One specific outcome of this analytic work is Bank support
through the development policy operation for energy efficiency policy reforms in Poland. Moreover, Bank
representatives were invited to participate in the national Energy Round Table, a series of high-level
discussions on Poland's low carbon strategy. Also, insights from the study have been used by the
government in preparing its medium-term and long-term economic strategies. Last is the transfer of one of
the models developed under the study to the government for additional study of EU policies and the use of
another of the models for more in-depth analysis of energy efficiency questions.

24

Annex 4b: Poland Transport Policy Note—Toward a Sustainable Land Transport Sector
Poland’s rapid economic growth since EU accession has translated into a strong increase in freight and
passenger traffic, even above GDP growth. Most of this growth has been served by road transport despite
the existence in Poland of one of the largest rail networks in the EU. In spite of many positive
developments, the country is still perceived by potential investors as having a poor quality of transport
infrastructure. Poland has made significant progress in developing land transport infrastructure over the
last several years. It has successfully seized the opportunities from the accession to the EU and the large
financial support provided for development of transport infrastructure. For example, total road spending
in Poland doubled from 2004-2007 and almost doubled again in 2007-2010. The results of such large
investments are visible mostly in the road sector, where the percentage of roads in good condition
increased from 49 in 2005 to nearly 60 in 2009 and absorption of EU funds under the current 2007 -2014
program is well underway. Current road-focused transport policy orientation is partly understandable as
the country still lacks a good backbone network of highways, while the surge in car ownership and road
traffic have resulted in strong demand for high quality infrastructure supporting primarily road mobility.
Poland is still one of the worst EU performers in road injuries despite progress in legal regulations,
enforcement and education campaigns. The economic and social cost of road crashes is estimat ed at 1.5
percent of GDP or US$10 billion a year. By approaching road safety initiatives more as investments
rather than just costs to the budget, it was possible to reduce the number of fatalities in Poland by over 25
percent in 2009-10 to around 3900 in 2010. To sustain this positive trend, further coordinated efforts and
sustainable medium–term funding would be necessary. Finally, the contribution of transport to CO2
emissions has already reached around 12 percent with road transport representing 92 percent of the sector
emissions.
Of the imbalances in the land transport sector which need to be addressed in the short to medium -term,
the key ones are related to a relatively low level of state funding for railways, resulting in the need for a
significantly larger share of user funding of the railway infrastructure compared to road users. Another
one is the relative underfunding of revitalization and current maintenance of existing land transport
infrastructure compared to modernization and construction of new infrastructure. The sustainability of
road sector financing, which depends largely on EU structural funds and debt, is also a matter of concern.
On the discrepancy between investment in new infrastructure on the one hand and revitalization and
maintenance of the infrastructure on the other hand, we believe there is a lot to be gained from adopting a
life-cycle approach to transport infrastructure and assuring sufficient medium-term funding for reducing
the backlog in rehabilitation of existing infrastructure as well as proper current and periodic maintenance
of newly developed infrastructure.
While the current transport policy orientation of the government seems to focus on improvement of road
mobility, changes are needed in the transport policy in order to align it with EU recommendations
towards a more balanced and energy efficient sector and to overcome numerous other challenges. These
are mostly linked to further reforms in railways to improve efficiency and competitiveness of this
transport mode and the need to focus attention on improving railway infrastructure.
The report makes an attempt to identify some basic alternative policy options and provides a general
impact assessment using a simplified simulation tool developed as part of the study. These simulations
show that modifications are needed in the direction of land transport policy, including adoption of a
medium term financial strategy, further institutional strengthening and improvement in coordination
between different stakeholders and transport modes. Delaying these reforms would be risky. The study
suggests a number of priority actions to be considered by the government that should lead to improved
financial, economic, social and environmental sustainability of the Polish land transport sector in the
medium-long term.

25

Annex 4c: Poland Public Expenditure Review Analysis of Social and Public Wages
This report looks at public spending on pensions, education, health, social assistance, labor market
programs, and public wages. Presenting the findings of a series of studies and notes compiled since
April 2009, it highlights how reforming such spending, which comprises about one quarter of GDP, is
essential for mitigating the impact of the economic crisis and for transforming Poland from a welfare state
to a workfare society in line with Government’s Vision 2030.
The report has two main messages. First, Poland can take measures to reduce public expenditures
on social sectors and public wages by around 2.3 percentage points over the next three years . This
would go a long way towards reducing the fiscal deficit from around 6 percent of GDP in 2009 to below 3
percent of GDP in 2012, consistent with the Maastricht threshold and as advised by the European Council
from July 2009. The adjustment would allow the Government to maintain public debt below the
constitutional ceiling of 60 percent of GDP and to aim for euro adoption by the middle of the decade.
Such fiscal consolidation can be done while maintaining economic and social priority programs that
mitigate the social costs of the crisis and enhance growth prospects. Delaying the adjustment to latter
years would make the problem more difficult to address, raises the probability of new fiscal crisis in the
years ahead, and runs the risks of constraining policy flexibility in future.
Second, beyond supporting the fiscal adjustment required in the context of the economic crisis,
public expenditure reforms can also help bring about structural changes envisioned as part of the
Government’s strategy for 2030. This vision entails a fundamental transformation to a workfare society
in response to the challenges of globalization, energy deficiency, climate change, and population aging.
The aim is to build a competitive, innovative and energy efficient economy supported by a well
performing state for a socially and regionally cohesive society.
This report provides a comprehensive assessment of Poland’s social sector and public wage polices
and lays out options for reform. The summary report has five parts. The first part lays out the
macroeconomic context. It emphasizes that Poland has weathered the global economic crisis remarkably
well but that the recovery is likely to be feeble and subject to uncertainty. The next part discusses the
fiscal fallout of the crisis and argues that public expenditure reform should be a crucial pillar for fiscal
consolidation. Sections III to V contain the main findings of the report. Section III presents a list of
important reforms of public expenditures on social sectors and wages in support of Vision 2030. Section
IV simulates the fiscal impact of public expenditure reforms, with a particular focus on state budget
expenditures. The final section discusses how institutional reforms in the areas of medium-term and
performance-based budget can support the reform agenda. Volume 2 presents the detailed analyses of
social sectors and institutional reforms of public finance.
The analysis offers three original contributions to the debate o n public expenditure reform in
Poland. First, based on empirical evidence from administrative and household survey data, the report
provides in-depth treatments of the social sectors. It takes stock of the achievements of the last years,
presents outstanding challenges and lays out policy options to support Vision 2030, drawing on experience
in the central Europe and elsewhere. Second, based on the Government’s latest macroeconomic
framework, the report presents estimates of fiscal savings for specific public expenditure reforms. While
these calculations rely on a number of simplifying assumptions, they relate public expenditure reforms to a
fiscal framework and provide order-of-magnitudes for potential savings. Third, the report presents an
action plan to meet the goal of program-based budget appropriations in financial year 2013, as well as the
new Multi-Year State Financial Plan.

26

Annex 4d: Europe 2020 Poland--Fueling Growth and Competitiveness through
Employment, Skills, and Innovation.
This Report aims to analyze how Poland could help offset a projected decline in potential growth
rate after the crisis and meet the Europe 2020 targets. Growth and competitiveness through
employment, skills, and innovation and technology absorption are key issues to enable the EU to meet the
targets set out in the Europe 2020 Strategy for Smart, Sustainable, and Inclusive Growth. Poland has
undertaken important reforms in the first two areas, but it needs to go further to sustain its impressive precrisis growth rates and meet the new targets on which Poland still lags behind.
The Report argues that accelerating post-crisis rate of growth and meeting the EUROPE 2020
targets could be achieved through reforms in three specific areas: raising employment, improving
skills, and enhancing technology absorption and innovation.
On raising employment, the report argues that although labor market conditions have substantially
improved in Poland in recent years, the current employment rate of 65 percent is still less than the EU
average and well below the Europe 2020 target. Raising the employment/population ratio is thus one of
the key challenges that Poland faces on the road to convergence to the income level of the EU-15. The
report shows that reducing labor market inactivity of older workers would yield particularly substantial
economic benefits. Achieving a higher employment rate would also be critical given population aging and
the growing life expectancy.
On improving skills, surveys indicate that Polish employers see inadequate workforce skills as one of the
main constraints to the activity of their firms, with innovative firms tending to be more affected by skill
shortages than traditional firms. To reduce the skills mismatch in Poland, the key challenge going forward
will be to increase the supply of tertiary students, while ensuring that they are able to acquire the key
skills that employers want. In addition, it will be crucial to give greater access to adult learning
opportunities for those already in the labor market and those who are unemployed, but could shift to
different jobs requiring different skills. Finally, Polish higher education will also need to offer the new
skills that employers seek as well as provide good quality vocational courses at the tertiary level.
On enhancing technology absorption and innovation, the report argues that growth in Poland in the
longer term will have to increasingly rely on technological change in addition to factor accumulation.
The report shows that Poland ranks poorly among EU countries with regard to the efficiency of public
expenditures and that Poland has a large scope to increase the efficiency of public expenditures on
Research & Development (R&D) before increasing its levels. Further restructuring of Research and
Development Institutes (RDIs), enhancing interest in innovation among Polish firms, and promoting
international collaboration on co-patents will be crucial to support productivity-based growth.
The Report provides a list of specific policy recommendations for each of the three areas. It
recommends, for instance, to make further revisions regarding the access to social security benefits so that
they do not present a disincentive for labor market participation; develop a learning outcomes approach
for all levels of learning, with more emphasis placed on generic skills as a basis for labor mobility; and
reform the RDI financing system to strengthen applied research and links with the needs of Polish small
and medium enterprises and industry.

27

Annex 5: Poland at a Glance

Poland at a glance

CAS A2

5/9/11

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

High
inco me

P o land

Age distribution, 2008

(2009)

Male

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

38.1
313
0.1
61

1,110
35,527
0.7
77

468.6
12,280
18,440

43,030
38,781
37,286

1.8
1.7

0.5
-0.2

<2
<2
76
6
..

..
..
80
6
..

100
99
97
97

99
98
101
101

..
..

100
99

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

15-19

0-4
6

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

4

2

0

2

4

6

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 9 )
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)
A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
20

10

0
1990

1995

Poland

N e t A id F lo ws
(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2008):
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

19 8 0

19 9 0

2000

–

1,320

1,393

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–

2.4
35

0.8
36

2009

a

–
–
–
0.6
40

8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
95

..
..

Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

..
..

585.5
55.2
0.9
104

2007

High income

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

1,522

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds
Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)

2000

10.1
7.3

3.5
3.6

4.3
100

3.1
109

05

GDP

GDP per capita

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 – 0 9
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

35.6
..

38.1
58,976

38.5
171,263

38.1
431,307

0.7
..

0.1
4.7

-0.1
4.4

(% o f GDP )
A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

8.3
50.1
..
41.6

5.0
31.7
18.5
63.3

3.6
29.9
16.7
66.5

..
..
..
..

0.5
7.1
9.9
5.1

0.8
5.7
8.5
3.8

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n

..
..
..

48.0
19.3
25.6

63.1
18.5
24.8

60.5
19.2
20.2

..
..
..

5.2
3.7
10.6

3.6
4.2
5.9

Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

..
..
..

28.6
21.5
15.9

27.1
33.5
18.8

38.9
38.9
18.6

..
..

11.3
16.7

9.1
8.0

28

Poland
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2009
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

36,179
50,381
-10,904

135,811
145,151
358

Voice and accountability

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

-10,343
-6.0

-7,199
-1.7

Regulatory quality

1,496

8,816

27,466

79,591

Political stability

Rule of law

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)
Reserves, including go ld

Control of corruption
0
2009

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e

2000

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

38.1
19.8
38.2

36.7
20.3
38.2

Overall surplus/deficit

-3.0

-7.1

..
30

32
19

25

50

100

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

75

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

2000
68.3

2008
90.3

46

141

3.3

5.2

60
29.8
..

53
30.4
24.3

1,402
16.2

1,406
..

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)

64,834
10,156
–

195,201
27,538
–

37.9
..

45.3
..

To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)
Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

9,343
447

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)
Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)

16,974
559

CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)
GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

Composition of total external debt, 2008
IMF, 0

IDA, 0

Other multilateral, 0

Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)

7.8

8.3

5.1

6.1

2,317

2,547

IBRD, 1,776

Bilateral, 1,121

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio
Short-term,
64,904

US$ millions

Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
Tax rates
A ccess to /co st o f financing
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2009

(US$ millio ns)

Private,
150,221

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt

2000

2000

2009

–
–
–

32
17.9
197

2000

2009

..
..

2,229
349
199
122

1,655
31
152
62

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

–
–
–

–
–
–

111
91
8

38
38
5

21

8

2
0

0
0

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt

57.5
50.7

18.3
7.1

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

31.4
7.9

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

29

5/9/11

Millennium Development Goals

Poland

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

P o la nd

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)
G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)
G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

19 9 0
<2
..
9.2
..

19 9 5
<2
14.6
8.2
..

2000
<2
14.8
7.9
..

2008
<2
..
7.3
..

..
98
88
100

..
94
95
100

97
95
100
100

96
96
100
100

..
14

..
47
13

98
47
13

99
47
20

17
15
95

14
12
96

10
8
97

7
6
98

..
..

..
..
..

100

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)
G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

49

..

8
100

100
..

..

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
..
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
52
Tuberculo sis case detectio n rate (%, all fo rms)
81

0.1
51
82

0.1
35
81

0.1
25
79

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
..
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
..
Fo rest area (% o f to tal land area)
29.2
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)
..
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
9.1
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
3.0

..
..
29.5
..
9.0
3.5

..
..
29.8
..
7.8
5.1

..
..
30.4
24.3
8.3
6.1

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
P erso nal co mputers (per 100 peo ple)

14.8
0.2
0.6
2.9

28.5
17.5
7.3
6.9

25.5
115.2
49.0
16.9

8.6
0.0
0.0
0.8

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125

100

160
140

100

120

75
75

100

50

80

50

60

25

40

25

0

20
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary education

Poland

High income

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

30

Fixed + mobile subscribers

Internet users

5/9/11

Annex 6: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
as of 3/16/2011
CAS B2

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment

2008
a

Number of Projects Under Implementation
Average Implementation Period (years)

b

2009

2010

2011

7

5

5

4

3.4

2.7

3.5

5.1
25.0

Percent of Problem Projects by Number

a, c

14.3

40.0

20.0

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount

a, c

1.5

11.1

0.6

2.4

9.7

26.8

10.1

10.7

N
660,674
94,382

N
648,027
129,605

N
422,882
84,576

N
340,709
85,177

Disbursement Ratio (%)

d

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.

Since FY 80
44
4,699.2
20.5
11.2

Last Five FYs
7
854.4
28.6
11.3

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.

* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

31

Annex 7: IBRD Program Summary
as of 3/16/2011
CAS B3
Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal year

Proj ID

US$(M)

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

1,000.0

H

M

Municipal Credit Line (FIL) 1

500.0

H

H

PF/ Adm Reform

500.0

H

M

Municipal Credi Line (FIL) 2

250.0

Energy/Roads Results Based Lending*

500.0

PF/Adm Reform DPL2

250.0

H
M
H

H
M
M

2011

PL ENERGY EFFICIENCY DPL

2012

2013

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

*FY12 or FY13
3,000.0
Total

Annex 8: IFC Investment Operations Program

2008

2009

2010

12.25
12.25

14.73
14.73

100
100

100
100

0

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity
45.17
Loan
54.83
Quasi loan
Total
0
100

100
100

0

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
FINANCE & INSURANCE
Total

* Data as of March 01,2011

32

0

2011*

Annex 9: Summary of Analytical and Advisory Assistance
CAS B4
Product

Completion FY

Recent completions
TA on Regional Roads Mazovieckie
Voivodship (FBS)
Education Reform in Poland TA
Regulatory, Business Environment
and State Control Reform
Poland Transport Policy Note
Warsaw City Policy Note
PEIR Update
Mazowieckie region PEIR
Regional Development
Private & Financial Sector TA
Tax Expenditure Report TA
Poland Low Emissions Study
Underway
Training of Supreme Audit Institution
(SAI0
Poland Health & SP Technical Cooperation
Public Finance TA
Lubelskie: Support for Regional
Development Strategy
TA for Innovation, Knowledge and
Competitieness (EU) accession
countries)
TA Program of Technical Cooperation
in Pensions Policy in New EU
Member States and Croatia (EU
accession countries)
ROSC - Financial Sector
Assessment Program
Strategy for Human Capital
Development
Use of Country Systems for
Procurement in Poland
Financial Reporting TA Program 2010-2015
Planned
Municipal Finance
Subnational Transport 1
Monitoring & Evaluation TA (FBS)
Low emissions CEM follow-up TA
Roads/Railways Reform TA (FBS)
Administrative Reform TA (FBS)
Subnational RDS/PeR (FBS)
____________

Cost (US$000)

Audience

a

Objective

b

FY10
FY10

229
164

Gov
Gov

KG/PS
KG/PS

FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY11
FY11
FY11

80
210
102
290
248
60
92
38
858

Gov
Gov
Gov
Gov
Gov
Other
Gov
Gov
Gov

KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS/PD
KG/PS

FY11

15

Gov

KG/PS

FY11
FY11

147
34

Gov
Gov

KG/PS
KG/PS

FY11

28

Gov

KG/PS

FY11

135

Gov

KG/PD/PS

FY11

52

Gov

KG/PS

FY11

77

Gov

KG/PD

FY12

130

Gov

KG/PS

FY12
FY16

20

Gov

KG/PS

FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12

tbd
25
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd

Gov
Gov
Gov
Gov
Gov
Gov
Gov

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

33

KG/PD/PS

Annex 10: Poland Social Indicators
CAS B5

Latest single year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2002-08

Europe &
Central
Asia

37.2
0.9
59.9
2.3

38.6
0.2
61.5
1.6

38.1
0.0
61.3
1.4

443.3
0.1
63.7
1.8

949.3
0.8
74.8
2.0

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

..
..
..

23.8
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)

..
0
0

2,970
48
62

11,730
108
103

7,350
133
..

7,852
121
..

25.2
9.8
35.0

32.4
6.5
38.9

34.9
7.3
42.4

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
4.8

..
4.4

4.6
5.7

3.7
4.5

3.5
4.6

..
..
..

..
..
96

96
95
96

92
93
92

94
94
93

..
..
..

..
100
..

..
100
..

95
99
88

94
98
82

92
94
..

96
96
..

98
99
..

96
96
..

93
92
4

71
67
75

72
68
76

76
71
80

70
66
75

71
68
75

18
20

12
14

6
7

19
22

19
23

253
105
..
..

250
94
..
..

209
80
8
100

305
126
45
97

210
127
110
95

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DIST RIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Uppermiddleincome

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 23 April 2010.

34

Annex 11: Key Economic Indicators
CAS B6
Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product a

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Estimate
2009

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2010

2013

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

5

4

4

4

4

4

4

3

3

Industry

31

31

32

32

32

32

30

30

30

Services

65

65

64

65

65

65

67

67

67

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

81
18
4
14

81
20
5
15

78
22
5
17

80
22
5
17

80
21
6
15

80
18
6
13

81
19
7
13

79
20
6
14

78
20
5
15

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

37
38

40
42

41
44

40
44

40
40

42
43

41
42

41
43

42
43

Gross domestic savings

18

18

19

19

18

18

20

21

22

Gross national savings c

18

17

18

18

17

18

19

20

21

303976

341670

425321

529401

431184

468476

531981

580227

630587

7280

8340

9800

11870

12190

12420

13470

14920

16440

Real annual growth rates
Gross domestic product at market prices

3.6

6.2

6.8

5.1

1.7

3.8

4.0

4.0

3.7

Real annual per capita growth rates
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption

3.7
2.8
2.1

6.3
5.3
5.1

6.8
4.7
5.0

5.1
6.1
5.7

1.6
2.0
2.0

3.8
3.3
3.2

4.1
3.5
3.9

4.2
3.7
4.0

4.0
2.4
4.4

Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB

112653
96395

138060
117269

174251
144787

213976
176458

171071
141309

194747
161779

215974
190456

238652
215632

262517
244399

Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

114681
99161
-2028
8183
-3716

144330
124219
-6270
6492
-9225

186550
161699
-12299
8480
-20094

234942
202329
-20966
8068
-25533

170631
145616
440
6627
-9055

199229
170203
-4482
6195
-15385

223336
201978
-7361
8811
-18096

247009
228860
-8358
8731
-20968

270228
257074
-7711
8970
-21580

Net foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

6951
4059
-7514
11573
841

10821
-367
-1976
1609
1443

18078
4627
-2533
7160
10214

10299
3520
-9019
12539
8011

8583
4264
1981
2283
10986

4983
4892
2858
2034
21237

10167
3794
2027
1767
26231

8599
3348
2124
1224
25557

8450
3153
1949
1204
22652

Change in reserves d

-8135

-2672

-12825

3703

-14778

-15727

-22096

-16536

-12675

-0.7

-1.8

-2.9

-4.0

0.1

-1.0

-1.4

-1.4

-1.2

Agriculture

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)

35

Indicator

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
38.8
Current expenditures
39.0
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
-0.2
Capital expenditure
4.4
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR02 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

Estimate
2009

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2010

2013

39.7
39.0
0.7
4.8

39.8
37.3
2.5
4.8

39.1
37.8
1.3
5.5

36.8
38.2
-1.5
6.3

36.8
40.2
-3.4
5.6

39.3
39.1
0.2
6.6

39.9
37.9
2.0
5.8

38.9
37.3
1.6
4.9

43.4
13.1
105.3

46.7
16.0
105.9

47.7
13.4
108.0

52.2
18.6
102.8

53.6
8.1
72.5

54.8
8.3
84.6

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

136.3

139.4

144.7

159.3

135.0

143.5

..

..

..

2.1
2.6

1.0
1.5

2.5
4.0

4.2
3.1

3.5
3.6

2.6
1.3

3.5
3.3

2.8
2.6

2.5
2.5

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

36

Annex 12: Key Exposure Indicators
CAS B7
Actual
2006
2007

2008

132927

169636

234052

245496

2937

36709

64416

11444

35598

37420

41772

60936

75786

TDO/XGSb

118.0

122.9

134.3

TDO/GDP

43.7

49.6

55.0

TDS/XGS

33.2

30.3

...

2.2

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

2005

Estimated
2009

2011

Projected
2012

2013

359088

388752

414464

31120

46874

29665

25712

82299

98838

93792

97387

102698

114.7

164.3

160.3

166.3

162.9

157.9

46.4

65.2

66.6

67.5

67.0

65.7

35.0

35.4

48.1

50.8

43.4

40.8

39.1

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

3.8

5.8

3.5

3.4

2.7

5.3

2.3

1.5

2010

281094 312214

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)

Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.1

0.1

1796

1961

1870

1776

4493

5417

6247

6807

7175

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Loans

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

Equity and quasi-equity /c

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
d

IDA TDO (US$m)
IFC (US$m)

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

37

Annex 13: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
CAS B8 (IFC)
As of 2/28/2011
(In USD Millions)

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

1997
0
2009
0

Cpf
Fm bank
Fundusz
Schwarz group

0
0
1.08
22.48

0.24
5.14
0
0

0
14.66
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
1.08
22.48

0.14
3.24
0
0

0
5.23
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

23.56

5.38

14.66

0

0

23.56

3.38

5.23

0

0

Total Portfolio:

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

38

Annex 14: Portfolio (IBRD/Grants)
CAS B8
Closed Projects

47

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
287.44
of which has been repaid 0.00
Total Disbursed (Closed)
4,985.68
of which has been repaid 2,605.42
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 5,273.13
of which has been repaid 2,605.42
Total Undisbursed (Active)
183.40
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
0.00
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)
183.40

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Project ID

Project Name

P070246
P086768
P065270
P096214
Overall Result

ENERGY EFFICIENCY (GEF)
MU
ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD
S PROT
POST-ACC RUR SPPRT S
ROAD MAINTENANCE & REHAB
MS
3

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementatio
n Progress

Fiscal Year

U
MS
S
MS

2005
2007
2006
2006

39

IBRD

IDA

GRANT
11

184
88.8
180.2
453

11

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.

2.444938
168.4217
9.756076
5.224612
185.8473

2.4449377
64.220907
-1.037561
-10.69391
54.934374

Frm
Rev'd
0.15

0.15

IBRD 33467R

PO L A N D
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
PROVINCE (WOJEWÓDZTWO) CAPITALS
NATIONAL CAPITAL

POLAND

RIVERS
MAIN ROADS
MAIN RAILROADS
PROVINCE (WOJEWÓDZTWO) BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

14°E

16°E

18°E

B a l t ic

20°E

22°E

24°E

Sea
RUSSIAN
FEDERATION

To
Gusev

Gulf of
Gdansk

LITHUANIA

Gdynia

POMORSKIE

Koszalin

Elblag

Wisla

ZACHODNIOPOMORSKIE
Szczecin

Notec

Gorzów
Wielkopolski

Torun

LUBUSKIE

Plock
Wisla

MAZOWIECKIE

WIELKOPOLSKIE

Zielona Góra

sa
Ny

Leszno

Biala
Podlaska

O
a
dr

Sieradz

Walbrzych

52°N

To
Kovel'

LUBELSKIE

LÓDZKIE

Piotrków
Trybunalski

Radom

Lublin

To
Kovel'

Chelm

Wroclaw

Jelenia
Góra

To
Pinsk

Siedlce

Lódz

Kalisz

Legnica

OPOLSKIE

Czestochowa

Opole

Tarnobrzeg
tula
Vis

Katowice

To
Prague

Kraków

C Z E C H R EPU B LIC
LI C

BielskoBiala

,,
Zamosc

Kielce

SWIETOKRZYSKIE
S
an

SLASKIE

To
Prague

50°N

To
Baranavichy

Skierniewice

DOLNOSLASKIE
DOLN OSL ASKIE

To
Dresden

Bu
g

WARSAW

Konin

ta
War

Bialystok

Ciechanów
ew
ar

Wloclawek

,
Poznan

52°N
To
Berlin

,
Lomza
Ostroleca

Warta

To
Berlin

PODLASKIE

Bydgoszcz

Pila

Od
ra

Olsztyn

K U J AW S K O POMORSKIE

To
Berlin

54°N

N

GERMANY

To
Neubrandenburg

Suwalki

WA R M I N S K O MAZURSKIE

BELA RUS

To
Stralsund

54°N

To
Vilnius

´
Gdansk

Slupsk

PODKARPACKIE

Tarnów

Rzeszów

,
Przemysl

MALOPOLSKIE

50°N
To
L'viv

Krosno

Nowy Sacz

To
Brno

0

0

25

50

25

75

50

100 Kilometers

75 Miles

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rysy
(2,499 m)

To
Zvolen

UK R AI N E
UKR

To
Kosice

SLOVAK
SLO
VA K REPUBLI
REPUBLIC
C
18°E

20°E

22°E

24°E
MARCH 2007

