Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 59355 - KI

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF KIRIBATI
FY 2011 - 2014

January 31, 2011

Timor Leste, Papua New Guinea, and Pacific Islands Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region
The International Finance Corporation

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official duties.
Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

REPUBLIC OF KIRIBATI
CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
1 Australian Dollar (AUD) = 0.99 US Dollar (USD)
(Exchange rate effective as of January 2011)
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA

Analytic and Advisory Activities

KAP

Kiribati Climate Adaptation project

ADB

Asian Development Bank

KDP

Kiribati Development Plan

AusAID

Australian Agency for International Development

M&E

Monitoring and Evaluation

CAS

Country Assistance Strategy

MDGs

Millennium Development Goals

CEDAW

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women

MDTF

Multi-Donor Trust Fund

CPAR

Country Procurement Assessment Report

MOF

Ministry of Finance

CPPR

Country Project Portfolio Review

NGO

Non-Governmental Organizations

DGF

Development Grant Facility

NZ

New Zealand

DPO

Development Policy Operation

PALM

Japan – Pacific Alliance Leaders’ Meeting

DRR

Disaster Risk Reduction

PASAI

Pacific Association of National Audit Institutions

DWFNs

Distant Water Fishing Nations

PEFA

Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability

EC

European Commission

PFM

Public Financial Management

EDF

European Development Fund

PFTAC

IMF Pacific Technical Assistance Facility

EEZ

Exclusive Economic Zone

PF3

Pacific Facility III

EITI

Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative

PIC

Pacific Island Country

FIAS

Investment Climate Advisory Service

PNA

Parties to the Nauru Agreement

FTI
FSM

Education for All Fast Track Initiative
Federated States of Micronesia

PPCR
PRIF

Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility

GDP
GEF

Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility

PSD
RMI

Private Sector Development
Republic of the Marshall islands

GFDRR

Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery

QER

Quality Enhancement Review

GFRP

Global Food Crisis Response Program

RERF

Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund

GNI

Gross National Income

RSE

NZ Recognised Seasonal Employment Scheme

HDI

Human Development Indicators

SDR

Special Drawing Rights

IBRD
ICAO

International Bank for Reconstruction and
International Civil Aviation Organization

SPREP
TA

South Pacific Regional Environment Programme
Technical Assistance

IDA

International Development Association

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

IEG

Independent Evaluation Group

UNICEF

United Nations Children's Fund

IFC

International Finance Corporation

USAID

United States Agency for International

ILF

Import Levy Fund

WCPFC

Western Central Pacific Fisheries Commission

IMF

International Monetary Fund

WFP

World Food Programme

IUU

Illegal, Unregulated, Unreported fishing activity

JICA

Japan International Cooperation Agency
IDA

IFC

James W. Adams

Rashad Kaldany

Country Director:

Ferid Belhaj

Karin Finkelston

Task Team Leader:

Robert Jauncey

Gavin Murray

Vice President:

REPUBLIC OF KIRIBATI
WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Contents

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY............................................................................................................ i
I.

RATIONALE FOR A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY......................................... 1

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ..................................... 1

Economic Geography ........................................................................................................................................ 1
Recent Economic Developments ....................................................................................................................... 3
Government Development Strategy: 2009-13 .................................................................................................... 5
Donor Engagement ............................................................................................................................................ 5

III. WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT WITH KIRIBATI ................................................ 6
Transforming World Bank Group Engagement in the Pacific ............................................................................ 6
Translating Pacific Themes to Kiribati............................................................................................................... 7
Building Resilience Against Climate Change and External Shocks ................................................................... 7
Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration .......................................................... 8
Internal Finance Corporation ........................................................................................................................... 10
Mainstreaming Gender..................................................................................................................................... 10
Implementation: Partnerships, Selectivity, New Ways of Doing Business, and Accountability ....................... 10
Financing Terms and Sources .......................................................................................................................... 11

IV. RISK..................................................................................................................................................... 12
Attachments
Attachment 1: Kiribati and Pacific Island Countries MDG Progress ................................................................ 13
Attachment 2: Kiribati Results Matrix ............................................................................................................. 15
Attachment 3: Kiribati: Country at a Glance .................................................................................................... 17
Attachment 4: Selected Indicators of IDA Portfolio Performance and Management ........................................ 19
Attachment 5: IDA Program Summary ............................................................................................................ 20
Attachment 6: Operations Portfolio ................................................................................................................. 21
Attachment 7: Map of the Republic of Kiribati ................................................................................................ 22

REPUBLIC OF KIRIBATI
WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FY2011 – FY2014

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
This is the first Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Kiribati and reflects a deepening of the
World Bank Group’s engagement. The World Bank Group has been scaling up its assistance throughout the
Pacific and decided to move from the previous umbrella approach afforded by a regional strategy to individual
country strategies better able to reflect specific country development challenges. This CAS aims to assist
Kiribati in: (i) addressing the existential threat posed by climate change; and, (ii) mitigating the effects of
geographic isolation. The CAS accompanies Kiribati’s first IDA investment and heralds an expanded program
of World Bank Group support.
ii.
Kiribati is one of the most remote and geographically dispersed countries in the world, consisting of
33 islands spread over 3.5 million square kilometers of ocean – an area larger than India. None of the
inhabited atolls in Kiribati lie more than a few meters above sea level, and the effects of rising sea-levels and
associated soil salination are beginning to threaten already limited water supplies. In June 2008, President
Tong highlighted the possibility for Kiribati citizens to consider future resettlement to larger metropolitan
centers in the region noting that “to plan for the day when you no longer have a country is indeed painful but I
think we have to do that.”
iii.
Reflecting Kiribati’s vulnerability to the existential threat of climate change, the core of the Bank
Group’s strategy will be to help with climate adaptation measures. A key focus will be to expand current
pilot approaches to coastal protection and water management. These efforts will provide a basis for a
coordinated multi-donor, multi-sectoral engagement to help Kiribati address the multiple and complex
dimensions of climate adaptation as well as the pressing water-supply issues faced by the main population
center of South Tarawa. Given the Bank Group’s limited engagement with Kiribati to date, preparation of a
more comprehensive approach to climate change adaptation will also be accompanied by a series of
complementary but less complex investments.
iv.
Beyond climate change, Kiribati remains geographically isolated and highly exposed to external
shocks, resulting in volatile economic performance. Revenues from fishing licenses, remittances, aid, and a
trust fund from now depleted phosphate reserves, comprise almost half of all economic activity. Given its
heavy reliance on imports, Kiribati was impacted severely by the recent food and fuel price spikes.
v.
In this context, the World Bank Group will also seek to scale-up efforts to help overcome the
tyranny of distance and to generate opportunities from closer regional and global integration and private
sector led growth. The importance of greater integration for small and remote island states is highlighted in
the 2009 World Development Report, Reshaping Economic Geography. The Bank will continue to work with
the Kiribati authorities, as well as the Australian and New Zealand Governments, to mitigate geographic
isolation and expand economic opportunities, including core infrastructure – airports and telecoms – to help
connect Kiribati to the world. Similarly, support for regional measures to improve the sustainable
management and returns to island countries from the tuna fishery offer considerable potential benefits.
vi.
World Bank Group support to Kiribati will require a new way of doing business, consistent with the
recommendations of the Post Crisis Directions (PCD) paper. The challenge of applying the Paris
Declaration principles is thrown into starkest relief in small states such as Kiribati. The 2009 Cairns Compact
committed Pacific countries and development partners to coordinating their resources more effectively and to
accelerating progress towards the MDGs. These objectives are echoed strongly in the PCD where they are
identified as essential to development effectiveness. Accordingly, Bank activities in Kiribati will be selective
and will focus on promoting growth and regional integration. The program will be informed by successful
experience in Kiribati and elsewhere in the Pacific with all interventions designed with capacity considerations
uppermost.

REPUBLIC OF KIRIBATI
WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FY11 – FY14
I.

RATIONALE FOR A COUNTRY STRATEGY FOR KIRIBATI

1.
The World Bank Group is significantly scaling up analytical and financial support to help Kiribati
reduce the constraints of economic geography and make the most of economic opportunities. The Bank will
be providing IDA finance to Kiribati for the first time in FY11, with Board approval being sought in parallel to
this CAS for a road maintenance investment to be undertaken jointly with the Asian Development Bank, with
additional financial support from Australia and New Zealand. Over the next few years, it is anticipated that
Bank Group support for Kiribati could grow significantly, drawing on both IDA and generous donor trust
funds resources.
2.
Reflecting increased World Bank Group engagement across the Pacific islands, individual country
strategies will be prepared for each client country. Given the importance of greater regional integration, such
bespoke strategies will draw from key elements of a common regional approach. Nevertheless, individual
country strategies will allow for a greater acknowledgement of the different histories, development situations,
and challenges of the Pacific island countries, as well as a more nuanced discussion of how common regional
themes in the Bank Group’s engagement are translated into specific country contexts. Strategies for each of
the Pacific islands will inevitably need to be appropriately streamlined and focused, and will not necessarily be
articulated with the same level of detail as they are for the Bank Group’s larger clients. Reflecting a
commitment to work collaboratively with other donors, strategies such as this one for Kiribati, draw heavily
from analytical work undertaken by other partners, particularly the ADB, IMF, and the Pacific Islands Forum
Secretariat. The Government of Kiribati strongly supports both the preparation of individual country strategies
and the program outlined in this CAS.
II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

Economic Geography
3.
Kiribati is a Micronesian island country with a history of human settlement extending back 2-3000
years when the first Austronesian speaking voyagers reached the islands. Kiribati culture has been
influenced by interaction with both Polynesian and Melanesian societies.
4.
Since independence from the UK in 1979, Kiribati has been a Parliamentary democracy. Under the
Constitution, executive power rests with a President elected by a unicameral legislature. The next elections are
scheduled for October 2011. Representation in the legislature is heavily weighted toward the outer islands. In
addition, 23 elected local councils are substantively involved in service delivery and responsible for business
licensing and for urban land use planning. In this environment, a high degree of political consensus tends to be
required if reform measures are to be successfully implemented.
5.
Kiribati is one of the most remote and geographically dispersed countries in the world. The country
is composed of 33 islands spread over 3.5 million square kilometers – an area larger than India. The
population of about 100,000 people lives on 20 coral atolls and a single volcanic island, with a total land area
of less than 800 square kilometers. The capital, South Tarawa, is about 4,000 kilometers from Australia,
Hawaii, and New Zealand. Partly because of this remoteness, atolls in Kiribati were used for nuclear testing
by the US and the UK in the 1950s and 1960s.
1

6.
Kiribati is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change, natural disasters,
and environmental degradation. In the longer-term, climate change poses an existential threat for Kiribati.
With the exception of the sparsely populated Banaba island, the highest point above sea level is only a few
meters, and sea level rises are already causing erosion that is threatening several atolls. While Kiribati’s
Phoenix Islands Protected Area is the world’s largest marine reserve – covering over 400,000 square
kilometers and including over 120 varieties of coral and 520 fish species – warming seas are damaging coral
reefs and marine habitats. Increasing soil salination is reducing the amount of arable land available. Thin
ground water lenses are similarly fragile and there is a risk of increased salination as a result of predicted sea
level rises. These vulnerabilities are compounded by the fact that the main island of South Tarawa is very
densely populated. About 50,000 people live on South Tarawa which has a total land area of 16 square
kilometers, while the islet of Betio has over 10,000 people living on a total land area of just over 1 square
kilometer – making it as densely populated as Manila or Jakarta. Critically, climate change cuts across all
aspects of Kiribati’s development; as well as technical responses, it will be vital to ensure that the social
dimensions of climate change – and the particular vulnerability of many poor people with already limited
access to land and water – are addressed. The effects of climate change are similarly exacerbated by
population growth, which in turn is linked to poverty and women’s access to family planning measures.
7.
Although at the margins of the global economy, Kiribati’s economic geography means that it is
heavily reliant on external factors, with economic performance being highly volatile. In the last ten years,
GDP growth has averaged around 1.1% per annum, but has ranged from -5% to 6%. Kiribati’s growth
prospects are constrained by its geographic isolation, its narrow export base, and impediments to private sector
activity. Comparative advantages are limited because of permanent cost wedges associated with Kiribati’s
small size and remoteness from markets. Systemic volatility is exacerbated by Kiribati’s exposure to natural
hazard risks, particularly drought and the loss of groundwater. The country is highly reliant on imports –
equivalent to over 50% of GDP. With exports of only about 3% of GDP, Kiribati faces a significant structural
trade gap. Main sources of external income are investment earnings from the Revenue Equalization Reserve
Fund (RERF) established in the 1950s to invest royalties from now depleted phosphate reserves, workers’
remittances, and the sale of fishing licenses to operate in its Exclusive Economic Zone. These external income
sources are equivalent to about half of GDP or about a third of GNI. In addition, foreign aid has also
amounted to about 20-25% of GDP in recent years.
Figure 1: Components of Kiribati Gross National Income: 2001 – 20010 (est)
300
250
200

RERF Investment Income

A$m 150

Fishing Licenses
Remittances

100

GDP
50
0
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

Source: IMF Estimates, OECD-DAC Geographical Distribution of Financial Flows to Developing Countries

2

8.

Kiribati’s development outcomes are mixed.

•

Kiribati is one of the poorer countries in the Pacific, with GNI per capita of about $2,000. While absolute
poverty is rare, one fifth of the population lives below the national poverty line, particularly in the outer
islands and parts of the main urban settlements in Tarawa.

•

Education coverage is high and Kiribati is close to achieving universal primary education, although issues
remain in regard to educational quality. As well as the Government, which provides free primary
education, churches play a central role in Kiribati’s education system.

•

Health service delivery is improving, but outcomes are a source of concern. Under five mortality rates
have improved from 88 per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 64 in 2008, but this is still among the highest in the
region, in large part due to lack of clean water and sanitation. The proportion of births attended by a
skilled health physician has increased significantly, but maternal mortality has also increased from an
average of 1-2 per year to 4-5 per year.

•

Gender outcomes are mixed. Kiribati has signed the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and women’s rights are protected under the Constitution.
Unlike some countries in the region, women have full rights to own land. There is little or no difference
between enrollment rates for boys and girls (girls are slightly over-represented at secondary levels). On
the other hand, violence against women is high; and at the local level unimwane (elder men) preside over
village decision-making while women tend to work primarily in the informal economy. Women’s
representation in Parliament is limited, although the Vice President is a woman.

9.

Kiribati’s progress against each of the MDG goals is set out in Attachment 1.

Recent Economic Developments
10.
External economic shocks, particularly the food and fuel prices spikes of 2008, hit Kiribati harder
than almost any other country in the world. Kiribati is highly reliant on imported food, especially rice.
Electricity supply is also heavily dependent on imported petroleum products, and Kiribati’s remoteness means
that fuel price increases flow through to almost every sector of the economy as a result of increased transport
costs. In total, imports – primarily of food and fuel – are equivalent to about half of Kiribati’s GDP.
Following global price shocks, the Government did take action to open food imports to a wider range of
private sector companies in Kiribati, and the increased competition helped mitigate the impact of the spike in
prices. Still, these shocks contributed to an economic contraction in Kiribati, as well as a significant increase
in inflation and deterioration in Kiribati’s external position from which the economy is still recovering.
Figure 2: Real GDP Growth and Inflation: 1992 – 2010 (est)
20
15
10
5

GDP

0

Inflation

-5
-10
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

Sources: 2000 – 2008: IMF Article IV June 2009, 2009 – 2010 (est) ADB Pacific Economic Monitor July 2010

3

11.
Rebuilding the value of the Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund (RERF), which declined as a result
of a fall in global asset prices as well as unsustainable Government expenditures, is a key challenge. The
RERF was established in 1956 to invest royalties from now depleted phosphate reserves on Banaba Island.
Earnings from the RERF are a major source of Government finance. The Government has generally followed
conservative investment policies. The RERF reached a peak value of A$650m in 2000, or slightly more than
A$7,000 per capita. Asset price volatility since 2000, however, has seen the value of investment assets fall.
This has been compounded by Government drawdowns to fund high fiscal deficits which have exceeded RERF
earnings. The IMF estimated in its 2009 Article IV that drawdowns should be limited to 6-7% of GDP to
ensure sustainability, yet average annual drawdowns since 2003 have been about double this. As a result of
both external and domestic factors, the value of the RERF declined to about A$550m in 2009, recovering
slightly to over A$570m in 2010. Under current fiscal trends, IMF estimates suggest that the RERF could be
depleted by around 2030.
Figure 3. RERF Closing Balance (nominal A$m) and Real Per Capita level (A$ 1996)
700

8000

600

7000

500

6000
5000

400

4000

300

3000

200

2000

100

1000

0

0
1991

1993

1995

1997

RERF Balance (LHS)

1999

2001

2003

Per Capita A$ 1996 (RHS)

2005

2007

2009

1996 Real Value (A$)

Source: IMF Article IV and Staff Estimates

12.
Fiscal consolidation will be important to preserve the RERF but will be a challenge given large
infrastructure requirements, as well as basic needs in health and education. The public sector provides
nearly two-thirds of formal employment and government expenditure amounts to more than 100 percent of
GDP. Unless carefully managed, fiscal consolidation could disrupt service delivery and depress growth. To
enhance revenues, the Government is introducing tax reforms including a PAYE system and plans for a broadbased consumption tax, but progress has been hindered by capacity constraints. Revenue generation will also
be constrained if growth prospects remain weak. Given revenue limitations, depletion of the RERF, and its
high vulnerability to economic shocks, Kiribati will need to rely mainly on external grants rather than debt to
finance its development priorities.
13.
SOE reforms and efforts to encourage private sector growth will also be needed. There are 24 SOEs
in Kiribati, engaged in electricity, telecommunications, domestic air services, ports, marine service, hardware
retailing, inter-island fish transport, hotels, and general stores. The efficiency of SOE operations is
questionable: for instance, telecommunications and electricity costs in Kiribati are the highest in the Pacific
and coverage is very limited. Many SOEs also represent a significant drain on public finances, through both
implicit and explicit subsidies. Given weaknesses in expenditure controls, the unknown fiscal risk from SOEs
has the potential to undermine the Government’s budget position. ADB and the Australian Government have
been supporting Kiribati’s plans to privatize or liquidate 15 of the 24 SOEs. There has been progress in
developing a legislative framework and institutional capacity for reform, although no transactions have
occurred to date. The authorities are moving to increase competition, and have, inter alia, encouraged greater
competition in food imports in 2008, overseen the establishment of a private airline in 2008, and stated their
commitment to moving ahead with a second telecoms license.
4

14.
The private sector is relatively small but growing. The Chamber of Commerce estimates that there
are some 2,000 businesses, although almost all are small, with only two employing over 200 people. Kiribati
rates 79 out of 183 economies in the World Bank Group’s Doing Business report, the fifth in the Pacific after
Tonga, Samoa, Fiji and Vanuatu. Private investment remains constrained by cumbersome entry and exit
procedures and limited access to finance. Improving the business environment is vital, although given
Kiribati’s economic geography, reform on its own may not be sufficient to attract new foreign investment.
Addressing governance issues will be a priority, particularly strengthening weak public financial
15.
management (PFM) systems. Kiribati is ranked 111 out of 180 countries on Transparency International’s
corruption perceptions index. Despite progressive improvements, a 2010 Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability (PEFA) assessment led by ADB highlighted concerns regarding the quality and completeness
of financial statements of the Government’s public accounts.
Government of Kiribati’s Development Strategy
16.
The Government of Kiribati’s development vision is “a vibrant economy for the people of Kiribati”.
The Government’s approach is set out in the Kiribati Development Plan (KDP) 2008–2011, which was
endorsed in April 2008 and serves as a basis for the CAS. The theme running through the strategy is
“enhancing economic growth for sustainable development”. The KDP prioritizes 6 key policy areas: (i) human
resource development, (ii) economic growth and poverty reduction, (iii) health, (iv) environment, (v)
governance, and (vi) infrastructure. The strategy then sets out 195 individual goals and activities. In
discussions with the Bank Group and partners, the Government has consistently identified the priority it places
on improving key elements of the national infrastructure network, which is seen as essential to lowering the
cost structure of the economy, and on climate change adaptation.
Donor Engagement
17.
Kiribati, like many small island states, is heavily reliant on international development cooperation
flows. Net flows to Kiribati in recent years have reached slightly over $40m per annum, equivalent to about
25% of GDP or about $400 per capita, per annum.
•

Australia is Kiribati’s largest partner, providing an annual program of assistance in excess of A$20m
($20m). The framework for Australian cooperation with Kiribati is set out in the Partnership for
Development signed by respective Leaders in January 2009. Australian assistance has three key themes:
(i) strengthening growth and economic management by supporting public financial management reforms,
increasing government revenues, reducing the cost of public enterprises and improving delivery of public
services; (ii) improving basic education; and (iii) developing workforce skills in areas of industry demand
to reduce youth unemployment.

•

The Asian Development Bank has had a long-term engagement in Kiribati, based around an integrated
program of analytical work and investments. ADB has tentatively set a 5-year ADF allocation of $12m for
Kiribati covering the period 2008 to 2012, with additional trust fund resources available to support
investments and TA. ADB, with Australia, is leading economic reform and improving PFM. ADB and
the World Bank have prepared a co-financed investment to undertake road maintenance on the main road,
and to strengthen infrastructure management.

•

The European Commission’s country strategy (2008 – 2013) sets out a framework for engagement with
Kiribati under the 10 th European Development Fund (EDF). The EC anticipates making approximately
€14m ($18m) available during this period, with a focus on the outer islands, including household solar
energy supply, water/sanitation and health services.

5

•

Japan. Japanese assistance has averaged about $10m per annum in recent years. Kiribati is also eligible
for support from the 6.8 billion Yen ($66m) Pacific Environment Community Fund (PEC Fund) which will
focus on solar power generation and sea water desalination projects in the Pacific region.

•

New Zealand announced in August 2010 that it would double aid to Kiribati to approximately NZ$8m
($6m) per annum. A key focus of expanded assistance will be to rehabilitate Cassidy airport on Kiritimati
island, which will be essential to bring this facility up to ICAO standards. NZ assistance to date has
focused on: (i) workforce skills development, particularly the highly successful Maritime Training
College; (ii) a sustainable towns program to address urban management, piloting of village water and
sanitation improvements, and local business development agencies; (iii) Kiritimati Island port
infrastructure improvements, and (iv) improved public sector management.

•

Taiwan, China, is a significant donor to Kiribati, providing approximately A$11m (US$10m) per year.
Priorities are set by the Government of Kiribati, with a focus particularly on infrastructure, including
school and hospital building, and technical assistance with a focus on household agriculture, livestock, and
fish farming, as well as providing scholarships and medical referrals. Taiwan, China, will be providing a
$14m loan on partly concessional terms to refurbish the runway and terminal of the main Bonriki
international airport on South Tarawa.

•

The United Nations system is active, with UNICEF and WHO providing support to strengthen early
childhood development and health programs.

•

Church groups play an especially important role in providing education in Kiribati. Traditionally,
churches rather than the Government have provided schooling, and over half of all students in Kiribati
today attend church schools.
III.

WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT

Transforming World Bank Group Engagement in the Pacific Region
The Bank Group’s engagement with the Pacific Island countries reflects the fact that their
18.
development trajectories will be shaped – more than perhaps any other nations in the world – by their
economic geography. The Bank’s Pacific island member countries 1 have a population of about 2 million
people, spread across hundreds of islands, and scattered across an area equivalent to 15 percent of the globe’s
surface. Given their fragility and geographic isolation, sustained development progress will require long-term
cooperation by international partners. The reality for most Pacific countries is that aid will not be a
transitional phenomenon. Even where policy environments are strong, continued external assistance is likely
to be needed to support service delivery. More broadly, greater economic integration, more equitable natural
resource agreements, and more open labor markets in metropolitan neighbors will also be vital for the longerterm future of the Pacific Islands.
19.
The World Bank Group is in the process of scaling up its engagement with the Pacific Island
countries as part of a renewed longer-term commitment. Both IDA and IFC are significantly increasing
engagement. As well as scaling up in more “traditional” clients, the Bank is placing particular emphasis on
deepening engagement with “non-traditional” clients, such as Kiribati. Reflecting the similar challenges
faced by many island countries, World Bank Group engagement across the Pacific has been tightly focused
around the overarching objectives of: (i) strengthening regional/global integration; (ii) building resilience to
economic shocks, natural disasters and climate change; and (iii) encouraging economic reform and private
sector development. At the same time, the way these themes are operationalized will obviously depend on
differing country circumstances, and this is the purpose of individual CASs now being prepared.
1

Fiji, Kiribati, Palau, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.

6

Figure 4: World Bank Group Commitments to the Pacific Islands FY01 – FY11 (est)
140
120
100
80
$m

IFC

60

IDA + TF

40
20
0
FY01 FY02 FY03 FY04 FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11

20.
The World Bank Group is committed to the Cairns Compact agreed by Pacific leaders to better use
all resources available for development, and will work closely with clients and partners to improve
development effectiveness. This will be especially important as total aid from all donors to the Pacific is
increasing substantially. While the Bank is scaling up, the value of our engagement is not principally defined
in terms of the size of the lending program, but rather by the extent to which the Bank can “bundle” its
expertise and financing, collaborate with other development partners to transfer global knowledge, build
capacity, and encourage changes that will improve the lives of Pacific Island citizens.
Translating Pacific Themes to Kiribati
21.
Reflecting the Government’s development priorities, and consistent with the unifying themes of
World Bank Group engagement in the Pacific islands, engagement with Kiribati will be focused on:
•

Building resilience against external shocks, with a particular focus in Kiribati on climate change
adaptation; and

•

Mitigating economic isolation by encouraging regional and global integration.

Building Resilience Against Climate Change and External Shocks
22.
The core focus of increasing World Bank Group involvement with Kiribati will be to support
adaptation measures that respond to Kiribati’s extreme vulnerability to climate change and climate related
natural disasters. The potential effects of climate change in Kiribati are particularly evident in risks to
already limited supplies of fresh water on South Tarawa. Managing groundwater reserves, sustaining
freshwater lenses, improving rainwater collection, and developing new sources of water (either from
desalination, treatment of water from contaminated lenses, or piped from North Tarawa) will be especially
important, although all have been tried previously with limited success.
23.
The Bank proposes to work closely with partners and the Government over to help coordinate a
comprehensive approach to climate change adaptation on the main population centre of South Tarawa.
World Bank engagement in Kiribati to date has been based around the Kiribati Adaptation Project (KAP)
implemented by the Bank with financing from the Global Environment Facility and the Australian and New
Zealand Governments. KAP is one of the first Bank programs to fully integrate climate adaptation into
development planning efforts.
7

24.
The Bank proposes to allocate the bulk of the IDA-16 resources available to Kiribati toward a
multi-donor climate change adaptation investment, informed by coordinated analytical work. As well as
IDA resources, we will also explore options to work with other partners to mobilize grant financing for any
such investment, particularly with significant additional financing for Pacific Island countries anticipated for
climate change adaptation. The complexity of the sector, the scope of the undertaking, and the Bank’s
relatively steep learning curve in Kiribati will require the building of country knowledge and to develop a
common understanding of risks and priorities with the Government and partners. The Australian Government
has expressed strong interest in supporting the Bank’s engagement in this area.
25.
As well as strengthening resilience against climate change, the Bank will also be helping to reduce
Kiribati’s vulnerability to external economic shocks, such as the food and fuel price spikes. A proposed
500kW grid-connected solar photo-voltaic generator for South Tarawa (financed by GEF with support from
Australia) will help diversify electricity generation and reduce reliance on diesel, imports of which are
currently equivalent to 15% of GDP. The Bank’s successful experience with the Tonga Energy Roadmap
suggests that gains could also be made from energy sector reform, including opening of the market to new
private generation. The Bank will also be supporting the Government of Kiribati’s efforts to ensure the
availability and affordability of food on the outer islands, where the population has limited livelihood
opportunities and meager agricultural land. People living on the outer islands already spend a high proportion
of their income on imported food, and were especially hard hit by steep both in food and transport costs. A
$2m grant from the Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFRP) will help finance the shipping of food
from South Tarawa to the outer islands and the freight of selected agricultural products from the outer islands
to Tarawa. Assistance will also be provided from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
(GFDRR).
Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration
26.
Given Kiribati’s remoteness, basic infrastructure that connects the people of Kiribati to the outside
world will be essential to encouraging greater global and regional integration, and to supporting increased
levels of external assistance. High priority transport sector investments integrating climate change adaptation
planning will be started in parallel with efforts to develop coordinated and more comprehensive multi-donor
adaptation interventions. IDA investments in relatively less complex areas will provide ballast to the
relationship by building World Bank country knowledge, as well as by increasing Government familiarity and
understanding of Bank systems and processes. The Bank will collaborate with ADB to jointly co-finance
rehabilitation of the main South Tarawa road, with support from Australia and NZ through PRIF. This
operation – the Government’s immediate priority – is being presented to the Board with this CAS, and will be
the first ever IDA investment in Kiribati. Airport rehabilitation and safety measures will also be critical if air
services to the remote Kiribati archipelago – the key link with the outside world – are to be maintained and
ICAO standards met. The Bank proposes to work with the NZ Government to co-finance the rehabilitation of
Kiritimati airport and road from the airport to town, as well to provide critical safety and navigation
investments at Bonriki airport in Tarawa, where China, Taiwan is financing runway rehabilitation. These
significant “once in a generation” infrastructure investments will be needed and will fully incorporate climate
change adaptation measures into their design.
27.
Across the Pacific, the Bank Group will work with clients and partners to help island states derive
greater benefits from closer integration with the metropolitan countries in the region and from stronger
regional cooperation. There are particular opportunities available to Kiribati from regional cooperation in
improving returns from sustainable management of pelagic fish stocks, temporary labor migration, and
telecommunications reform.
28.
A fisheries engagement strategy for the Pacific is being developed, following a request for support
from the newly established Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA) Office. In the past few years, the eight
Pacific island members of the PNA – which collectively account for about 40% of the world’s tuna stocks –
have agreed on a wide range of measures to improve the management of the tuna resource and to increase
8

benefits for Pacific island countries. These include: (i) agreements to cut licensed fishing days by 30% in
2011, (ii) the closure of high seas pockets that previously complicated the control of fishing activities in the
region; improved vessel monitoring systems to reduce illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing,
including a goal of 100% observer coverage on all boats; and (iii) preferential conditions for domestic vessels
or those that comply with specific requirements for local crew and unloading. Nevertheless, several tuna
species remain under pressure and further actions are likely to be required. In formulating a fisheries strategy,
the Bank will work closely with the existing regional architecture managing fisheries in the Pacific, including
FFA and the Western Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC), as well as with other donor partners.
It is anticipated that Bank support will primarily revolve around technical assistance to the PNA Office to
implement reform measures.
29.
The Bank will continue to work closely with Pacific island countries and partners to help expand
opportunities for international employment. Labor is one of the few viable exports for many small and
remote island countries – but is subject to significant policy barriers. New Zealand’s Recognized Seasonal
Employment (RSE) scheme has provided over 9,000 Pacific islanders, including over 150 from Kiribati, with
opportunities to work up to nine months in the horticultural industry, returning home with skills and
remittances averaging $4,400 per worker (after deductions and living expenses). Although the number of
Kiribati nationals so far employed under this scheme is relatively low, the Bank is currently working with the
Government to improve the competitiveness of Kiribati workers, which is constrained by the relatively high
costs of travel from Kiribati compared with other labor sourcing countries in the Pacific. As well as the
immediate financial returns, broader benefits have also flowed back into Pacific countries including new
found skills in agriculture, as well as computer literacy and English language skills. The World Bank will
continue to work with regulatory agencies in both Australia and New Zealand to reduce the cost of
remittances, to explore opportunities for returning Pacific islanders to apply their skills and establish
businesses, and to encourage greater opportunities for skilled migration.
30.
There is considerable untapped potential for Kiribati to take advantage of opportunities for closer
global integration made possible by the telecommunications revolution. The World Bank Group has played
a significant role in encouraging telecoms reform throughout the Pacific in recent years. Increased
competition and the entry of new private sector operators have caused prices for mobile telephones in
countries across the region to fall dramatically, and access to telecoms services to increase in some cases by a
factor of ten. The World Bank is also helping to strengthen independent telecoms regulators, and is
supporting the establishment of a Pacific Regional Telecommunications Regulatory Resource Center, with
PRIF financing from Australia and NZ. Similarly, IFC investments of around $170m over the past three
years have played a key role in encouraging over $500m in investments by new private sector telecoms
operators. Following technical assistance from the Bank, the Government of Kiribati has indicated its
commitment to opening the telecoms market to competition in parallel to efforts for the state owned operator,
TKSL, to form a non-exclusive joint venture that would increase its competitiveness. Competition holds
particular relevance for Kiribati that currently has among the highest telecoms costs in the region and very
low mobile phone usage rates.
31.
Structural economic reform will be vital if Pacific island countries are to participate more fully in
global growth and to attract and benefit from private sector investment. As the World Bank Group develops
credibility, and as investments start to provide an anchor for the relationship and examples of the benefits of
reform, the World Bank anticipates working with partners in a more formally coordinated policy dialogue that
addresses economic and structural reform priorities more substantively. The Bank will work closely with the
IMF in Article IV missions and will similarly participate in future PEFA assessments, led by multilateral
partners. At the regional level, there will be greater Bank engagement with the IMF’s Pacific Financial
technical Assistance Center (PFTAC). The World Bank is also one of the partners supporting the Pacific
Association of Supreme Audit Institutions (PASAI), and this will be one mechanism to strengthen oversight
institutions in Kiribati and throughout the region.
9

International Finance Corporation (IFC)
32.
IFC will play a key role in coordinated World Bank Group efforts in Kiribati to encourage new
private investment, as well as to increase competition and private sector involvement in service delivery.
Across the Pacific, IFC is significantly scaling up both investment and analytical support. IFC engagement
has been integrated in this joint CAS. In particular, IFC is playing an important role in strengthening
investment climate in countries across the Pacific, and will similarly scale up TA to Kiribati to strengthen the
business enabling environment and to support specific PPP transactions or asset sales as the government
moves to rationalize SOEs. IFC has scope to provide financing for any new telecoms market entrant, as has
been done successfully elsewhere in the region, and will explore other investment opportunities. As has been
illustrated by the telecoms revolution around the region, encouraging competition and private sector
involvement in service delivery has been crucial in overcoming capacity constraints. Reflecting this, a key
element of the Bank Group’s approach will be to encouraging local private sector involvement throughout the
program, including road maintenance, airport management, and energy.
Mainstreaming Gender
33.
Gender issues will be incorporated throughout the Bank program. Gender outcomes in Kiribati are
mixed, with good representation of girls in school and a strong legislative framework, but relatively high
maternal mortality and low representation of women in the formal economy. Bank activities are expected to
be very tightly focused, with other donors leading interventions specifically targeting gender issues.
Nevertheless, gender considerations will actively inform the implementation of the Bank’s program. A focus
on addressing climate change adaptation and improving water supply in South Tarawa, for instance, is
anticipated to result in improvements in maternal and child health. Similarly, research by the Pacific Institute
for Public Policy 2 in Vanuatu shows a clear link between economic productivity and access to mobile phones,
with women successfully making use of new opportunities, and similar outcomes are anticipated in Kiribati.
Implementation: Partnerships, Selectivity, New Ways of Doing Business, and Accountability
34.
In scaling up analytical and financial support for Kiribati, the World Bank Group will be highly
selective. The proposed program will be closely focused on scaling up activities that have already been
piloted in Kiribati – particularly climate change adaptation – or on replicating successful experience
elsewhere in the Pacific. Investments will be carefully sequenced to build a track record and strengthen the
Bank’s country understanding. New investments will be designed with simplicity in mind and to reflect the
capacity constraints in Kiribati.
35.
Selectivity will be accompanied by close collaboration with development partners which have a
more extensive track record in Kiribati. The Bank intends to work closely with other partners on analytical
work in Kiribati to give substance to the Cairns Compact agreed at the Pacific Island Forum in August 2009
that aims to strengthen coordination and make better use of all the resources available for development,
avoiding duplication and strengthening synergies among donors.
36.
Given extremely limited capacity in Kiribati, as with many of the smaller island countries,
developing leadership and institutions needed to manage change will require commitment to a long-term
capacity enhancement effort that places emphasis on developing fiduciary oversight and on downstream
implementation support. Governments throughout the Pacific continue to face significant challenges in
recruiting and retaining domestic expertise. Reflecting weak public financial management arrangements in
Kiribati, all investments will include strong fiduciary and safeguards oversight and support. The Bank will
try to be more nimble in project preparation, and give greater attention to downstream implementation
support. Without lowering fiduciary or safeguards standards, we intend to try to streamline and accelerate
activity preparation, and to rebalance Bank engagement toward greater support throughout the project cycle.
2

“Going Mobile: Social and Economic Impact of Introducing Telecommunications Through Vanuatu”, December 2009.

10

37.
Anticipated outcomes from World Bank Group engagement are set out in the results matrix in
Attachment 2. This will be revised as implementation proceeds, and will be updated in the CAS

Progress Report.
38.
Supporting this growing engagement, the Bank Group will open a joint liaison office with ADB in
2011. This reflects the model in Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu, where local professional liaison officers
represent both institutions in the first ADB/World Bank shared (rather than simply co-located) offices
anywhere in the world. This presence has been instrumental in improving the Bank’s dialogue with clients
and encouraging better cooperation with the ADB.
Financing Terms and Sources
39.
The financing envelope for this CAS – including both IDA and generous donor trust funds and
co-financing – will be flexible and contingent on Kiribati’s commitment to undertaking structural
reforms. The base case scenario from FY11 to FY14 will foresee the full use of Kiribati’s IDA allocation
across the IDA 15 and IDA 16 periods. The CAS provides opportunities for some opportunistic reallocations
to Kiribati from elsewhere in the Pacific, although any such reallocation will require a strong performance to
be justified. In addition, the Bank will look at ways to leverage its resources with other donors’ so as to offer
a comprehensive and substantive program of assistance that can underpin the present strategy. All proposed
investments are anticipated to be co-financed with other partners or supported by trust funds and other
programs such as the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Global Food Crisis Response program
(GFRP). Australia and New Zealand have been especially generous in supporting the World Bank Group’s
engagement in the Pacific, both through the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF), which is
designed to coordinate multilateral bilateral engagement in infrastructure, as well as on a bilateral basis.
Trust fund financing by donors could potentially amount to almost as much as the Bank is able to make
available through IDA. Details of the source of financing anticipated for individual activities are set out
below.
Kiribati: Proposed IDA and Trust Fund Operations (FY11 – FY14)
Year
IDA

IDA-15 Period
Kiribati Climate Change Adaptation (KAP-3)
Food Price Crisis Response
Transport (Road Maintenance)

FY11
FY11
FY11

IDA-16 Period
Airport Safety and Rehabilitation
Tarawa Renewable Energy
Telecoms Liberalization Support
Climate Change Adaptation/ Water

FY12
FY12
FY12
FY13






Cofinanced/
Trust Fund

GEF/Aust/NZ
GFRP
ADB/PRIF 3
NZ
GEF/PRIF
PRIF
Australia

40.
IDA resources will be provided on 100% grant terms. While Kiribati has very limited external debt,
its capacity to take on new debt – even on concessional terms – is extremely constrained. This reflects
Kiribati’s limited growth prospects, and the potential for the RERF to be depleted. A joint IMF-World Bank
debt sustainability analysis has concluded that if the proposed World Bank program were to be provided as
concessional credits, Kiribati would be at a high risk of debt distress. The provision of grants is
consequently consistent with IDA’s debt sustainability framework.

3

PRIF financing is provided by Australia and NZ.

11

41.
A selective program of World Bank Group analytical work is proposed in sectors where the Bank
is scaling up engagement and in collaboration with analysis being undertaken by other partners.
Analytical work and technical assistance anticipated during the first part of the CAS period is set out below.
Kiribati: Proposed Analytical Work and Technical Assistance FY11 – FY14
FY11
Telecoms: Regulatory Support and Transaction Advice for Market Liberalization
Climate Change Adaptation/ Water Masterplan for South Tarawa
Participation in 2010 IMF Article IV; Debt Sustainability Assessment
(Regional) Fisheries Engagement Strategy: Support to the PNA Secretariat
FY12
Import Levy Fund Reform Options Study
IFC Business Enabling Environment TA
Participation in Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment

IV.

RISKS

42.
Risks to the proposed scaling up in Bank Group engagement in Kiribati are high. This reflects the
Bank Group’s limited engagement to date, domestic capacity constraints and PFM weaknesses affecting
development outcomes, and the difficulties in securing political consensus for reform. Risks are magnified
by the Bank’s limited country knowledge. Nevertheless, this strategy has the strong support of the
Government of Kiribati, and of a broad range of civil society organizations in Kiribati with which it has been
discussed.
43.
Mitigating these risks will require a new way of doing business where the Bank draws on the
experience of long-standing development partners. A tightly focused and sequenced program of activities
will give priority to investments that can be co-financed with partners with a longer-track record in Kiribati.
Risks will also be managed through simplicity of design, a greater focus on downstream implementation
support, a willingness to restructure activities as needed. Ensuring adequate procurement and fiduciary
support will be vital. Downstream implementation support will be further strengthened by the establishment
of a joint liaison office in Kiribati expected to provide a basis on which to build more regular dialogue and a
nuanced country understanding.
44.
Given the difficulties of sustaining reform momentum in Kiribati, new activities will be
implemented in a sequenced way and linked to areas where there is clear reform momentum. Decisions
on new investments in the second part of the CAS period will be dependent on experience with initial
interventions and an assessment of how best to support reform efforts by the Government. The
Government’s expressed strong support for the program outlined in this CAS will be critical in ensuring
effective implementation.

12

Attachment 1: Kiribati and Pacific Island Countries: MDG Progress
Melanesia
Kiribati
MDG 1. Eradicate extreme
poverty and hunger

Low food poverty, but off
track to halve basic
Halve between 1990 and 2015 the
needs poverty
proportion of people whose income is
less than $1 per day.

MDG 2. Achieve universal
primary education
MDG 3. Promote gender equality
and empowerment
Eliminate gender disparities in
primary and secondary education

MDG 4. Reduce child (Under 5)
mortality by two thirds
MDG 5. Improve maternal health
Reduce maternal mortality by three
quarters

MDG 6. Reverse the spread of
HIV/AIDS, malaraia and TB
MDG 7. Ensure environmental
sustainability
Integrate principles of sustainable
development into country policies

On track
On track education
equality, off track
empowerment

Fiji

PNG

Polynesia

Solomon Islands

Vanuatu

Samoa

Micronesia
Tonga

FSM

Palau

RMI

Low food poverty,
but off track to
halve basic needs
poverty

Off track

Low food poverty, Low food poverty, Low food poverty, Low food poverty, Low food poverty, Low food poverty, Low food poverty,
but off track to
but off track to
but off track to
but off track to
but off track to
but off track to
but off track to
halve basic needs halve basic needs halve basic needs halve basic needs halve basic needs halve basic needs halve basic needs
poverty
poverty
poverty
poverty
poverty
poverty
poverty

Slightly off track

Off track

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

Off track

Slightly off track

On track education
equality, off track Slightly off track
empowerment

On track

On track

Slightly off track

On track

Of concern

On track education On track education
On track education On track education
equality, off track equality, off track Slightly off track equality, off track equality, off track
empowerment
empowerment
empowerment
empowerment

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

Off track

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

On track

On track

Slightly off track

On track

On track

Off track

Off track

Off track

On track

Off track

On track

On track

Of concern

On track

On track

Off track

Off track

Off track

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

On track

Slightly off track

On track

On track

Slightly off track

Off track

Slightly off track

Off track

Off track

Slightly off track

On track

On track

On track

On track

Of concern

Source: 2010 MDG Tracking Report, Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat
Average Annual GDP Growth 20002009

1.1

0.7

2.9

1.6

3.2

3.5

1.1

-0.1

0.9

1.9

World Bank IDA Country
Performance Rating 2009

3.0

N/A

3.1

2.6

3.3

4.0

3.5

2.8

N/A

2.8

13

Millennium Development Goals

Kiribati

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Kiribati

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
..
..
..
..

1995
..
..
..
..

2000

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

97

99
99
..

125
87

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

..
..
0

..
..

122
37
5

107

77
57
47

70
52
80

64
47
61

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

88
65
75

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

..
..
..

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

..
513
18

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

0

72

2008
..
..
..
..

..

..
..
..
..

..

..

4

..

..
..
..

89
21

..

..
464

..
420
71

48
22
2.5
..
0.3
..

54
25
..
..
0.3
..

62
30
2.5
..
0.4
..

1.7
0.0
0.0
..

2.6
0.0
..
..

4.0
0.4
1.8
1.0

92

..

372

..

97

65
33
2.5

55.0

0.3

..

4.1
1.0
2.1

1.1

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

150

100

10

125
75

100
75

50

50
25

25

0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Kiribati

East Asia & Pacific

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.

14

Fixed + mobile subscr ibers

Internet users

1/14/11

Attachment 2: Kiribati Results Matrix
Medium-term
Country Goals

Key Issues

CAS Outcomes
Expected (FY11 – FY14)

Milestones

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

Strategic Area I: Building Resilience Against Climate Change and External Shocks
Improved resilience to
climate change and
natural disasters

Improved capacity to
transport food to
remote outer islands

• Kiribati highly vulnerable to
natural disasters and climate
change
• Fresh water lens already
stressed and access to water
will become more limited
• Limited freshwater a major
source of disease

• Outer islands’ population
heavily reliant on imported
food with very high transport
costs
• Import Levy Fund (ILF) largely
exhausted

Reducing reliance on
• Kiribati is reliant on imported
price volatile imported
petroleum products for 75% of
fuel and increase
energy generation
affordability of energy • Imported fuel accounts for 15%
of GDP
• Over 80% of the population of
South Tarawa has access to
grid, but prices high (peak of
over $0.50/ kWh in 2008)

• Improved coastal resilience
• Strengthened water resources
and management with greater
access to clean water
(baseline:48% of the
population with access to clean
water)
• Greater integrated capacity to
manage DRR and CCA issues

• ILF reforms ensure more
sustainable and efficient
approach to subsidizing
transport of food to outer
islands
• Improve petroleum supply
chain to reduce price and
volatility of energy supply
• Increase renewable energy to
5% of grid supplied power by
2014
• Direct reduction of GHG
emissions of 10 ktCO2 over 20
years

15

• Comprehensive strategy
developed and under
implementation to address
CCA/ water issues on South
Tarawa
• Shoreline protection
completed at key sites in
South Tarawa and mangrove
replanting on 5 outer islands
• Rainwater harvesting systems
in place in Banaba island and
5 sites in South Tarawa,
including Tungaru hospital
• Rainwater run-off from South
Tarawa road replenishing
water lens
• Expansion of groundwater
abstraction in Tarawa
• Recapitalization of Import
Levy Fund

AAA/TA: Regional DRR/CAA
risk analysis; South Tarawa
climate change adaptation and
water masterplan (2012)
Operations: Kiribati Adaptation
Project 2 and 3 (2006 and 2011);
Coordinated multi-donor, multisector climate change adaptation
investment (2013);
Donor Partners: ADB, Australia,
NZ, PRIF/PIAC. GFDRR

AAA/TA: Review of options to
strengthen sustainability of ILF
(FY12)
Operations: GFRP food price
crisis response grant (FY11)

• 500 kW on-grid solar PV
generation capacity to be
introduced

AAA/TA: Energy sector analysis
(FY12)
Operations: South Tarawa solar
energy (FY12)
Donor Partners: Australia, New
Zealand, GEF, Japan (Tarawa
grid), EC (outer islands off-grid
PV systems)

Strategic Area II: Overcoming Isolation and Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration
Medium-term
Key Issues
CAS Outcomes
Milestones
Country Goals
Expected (FY11 – FY14)
Improve transport
infrastructure for
remote populations
and provide
countercyclical
employment
opportunities

Improved access to
telecommunications
services to provide
opportunities for
growth

Greater opportunities
for Kiribati
temporary labor
migration

• South Tarawa road has failed
• Air transport critical for remote
communities, but safety
concerns risks stoppage of
flights (as has already occurred
At Tarawa for 2 weeks and
Kiritimati island for 12 months
in 2009)
• Unemployment and
underemployment increasing as
a result of global economic
slowdown
• Telecoms services provided by
monopoly state owned TSKL
• Mobile penetration is less than
10% of the population
• High cost telecoms ($20
monthly rental charge with 30c
per minute mobile to mobile on
South Tarawa up to $1.30 per
minute from South Tarawa to
Kiritimati island)
• 150 Kiribati workers currently
participate per year in NZ RSE
scheme
• Each worker on average returns
with $4,000

• Functioning road system on
South Tarawa, with continuing
maintenance undertaken by
domestic private sector
contractors
• Bonriki and Cassidy airports
moving from non-compliant to
compliant with ICAO
standards
• Temporary employment of
1,000 person months on road
construction
• Mobile penetration to increase
to 40% by 2014
• Reduced price for telecoms
services
• Regulatory environment that
allows competition with equal
access by all market players

• Increase in Kiribati workers
participating in temporary labor
migration schemes in Australia
and NZ, with higher returns per
worker as efficiency increases

16

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

• 31 km of roads rehabilitated
• Agreed plan for reform of
road sector management and
financing under
implementation
• Navigation and safety aids
installed at Bonriki and
Cassidy airports
• Civil aviation masterplan
agreed and under
implementation

Operations: South Tarawa Road
Rehabilitation (FY11) and
Kiribati Aviation Infrastructure
Investment (FY11)

• Second telecoms license
granted to allow new private
sector market participant
(2012)
• Transparent CSO for outer
islands services

AAA/ TA: Telecoms TA (2011)

• WB and Government to
improve the competitiveness
of Kiribati workers in RSE
scheme

AAA: Trade facilitation TA
(FY12)

Donor Partners: ADB; Australia;
Taiwan, China; New Zealand

Operations: Telecoms reform
investment (FY12)
Donor Partners: IFC, Australia

Kiribati at a glance

1/14/11

Key Development Indicators

East
Asia &
Pacific

Kiribati

(2009)

Lower
middle
income

Age distribution, 2008
Male (..)

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

0.10

44

1,930
16,299
0.7
44

3,767
31,923
1.2
40

0.2
1,820
3,350

5,283
2,738
5,596

7,709
2,046
4,481

-0.7
-2.2

8.5
7.7

7.5
6.3

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

..
..
..
47
..

17
39
72
22
12

..
..
68
44
25

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

..
..
112
114

96
90
111
112

87
73
109
105

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

65
33

88
59

0.8

1.6

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)
GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

Female (..)

75…
60…
45…
30…
15…
0-4
0

0

0

1

1

1

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2003–2009)
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

86
50

1990

1995

Kiribati

Net Aid Flows

(US$ millions)

Net ODA and official aid

Top 3 donors (in 2008):

Australia
Japan
European Commission

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1980

1990

2000

2000

East Asia & Pacific

a

2009

19

20

18

27

3
2
0

4
9
1

5
8
1

8
8
6

50.1
329

41.9
287

16.2
211

13.6
277

5.5

15.8

3.8
-4.7

0.4
0.3

8.8
4.6

0.9
..

1.3
..

1.7
..

1.3
..

Long-Term Economic Trends

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
95

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

2007

05

GDP

GDP per capita

1980–90 1990–2000

2000–09

(average annual growth %)

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

0.1
28

0.1
28

0.1
68

0.1
128

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

20.7
9.0
2.1
70.2

18.6
7.6
1.2
73.8

22.5
11.8
5.0
65.7

28.6
9.5
6.2
61.8

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

94.5
59.2
33.1

89.6
52.8
93.1

..
..
..

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

23.4
110.2
..

11.6
147.2
..

6.9
46.8
..

1.9
1.5

1.8
3.9

1.7
1.3

-3.2
6.8
1.9
5.5

2.2
-2.3
4.4
2.6

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

(% of GDP)

..
..
..

9.4
76.5

..

-2.3
-3.9
-10.7
0.1

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2008.

17

Kiribati
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2009
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

4
40
-47

4
60
-81

Voice and accountability

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

6
9.2

-4
-2.8

Regulatory quality

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

7

9

Reserves, including gold

0

Political stability

Rule of law
Control of corruption

0

0
2009

Central Government Finance

2000

(% of GDP)

Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

71.0
..
48.1

98.2
..
53.9

Overall surplus/deficit

-1.4

-12.4

..
..

..
..

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

25

50

75

100

Country' s percentile rank (0-100)
higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

Technology and Infrastructure
Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

2000

2008
..

..

4

5

..

..

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment

(US$ millions)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)
Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

8

2

–

11.1

10
2
–

3.0

7.7
2.5

1
0

..
..

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)

46
2.5
..

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)
CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

Composition of total external debt, 2008

46
2.5

55.0

..
..
0.39

..
..

0.35

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

..

..

World Bank Group portfolio

2000

2009

(US$ millions)

Multi- lateral,
10

US$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2009

–
–
–
2000

21
38.0
513
2009

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

0
0
0
0

–
–
–
–

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

0
0
0

–
–
–

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account

–
–
–

0
0
0

–

0

MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

–
–

–
–

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.

18

1/14/11

CAS Annex 4 - Kiribati
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date
12.16.2010

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation

2008

2009

2010

2011

1

1

1

1

2.1

3.1

4.1

4.3

100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
32.3

0.0
0.0
100.0
100.0
37.7

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
72.6

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
100.0

b

Average Implementation Period (years)
a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
c

a, c

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
e
Disbursement Ratio (%)
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80
0
0
0
0

Last Five
FYs
0
0
0
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress
(IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
this includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

19

CAS Annex 5 - Program Summary - Kiribati
As Of 1.31.2010

Indicative Program Including IDA and Potential Trust Funds

FY
2011
2011
2011
2012
2012
2013
2014

Project ID

US$(M)

Kiribati Road Rehabilitation Project
GEF Kiribati Climate Adaptation 3
Food Price Crisis Response
Kiribati Airport Rehabilitation
Tarawa Solar Energy
Kiribati Telecommunications Reform
Kiribati Climate Change Adaptation

24.0
5.0
2.0
10.0 – 15.0
3.0 - 4.0
3.0 - 5.0
10.0 - 20.0

20

Strategic
Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

M
H
M
M
M
H
H

M
L
L
M
L
L
H

CAS Annex 5 - Kiribati
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 16 Decem ber 2010

Closed Projects

0

IBRD/IDA *
Total Commitments

0.00

GEF
Total Commitments

1.80

Total Disbursed

1.50

Active Projects

Difference
Last PSR

Expected a

Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P089326

KI Adaptation Program 2

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

MS

MS

2006

21

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

1.8

Disburse
Cancel.

Undisb.

0.3

Orig.

170°E

180°

170°W

160°W

This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

10°N

Monday
Sunday

M AR S H ALL
I S LAND S

PACIFIC

OCEAN

Kingman Reef (U.S.)
Palmyra Atoll
(U.S.)
Teraina
Tabuaeran
(Fanning I.)

Makin
Butaritari
Marakei

Abaiang

TARAWA

Maiana
Abemama
Kuria
Aranuka

NA U R U

0°

Banaba
(Ocean Island)

Nonouti
Tabiteuea

Gilbert
Islands

0°

Jarvis I.
(U.S.)

Phoenix
Islands

Beru

Nikunau
Onotoa

Tamana

Kiritimati
(Christmas I.)

Howland I. (U.S.)
Baker I. (U.S.)

Arorae

Kanton
McKean
Nikumaroro

Birnie
Orona

Line Islands

Enderbury
Rawaki

Malden

Manra
Starbuck

K I R I B A T I
SO LOM ON
I S L AN D S

TU VALU

Tokelau
(N.Z.)
Vostok

Wallis and Futuna Islands
(France)

VA N UAT U

SAMOA

Cook Islands
(N.Z.)

Millenium

10°S

Flint

American
Samoa
(U.S.)
KIRIBATI

170°E

20°S

NATIONAL CAPITAL
180°

0

400 Kilometers

200

20°S
0
170°W

100

200

300

400 Miles
160°W

150°W

IBRD 33427

FEBRUARY 2005

International

T O NGA
Date Line

KIRIBAT I

FIJI

