Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of

The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No. 63504-BZ

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
Public Disclosure Authorized

(FY2012-FY2015)
FOR

BELIZE

Public Disclosure Authorized

July 29, 2011

Caribbean Country Management Unit
Latin America and Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. It contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The Interim Strategy Note for Belize was discussed by the Executive Directors on March 19, 2009
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS (BZ$)
US$1.00 = BZ$2.00 (Fixed)
FISCAL YEAR
April 1 – March 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AIDS
AMS
BHIS
BOOST
CABEI
CAPRA
CCRIF
CCT
CDEMA
CDB
CEA
CPI
CPS
DoE
DFC
DSA
EC
ENDA
EU
FAO
FIRST
FSAP
FY
GDP
GEF
GFDRR
HD
HDI
HIV
HRH
IBRD
IDB
IDF
IFAD

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Accompanying Measures for Sugar Protocol
Countries
Belize Health Information System
Building Opportunities for Our Social
Transformation
Central American Bank for Economic
Integration
Central American Probabilistic Risk Initiative
Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
Conditional Cash Transfer
Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management
Agency
Caribbean Development Bank
Country Environmental Analysis
Consumer Price Index
Country Partnership Strategy
Department of Environment
Development Finance Corporation
Debt Sustainability Analysis
European Commission
Emergency Assistance for Natural Disasters
European Union
Food and Agriculture Organization
Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery
Human Development
Human Development Index
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Human Resources for Health
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Fund for Agricultural
Development

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Manager:

IFC
IMF
ISDR
ISN
JSDF
MBRS
MDG
MDP
MTDS
NEAC
NEMO
NHI
NLTA
NPESAP
NPL
OPEC
PAHO
PEFA
PFM
PUP
RAAP
RB
SEETF
SEMCAR
SFA
SFLAC
SCCF
TA
TFSCB
UDP
UNDP
UNIFEM
UNFPA
UNICEF
UNISDR
WB

International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
Interim Strategy Note
Japan Social Development Fund
Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System
Millennium Development Goals
Municipal Development Project
Medium Term Development Strategy
National Environmental Appraisal Committee
National Emergency Management Organization
National Health Insurance
Non-lending Technical Assistance
National Poverty Elimination Strategy and
Action Plan
Nonperforming Loan
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries
Pan American Health Organization
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Public Financial Management
People’s United Party
Rapid Assessments and Action Plan
Restore Belize
South-South Experience Exchange Trust Fund
Supporting Economic Management in the
Caribbean
Special Framework of Assistance
Spanish Fund for Latin America and the
Caribbean
Special Climate Change Fund
Technical Assistance
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building
United Democratic Party
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Development Fund for Women
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction
World Bank

Pamela Cox
Françoise Clottes
Michael Corlett

Acknowledgements

The CPS was prepared under the guidance of Françoise Clottes, Country Director, and the Sector
Leaders Christina Malmberg Calvo, Auguste Kouamé, and David Warren. Afef Haddad
provided invaluable guidance and inputs. The CPS team, led by Michael Corlett (TTL),
consisted of: Enos Esikuri, Hannah Kim, Ana Carolina Saizar Renart, Andrea Coppola, Miriam
Muller, Jun Zhang (IFC), Kalim Shah (IFC), Frank Fusco (IFC), Keiko Ashida, Ricardo Tejada,
Irina Kyltchnikova, Ludovic Subran, Yoonhee Kim, Ellen Hamilton, Carmen Carpio, Viviana
Maya, Niels B. Holm-Nielsen, Rossella Della Monica, Stephen Brushett, Jane Hwang, Angelica
Afanador-Ardila, Marea Eleni Hatziolos, Timothy Cheston, Yingwei Wu, Joseph Kizito, Lisa
Bhansali, Joscelyn O'Rell Truitt and Jimmy Pannett. The CPS also benefitted from strong
collaboration with OPCS (Lawrence Bouton and Tevfik Yaprak) and Bruce Courtney. The
support of Armele Vilceus, Anna Musakova, Elisabeth Mekonnen and Betty F. A. Bain is highly
appreciated. The team greatly appreciates the close collaboration with the Government of
Belize.

1

Table of Contents
I.

Executive Summary ............................................................................................................1

II.

INTRODUCTION...............................................................................................................2

III.

COUNTRY CONTEXT......................................................................................................2

A.

Country Context.............................................................................................................................. 2

B.

Political Developments and Governance....................................................................................... 3

C.

Poverty, Social indicators and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).................................. 4

D.

Recent Economic Developments .................................................................................................... 6

E.

Macroeconomic Outlook ................................................................................................................ 8

IV.

GOVERNMENT VISION AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ...........................9

V.

WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT FY2009-2011......................................................13

A.

Bank program under ISN and lessons learned........................................................................... 13

B.

Role of Development Partners ..................................................................................................... 15

C.

Consultations ................................................................................................................................. 17

D.

Proposed Bank Program .............................................................................................................. 18

E.

IFC Strategy .................................................................................................................................. 25

VI.

RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION .................................................................................25

Annex A1: Results Monitoring Framework .............................................................................28
Annex B1: Belize At A Glance ...................................................................................................32
Annex B2: Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ............34
Annex B3: IBRD/IDA Program Summary ...............................................................................35
Annex B4: Summary of Nonlending Services – Belize ............................................................35
Annex B6: Belize - Key Economic Indicators...........................................................................36
Annex B7: Belize - Key Exposure Indicators ...........................................................................38
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)......................................................39
Annex B8: IFC Operations Portfolio ........................................................................................40
Annex C: Belize: Country Financing Parameters ...................................................................41
Annex D: Belize Debt Sustainability Analysis ..........................................................................42
Annex E: CPS Consultations .....................................................................................................46
Annex F: Bank Experience in Climate Change, Natural Disaster Risk Management, and
Environment .................................................................................................................................51
Annex G: Donor Harmonization Matrix ..................................................................................53
MAP: .............................................................................................................................................56
2

I.

Executive Summary

i)
Belize is a small lower middle income country endowed with unique natural resources,
including the largest barrier reef in the Americas and pristine tropical forests. The country’s
global comparative advantage is derived from its natural resource base, which supports the
tourism and agriculture sectors, and its advantageous geographical proximity to major markets.
Belize’s principal development challenges are rooted in its high vulnerability to external shocks
including terms of trade, natural hazards and impacts of climate change, while the Government’s
ability to address these challenges is constrained by high debt levels and limited fiscal space.
ii)
The global economic crisis had a major impact on the country, and came on the heels of
other exogenous shocks including food and fuel price increases of 2008 and natural disasters.
Furthermore, these shocks hit the country amid an ongoing fiscal consolidation following a 2007
market friendly debt restructuring. Following a long period of robust growth, GDP growth was
flat in 2009, due to declines in tourism, foreign direct investment, and remittances. As a result
unemployment levels have increased and a 2009 Country Poverty Assessment showed that the
overall poverty rate increased to 41% of the population from 33% in 2002. Similarly, crime and
violence rates reached and remain at disconcerting levels. While growth resumed in 2010,
reaching 2.9%, buoyed by an increase in electricity production, high debt levels (83.5% of GDP
in 2010) and increasing fiscal pressures remain a persistent challenge for policymakers, limiting
the government’s ability to address pressing social concerns and to respond to further shocks.
iii)
The Government’s medium and long-term strategies highlight that the country’s
development prospects are intricately linked to the sustainable management of its natural
resource base in the face of high vulnerability to exogenous shocks and development pressures.
Belize’s development strategies lay out an ambitious program to create a conducive enabling
environment for private sector led growth, improve education and health outcomes, and
sustainably manage the country’s natural resources. Belize’s development plans recognize that
fiscal constraints compel sound macroeconomic management including efforts to institutionalize
fiscal discipline and mobilize official financing.
iv)
The Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy for 2012-2015 follows the successful
implementation of an Interim Strategy Note, which represented the Bank’s re-engagement with
the country after a long hiatus. The ISN included the Bank’s first loan to Belize in almost 10
years and knowledge services which served to establish a productive dialogue with the
Government and for the Bank to build the necessary knowledge base to underpin a long-term
engagement.
v)
This CPS will support the Government’s efforts to adopt a sustainable natural resource
based economic model while enhancing the country’s resilience to climate change and natural
hazards. Three results areas support this overall objective and include: i) policies and strategies
for mainstreaming of natural resources and climate resilience; ii) institutional capacity
strengthening for natural resource management and climate change; and iii) investments to
strengthen climate resilience. The Bank’s program is selective, reflects an area in which the
Bank has a comparative advantage, and supports an area central to Belize’s development
prospects. Capitalizing on heightened global awareness of climate change, the proposed
program aims to leverage substantial grant resources to complement modest IBRD lending to
increase the impact of the program.
1

II.

INTRODUCTION

1.
After a long hiatus1, the Bank re-engaged with Belize in 2009 with a two-year Interim
Strategy Note (FY09-11). The ISN has been satisfactorily implemented and has helped the Bank
establish a productive dialogue with Government and build a knowledge base of the country’s
development challenges to inform future engagement. Based on the success of the reengagement, the Bank is moving to a four year Country Partnership Strategy, which will be
highly selective and concentrate on supporting the country’s efforts to move towards a more
sustainable development model, safeguarding its natural resource base while reducing
vulnerabilities to climate change and natural hazards.
III.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. Country Context
2.
Belize is a small, lower-middle-income country with a population of 330,000. It is
remarkably diverse ecologically with substantial natural capital along its coast, represented by
the largest coral reef and associated ecosystem in the Americas2, as well as significant areas of
mangroves, tropical forest and inland wetlands. Belize has a unique cultural heritage as well,
owing to its strong ties to the English-speaking Caribbean, and geographic ties to Spanish
speaking Central America, which have strengthened substantially over the last 20 years due to
immigration from neighboring countries, especially Guatemala, and trade links with Guatemala
and Mexico. Since the country achieved full independence in 1981, it has largely experienced
peaceful and stable democracy. However a long-standing territorial dispute with its neighbor
Guatemala has not yet been resolved. In December 2008, both countries agreed to refer the
dispute to the International Court of Justice (ICJ), requiring referenda in both Belize and
Guatemala which to date has not been carried out. Although the economy has traditionally been
oriented towards agriculture, the services sector grew in importance during the 1990s and has
been by far the largest contributor accounting for 60 percent of GDP. The agricultural sector,
which accounts for around 10 percent of GDP but over 50 percent of total exports, is dominated
by the sugar and citrus industries.
3.
Belize is highly vulnerable to natural hazards and climate change. Belize's long lowlying coastal areas are especially vulnerable to more intense and frequent tropical storms and
hurricanes, flood damage, and rising sea levels3. Like the rest of the Caribbean, Belize has
experienced frequent natural disasters of catastrophic proportions, and most recently suffered the
impact of a Category 1 hurricane (Richard in October 2010) and widespread flooding in 2008.
Tropical Storm Arthur (May 2008) caused extensive damage to infrastructure and the agriculture
sector. Hurricanes Keith (2000) and Iris (2001) struck Belize in the first year of the previous CPS
period, each causing damage reaching 45 percent and 25 percent of GDP, respectively. In 1961,
Hurricane Hattie destroyed Belize City and prompted the Government to build a new
1

The Bank suspended its program in 2001 due to fiscal and governance concerns, but maintained limited
engagement through regional programs financed by Global Environment Facility (GEF).
2
A UNESCO world heritage site.
3
Recent natural disasters, including flooding in 2008 and Hurricane Richard in 2010, affected large parts of the
country, highlighting the vulnerability of the whole country to natural hazards.

2

administrative capital 50 miles inland in Belmopan. Belize’s vulnerability to natural disasters is
exacerbated by the effects of climate change, as storm hazards are expected to become stronger
and develop more rapidly, and that greater variations in precipitation are predicted to affect
droughts and floods. Beyond economic and social losses, natural disasters have contributed to
large fiscal deficits and debt accumulations that required Belize to restructure its public debt in
2007. These severe budget constraints, in turn, have limited Belize's ability to finance adaptation
and mitigation activities.
4.
Belize’s natural resources are critical to the health of its economy and well-being of
its most vulnerable population. Belize's growth prospects and main economic activities,
including tourism, agriculture, and fishing, are strongly linked to the country's environment and
natural resource base which give the country its key inherent comparative advantages. In
particular, the barrier reef provides critical economic and environmental services (fisheries,
tourism, and coastal protection), is habitat for many unique species, is possibly an important
carbon sink, and contains a large genetic resources pool. The poorest people and communities in
Belize are predominantly rural and their livelihoods depend largely on access to land and natural
resources; furthermore, the highest poverty levels tend to occur in areas with the highest (e.g.,
South and West of Belize) or lowest (e.g., North and East of Belize) levels of biodiversity, thus
presenting critical poverty-environment challenges (for example with encroachment and
enforcement issues). It is therefore important to support effective and improved management of
the environment and natural resources for sustainable livelihoods and economic growth in
Belize.
5.
Although Belize has managed to preserve its environmental capital to a greater
extent than its neighbors, it still faces some serious environmental problems that adversely
affect the poor, and growth prospects. These include: (i) unsustainable management of solid
waste and liquid effluents resulting in water and soil pollution; (ii) unregulated development of
urban and coastal areas and the rising pollution from cruise ship tourism leading to the
degradation of mangroves and coral reefs; (iii) overfishing, resulting in recent declines in catch
levels and species varieties; (iv) deforestation and unsustainable extraction of non-timber forest
products in hotspot areas; and (v) mitigation of environmental risks from oil exploration in
environmentally sensitive areas. The short-term impacts of natural disasters and the long-term
effects of climate change are expected to undermine the resilience of the natural ecosystems and
human vulnerability, increasing the urgency of tackling these challenges.
B. Political Developments and Governance
6.
Since gaining independence from the United Kingdom on September 21, 1981,
Belize has experienced peaceful and democratic transitions, with power alternating between
two major parties, the United Democratic Party (UDP) and the People’s United Party (PUP).
The governing party, the United Democratic Party led by Prime Minister Dean Barrow, won a
commanding majority in the March 2008 parliamentary elections, and requested the Bank to reengage with the country. Parliamentary elections are due by June 2013.
7.
The governing party entered office amid a challenging environment characterized by
severe natural disasters (widespread floods during 2008) and external shocks (food and fuel price
increases), followed by the onset of the global economic slowdown. The administration also
inherited a challenging fiscal situation owing to high debt levels (80 percent of GDP in 2008)
3

despite a market-friendly debt restructuring in 2007 and a legacy of weak governance left by the
previous administration, which was beset with allegations of corruption. The governing party
faces public pressure to combat rising levels of poverty, unemployment and crime and violence,
amid a constrained fiscal environment.
C. Poverty, Social indicators and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
8.
Poverty has increased sharply in recent years, partially attributed to the stagnating
economic situation and the effects of the 2008 floods. The latest Country Poverty Assessment
(2009) showed that the overall poverty rate increased from 34 percent in 2002 to 41 percent.
Extreme poverty increased from 11 percent to 16 percent during the same period. In addition to
the 41 percent of the population classified as poor, a further 14 percent of households are deemed
vulnerable to poverty. Therefore, 55 percent of all households are either poor or susceptible to
falling into poverty. Poverty is more prevalent in rural areas (56.6 percent) than in urban areas
(30.3 percent). Income inequality is high, with a Gini coefficient of 0.42 in 2009, but it is lower
than its Central American neighbors. Sharp regional and ethnic differences in poverty exist,
ranging from 32.5 in the Belize district to 64.6 percent in Toledo, with its heavy concentration of
indigenous Mayan communities. Poverty and indigence increased in all districts, though the
sharpest increase has been in Corozal which now has a similar level of overall poverty as Toledo.
Despite the effects of the global recession, there are industries, such as the oil sector that have
prospered, but the gains have not generated multiplier effects across the wider economy.
9.
High poverty rates persist despite the devotion of a significant amount of resources
to social protection (5.7 percent of GDP)4. Yet this spending has not translated into results,
evidenced by the large number of poor families that remain vulnerable in Belize. The Social
Protection System in Belize is inadequate to address the risks these vulnerable groups face due to
poor resource allocation, weak targeting, and low program effectiveness. When facing hardship,
poor people most often seek the assistance of elected officials to solve their problems, which
underscores the limitations of Belize’s existing safety net.
10.
Social indicators and progress towards achieving the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) have been mixed. According to the 2010 United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) Scorecard and Outlook Report, Belize is on track to meet MDG targets with
respect to child mortality, major diseases, and the environment. However, it is not on track to
meet targets related to poverty, education, gender, maternal health, and debt management.
Belize is in last position (131st) on the Global Gender Gap Index5 in the area of political
empowerment of women, along with Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Brunei. With the proportion of
seats held by women in national parliament being a critical indicator of MDG 3 (Promote gender
equality and empower women), Belize is not on course to achieve this MDG. The National
Women’s Commission is currently working on an update of the 2002 national gender policy.
Box 1 summarizes gender issues in Belize6. Belize ranks 78 out of 169 countries according to
the 2010 Human Development Index (HDI), which places the country below the regional
average. Chronic diseases have become important causes of disability and death imposing an
4

World Bank Draft Policy Note (June 30, 2010). BELIZE: Issues and Options to Strengthen the Social Protection
System.
5
Ricardo Hausmann, Laura D. Tyson, Saadia Zahidi, Editors (2010). "The Global Gender Gap Report 2010". World
Economic Forum, Geneva, Switzerland. http://www.weforum.org/pdf/gendergap/report2010.pdf.
6
Based on a Gender background note prepared for the CPS.

4

increasing burden on individuals and on the healthcare system because of the cost and the lifelong nature of these diseases (e.g., cardiovascular diseases, cancer). HIV/AIDS continues to
pose a major challenge to national development with adult prevalence rates estimated at 2
percent in 2007, which is among the highest in the Caribbean and Central American regions.
Box 1. Gender Issues in Belize
While not on course to achieve MDG 3, Belize has made clear progress in many areas including the legal
and institutional framework for the promotion of gender equality.7 Belize’s provision of sexual and
reproductive health services has improved over the last decade. Girls have caught up with or surpassed
boys in education – in tertiary education, a large gap in favor of girls can be observed. However, girls’
increased educational attainment relative to boys has not resulted in their equal participation in politics or
in private sector careers. Power and decision-making remain dominated by men in all sectors. In the
labor market, women continue to earn less than men, are limited mainly to the service sector and face
higher unemployment rates.
Despite the progress made, a number of priority gender concerns persist in the country. Adolescent
fertility and maternal mortality are higher than the regional average; HIV/AIDS is increasingly feminized,
particularly among young girls; and gender based violence is a severe and pervasive problem. Male
issues, such as high suicide rates, boys dropping out of school, and young men’s increasing involvement
in crime and violence, also pose challenges to policy makers. Moreover, country-level aggregates mask
important inequities within the country, particularly along ethnic lines. Rural and indigenous women
seem to be a particularly vulnerable group. However, many indicators used in this note are not
disaggregated by ethnicity, which poses certain limits to these findings.

11.
Recent efforts to ensure equitable access to education have been successful, but have
not always translated into improved outcomes. The gender parity index between girls and
boys in primary education increased from 0.939 in 1995 to 1.01 in 2009; in secondary education,
from 1.105 in 1995 to 1.13 in 2009; and for tertiary education, from 1.49 in 2002 to 1.73 in
20098. Net primary enrolments fell from 90.3 percent in 1992 to 83.7 percent in 2009, but male
enrolments declined further due to the high drop-out rates among boys. Both male and female
primary enrolment rates have declined, but male enrolment rates showed greater declines, a
common trend in the Caribbean. Key factors that explain declining primary attendance and
drop-out rates amongst boys include low-quality primary education, high proportion of untrained
teachers, and the absence of role-models who can motivate young boys to stay in school.
12.
High drop-out rates among boys is a growing concern, particularly due to their
implications for the incidence of crime and violence. There is a clear gender dimension to the
problems of at-risk youth, or young people who are neither working nor in school, since young
boys and girls tend to engage in different kinds of risky behaviors. While girls continue to be
disadvantaged in terms of higher unemployment rates and earlier family responsibilities, boys’
underachievement in education and lack of employment opportunities can lead to their
participation as perpetrators and victims of violent crime. This has compelled the Government to

7

Belize has introduced or adopted legislative initiatives to promote gender equality such as a National Gender
Policy, 2003-2008. The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)
as well as the Optional Protocol to CEDAW have been ratified, as has been the Inter-American Convention on the
Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women (Convenção do Belém do Pará). The preamble
to the Constitution was amended to read “to guarantee gender equality”.
8
Government of Belize (2002). National Gender Policy.

5

include interventions aimed at addressing high youth unemployment and low secondary level
completion rates.
13.
Crime and violence, which has increased steadily in Belize over the last decade,
reached crisis levels in 2010. The homicide rate of 34.3 (per 100,000 people) is very high
compared to 11.6 for Mexico, 18.1 for Ecuador, and 38.8 for Colombia (Human Development
Report 2010), and more than doubled from 16 murders per 100,000 citizens in 2000 (according
to the Belize Police Department), making it the third highest homicide rate in the Caribbean.
Though violence tends to be concentrated in urban areas, particularly in Southside Belize City,
the rising incidence of crime in tourist areas threatens to damage the country’s image as a safe
and secure tourist destination. The high levels of violence have been attributed to high levels of
poverty, lack of employment and educational opportunities, the increased abuse of alcohol and
drugs, the use of weapons, the weakness of state institutions, and a breakdown in the family
structure. The surge in violence is linked to increased transit of drugs.
D. Recent Economic Developments
14.
Belize was adversely impacted by the global downturn and the effects of floods in
late 2008; however the economy has recovered modestly in 2010. Owing to the impact of the
2008 floods on agricultural output and the fallout from the global recession, the economy
registered zero growth in 2009. Among the hardest hit sectors were wholesale and retail trade,
tourism and agriculture (which in 2009 contracted by 7.1 percent, 7.2 percent and 4.8 percent
respectively). Manufacturing output improved amid a 24 percent expansion in petroleum
production, as three additional production wells were installed. The economy expanded by 2.9
percent in 2010 driven by a substantial increase in electricity generation and modest recovery in
the tourism sector. Amid a weak economic recovery, unemployment has increased from 8.2
percent in May 2008 to 12.6 percent, contributing to worsening social conditions as evidenced by
the spike in crime and violence.
15.
Economic performance has been highly uneven and dependent on fiscal stimulus.
Between 2000 and 2009 the economy grew by an annual average of 5.0 percent, peaking at a
record rate of 13 percent in 2000. Economic performance has been vulnerable to external shocks
as well as erratic policymaking. During 1999-2003, the Government pursued an expansionary
fiscal policy financed largely by external commercial borrowing which produced strong GDP
growth rates but drove public debt to over 100 percent of GDP in 2003 and the following years.
In 2007, debt restructuring eased external debt service and enabled Belize’s debt to become
fiscally manageable, avoiding a macroeconomic crisis. However, public debt remained high and
foreign reserves low, which limited the policy capacity to respond to shocks.
16.
Inflationary pressures are modest in Belize, including food prices. After deflating by
an average of 0.4 percent in 2009 (eop), growth in the price level rose to 0 percent in 2010. The
increase reflected the rise in fuel prices (a 3.2 percent rise in transport & communications and 1.4
percent rise in rent, water, fuel & power categories) and the 2.5 percent increase in the general
sales tax (which came into force in April 2010), although it was offset by declines in food,
beverages and tobacco prices as well as household goods and maintenance reflecting the still
weak demand pressures. International food prices are on the rise and although Belize is a net
food exporter and the country as a whole could gain from a positive terms of trade shock, those

6

gains can be distributed very unevenly and also it could endanger the wellbeing of the poor net
buyers. As of February 2011, average food prices remain at a 3 year low.
17.
Despite government efforts to promote credit conditions, domestic credit demand
remains weak. In line with the Central Bank's objective of promoting credit conditions, in
November of 2010 the minimum interest rate on savings deposits was reduced from 4.5 percent
to 3.5 percent. However, credit to the private sector contracted by 3.6 percent in 2010 from 4.8
percent growth in 2009 with manufacturing, financial institutions and transportation sectors
making a sizeable contribution to the reduction. The decline in the domestic credit along with an
expansion in foreign assets was reflected in a highly liquid banking system.
18.
On the external front, Belize's current account balance has improved. The current
account balance in Belize registered a deficit of 2.8 percent of GDP in 2010 down from 9.8
percent in 2008. This was the result of three main factors: improved earnings due to higher oil
prices and agricultural prices (predominantly earnings from citrus exports) in 2010, strong
performance of the services sector, especially tourism which boosted travel receipts by 6 percent,
and decreased capital goods imports for projects that occurred in 2008. However, the capital and
financial account surplus plunged by 49 percent in 2009 and is expected to continue decreasing
in 2010, owing to lower grants, the ending of the United Kingdom's debt relief program in 2009
and a significant decline in foreign direct investment. International reserves stood at US$219
million at end-2010 (3.2 months of imports), strengthening from the low levels seen in previous
years.
19.
Weak fiscal results along with the modest economic performance have been
reflected in an increased public debt burden. Despite debt restructuring in 2007 public debt
ratio remains high, at around 83.5 percent of GDP at end-2010, leaving the government with
limited fiscal headroom. In line with the IMF's advice, the authorities' ongoing efforts to
strengthen tax administration center on improving controls over large taxpayers; and adopting a
new management and auditing system for customs. In addition, the government implemented
tax measures in April 2010, including the increase in the general sales tax from 10 percent to
12.5 percent; and new taxes on petroleum, which together improved government fiscal revenues
in FY2010/11. Lower revenues from external grants have been offset by higher oil revenues,
that in tandem with flat total expenditures have improved the overall fiscal deficit to 0.8 percent
of GDP in FY2010/11 from 1.6 percent of GDP in FY2009/10.
20.
The overall health of the banking system has deteriorated. According to 2010 IMF
Article IV consultations, three banks (of the five banks) which account for over 40 percent of
deposits in the banking system are facing high levels of nonperforming loans (NPLs). By
September 2010, nonperforming loans (NPLs) surged to nearly 30 percent of total loans in the
distressed banks compared to 20 percent in September 2009. As a result, foreclosures
proceedings are already taking place on several large businesses in Belize. While banks comply
with current regulations, provisioning remains low by international standards, covering less than
16 percent of NPLs. Preliminary computations show that the capital that would be required to
absorb potential loan losses is estimated at up to 5 percent of GDP. Protecting the stability of the
banking system is a priority. The 2010 Article IV recommends that the government should
specify the size of the capital increase that is needed in each bank and set a timeline for the
implementation of a recapitalization plan. In line with IMF technical assistance advice, the

7

central bank has implemented measures to intensify oversight of the overall banking system and
to strengthen the regulatory and bank resolution framework.
Table 1: Belize: Selected Economic Indicators, 2008-2012
Prel.
Projections
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
(Annual percentage change)
National income and prices
GDP at constant prices
Prices (GDP Deflator)
Consumer prices (end of period)

3.8
2.6
4.4

0.0
-0.7
-0.4

2.9
0.9
0.0

Money and credit
Credit to the private sector
11.6
4.8
-3.6
Money and quasi-money (M2)
14.0
5.8
-1.8
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
National accounts
Consumption
80.6
82.2
80.1
Gross domestic investment
27.5
22.0
18.0
Net exports
-8.0
-4.2
1.9
Gross National saving
17.7
15.7
15.2
Central Government 1/
Revenue and Grants
28.7
27.0
27.7
Total Expenditure
28.3
28.2
28.5
Primary balance
4.2
2.4
2.6
Interest
3.8
3.6
3.4
Overall balance
0.4
-1.6
-0.8
External Sector
Current account balance
-9.8
-6.3
-2.8
62.5
53.8
59.7
of which exports of goods and services
70.5
58.0
57.8
of which imports of goods and services
Change in reserves (- increase)
-4.3
-3.6
-0.3
Gross int. reserves (in months of imports)
2.1
3.3
3.2
Public and publicly guaranteed debt
79.7
82.3
83.5
Domestic
7.4
7.1
11.8
External
72.3
75.2
71.7

2.8
2.9
4.5

3.0
2.5
2.5

1.6
5.7

3.8
5.6

81.6
19.0
-0.6
13.9

82.3
19.5
-1.8
12.5

27.2
29.1
2.0
3.9
-1.9

26.6
29.2
2.0
4.5
-2.5

-5.1
61.6
62.3
-3.2
3.5
80.6
11.4
69.1

-7.0
62.1
63.9
-0.6
3.3
78.3
12.2
66.1

Source: IMF 2010 Art IV
1/ Fiscal year ends in March

E. Macroeconomic Outlook
21.
With the economy showing signs of recovery from the impact of the global
economic slowdown, the economic outlook has improved marginally. Moderate growth is
8

expected over the next 2 years (2.8 percent and 3.0 percent for 2011 and 2012) largely driven by
an expansion in electricity generation and tourism, and increased estimated oil reserves that will
allow the present level of oil output to be maintained for the next few years. Inflation is
expected to rise to 4.5 percent in 2011, due to increases in fuel prices. The fiscal deficit is
expected to deteriorate to 1.9 percent and 2.5 percent of GDP in FY2011/12 and FY2012/13
respectively, reflecting anticipated increases in interest payments as scheduled increases in
interest rates of restructured external debt come into effect, as well as reflecting reduced revenue
collection. Nevertheless, public debt is projected to fall to 78.3 percent of GDP in 2012, from
the 2010 level of 83.5 percent of GDP (mainly external debt, around 72 percent).
22.
According to the latest debt sustainability analysis (DSA) conducted by the IMF
(October 2010), public debt remains high and vulnerable to shocks over the medium-term.
The DSA (see Annex D) indicates that under the baseline scenario, debt levels would remain
almost constant and slightly under 80 percent of GDP through 2015. The stable debt ratio reflects
the positive effect of a gradual increase in growth that offset the impact of the step-up coupon
rates on the restructured debt. The debt ratio is highly sensitive to shocks in growth and the
primary balance and to a slightly lesser extent to shocks in the interest rates. Under the active
scenario, fiscal consolidation improves primary surplus to above 4 percent of GDP over the
medium-term, resulting in a downward path of the debt ratio reaching almost 40 percent by the
end of the decade.
IV.

GOVERNMENT VISION AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

23.
Belize's developmental challenges are rooted in its high vulnerability to external
shocks including terms of trade, natural hazards and impacts of climate change. The
country's natural resource base, which holds the key to its developmental prospects in terms of
sustainable growth and poverty reduction, is particularly vulnerable to these shocks, and faces
additional pressures from unsustainable development practices. These challenges were evident
during the implementation of the ISN as the country was affected by multiple exogenous shocks
including severe flooding in 2008, food and oil price increases, the global financial crisis, and
Hurricane Richard in October 2010. These shocks manifested themselves in an economic
slowdown with negative impacts on growth and employment, and contributed to a dramatic
increase in poverty levels (41 percent), and a surge in crime and violence. Furthermore the
country's size and low population density pose significant challenges for the provision of
infrastructure necessary to underpin economic activity in main areas including tourism and
agriculture, and services to support human capital development. The government's ability to
confront these challenges is limited due to fiscal constraints, owing to a high debt burden,
accumulated during the 2000s due to serious governance failures.
24.
The Government’s development agenda is articulated in the National Poverty
Eradication Strategy and Action Plan, 2009-2013 (NPESAP) and the Medium-Term
Development Strategy, “Building Resilience against Social, Economic and Physical
Vulnerabilities” (MTDS, 2010-2013), which is closely linked to the NPESAP. A long-term
draft development plan, Horizon 20309, emphasizes sustainable natural resource management,
9

Horizon 2030 is currently being finalized. The draft vision statement is “Belize is a country of peace and
tranquility, where citizens live in harmony with the natural environment and enjoy a high quality of life. Belizeans
are an energetic, resourceful and independent people looking after their own development in a sustainable way”.

9

governance, and education. The main government priorities and challenges discussed in these
strategies include the following:
25.
Sustainable Environment and Natural Resource Management. Despite the progress in
strengthening environmental management in several areas, and, most lately, the highly
significant move of the government to ban the bottom trawling fishing method in Belizean
waters so as to protect the ocean floor and deep-sea coral reefs, serious challenges remain. Due
to weak institutional capacities, implementation and enforcement of environment and natural
resources management actions has been inadequate. The institutions that are directly responsible
for the management of Belize’s environment and natural resources (e.g., Department of
Environment, Forest Department, Fisheries Department, Coastal Zone Management Authority
and Institute) are under-funded, under-staffed and in many cases do not have the capacity to
perform their basic functions. For example, the Department of Environment currently has about
15 staff which can hardly cover the mandate given to the Department under the Environmental
Protection Act; and the Forest Department has just under 40 staff charged with managing
protected areas (PAs), licensing, monitoring, and enforcement within and outside PAs. The
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) system—the main instrument in the environmental
management toolbox—needs substantial strengthening. Furthermore, there is an overriding need
to develop, adopt and implement a comprehensive natural resources and environmental policy
and strategy including planning for climate change and mitigating its effects.
26.
Government priorities10 to address these challenges include: (i) strengthening
environmental institutions, governance and regulation; (ii) recognizing the contribution of
environmental stewardship to economic growth and poverty outcomes by valuing the
environment; and by making the protection and sustainable use of natural resources an integral
part of the development strategy and sectoral policy planning; and (iii) international technical
and financial assistance to help the Government strengthen the resilience of the country's
economy and natural resources to climate change shocks and natural disasters.
27.
Disaster Risk Management. The policy framework relating to disaster risk management
in Belize is fragmented, with several sectoral policies but no overarching policy in place as a
more comprehensive measure. The most comprehensive attempt to date is Belize’s National
Hazard Mitigation Policy(2004),11 which provides an integrated approach to hazard risk
management and sustainable development at national, sectoral, and community levels within a
broader national development framework. The National Emergency Management Organization
(NEMO), established in the aftermath of Hurricane Mitch (1998), coordinates ex-post disaster
preparedness and response activities, but lacks a focus on mainstreaming risk management into
sectoral planning and building a culture of ex-ante prevention through risk reduction. Public
sector agency organization and legislative frameworks mainly support the emergency
management cycle, and suffer disparities in addressing comprehensive risk management.
28.
Strengthen macroeconomic and fiscal management. A main challenge for the
government will be to further strengthen the macroeconomic framework to ease Belize's
vulnerability to shocks and improve growth and social prospects. Despite Belize's vulnerability
10

Which were validated during a February 24, 2011 stakeholder workshop in Belize City and discussions with
Government of a Bank policy note entitled "Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth".
11
The National Hazard Mitigation Policy has been prepared through a concerted effort of the Government, CDB and
CDEMA (at the time CDERA).

10

to external shocks, the government has very little flexibility to implement countercyclical fiscal
policy given high debt levels and limited external financing. In February 2007, Belize
restructured 98 percent of its public external commercial debt of US$550 million, avoiding what
had been an imminent threat of a fiscal crisis. Though the 2007 debt restructuring temporarily
eased fiscal pressures, Belize faces the challenge of increasing debt service in the years ahead
associated with the “Superbond” 12 along with competing demands to address the increase in
poverty and infrastructure needs to support economic development. In the 2010 Article IV
consultation, the IMF has called for a fiscal consolidation strategy geared towards reducing
public debt to a more sustainable level (40 percent of GDP by 2019), since this would ease fiscal
pressures13 and help Belize regain access to external private financing. Lower debt ratios would
also provide additional space to respond to adverse shocks and facilitate the future rollover of
amortizations coming due from the restructured debt. The government has implemented reforms
to improve revenue collection, but has avoided public expenditure cuts due to concerns that they
would derail the incipient economic recovery.
29.
Government is committed to implementing sound fiscal policies in the face of
increasing fiscal pressures. Government’s strategy has been to mobilize bilateral and
multilateral support, enact measures to bolster fiscal revenues, and undertake a comprehensive
reform of public financial management programs to enhance fiscal discipline. On the latter
initiative, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) is supporting actions to improve
budgeting framework including implementing a Medium-Term Fiscal Framework. Belize is also
a subscriber to the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF).
30.
Improve Government Transparency and Accountability. The lack of government
transparency and accountability has been a long-standing challenge in Belize. Entering office on
a mandate to improve governance, the administration has taken several measures to increase
transparency and accountability including: i) term limits for the Prime Minister; ii) a recall
mechanism for elected officials; iii) extension of powers and functions of the Senate (enabling
the Senate to initiate and conduct inquires into the operations of any government office or public
statutory body); and iv) fiscal transparency legislation which sets standards to increase
transparency throughout the whole budget process. Additionally, the Auditor-General is
empowered by law to report on the use of public monies to Parliament.
31.
The Administration’s governance reform agenda focuses on improving the public
financial management framework. Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Program
(PEFA) and procurement assessments undertaken during the ISN period revealed significant
weaknesses in public financial management (PFM), public procurement, public investment
management, and government internal audit and control. Government has initiated a wideranging agenda to improve the public financial management framework, and has developed
extensive action plans, with donor support, which are currently under implementation. Reform
areas include the adoption of a fiscal transparency and responsibility framework, supported by

12

The “Superbond” was structured in such a way that, for the first 12 fiscal years, no payments will be made on the
principal. Starting August 2019, Belize will pay principal payments annually until the bond is paid off in 2029.
13
The pressures are the result of: i) the increase in the interest rate on the “Superbond” from 4.25 percent to 6.00
percent in 2010 and to 8.50 percent in 2012; ii) an expected decline in oil revenues as production from existing
wells will weaken during the forecast period; and iii) increased spending in infrastructure and anti-poverty
programs that will result from the 2010-13 development plan.

11

IDB. In addition, the Finance and Audit (Reform) Act was amended to provide sanctions for
violations and to enhance transparency in the tendering process of Government procurement.
32.
Investment in Human Capital Development. Belize faces immediate challenges on the
social front including a rise in poverty levels and an escalation in crime and violence. The
Government has undertaken several initiatives to tackle these challenges including the
RESTORE program, a government-wide citizen security umbrella program supported by IDB
and the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), and other social programs including a youth skills
project and food pantry pilot. Related to these efforts, the social protection system has been
undergoing major reforms since 2008 to address deficiencies in coverage despite substantial
spending levels. Government priorities include the need to improve the capacity to target,
coordinate, monitor, and evaluate social services. The recent launch of a conditional cash
transfer program, supported by World Bank NLTA (Building Opportunities for Our Social
Transformation, BOOST), an innovative way to transfer income to poor households is an
important step in upgrading Belize's social policy and programs. BOOST’s co-responsibilities
include 85 percent school attendance for children 5-17 years old and 100 percent immunization
for children 0-5 years old. However, further efforts are needed to consolidate the institutional
set-up, the actual implementation of the program, and leverage the opportunities this represents
in rationalizing social protection expenditures.
33.
Improved access, coverage, efficiency and equity in health and education.
Affordability of health and schooling remains an important barrier to equity in Belize, and
spending on the 0-5 age group remains very low which confirms the need for re-investing in
human capital, using income transfers, as well as bridging the gaps in the supply of services,
especially for the poor. Key policy areas in the education sector include: (i) early childhood
development; (ii) expanding access to secondary education; (iii) quality in schools; and (iv)
teacher development and management. Several donors are active in the education sector,
including the IDB, which completed a project to improve equity in educational resource
allocation, and is planning to focus future engagement in improving teacher quality. The
Government, with CDB support, is carrying out an education sector strategy and action plan in
2011, which is expected to receive support by IDB. The United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) has provided technical assistance in the area of early childhood development, which
has led to an announcement in the FY2011-2012 budget of a child care subsidy to support early
childhood development. Health priorities include the need to expand access to healthcare,
particularly for those in the lower income brackets, and to further improve the quality of service.
The need to upgrade health care facilities at all regional hospitals to provide all basic testing and
care services has also surfaced as a priority. Further to this, the Belize health sector reform
policy prioritizes the development of Belize’s Health Information System (HIS) which is
recognized among the international community as good practice in the initial development and
implementation of a comprehensive HIS.
34.
Foster an Enabling Environment for Growth and Sustainability: The Government has
prioritized actions to enhance the enabling environment to support private sector led growth.
Belize’s comparative advantage is based on its unique tourism product and advantageous
geographical location near large markets including the United States, Mexico and Central
America. In the face of trade preference erosion, which has affected traditional agriculture
exports such as bananas, and sugar, the Government aims to diversify the country’s economic
base, targeting expansion of non-traditional export related products and services, including
12

primary and agro-industry sectors, fisheries, and tourism. The country is also attempting to
increase trade relations with Mexico and its Central American neighbors14. Growth prospects in
these areas face four major constraints including road transport infrastructure, institutional
capacity for trade policy making and implementation, access to finance and export promotion. In
addition, recent expropriations of the telecommunications (August 2009) and electricity
companies (June 21, 2011) could reduce the attractiveness of the country’s investment climate to
foreign investors. Government initiatives to promote private sector development include the reestablishment of the Development Finance Corporation to improve access to finance, and IDB
supported operations to enhance competitiveness of the tourism and agriculture sector.
35.
The Government continues to prioritize enhancement of the country’s
infrastructure following years of low capital investments as a result of fiscal constraints.
The Government has mobilized substantial bilateral and multi-lateral financing of infrastructure,
particularly transport investments, which are critical to support private sector development.
Requirements for future investments on the primary network include raising the level of
robustness to potential future disaster events (particularly coastal flooding) and addressing
substandard conditions in parts of the network which have safety consequences. A particular
challenge is the absence of sustainable road maintenance financing mechanisms, owing to fiscal
constraints but also to institutional resistance to adopting alternative approaches, including
private sector participation. However, the government has expressed commitment to undertake
institutional reforms, supported by the EU program which is developing a road maintenance
plan.
V.

WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT FY2009-2011

A. Bank program under ISN and lessons learned
36.
The Bank program during the ISN period (March 2009-2011) includes one
operation, the US$15 million Municipal Development Project (MDP), which became
effective in January 2011. Currently its implementation is rated as satisfactory. During this
period several Analytical and Advisory Activities/ Non-lending Technical Assistance (NLTA)
have been ongoing and are expected to be finalized in 2011. Three trust funds (see Table 2
below) have also been approved during this period and are currently under implementation. In
the social sectors, Bank activities include a multi-year Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) NLTA;
an Influenza Detection and Response project, and a JSDF grant, Improving Children's Health and
Nutrition in Poor Mayan Communities in Toledo. Supporting the government’s PFM and
procurement reform agenda, the Bank has an IDF grant to Strengthen Capacity of AuditorGeneral and procurement. In disaster risk management, Belize is participating in the Central
American Probabilistic Risk Assessment Initiative (CAPRA), with the support of the World
Bank, Center for the Coordination of Natural Disasters Prevention in Central America, United
Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), and IDB. The Marine
Conservation and Climate Adaptation Initiative NLTA seeks to find innovative and sustainable
financing mechanisms for long-term marine conservation and climate adaptation actions. This
work builds on a long Bank engagement in climate, environment and disaster risk management
issues in Belize and the region (see Annex F).
14

Belize is a member of the Central American Integration System (SICA)

13

Table 2: Active Belize Trust Funds
Net Grant
Amount (US$
‘000s

Trust Fund
South-South Experience Exchange Trust Fund (SEETF)
Effective Cash Transfers Program: Lessons Across Honduras,
TF094035 Belize, Mexico, and Jamaica

75.00

Building Institutional Capacity of Auditor General and
TF094490 Improving Quality of Public Procurement
TF095644 Influenza Detection and Response

351.00
501.74

37.
IFC. As of April 30, 2011, IFC's disbursed and held portfolios totaled US$5.2 million.
IFC's portfolio consists of two projects. Work done to date for the establishment of a Credit
Bureau consists of a market assessment which was presented to stakeholders. IFC is now
working with the Central Bank on a National Strategy document, which will then be followed by
assistance in drafting of the required legislation. Regarding SME support, discussions are
underway with a client bank for a SME market evaluation.
38.
Achievements during the ISN period: The MDP was the first Bank loan to Belize in
nearly 10 years and will address mounting infrastructure needs of several municipalities, most of
which had not benefitted from any major infrastructure works in a decade due to fiscal
constraints in the 2000s. The project will contribute to higher-level objectives including:
1) addressing key infrastructure bottlenecks needed to support economic growth and mobility;
2) contributing to modernize and enhance municipal management; 3) reducing vulnerability and
risk associated with natural disasters; and 4) improving government’s transparency and
accountability. The Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) NLTA has provided just-in-time
assistance to support the Government in its assessment of the suitability and feasibility of the
CCT, culminating in the government’s decision to launch a pilot CCT, a key part of the
government’s strategy to combat rising poverty and crime and violence. An important
achievement of this NLTA was to build the WB reputation with the client to provide quality
assistance based on flexible, client-based responsiveness and global experience. The NLTA
benefitted from South-South TFs to share experiences with CCTs between Belize, Jamaica,
Honduras, and Mexico. The Bank was able to deliver just-in-time assistance following the
H1N1 outbreak (Avian Flu TF), which focuses on strengthening health surveillance systems.
39.
Knowledge services also contributed to building the Bank’s depleted knowledge
base and initiating dialogue in key areas. Several analytical reports (mentioned above) were
produced during the ISN period. The policy note, "Natural Resources for Climate Resilient
Growth", was well received by officials in the Ministry of Natural Resources and a wider
stakeholder audience, and has resulted in a request for further engagement to tackle priority
environmental challenges. The social protection NLTA produced a Policy Note on Issues and
Options for Social Protection Reform at a very opportune moment to help the Government
articulate a response to evidence of higher poverty levels in the 2009 Country Poverty
Assessment. The objective of the Agriculture Sector Risk Assessment NLTA was to assist the
government in managing agriculture risks, which is critical both for economic growth,
14

competitiveness and poverty reduction. The objective of the Housing diagnostic NLTA is to
provide an analysis of the housing sector in Belize focused on its parameters, potentials, and
pitfalls, in order to assist the Government as well as the various stakeholders in the housing
sector in moving towards ensuring “access to quality and affordable housing by all” in the
coming years.
40.
Implementation of the ISN has provided important lessons to guide the preparation
of the CPS. Through the implementation of the ISN, Bank teams faced a number of challenges
related to the Bank’s long absence, including limited knowledge of the political economy of
reform, the government’s unfamiliarity with Bank procedures, and limited Bank knowledge of
other donor programs.
41.
These achievements and challenges provide ample lessons to inform the design of the
new CPS, including:
42.
Challenges of small size. While project teams have consistently noted the high
qualifications of government counterparts, the scarcity of qualified personnel leads to delays in
project implementation. The Bank needs to make an effort to ensure that it does not overburden
the core group of government staff who manage most Bank activities. This also points to a need
to exercise selectivity, simplify project design, and account for the need to conduct extra
supervision.
43.
Coordination and harmonization with development partners. With no local presence nor
formal donor coordination mechanism, the Bank needs to invest more efforts into donor
coordination/mapping activities.
44.
Consensus building to achieve reform. Achieving sustainable results requires a better
understanding of the political economy of reform, and investment in consensus building in order
to bring about policy change.
45.
Country financing parameters (CFP) for Belize, which have been agreed upon by
Authorities, are included in Annex C.
B. Role of Development Partners
46.
The design of the CPS is intended to fill key gaps/complement other donor
programs in order to most effectively address the country’s development challenges. The
major multilateral donors in Belize are the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), IDB and UN
agencies, and significant bilateral partners include the EU, Taiwan, China, and Venezuela. Other
donors include OPECs Fund for International Development, and the Central American Bank for
Economic Integration (CABEI). Belize does not have a formal IMF program, but has benefitted
from close collaboration through Article IV consultations.
47.
The Bank program in Belize has traditionally been small, relative to other donors,
and it is the only donor to have suspended its program during the early 2000s (though other
donors reduced disbursements) when fiscal conditions rapidly deteriorated amid financial
irregularities. Aid flows in Belize decreased from the early 2000s as the fiscal situation
deteriorated and the government reverted to costly commercial borrowing. Beginning in 2005,
the previous administration implemented a home-grown adjustment program, under IMF
15

guidance, and supported by substantial budget support by CDB and IDB. The Barrow
administration entered office vowing to avoid costly commercial borrowing and to seek only less
costly bilateral and multi-lateral financing, including the World Bank. Thus far it has made good
on this pledge as donor programs have ramped up since 2008 with several major infrastructure
projects planned or underway.
48.
The Ministry of Economic Development is the liaison for development partners, but
no formal donor coordination mechanism exists. Bank project teams have actively pursued
donor coordination on an ad-hoc basis, including the CCT team's collaboration with the IDB and
UNICEF on a single beneficiary information and targeting system, and a joint WB/IDB
commitment to ensure harmonization of activities in the areas of PFM and procurement reform.
The CDB and World Bank recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding to increase
collaboration and coordination.
49.
IDB’s program tackles several of Belize’s key development challenges through
lending and technical assistance. IDB has a lending portfolio of US$70 million and is active in
several sectors (see Annex G). The IDB’s country strategy (2008-12) focuses on the following
development objectives: i) Ensuring sound fiscal management and public sector transparency; ii)
Creating the conditions for and restoring sustainable, private sector led growth; iii) Improving
human resource development and social protection; and iv) Rehabilitating road infrastructure
damaged by floods in early November 2008. IDB has active projects (or projects under
preparation) in tourism, agriculture competiveness, solid waste management, health, education,
disaster risk mitigation, and crime and violence. IDB is also delivering substantial technical
assistance under development objective i. IDB’s program is front-loaded in 2008-2009, with a
base-line envelope of US$51.5 million (maximum envelope is US$101.5 million), though several
additional loans have been approved or are under preparation including an education program,
Community Action for Public Safety (Crime and violence), and a Hurricane Richard
reconstruction loan.
50.
Similarly, CDB’s large and diverse portfolio (US$64 million) consists of projects in
infrastructure (water, bridges, roads), financial sector (credit line to the Development Finance
Corporation (DFC)), and social development (Basic Needs Trust Fund, health and skills). CDB
is currently preparing a country strategy paper for the years 2011-13. CDB is also currently
preparing an Education Sector Strategy and action plan, which will include an investment plan to
be financed by CDB and IDB.
51.
The European Union (EU) is the largest provider of grants, primarily for rural
development, including banana and sugar support. A Global Climate Change Alliance15 grant
(€2.9 million) for Belize, financed by the EU, is expected to disburse in 2011. The grant will be
implemented by UNDP to enhance adaptive capacity and resilience to climate change in national
policies, including the water sector in Belize. According to the EU, 80 percent of the funds will
finance investments in the water sector, where a climate change strategy is already in place. The
remaining funds will be dedicated to mainstreaming climate change policy, a pre-condition of
which is that the Government of Belize establishes a climate change desk.
15

Initiated in September 2007 by the European Commission, (EC) the Global Climate Change Alliance seeks to
enhance cooperation and support between the European Union (EU) and poor developing countries, most vulnerable
to climate change, to adapt to the effects of climate change without prejudice to achieving the Millennium
Development Goals.

16

52.
UNDP’s main areas of focus include: i) Poverty Elimination by Investing in People; ii)
Reverse the Spread of HIV and AIDS; and iii) Improving Sustainable Development Practices
(Disaster Risk Reduction, Natural Resource Management and Climate Change). UNDP also
plays a leading role in gender and development, using its convening services to engage
stakeholders, and has conducted workshops in gender and economic policy management,
Disaster Risk Reduction and Gender Workshop. UNDP also supports initiatives aiming at
increasing the contribution of women to national decision-making in the National Assembly, and
at increasing national capacity for gender-mainstreaming in policy development and
implementation.
53.
IMF macro policy advice is generally well regarded by Authorities. It is presently
providing technical assistance related to the resolution of banking problems. In 2009 Belize
received financial assistance from the IMF Emergency Assistance for Natural Disasters (ENDA),
following extensive flooding. Taiwan, China has provided budget support (grants and
concessional lending) and agriculture investments while Belize benefits from the Venezuelan
Petro-Caribe program and a housing grant.
54.
In sum, the programs of Belize’s main development partners are well-aligned with
the Government’s national strategies and generally address the key development challenges
outlined in Section IV. IDB’s program addresses the country’s macro and fiscal challenges
through technical assistance focused on improving the PFM framework. The Government’s
program to tackle rising poverty rates and associated crime and violence is supported by IDB and
CDB, and the World Bank through its existing CCT technical assistance. Health and Education
challenges are addressed under the leadership of CBD and IDB. Several development partners
support the promotion of an enabling environment for private sector led growth through
infrastructure lending, including targeted investments to key growth sectors (tourism and
agriculture) and improved access to finance. However, while elements of the challenges related
to sustainable natural resource and disaster risk management are addressed by various
development partners, including IDB and UNDP, the programs lack sufficient scope and
coordination to adequately address the magnitude of the challenge facing the country.
C. Consultations
55.
Stakeholder consultations (see Annex E) played an instrumental role in the design of
the CPS. The Bank conducted consultations in Belize during the week of February 23-27, 2011
and May 9-12, 2011. The team met with varied state and non-state stakeholders including
representatives from government ministries, private sector, academia, NGOs, and other
development partners, sharing the Bank’s diagnostic of Belize’s development challenges. A
recurring theme in these discussions was that Belize’s development prospects are intricately
linked to its natural resource base. There was a general concern that Belize must manage its
natural resources in a more sustainable manner and strengthen resilience to natural hazards and
climate shocks in order to achieve its medium- and long-term development goals. While this
conclusion is reflected in the Government’s national development strategies, there is a lack of a
systematic approach to address the critical challenges posed by unsustainable natural resource
use and climate change. Stakeholders encouraged the donor community, including the World
Bank, to play a more supportive role in this area.

17

56.
The Bank’s main government counterpart also identified priority areas for Bank
engagement including the need to enhance the country’s infrastructure, strengthen the education
system, continue to strengthen the social protection system, and modernize the country’s
payment systems. Discussions with key decision makers focused on indentifying the most
strategic role for the World Bank that would leverage IBRD resources/financing with additional
resources, in a manner that responds to Government priorities and addresses the country’s main
developmental challenges. The outcome of these discussions was an agreement to focus the
Bank’s program on the country’s development challenges related to Sustainable Environment
and Natural Resource Management.
D. Proposed Bank Program
57.
The CPS will concentrate on one central area: to support the Government to achieve
Inclusive and Sustainable Natural Resource-Based Growth and Enhanced Climate Resilience.
The rationale behind this selectivity is threefold: (i) the Bank’s comparative advantage and the
potential impact it could have given the importance of natural resources in Belize’s growth;
(ii) the Bank’s capacity to leverage additional funds to complement the limited resources; and
(iii) the fact that other priority sectors are supported by other donors (see Annex G).
58.
This selected program will support the Government’s efforts to adopt a sustainable
natural resourced based economic model while enhancing the country’s resilience to
climate change and natural hazards. Natural resources are undoubtedly central to Belize’s
development prospects, and there is a sense of urgency to adopt a sustainable model in the face
of more frequent and intense natural hazard impacts. Belize also has an opportunity, afforded by
the uniqueness of its natural resource base, to position itself on the global climate stage as a
responsible steward of its natural resources. By supporting these efforts, the proposed program
could substantially leverage IBRD funding with other existing funds that target environment and
natural resources management, emerging global climate funds (grants), and other development
partners’programs. A program to protect the natural capital of Belize would help improve growth
prospects and benefit the poor who tend to depend on natural resource-driven sectors in Belize.
Furthermore, the CPS would also support fiscal sustainability to the extent to which increased
resilience to climate change and natural hazards would reduce associated fiscal costs borne by
the government as a result of disasters.
59.
The proposed CPS includes a range of potential activities under 3 main results
areas: i) Policies and strategies for Mainstreaming of natural resources and climate resilience;
ii) Institutional capacity strengthening for natural resource management and climate change; and
iii) Investments to strengthen climate resilience. The results areas correspond to activities related
to policy, capacity building, and investments, respectively. The results matrix (Annex A) is
indicative, as specific activities will be developed during the course of an annual programming
exercise, subject to available Bank and grant resources. A CPS progress report will be prepared
in FY14, following Parliamentary elections due by June 2013. At this time, the results matrix
will be revised to reflect actual programmed activities.
60.
Governance and gender issues are integrated in the CPS. Supporting the
Government’s commitment to transparency and accountability, the Bank will identify
opportunities to integrate governance into ongoing and new activities. Ongoing activities,
including the Municipal Development Project and the IDF grant to Strengthen Capacity of
18

Auditor-General and Procurement, already include governance related activities, as described
below. As the Government and the Bank seek to identify new entry points for enhancing
governance capacity, particular focus will be given to identifying activities related to the demand
side of good governance, such as information and transparency, consultation and participation,
and monitoring and oversight. Regional development in the demand-side of good governance
area continues to be a high priority agenda with the implementation of various initiatives
focusing on decentralization, citizen and civil society participation and open access to
information. This creates an opportunity for Belize through the CPS to engage in learning
exchanges on progress within the LCR Region, taking advantage of South-South knowledge
exchanges, or outside the region with other countries addressing similar issues of interest. The
CPS also provides a window to address gender issues in the natural resource based economy, as
described below.
61.

Bank support can be provided through two main instruments:
i)

ii)

Analytical, Knowledge, and Convening Services: aimed at enhancing the
institutional capacity of the Government in natural resources management and
climate change related activities in a sustainable manner, including policy and
strategy formulation, planning, coordination, implementation and monitoring.
This implies substantial strengthening of institutional capacity in a systematic
fashion at the macro-level (i.e., MED/MoF), micro-level (i.e., implementing
ministries/departments/agencies such as Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environment, Agriculture and Fisheries, National Emergency Management
Organization, and others), and community level. CPS resources could also
selectively strengthen agencies involved in natural resource management and
climate resilience activities.
Financing: an investment program targeted at the improvement and/or
development of climate resilient infrastructure (roads/bridges, drainage, schools,
health facilities, emergency shelters). The investment activities would build on
the analytical and capacity building initiatives undertaken, and could be financed
by IBRD, GEF, Adaptation Fund and other trust funds.

62.
The CPS spans a four-year period. Early in the CPS period, the Bank will focus on
knowledge services which may lead to operations later. These operations may be funded by
grant resources, including the Adaptation Fund, Special Climate Change Fund, GEF, Global
Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), and others, allowing for the scaling-up
of the program. For example, applications are currently being prepared for the Adaptation Fund
and Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF). The Bank team expects that the CPS' focus, and
Government commitment to its stated goals, will further enhance fund-raising efforts. The Bank
will engage in an annual programming exercise in close coordination with Government and
donors. In allocating Bank resources to support the program, priority will be given to activities
that support the CPS’ main focus and leverage grant resources and additional donor financing to
increase developmental impact. The CPS will continue to support ongoing activities (see section
on "Ongoing Activities") identified as Government priorities including the CCT technical
assistance (under a HD NLTA) and payment systems work, but Bank engagement in education is
expected to be limited to upstream activities on account of substantial donor support (CDB and
IDB) in the sector.

19

63.
Consideration will also be given, particularly in the event that additional resources
are identified, to other strategic areas outside the scope of the CPS, including follow-on to
ongoing activities described below. Such demands will be evaluated according to the following
criteria i) Government demand and a demonstrated strong will for political reform, where
applicable; ii) alignment with National Development Strategies; and iii) resource availability.
64.
Limited indicative lending is US$5-7 million per year over four years with the
possibility for higher amounts subject to client demand, country performance, global economic
developments, and IBRD financial capacity. This would likely translate into one large or two
medium-sized IBRD financed projects.
Table 3: Ongoing and Planned Knowledge Services and Lending Activities
(FY12-15)
Ongoing activities (committed during ISN
preparation and implementation)

Inclusive and Sustainable Natural ResourceBased Growth and Enhanced Climate
Resilience (Planned Activities)

Municipal Development
Project (lending through FY15)

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth
NLTA (through FY15)

JSDF Improving Children's Health and Nutrition in
Poor Mayan Communities in Toledo (through FY13)

Human Development NLTA (FY12)

BZ (TF) Influenza Detection and Response (FY13)

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth
IBRD financing ( FY13)

IDF grant on Building Institutional Capacity of the
Auditor- General and Improving Quality of Public
Procurement (through FY12)

Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation
Initiative (Adaptation Fund and other donors to
be identified)

Payment Systems TA (FIRST trust fund) (FY12)
Financial Sector Assessment Program (joint with IMF)
(FY12)

GEF Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System II
Project

Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment
Initiative (CAPRA) (through 2015)

Results Area 1: Policies and Strategies for Mainstreaming of natural resources and climate
resilience
65.
Horizon 2030 states that “the principles of sustainable development should be at the
center of decisions to allocate and utilize the natural resources of the country”. To achieve this
vision, the strategy calls for the incorporation of environmental sustainability into development
planning.
66.
The Bank Group will contribute to the following outcomes: i) Principles of
environmental sustainability/climate resilience/disaster risk reduction are incorporated into
development planning; and ii) Improved coordination on climate change across sectors. The
Bank aims to achieve these two outcomes through supporting UNDP’s preparation of a climate
change adaptation and disaster risk reduction policy and strategy (described below), and
establishing a climate change desk to improve coordination across sectors.
20

67.
The Bank Group will support this Results area through a Natural Resources for Climate
Resilient Growth NLTA. The Bank will work closely with UNDP, under the EU funded Global
Climate Change Alliance grant (€2.9 million), whose objective is to enhance adaptive capacity
and resilience to climate change in national policies, including the water sector in Belize, to
identify specific areas of engagement. Bank objectives will focus on filling the analytical gaps
and undertaking consensus building efforts to support the mainstreaming of climate change
adaptation agenda. Bank activities could also seek to capture the incomes and services generated
by the key ecosystems, to illustrate to policymakers the various trade-offs of alternative
development scenarios through a Natural Capital (Ecosystems) Valuation.
68.
The World Bank is currently preparing the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System II Project
to be funded by the Global Environment Facility (GEF). The scope of this project is
complementary to the proposed Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation Initiative (see
below) as it is directed at land-based threats, work on judicial system (court enforcement), and
trans-boundary watersheds among the Mesoamerican Reef countries (Belize, Guatemala,
Honduras, and Mexico). The project aims to consolidate on-going efforts to coordinate national
policies for the conservation and sustainable use of the shared reef system and broaden the multisectoral focus with the participation of the tourism and agriculture sectors. Accordingly, the
project will support both outcomes of this results area.
Results Area 2: Institutional capacity strengthening for natural resource management and
climate change
69.
A strategy to protect the natural capital of Belize includes the need to strengthen
environmental institutions, governance and regulation. The institutions that are directly
responsible for the management of Belize’s environment and natural resources (e.g., Department
of Environment, Forest Department, Fisheries Department, Coastal Zone Management Authority
and Institute) are under-funded, under-staffed and in many cases do not have the capacity to
perform their basic functions.
70.
The Bank Group will contribute to the following outcomes: i) Enhanced effectiveness of
the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) System; ii) Enhanced human resilience and capital
for a natural resource based economy; iii) Strengthened capacity for compliance monitoring and
enforcement of key agencies responsible for environment in Belize; iv) Strengthened institutions
for implementing climate resilience measures; and v) Better preparedness through improved
disaster risk management institutions.
71.
To achieve these outcomes, the Bank could undertake activities to develop mechanisms
for implementing an effective EIA process by: i) establishing EIA certification process under the
DoE; ii) strengthening the National Environmental Appraisal Committee (NEAC) by
establishing clear terms of reference for NEAC; iii) upgrading the data and records management
system of the DoE; and iv) increasing NEAC autonomy and transparency of procedures via
regular update and publication of the committee’s decisions on publicly accessible website.
Under this initiative, the Bank would explore supporting the Government efforts to access
climate funds from sources such as the Adaptation Fund and Special Climate Change Fund, the
GEF, and other climate change funds, and support through the Clean Development Mechanism.
Particular focal areas could include the identification of policies and programs that improve
inclusiveness and human resilience and build human capital for a natural resource based
21

economy. The Bank would seek opportunities to include specific gender based programs in the
area of climate change adaptation and disaster based mitigation, complementing UNDP’s efforts.
The Bank could also assess, in short periods of time, key public management arrangements of
the institutions involved in environment and climate resilience activities (human resource
management, asset management, tax administration, public procurement, ensuring fiscal
sustainability, and public expenditure management), through Rapid Assessments and Action
Plans (RAAPs).
72.
The Bank could also support the Government’s efforts to adopt a road maintenance
program through upstream technical assistance under the Natural Resources for Climate
Resilient Growth NLTA. As part of a financing agreement with the EU, the Government is
currently preparing a national road maintenance strategy that would seek to create a sustainable
financing mechanism. The Bank is prepared to offer upstream technical assistance, including
sharing regional experiences. Further assistance could be considered during the CPS as the
reform process advances, and potential Bank activities would be linked to the climate resilience
theme of the CPS.
73.
The Bank would support building the country’s capacity for assessment of natural risks
and integration of such assessment into policy and decision making process for the development
of investments, disaster risk mitigation and disaster response across sectors, through the
provision of technical advisory services, training and acquisition of goods. Ongoing activities
include Belize’s participation in CAPRA, which will establish probabilistic risk assessment
capacity in Belize as well as a risk information platform. The initiative will train local users in
the use of open-source risk models in order to facilitate a comprehensive understanding of risk
and risk management and its integration in decision-making processes.
Results Area 3: Investments to strengthen climate resilience
74.
This results area would address the Government’s strategy to Foster an Enabling
Environment for Growth and Sustainability, and focus on infrastructure investments to
strengthen the country’s resilience to climate change and natural hazard impacts. Through this
strategy, the Bank Group is expected to contribute to achieving the following outcomes: i)
Enhanced climate resilience of key infrastructure; ii) Increased ecosystem resilience to climate
change impacts; iii) Strengthened legal and administrative framework for PAs; and iv) Increased
human resilience to climate change impacts.
75.
Priority investments are expected to be identified in climate change adaptation plans,
which would be developed under Results Area 1. IBRD financing and additional grant funding
would be sought to support these investments. Civil works to be financed would focus on
retrofitting and climate-proofing existing infrastructure as well as the construction of key
infrastructure designed to protect the most vulnerable assets. These interventions will mitigate
the adverse affects of future economic and natural shocks, and at the same time, create an
enabling environment for sustained economic development better adapted to a rapidly changing
climate.

22

76.
The Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation Initiative16, which is expected to be
partly financed by the Adaptation Fund, would seek to find innovative and sustainable financing
mechanisms for long-term marine conservation and climate adaptation actions that would
strengthen the climate resilience of the Belize Barrier Reef System through a comprehensive
package of climate adaptation and conservation measures. The initiative embodies a two-track
approach which combines ecosystem-based adaptation with national level enabling policy,
finance, and legal frameworks as an effective long-term approach to help strengthen the
resilience of the reef system to the adverse effect of climate change. The initiative will produce
long-term economic, environmental, and social benefits by addressing the challenges posed by
climate change on marine ecosystems and on the livelihoods of future generations. The
objectives of the program, which contribute to outcomes in each of the three results areas, are:
i) to expand and secure Marine Protected Areas and Replenishment (no-take) Zones (Result 2,
and Result 3 – outcome ii); ii) to improve the reef's policy and regulatory protection regime
(Result 1); iii) to scale up the pilot repopulation of coral reefs with resilient varieties grown in
coral nurseries; iv) to provide a comprehensive support in alternative livelihoods for affected
users of the reef (Result 3, outcome iv); v) to reduce impacts from resident and tourism activity
in keys (Result 3, outcome ii); and vi) to raise awareness, build local capacity, and disseminate
information (Result 2). The alternative livelihoods program will pay particular attention to
gender dimensions.
77.
Existing activities which support this results area include the Municipal Development
Project (MDP), which includes capacity enhancement in town planning such as in the area of
disaster risk reduction and mitigation. The Project will also finance specific investments in
drainage improvement which should help in flood mitigation and management. It also supports
the Government's efforts to improve land subdivision standards, to ensure adequate land fill of
plots and roads, as well as adequate storm drainage. The focus on the MDP as a dual entry point
for the CPS enhances both natural resource management and the demand-side of good
governance, as the MDP currently includes activities designed to strengthen accountability and
transparency including: i) public disclosure of financial statements of municipalities; and ii)
ensuring public participation through townhall meetings on investment prioritization. New
activities under this pillar would seek to enhance the climate resilience aspects already built into
MDP. The Bank would seek resources from the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF)17, to
finance additional activities aimed at enhancing climate resilience in the targeted municipalities.
Additional financing for MDP would also be strongly considered on the grounds that the
demand/need for additional infrastructure in the municipalities exceeds the scope of the project.18
This approach would capitalize on the strength of the Project Implementation Unit in the Social
Investment Fund, which after initial delays is fully staffed and well-functioning.

16

The Government has officially requested the Bank to prepare an application to the Adaptation Fund and act as
Implementation Agency (May 18, 2011).
17
The Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) was established in November 2004 under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) at its seventh session in Marrakesh to finance activities,
programs and measures relating to climate change that are complementary to those funded by the resources allocated
to the climate change focal area of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Trust Fund and by bilateral and
multilateral funding
18
Should the Bank pursue additional financing for the Municipal Development Project, OP/BP 7.60 (Projects in
Disputed Areas) would likely be triggered given the unresolved territorial dispute between Belize and Guatemala as
mentioned in paragraph 2 (said OP/BP was triggered in the original project in 2010).

23

Ongoing Activities
78.
The CPS will also continue to support the government’s social agenda in the context
of rising crime and poverty levels, building on the promising results of the CCT NLTA. The
second phase of CCT technical assistance, under the HD NLTA, will aim to consolidate the gains
under the program, making social protection more efficient in spending and more effective in
results, and move towards the creation of a flagship CCT program that helps rationalize other
programs (efficiency) and provides a further support for the accumulation of human capital
amongst the poor (effectiveness). The Bank will work with the Government to introduce good
practices on increasing transparency and accountability of CCT program. Continued support for
CCT implementation provides an excellent entry point to target gender-related issues, given that
reducing male drop-outs is one of the objectives of the program, and draws on regional Bank
experience including the Boys at Risk in the Caribbean Initiative19. Support of CCT programs
serves as a separate entry point for capacity strengthening of municipal and local governments
and fostering improved relationships between national and local-level governments, service
providers and beneficiaries. The program will also support deepening dialogue in the education
sector with government and the donor community through upstream participation in the
development of an education sector strategy, led by CDB. The program will also provide a
window to sustain health sector engagement initiated during the ISN period through the Avian
Flu TF and JSDF on Childhood Nutrition. In general, through the continued HD engagement
through the NLTA, the Bank will be well-positioned to support the CPS’ theme of climate
resilient growth.
79.
The Bank will continue its support for the strengthening of public financial
management in Belize. It will continue its current support for the strengthening of the capacity
of the Office of the Auditor General and upgrading public procurement systems in the country.
This project could include governance and anti-corruption activities in the procurement
component including: i) designing a system to safely report cases of malpractice, fraud or
corruption; and ii) training of bidders and procurement specialists from the Government.
Additional fiduciary training on World Bank operations strengthens the capacity of PFM in
handling both donor funds and State funds while building a more transparent and accountable
environment. This support will complement IDB’s activities. Belize is also a potential
beneficiary of SEMCAR (Supporting Economic Management in the Caribbean), a new program
funded by the Canadian International Development Agency to support improved economic and
public financial management including revenue administration in the Caribbean.
80.
In the financial sector, the Bank is providing technical assistance, financed by FIRST, to
support the Central Bank (CDB) in improving the safety and efficiency of the Payments,
Remittances and Securities Settlement Systems (PRSSS) in Belize, through: (i) developing an
overall National Payment Systems (NPS) development strategy and (ii) reforming the legal and
regulatory framework for payment systems. The CBB would use the NPS development strategy
created to guide its NPS reform process which will include development of the necessary
payment systems platforms. The Bank is also conducting jointly with the IMF a Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), a comprehensive and in-depth analysis of the country’s
financial sector.
19

The Bank is supporting regional efforts to tackle crime and violence, through an IDF grant to SICA (Sistema de
Integracion de Centro America) which includes Belize.

24

E. IFC Strategy
81.
IFC’s strategy for the Caribbean has four pillars: (i) crisis response (to the financial crises
and Haiti’s earthquake); (ii) financial inclusion and job creation; (iii) regional competitiveness
and integration; and (iv) climate resilience. In Belize, IFC’s focus will be specifically on
financial markets development and access to finance, infrastructure, agribusiness and tourism,
and green construction and other climate resilient activities.
82.
One of the key constraints to private sector development is access to finance, especially
for MSMEs and the informal sector. IFC’s financial sector strategy in Belize is geared towards
expanding credit through: (i) Advisory Services with a bank to identify the SME market potential
and, if attractive, on how to structure its operations to address it; (ii) increase trade through the
provision of trade facilities; and (iii) assist with the establishment of the legal framework for the
creation of Credit Bureaus. In infrastructure, IFC’s advisory services could help improve the
regulatory framework and facilitate private sector participation in infrastructure projects (publicprivate partnerships, or PPPs), with the objective of improving access to basic services for the
underserved and leveraging donor financing. Once a clearer regulatory framework is in place,
IFC could also explore potential direct investment in existing private sector infrastructure
companies. In the agribusiness, tourism and green construction, IFC will partner with the
suitable private sector players to identify opportunities that are consistent with IFC’s strategy. In
all these sectors, once IFC has a specific engagement, it will seek to ensure that the companies
meet benchmarks for energy and other input usage as well as meeting IFC’s environmental and
social standards.
83.
Given the small size of the economy, the relatively slow pace of reform and the
participation of other multilateral agencies, it is expected that IFC’s activity will continue to be
limited. As reforms intensify, IFC will respond to opportunities to support viable projects,
particularly in export-oriented sectors like infrastructure, agribusiness and tourism.

VI.

RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION

84.
Based on lessons of experience in implementing the ISN and based on the fiscal situation
of Belize, the risks associated with this program are characterized as high. The mid-term CPS
Progress Report to be prepared following parliamentary elections (to be held by June 2013) will
allow the Bank to revisit the risks associated with the strategy and make adjustments as needed.
85.
High Debt risk. Despite the 2007 debt restructuring exercise, public external debt levels
remain high at 83.5 percent of GDP. IBRD exposure to Belize is US$11.8 million, or 0.9 percent
of GDP. The debt restructuring has given Belize some additional fiscal space and greater
predictability on its interest payments, but increases in the step-up coupon rate of the
“Superbond” will place pressure on fiscal accounts. The Government has taken tough actions
on the revenue side, raising the General Sales Tax rate, but would need to exercise greater
expenditure constraint, to confront deteriorating conditions. Foreign reserves have strengthened
and the near-term outlook has improved moderately, but Belize remains susceptible to downside
risks. In line with IMF recommendations from the 2010 Article IV, further fiscal consolidation
measures are needed to reduce public debt to a more sustainable level.
25

86.
Financial sector risk. The global slowdown and severe floods adversely affected
economic activity, delayed the adoption of plans for fiscal consolidation, and contributed to
increased bank risks. Weaknesses in the banking system could undermine systemic stability,
though the IMF is providing technical assistance to strengthen the regulatory and bank resolution
frameworks. In addition, the Bank is conducting jointly with IMF a Financial Sector Assessment
Program (FSAP) in July 2011.
87.
Implementation risk. Belize's capacity limitations and lack of familiarity with World
Bank processes and procedures could constrain effective project implementation, resulting in
slower than anticipated implementation. Though government counterparts have gained
experience with Bank processes in the context of the ISN, including staff in the PIU of the
municipal development project, this remains an important risk. The Bank will continue
assessing this risk and mitigating it with frequent supervision as needed and training efforts
integrated in the operations. Implementation of the CPS is also highly dependent on obtaining
significant grant resources, which if they do not materialize, would limit the Bank’s ability to
deliver the full scope of the program. This risk is partially mitigated by the Bank’s demonstrated
success in leveraging trust funds to support country programs, as in the case of the Pilot Program
for Climate Resilience (PPCR) program which has leveraged US$65-70 million (see Annex F).
88.
Vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change. As previously noted, Belize is
highly vulnerable to natural disasters and climate change. The proposed CPS is focused on
mitigating these risks through activities related to policy, capacity building, and investments.
Should a natural hazard event occur during CPS implementation, the Bank would be prepared to
provide support, inter alia, through IBRD financing and additional financing of the Municipal
Development Project.
89.
Political Risk. With Parliamentary elections due by June 2013, there is a risk that a new
administration would not support the Bank’s program. This risk is considered low since both
political parties support a development model based on sustainable natural resources-based
growth and the related need to strengthen the country’s resilience to climate change and natural
hazard impacts.
90.
Governance. Concerns related to transparency and a weak public financial management
and procurement framework pose a risk to the Bank’s program with Belize. The key for
mitigating these risks is the Government's demonstrated commitment to improving the
governance and PFM framework, and its initial actions in this direction, including developing
action plans for PFM and procurement reform supported by the IDB and the Bank. These risks
are also mitigated through initiatives to strengthen governance which have been mainstreamed
into activities starting with the Belize Municipal Development Project and include:
i) developing a national framework for strengthening integrity in infrastructure that mitigates
corruption risks through information sharing; ii) independent monitoring involving beneficiaries;
iii) better use of information and communication technologies; and iv) tighter financial controls.
Other specific procurement measures include improved oversight, enhancing procurement
performance and monitoring to make the public procurement system more efficient and
transparent (including the emphasis on the open transparent competition), strengthening public
procurement processes and other business process reforms, capacity constraints in individual
procuring entities and needs assessment for procurement training, capacity building, and contract
management.
26

91.
Investment climate risk. Since 2009, two expropriation events have occurred involving
Belize Telemedia Limited (BTL) and Belize Electricity Limited (BEL). Belize has been engaged
in numerous lawsuits with regards to its expropriation of BTL in 200920, and concerns about
protracted lawsuits could undermine the quality of the investment climate and reduce prospects
for private sector led growth. The Government welcomes genuine foreign direct investments and
maintains that both expropriations were carried out in the public interest with a commitment to
provide fair compensation, as required by Belizean law. The Bank will monitor further
developments in connection with these expropriation cases.

20

The Belize Court of Appeal ruled on June 24, 2011 that the expropriation of BTL was unconstitutional. In turn, the
Government introduced an amendment to the legislation to satisfy concerns expressed by the Court of Appeal’s
judgment and seeking to re-acquire the same property that was expropriated in 2009. Also, the Government has
indicated its intention to take the case to the Caribbean Court of Justice. The potential application of OB/BP 7.40
(Disputes over Defaults on External Debt, Expropriation, and Breach of Contract) will be analyzed depending on the
outcome of said disputes.

27

Annex A1: Results Monitoring Framework
Inclusive and Sustainable Natural Resource-Based Growth and Enhanced Climate Resilience
Results Area 1: Policies and Strategies for Mainstreaming of natural resources and climate resilience
Outcomes

Milestones, Outputs of CPS Program and Proxy
Indicators*

Instruments/Partners

Principles of environmental
sustainability/climate resilience are
incorporated into development
planning

Climate change adaptation policy and strategy
adopted by parliament

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth
NLTA.

Indicator: Published Act/approved bills
Specific climate resilience measures incorporated into
sectoral development plans and investment programs
Indicator: Natural resources wealth
valuation/accounting undertaken for consideration
within the national development agenda

Improved coordination on climate
change across sectors

Framework of climate change coordination and
planning of project activities adopted by key
ministries

Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System II Project
(GEF)

Partners: UNDP, EU
Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth
NLTA
Partners: UNDP

Empowered and efficient climate change coordination
mechanism established
Indicator: Functioning inter-ministerial Steering
Committee as demonstrated by regular meetings and
follow-up actions taken.
Results Area 2: Institutional capacity strengthening for natural resource management and climate change
Enhanced effectiveness of the

EIA certification program established for enhanced
28

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth

Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) System

Enhanced human resilience and
capital for a natural resource based
economy

Strengthened capacity for compliance
monitoring and enforcement of key
agencies responsible for environment
in Belize

Strengthened institutions for
implementing climate resilience
measures

environmental compliance

NLTA

Indicators: Number of people certified, Number of
investment projects with EIAs

GEF

Policies and programs supporting skills development
that improve inclusiveness and human resilience and
build human capital for a natural resource based
economy

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth
NLTA

Indicator: Education strategy that improves the
system’s capacity to produce skills relevant for a
natural resource based economy is adopted

Partners: CDB, IDB, UNDP

Targeted training programs and collaboration
arrangements with communities, private sector, NGOs
which will result in enhanced capacity to:

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth
NLTA

HD NLTA

GEF


access funds and manage climate change
impacts

Indicator: Functional national entity(ies) with
technical and fiduciary capacity to access climate
funds and implement measures

Municipal Development Project (IBRD
US$15millions)

Partners: UNDP


measure and monitor climate variables

Indicator: Number of staff in key agencies trained
and equipped with better assessment and compliance
monitoring tools and capacities


prepare for and respond to adverse natural
events

Indicator: No. communities organized as part of
national emergency response organization

29

Better preparedness through improved
disaster risk management institutions

Improved Early Warning systems for hurricane and
coastal flooding

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth
NLTA

Indicator: Number of functioning communication
nodes forming part of the national system

GFDRR
Partners: UNDP

Results Area 3: Investments to strengthen climate resilience
Enhanced climate resilience of key
infrastructure

Select bridges, schools, hospitals, shelters, Ministries
retrofitted to improve their climate resistance and
functionality during natural hazard emergencies

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth
(IBRD lending)

Indicator: No. of bridges, schools, hospitals,
shelters, Government buildings climate-proofed
Provision of drainage in the selected Municipalities
Indicator: Km of drainage financed under the
Project
Baseline: 0

Municipal Development Project (ongoing, IBRD
US$15millions, potential additional financing)

Target: 3

Improved local road infrastructure

Trust Funds: Special Climate Change Fund

Indicator: Km of drainage financed under the

Partners: IDB, UNDP, EU, CDB

Project
Baseline: 0 Target: 4
Increased ecosystem resilience to
climate change impacts

Strengthened legal and administrative
framework for PAs

Integrated watershed and coastal zone management
Indicator: Area (ha) rehabilitated and or under
sustainable management
Replanting of mangroves and restoring forests and
habitats in target areas
Indicator: Number of people (local labor) employed

30

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth
(IBRD lending)

Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation
Initiative (Adaptation Fund)

in ecosystem restoration activities
Partners: The Nature Conservancy
Increased human resilience to climate
change impacts

Alternative local livelihoods program, including
vulnerable groups and women
Indicator: Number of households facilitated to
engage in sustainable livelihood activities

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth
(IBRD lending)
Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation
Initiative (Adaptation Fund)
GEF
Partners: UNDP, The Nature Conservancy

* Baselines and targets will be developed as specific activities are identified.

31

Annex B1: Belize At A Glance
Belize at a glance

2/25/11

B elize

Latin
A merica
& Carib.

Lo wer
middle
inco me

0.33
23
3.4
52

566
20,422
1.1
79

3,767
31,923
1.2
40

3,882
6,856
10,525

7,682
2,039
4,502

4.3
3.2

7.5
6.3

8
17
73
20
4

..
..
68
44
25

..
..
122
119

92
90
118
114

87
73
109
105

99
90

93
79

86
50

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

Age distribution, 2009

(2009)

Male

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

1.2
3,740
5,990

15-19
0-4
10

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

0.0
-3.4

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 8 )
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

13
23
76
16
5

A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

a
a

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1990

Belize

N e t A id F lo ws
(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2007):
Euro pean Co mmissio n
United States
Japan
A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

1995

2000

2008

Latin America & the Caribbean

b

19 8 0

19 9 0

2000

2009

15

30

15

25

1
0
0

2
12
0

7
-1
1

13
2
1

15

7.5
99

7.5
160

1.9
59

2.1
78

5

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

10

0

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds

-5
95

Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

11.2
11.4

3.0
2.8

0.6
0.5

2.3
-0.3

2.0
..

2.0
..

2.0
..

2.0
..

05

GDP

GDP per capita

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 – 0 9
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

0.1
195

0.2
413

0.2
832

0.3
1,354

2.6
4.7

2.8
4.5

3.2
4.2

A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

27.4
30.9
23.9
41.7

20.0
22.2
13.1
57.8

16.7
21.2
10.9
62.1

12.2
22.8
14.3
65.1

2.9
3.8
1.4
5.1

5.5
2.8
2.3
4.6

2.0
5.9
7.5
4.1

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n

71.9
17.2
24.1

57.7
12.9
27.2

79.1
12.9
28.7

66.7
15.8
25.5

-0.6
1.1
7.9

7.0
5.0
2.8

1.0
4.6
-0.2

Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

55.4
68.6
21.2

62.2
60.1
34.9

53.0
73.7
7.6

62.1
70.0
13.8

6.7
3.4

4.4
6.4

7.3
1.2

(% o f GDP )

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are no t available.
a. Co untry po verty estimate is fo r earlier perio d. b. A id data are fo r 2008.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

32

Belize
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2009
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

260
462
-168

429

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

-165
-19.9

-93
-6.9

Voice and accountability

..
-55

Political stability
Regulatory quality
Rule of law

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)

26

Reserves, including go ld

114

80

Control of corruption

73

0
2009

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e

2000

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

22.0
18.0
17.8

25.4
21.3
24.4

-9.1

-2.8

25

50

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

..
..

..
..

100

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure
Overall surplus/deficit

75

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

2000

2008

17.0

..

21

59

0.0

0.1

7
72.5
..

7
72.5
44.5

60,332
0.2

49,674
..

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)
To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)
Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

612
76
–

1,092
100
–

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)

73.5
16.2

80.7
12.4

Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)

23
0

95
0

CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)

2.8

1.4

GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

2000

2009

Composition of total external debt, 2009

IBRD, 16

IDA, 0

IMF, 7

Short-term, 8

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio

Other multilateral, 230

(US$ millio ns)

Private, 669
Bilateral, 162

US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2009

–
–
–

44
45.5
60

2000

2009

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

40
2
4
3

16
0
4
1

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

0
0
0

0
0
0

11
11
1

4
4
0

1

0

–
–

–
–

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt
M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.

33

Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

2/25/11

Annex B2: Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
As Of Date 5/25/2011

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by IEG by Number
Proj Eval by IEG by Amt (US$ millions)
% of IEG Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of IEG Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2011
1
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
9
0
80.5
0.0
33.3
0.0
30.0
0.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

34

Annex B3: IBRD/IDA Program Summary
Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program
Project ID

US$(M)

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b Risks
(H/M/L)

2010

Municipal Development Project

15.0

H

H

2013

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Grow th Project

Fiscal year

Annex B4: Summary of Non­lending Services – Belize
Product
Recent completions
BZ Economic Policy Notes
BZ Housing Diagnostic
BZ CCT TA
BZ Agriculture Sector Risk Assessment

Completion
FY

2011
2011
2011
2010

Underway
JSDF Improving Children's Health and Nutrition in Poor Mayan Communities in Toledo
IDF Building Institutional Capacity of the Auditor General and Improving Quality of Public
Procurement
FIRST Payment Systems TA
Comprehensive Approach for Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA)
Financial Sector Assessment Program (joint with IMF)

Planned
Human Development NLTA
Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth NLTA
GEF Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System II Project

35

2015
2013
2012
2015
2012

2015
2015
2015

Annex B6: Belize ­ Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
a

2005

Actual
2007

2006

2008

Projected
2011
2012

Estimate
2010

2009

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Agriculture

15

15

12

12

..

..

..

..

Industry

17

21

21

23

..

..

..

..

Services

67

65

66

65

..

..

..

..

90
19

82
18

83
17

81
28

82
22

80
18

82
19

82
20

55
64

65
63

65
64

62
71

54
58

60
58

62
62

62
64

10

18

17

19

18

20

18

18

5

16

13

18

16

15

14

13

1115

1213

1277

1359

1349

1401

1481

1563

3570

3650

3560

3770

3780

..

..

..

4.7
5.7

1.2
4.5

3.8
4.3

0.0
..

2.9
..

2.8
..

3.0
..

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 84 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
-0.2
1.3
Total consumption
-4.8
-6.0
Private consumption
-5.8
-6.4

-2.1
2.6
1.5

0.4
0.6
0.4

-3.4
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Gross domestic product

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
b

Exports (GNFS)
Imports (GNFS)

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings

c

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 84 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
3.0
Gross Domestic Income
-0.1

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
b

Exports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB
b

Imports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reserves

d

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)

618
325

790
427

824
426

849
480

726
382

715
556
-97
..
-160

764
612
26
74
-25

810
642
14
93
-52

958
788
-109
112
-132

782
621
-56
80
-85

126
31
25
6
36

108
-13
66
-79
-21

142
-108
-24
-84
41

188
33
5
28
-31

-33

-50

-23

-8.7

2.1

1.1

837
..

913
..

810
..

971
..

922
..

999
..

27
..
-39

-9
..
-75

-28
..
-110

95
0
26
-26
..

0
0
-9
9
39

0
0
-6
6
75

0
0
-12
12
110

-58

..

0

0

0

-8.0

-4.2

1.9

-0.6

-1.8

(Continued)

36

Indicator

Actual
2006
2007

2005

2008

Estimate
2009

Projected
2011

2010

2012

e

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)
Current revenues
23.6
Current expenditures
25.2
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
-1.6
Capital expenditure
5.7
Foreign financing
..

25.8
25.1
0.7
4.6
..

28.2
23.2
5.0
5.7
..

28.7
23.4
5.3
4.9
..

27.0
24.5
2.5
3.7
..

27.7
24.0
3.7
4.5
..

27.2
24.7
2.5
4.4
..

26.6
25.2
1.4
4.0
..

Money and credit
Money and quasi-money (M2)
Credit to the Private Sector

..
..

17.3
13.1

15.0
13.9

14.0
11.6

5.8
4.8

-1.8
-3.6

5.7
1.6

5.6
3.8

94.3

95.2

92.5

93.0

95.3

..

..

..

3.6
2.4

2.9
4.0

4.1
4.0

4.4
2.6

-0.4
-0.7

0.0
0.9

4.5
2.9

2.5
2.5

Price indices( YR84 =100)
f

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

37

Annex B7: Belize ­ Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

2005

Total debt outstanding and

Actual
2007

2006

2008

Estimated
2010

2009

Projected
2011
2012

1012

1181

1173

1083

1110

1170

1194

1224

Net disbursements (US$m)

..

..

0

0

0

0

0

0

Total debt service (TDS)

..

..

64

51

47

44

41

39

TDO/XGS

..

149.5

142.4

127.6

152.9

139.8

130.8

126.1

TDO/GDP

90.7

92.5

86.3

79.7

82.3

83.5

80.6

78.3

TDS/XGS

..

..

7.1

5.4

6.5

5.3

4.5

4.0

14.9

14.3

16.0

18.9

20.3

19.1

18.7

17.8

a

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)

a

a

(US$m)

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
b

Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS

..

..

..

..

5.4

..

..

1.9

Preferred creditor DS/public

..

..

..

..

23.2

..

..

28.7

..

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.7

..

..

..

30

25

21

16

12

8

7

c

DS (%)

IBRD DS/XGS
d

IBRD TDO (US$m)

35

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
d

IDA TDO (US$m)

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

38

Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As Of Date 5/25/2011

Closed Projects

9

IBRD/IDA*
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid

1.01
0.00
7.30
41.60
8.31
41.60

Total Undisbursed (Active)

13.87

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

13.87

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last ISR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P111928

BZ Municipal Development

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

S

S

2011

IBRD
15

39

IDA

GRANT

Disbursements a/
Cancel.

Undisb
.
13.87

Orig.
-1.13

Annex B8: IFC Operations Portfolio
Belize
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 4/30/2011
(In USD Millions)

Committed
FY
Approval
2010/2011
1998

Company
Atlantic Belize
Nova/ambergris

Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

Total

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Participant

Total

0
4.31

0
0

0
0

0.85
0

0
0

0.85
4.31

0
4.31

0
0

0
0

0.85
0

0
0

0.85
4.31

4.31

0

0

0.85

0

5.16

4.31

0

0

0.85

0

5.16

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

40

Annex C: Belize: Country Financing Parameters
Item

Parameter

Explanation

Cost Sharing and Local Cost
Financing

Up to 100
percent

The Bank may finance up to 100 percent of the cost of a
project in Belize provided that Government maintains its
commitment towards fiscal sustainability in addition to
careful prioritization of the scarce resources available to
support the development program.

No country
level limit.

The Bank will determine the possibility for financing
recurrent cost on a project by project basis. The Bank may
finance incremental recurrent cost after careful consideration
of the fiscal impact of the recurrent costs and the impact on
indebtedness in the short and medium terms as well as the
sustainability of the sector and project achievements. The
conditions for the Bank’s recurrent cost financing in Belize
are (i) incremental nature of the recurrent cost; (ii) decreasing
flow of financing by the Bank; and (iii) establishment of
mechanisms for sustainable financing of the recurrent cost by
the local counterpart at the end of the Bank financing. Loan
proposals should specify the mechanisms for the country to
cover the recurrent cost at an increasing rate towards a 100
percent local cost coverage before the end of the project.

Local cost financing. Are the
requirements for Bank financing of
local expenditures met, namely that:
(i) financing requirements for the
country’s development program
would exceed the public sector’s
own resources (e.g., from taxation
and other revenues) and expected
domestic borrowing; and (ii) the
financing of foreign expenditures
alone would not enable the Bank to
assist in the financing of individual
projects

Yes

The two requirements are met. The Bank may therefore
finance local costs in the proportions needed in individual
projects.

Taxes and Duties Are there any
taxes and duties that the Bank
would not finance?

None

The Bank considers the taxes in Belize to be generally
reasonable and nondiscriminatory.

Limit on the proportion of
individual projects costs that the
Bank may finance.
Recurrent Cost Financing
Limits that would apply to the
overall amount of recurrent
expenditures that the Bank may
finance.

41

Annex D: Belize Debt Sustainability Analysis
Belize’s debt restructuring in 2007 opened the path to restoring fiscal sustainability but
total public debt burden remains still high. In February 2007, Belize restructured 98 percent
of its public external commercial debt of US$550 million, avoiding what had been an imminent
threat of fiscal crisis. The “Superbond” was structured in such a way that, for the first 12 fiscal
years, no payments will be made on the principal and payments will be only made for interest.
Starting August 2019, Belize will pay principal payments annually until the bond is paid off in
2029. The bond features step-up coupon rates: 4.25 percent during the first three years after
issuance; 6 percent for fiscal years 2010 and 2011; and finally 8.50 percent (twice the initial
amount) from 2012 until maturity in 2029. Public debt decreased significantly in the last five
years (from 98.7 percent of GDP in 2005 to less than 80 percent in 2010) but the debt burden is
still high and further actions to lower the debt to GDP ratio are needed.
The debt sustainability analysis presented in this annex considers two alternative scenarios.
A baseline scenario and an active scenario are taken into account. These scenarios are based on
the macroeconomic assumptions which are consistent with the medium-term macroeconomic
frameworks envisioned in the 2010 IMF Article IV consultation (see Table 1). The baseline
scenario assumes the continuation of present policies, which are likely to lead to slower growth
and a moderate primary surplus. The active scenario incorporates the effect of policies able to
reduce expenditures and increase revenues. As a consequence, the active scenario would imply
higher primary surplus and lower external financing needs.
Bound tests are performed to assess the vulnerability of Belize’s debt to standard shocks.
To test how deviations from their predicted values of key macroeconomic variables (growth rate,
exchange rates, primary balance and interest rates) affect the debt path in Belize, the following
settings are considered: a) historical scenario based on the assumption that key macroeconomic
variables stay at their historical averages for 1999–2008; b) an exchange rate shock (one time 30
percent real depreciation in 2010); c) a negative shock in the output; d) a negative shock in the
primary balance; and e) a contingent liabilities shock (one time 10 percent of GDP shock to
contingent liabilities in 2010). Unless specified, all the shocks are considered to persist in the
projected years.
Under the baseline scenario, public debt will hover around 77 percent of GDP through
2015 (see Table A.1 – Panel A). The baseline scenario is based on the continuation of the
current fiscal policy. This assumption implies that growth rate won’t be higher than 2.5 percent
until 2019 and that the primary surplus will stabilize at 1.5 percent of GDP over the medium
term. Slower growth and a low primary surplus will entail higher financing needs which will be
mostly covered by external commercial creditors at market interest rates (10 year U.S. T-Bond
plus 400 bps) and to a lesser extent by multilaterals lending. In this scenario, the public debt-toGDP ratio will remain slightly below the 80 percent threshold. The limited primary surplus will
imply lower fiscal space and, therefore, a lower capacity to spend in order to address social
priorities.
Bound tests reveal that the public debt is vulnerable to standard shocks (see Figure A.1). In
the baseline scenario, Belize would be extremely vulnerable to a real exchange rate shock. This
vulnerability stems from the composition of the public debt: 90 percent of the public debt is
42

denominated in foreign currency. As a consequence, a 30 percent real depreciation of the local
currency would result in the public debt breaking the threshold of 115 percent of GDP. Lower
growth will negatively impact the level of public debt, too. A pessimistic scenario for growth
(half standard deviation contraction) will take public debt up to 96 percent of GDP in 2015.
Higher expenditures will have a similar impact. A contraction of half standard deviation of the
primary balance will lead to a situation of primary deficit with public debt climbing to 92 percent
of GDP by 2015.
In the active scenario of fiscal consolidation, public debt would gradually decline to under
60 percent by 2015 (see Table A.1 – Panel B). The active scenario is based on the assumption
that the Government will be able to achieve and maintain a primary surplus of 4.5 percent of
GDP since 2011. Higher primary surplus will increase the fiscal space and give the possibility to
the Government to increase capital investments and address social priorities. Improved
confidence would also favor foreign direct investments. As a result of these assumptions,
economic growth will be higher than in the passive scenario and will reach 3.5 percent over the
medium-term. The joint impact of higher growth and lower financing needs will reduce the
public debt ratio to 60 percent by 2014 and 40 percent by the end of this decade, when Belize
will start paying the principal payments of the “Superbond”. Bound tests reveal reduced
vulnerability to standard shocks compared to the baseline scenario. In this case, stronger primary
balance and higher growth would facilitate a rapid absorption of the impacts produced by the
shock considered, although the standard depreciation shock would result in a substantial stepincrease in the debt ratio as in the baseline scenario, followed by a steady decline.
Based on the above analysis, the sustainability of Belize’s public debt depends on the set of
policy actions that will be undertaken during next years. Fiscal consolidation will
significantly reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio and Belize’s vulnerability to shocks. It will imply
measures to increase revenues, reduce/reassign expenditures, and improve debt management. A
strong commitment from the government is needed to proceed in this direction. Moreover, bound
tests underlined the vulnerability of Belize to a depreciation of the exchange rate. Therefore, it is
crucial for the Government to continue in its effort to strengthen the stability of the exchange rate
by sustained fiscal consolidation, the successful resolution of weaknesses in the banking system,
and a disciplined monetary stance.

43

Table A.1. Macro framework and Debt Sustainability: Baseline and Active Scenario
Panel A. Baseline Scenario
2009
2010
2011
(Annual percent change)

Projected
2012
2013

2014

2015

Real Economy
GDP at constant prices

0.0

2.0

2.3

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

Prices (GDP Deflator)

-0.5

3.8

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

Primary balance

0.7

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

Interest

3.6

3.9

4.2

4.6

5.2

5.4

5.7

Overall balance

-2.9

-2.4

-2.6

-3.1

-3.7

-3.9

-4.1

Current account balance

-6.8

-5.7

-6.7

-5.6

-7.0

-7.6

-8.0

Gross official reserves (in months of imports)

3.2

3.4

2.9

2.7

2.6

2.6

2.6

80.2

78.1

77.2

76.6

76.5

76.8

77.2

73.1

71.2

69.2

67.3

67.3

67.6

68.2

Public Sector

External Sector

Baseline: Public Sector debt
o/w foreign currency denominated

Bound tests
Historical scenario

80.2

80.1

80.1

80.0

80.0

79.9

79.9

Real exchange rate shock

80.2

115.2

114.6

114.4

115.1

116.2

117.6

Real output shock

80.2

79.9

81.3

83.4

86.8

91.0

96.2

Primary balance shock

80.2

80.4

81.8

83.5

85.9

88.7

91.7

Contingent liability shock

80.2

83.6

82.7

82.1

82.2

82.6

83.1

2014

2015

Panel B. Active Scenario
2009
2010
2011
(Annual percent change)

Projected
2012
2013

Real Economy
GDP at constant prices

0.0

2.0

2.3

3.5

3.5

3.5

3.5

Prices (GDP Deflator)

-0.5

3.8

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

Primary balance

0.7

2.7

4.5

4.5

4.5

4.5

4.5

Interest

3.7

3.9

4.0

4.2

4.4

4.2

3.9

Overall balance

-2.9

-1.1

0.5

0.2

0.1

0.3

0.6

Current account balance

-6.8

-5.4

-5.0

-4.7

-4.6

-4.6

-4.2

Gross official reserves (in months of imports)

3.2

3.5

3.5

3.5

3.5

3.6

3.7

80.2

76.9

72.8

68.4

64.4

60.4

56.4

73.1

70.2

66.4

62.4

58.7

55.1

51.3

Public Sector

External Sector

Baseline: Public Sector debt
o/w foreign currency denominated

Bound tests
Historical scenario

80.2

80.1

80.1

80.0

80.0

79.9

79.9

Real exchange rate shock

80.2

114.0

110.2

105.8

102.0

98.4

94.6

Real output shock

80.2

78.7

76.8

75.0

73.9

73.4

73.2

Primary balance shock

80.2

79.2

77.5

75.3

73.6

72.0

70.4

Contingent liability shock

80.2

86.9

82.9

78.5

74.5

70.6

66.7

44

Figure A.1. The impact of bound tests in the baseline and active scenarios

Public debt to GDP ratio (%): Baseline Scenario
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Baseline: Public Sector debt

Historical scenario

Real exchange rate shock

Real output shock

Primary balance shock

Contingent liability shock

45

2015

Annex E: CPS Consultations
1.

The preparation of this strategy was based on a continuous and in-depth dialogue with
the Government of Belize, civil society, the private sector, and regional development
partners.

2.

The process of arriving at the CPS focus was highly consultative, and involved initial
discussions with the Government during the 2010 October Annual Meetings and the
2010 December Municipal Development Project loan signing ceremony, in which
Government laid out its initial priorities.

3.

The formal country consultations with high level officials and broader government
and civil society began in February and continued in May 2011, and consisted of a
brief presentation by the Bank team, setting out the Bank’s diagnosis of challenges
and development priorities, and proposed areas of intervention. This was followed by
comments and questions and answers on the proposed strategy as well as on broader
issues and concerns. The consultations were organized and hosted by the Ministry of
Economic Development and the Bank team met with a total of 74 government,
private sector, and civil society representatives in addition to development partners.

4.

During the consultations, there was a general understanding that Belize’s
developmental prospects are intricately linked to its natural resource base, which
faces a variety of pressures from the impacts of climate change, natural hazards and
economic development. Overall, the consultations served to deepen the Bank’s
understanding of the development challenges, government priorities, and the role of
other development partners.

5.

A results summary of the consultations is provided below. This summary is not
comprehensive and does not reflect the official views of any group or audience
consulted.

Main Consultation Comments and Outcomes
Public Sector Consultation
6.

This consultation was held with the Ministry of Economic Development and other
line ministries, and discussed the following priorities:





Supporting key areas, including infrastructure, payments system, and
education
Understanding that economic development goes hand in hand with natural
resource conservation measures and that important synergies between
ecological services and tourism remain untapped
Strengthening the social protection system as a whole, in addition to
supporting early childhood development, expanding access to secondary
education, improving the quality of schools, and teacher development
Involving the planners in order to position the natural resources agenda on a
higher platform that can be translated into a coherent program

46

Civil Society Consultation
7.

A roundtable was held with representatives from civil society, the private sector and
development partners which stressed the following priorities:





Private sector growth should be encouraged and stimulated with a view to
enhance competitiveness and reduce the cost of doing business.
Natural resources management should be integrated into national planning due to
the importance of the environment for the country’s growth; there is an important
window of opportunity to work on a unified economic development plan focused
on cross-sectoral and long-term issues.
A formal mechanism to incorporate non-state actors would facilitate collaboration
between the government, civil society groups, and the private sector.

Consultation on the Natural Resources Dimension of Development
8.

A workshop was held with the Government and other stakeholders based on the
Belize Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth draft policy note. Participants
stressed the multidimensional and cross-cutting nature of natural resource
management and the need to take such considerations into account when formulating
reforms.

9.

Current deficiencies in addressing natural resource management issues were
highlighted, notably insufficient institutional mechanisms that foster inter-sectoral
collaboration, and long-term strategic planning.
Consultation with Development Partners
10.
Consultations with development partners (IDB, EU, and UNDP) focused on
discussing any potential gaps in addressing the country’s strategic development with
a view to align activities moving forward.
11.

The IDB stressed the importance of adopting an intersectoral approach and in finding
strategic entry points on the natural resources management agenda to bring key
stakeholders to engage in higher-level dialogue with Government counterparts.

47

Local Consultation Participants
Consultations between February 21st and 24th, 2011
Non-state Stakeholders:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

Albert Reimer, BAS Group
Alex Martinez, The Nature Conservancy
Amanda Burgos Acosta, Belize Audubon Society
Dareece Chuc, Belize Audubon Society
Dudley Heredia, Belize Audubon Society
Andre Cho, Geology and Petroleum Department (GPD)
Audrey Matura-Shepherd, Oceana
Colin Gillett, Coastal Zone Management Institute (CZMAI)
E. Irving, Galen University
Ernest N. Raymond, Social Investment Fund (SIF), Belize Municipal Development Project
Imani Fairweather Morrison, Oak Foundation
Jose Alpuche, Belize Agro-Productive Sector Group
Joseph Hendrilex, UNICEF
Kerry Beliste, Protected Area Conservation Trust (PACT)
Sharon Ramclam, PACT
Leandra Cho-Ricketts, University of Belize
Vincent Palacio, University of Belize
Marilyn Gentle-Garvin, Belize Family Life Association
Melanie McField, Healthy Reefs/Smithsonian
Mike Heusner, National Environmental Appraisal Committee (NTIA NEAC)
Nadia D. Bood, WWF Central America
Nellie Catzim, Southern Environmental Association (SEA)
Olivia Rhaburn, National Association of Village Councils of Belize (NAVCO)
Orlando Dawson, NAVCO
Seleni Matus, Belize Tourism Board
Tracey Hutchinson, Belize Social Security Board
Yvette Alonzo, Association of Protected Areas Management Organizations (APAMO)
Evita Quiroz, APAMO
Caroline Clarke, Representative, Belize Country Office, Inter-American Development
Bank
30. Harold Arzu, Operations Advisor, Belize Country Office, IDB

Government of Belize:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Mary Vasquez, RESTORE Belize, Office of the Prime Minister
Yvonne Hyde, Chief Executive Officer, Ministry of Economic Development
Emily Waight-Aldana, Economist, Ministry of Economic Development
Yvette Alvarez, Senior Advisor, Ministry of Finance
Martin Alegria, Chief Environmental Officer, Department of Environment, Ministry of
Natural Resources
48

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

Colin Young, National Protected Areas Secretariat (NPAS) Director, Ministry of Natural
Resources
Arlene Mabela, NPAS, Ministry of Natural Resources
Paul Flowers, Strategic Planning and Policy Advisor, Ministry of Natural Resources
Tanya Marsden, Policy Unit (PCPU), Ministry of Natural Resources
Marlen Westby, PCPU, Ministry of Natural Resources
Marcelo Windsor, Forestry Department, Ministry of Natural Resources
Safira Vasquez, Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management (SAICM),
Department of Environment, Ministry of Natural Resources
Edgar Ek, Agriculture Dep. Chief Environmental Officer, Ministry of Natural Resources
Jeavon Hulse, Department of Environment, Ministry of Natural Resources
Gilroy Lewis, Solid Waste Management Authority (SWAMA), Ministry of Natural
Resources
Lumen Cayetano, SWAMA, Ministry of Natural Resources
Beverly Wade, Fisheries Department, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Eugene Waight, Chief Agriculture Officer, Department of Agriculture, Ministry of
Agriculture and Fisheries
George Myvett, Sr. Fisheries Officer, Fisheries Department, Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries
David Leacock, Chief Executive Officer for the Ministry of Education and Youth
Christopher Aird, Chief Education Officer, Ministry of Education and Youth
Ellajean Gillett, Ministry of Education and Youth
John Bodden, Ministry of Health
Judith Alpuche, Chief Executive Officer for the Ministry of Human Development and
Social Transformation
John Flowers, Ministry of Human Development and Social Transformation
Lawrence Sylvester, Chief Executive Officer for the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Development
Nigel Vasquez, Ministry of Tourism, Civil Aviation & Culture
Nonatis Canta, Pesticides Control Board (PCB)

Consultations between May 9th and 13th, 2011
Dean Barrow, Prime Minister
Joseph Waight, Financial Secretary, Ministry of Finance
Yvette Alvarez, Senior Advisor, Ministry of Finance
Yvonne Hyde, Chief Executive Officer, Ministry of Economic Development
Emily Waight-Aldana, Economist, Ministry of Economic Development
Beverly Castillo, Chief Executive Officer, Ministry of Natural Resources
Martin Alegria, Chief Environmental Officer, Department of Environment, Ministry of
Natural Resources
8. Colin Young, National Protected Areas Secretariat (NPAS) Director, Ministry of Natural
Resources
9. Paul Flowers, Strategic Planning and Policy Advisor, Ministry of Natural Resources
10. George Myvett, Sr. Fisheries Officer, Fisheries Department, Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

49

11. James Azueta, Fisheries Officer, Fisheries Department, Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries
12. Lisa Carne, Marine Biologist, Placencia, Stann Creek District
13. Nadia D. Bood, WWF Central America
14. Brian Young, Tour Guide and Co-Chairman of Friends of Laughing Bird Caye, Stann
Creek District
15. Kenrick Leslie, Executive Director, Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre
16. Ulric Trotz, Science Adviser, Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre
17. Mark Bynoe, Environmental/Resource Economist, Caribbean Community Climate Change
Centre
18. Winston Bennett, Project Manager, Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre
19. Kay Menzies, President of the Belize Chamber of Commerce

50

Annex F: Bank Experience in Climate Change, Natural Disaster Risk
Management, and Environment
Climate Change
The World Bank's involvement in adaptation to climate change impacts was initiated in the Latin
America region with the formulation of the Caribbean Planning for Adaptation to Climate
Change (CPACC) Project in 1997, an enabling activity of regional nature (US$6.2 million from
the GEF, closed in November 2002), which included all CARICOM nations. It focused on the
vulnerability of Caribbean island nations to the impacts of climate change.
The Bank continued to support these areas through the Mainstreaming Adaptation to Climate
Change (MACC) project (US$5 million from the GEF, closed in March 2009), the objective of
which was to facilitate the creation of an enabling environment for climate change adaptation in
the small islands of the Caribbean Community, and coastal developing states (Antigua and
Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis,
St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago). Under the MACC, a
National Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan in the Water Sector in Belize was completed in
March 2009. Belize also actively participated in the elaboration and formulation of a Caribbean
Regional Framework for Achieving Development Resilience to Climate Change (2009-2015)
which was endorsed by the Heads of State in July 2009. Also, regional position papers have been
prepared and agreed upon prior to UNFCCC related meetings (e.g. COP, SBSTA) once a year,
sometimes twice a year. These are incorporated into the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS)
negotiating position.
Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR): The Caribbean countries accepted the invitation to
be a regional PPCR pilot in May 2009. This is a regional program for: (i) country-based
investments in six nations - Haiti, Jamaica, Dominica, Grenada, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and
the Grenadines; and (ii) region-wide activities to support national climate change strategies as
well as regional planning strategies, policies and financing mechanisms. The latter is directly
benefitting Belize. The planned activities are: (i) monitoring and climate impact modeling
activities; (ii) facilitating an enabling environment (policy and institutional framework); (iii)
providing the right data and tools to enable countries to factor climate risks into sustainable landuse management and spatial planning; (iv) capacity building and awareness raising aimed at
different levels, including sectors and policy makers; and (v) integration of climate change into
development and budget planning. These two tracks will work through key entities in the
Caribbean region. CCCCC is a member of the PPCR Regional Steering Committee and also
implementing specific activities (see brief on CCCCC). The total grant allocation for the
Caribbean Regional PPCR is US$60-75 million.
Environment
Belize's sector-specific policies and legislation are generally robust. Various key environmental
policies and legislations exist, such as the National Biodiversity Strategy Action Plan, the 2009
Water Resources Management Act, the 1992 National Lands Act and the 1999Coastal Zone
Management Act. In December 2010, Belize also has banned bottom trawling in territorial
waters, which is known to be very destructive to the marine ecosystems. However, integration
51

and implementation of legislation have been lacking. For example, due to weak institutional
capacities, implementation and enforcement of environmental management actions have been
inadequate. On the other hand, environmental civil society organizations are very strong and
actively participate in the formulation of policies and management of protected areas (PAs).
The Conservation and Sustainable Use of the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System (MBRS I)
Project Phase I, which was executed by Central American Commission on Environment and
Development (CCAD) and closed on June 30, 2007, aimed at assisting Belize, Guatemala,
Honduras, and Mexico to strengthen and coordinate national policies, regulations, and
institutional arrangements for the conservation and sustainable use of the MBRS as a shared
regional ecosystem. The project was successful in catalyzing international cooperation among
the four countries and was widely regarded as a model for regional coordination and joint
management of a transboundary resource.
Building on the successes of MBRS I project, the Conservation and Sustainable Use of the
Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System (MBRS) II Project is under preparation with the objective to
consolidate on-going efforts to coordinate national policies for the conservation and sustainable
use of the shared reef system and broaden the multi-sectoral focus with the participation of the
tourism and agriculture sectors. It will also promote adoption of biodiversity-friendly activities in
local communities and the private sector. Currently, the legal agreement for the preparation grant
has been prepared but is on hold due to a lack of consensus among the 4 countries as to which
agency should be the recipient of the grant resources. The parties are considering various options
on how to move the process forward..
Disaster Risk Management
The Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment Initiative (CAPRA) aims to strengthen the
regional capacity for assessing, understanding and communicating disaster risk. CAPRA is a
partnership between Center for Coordination of National Disaster Prevention in Central America
(CEPREDENAC), the UN International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR), the IDB and the
World Bank as a means to raise awareness among client countries in the region by providing
them with a set of tools that would let them better understand the risk of adverse natural events.
CAPRA uses probabilistic methodologies to assess risk.
In Belize, during the first phase of CAPRA financed by the IDB, a country risk profile and
specific disaster risk assessments including seismic and hurricane risks (winds, storm-surges and
rain) have been developed for Punta Gorda, Belmopan and Belize City. For these locations, the
Average Annual Loss (AAL) calculated are between 1 to 3 percent of the total exposed value,
due mainly to contribution of losses associated with hurricane risk. Based on these analyses, the
Bank may support the second phase to improve the quality and reliability of these preliminary
results and focus on creating technical capacity in the country through a training strategy and by
supporting selected key institutions on the development of specific risk assessments using the
CAPRA platform.

52

Annex G: Donor Harmonization Matrix
External
Partner

Macroeconomic
Policy

CDB

Modernization of
Customs and Excise
Department

Productive Sectors

Infrastructure

Social Development

Placencia Road
Upgrading Project
Belize River Valley
Water Supply System

Financial Sector

Hurricane Dean
Emergency Relief

DFC Line of Credit

Technical &
Vocational Training
Project

Kendall / Mullins
River Bridges
Northern Highway
Haulover Creek Bridge
to Airport Road

Environment/Disaster

Social Investment
Fund (Basic Needs
Trust Fund) ($15mn)

National Disaster
Management (Tropical
Storm Arthur
Recovery)

Macal River Crossing
IDB

Strengthening Resultsbased Management in
the Public Sector
Strengthening Belize’s
Fiscal Transparency
and Responsibility
Program to support the
implementation of the
Medium Term Action
Plan to Enhance
Expenditure
Management (TA)

Sustainable Tourism
Loan
Agricultural Services
Program
Belize City Downtown
Rehabilitation (ta)

Post Hurricane Richard
flood risk mitigation
infrastructure in Belize
City 5mn
Integrated Water and
Sanitation Program for
the Placencia Peninsula

Land Management
Program III ($2.5mn)

Health Reform Project
(with CDB/EU)
Education Program
(5mn) under
preparation
Community Action
for Public
Safety.($5mn)
Social Policy Support
($15mn)
Strengthening of
Pension System in
Belize (TA)

Integrated Fiduciary
Action Plan (IDB, EC)

53

Solid Waste
Management (and
OFID)
Disaster Risk
Management (CAPRA)
Support for the
Preparation of an
Integrated Disaster
Risk Management (TA)

Institutional
Strengthening of the
credit union sector
(TA)

External
Partner

Macroeconomic
Policy

World Bank

IDF Building
Institutional Capacity
of the Auditor General
and Improving Quality
of Public Procurement

EC

Productive Sectors

Infrastructure

Social Development

Environment/Disaster

Municipal
Development Project

CCT – Education

Disaster Risk
Management (CAPRA,
GFDRR)

National Housing and
Urban Development
Plan, non-lending TA

SFA (Special
Framework of
Assistance) - Banana
Support Programme

Rehabilitation of Sugar
/Feeder Roads Corozal/Orange Walk

Belize Influenza
Detection and
Response

MBRS (II)

JSDF Improving
Children's Health and
Nutrition in Poor
Mayan Communities
in Toledo

CCRIF

George Town High
School; Technical
High School Building
- Stann Creek District

Global Climate Change
Alliance ($4mn)

UNICEF Programs Human Development
(Strengthen Protection
System for Children)

Mainstreaming and
Capacity Building for
Sustainable Land
Management Project
(GEF)

Accompanying
Measures for Sugar
Protocol Countries II
(AMS)
Rural Development
Project (BRDP) II
(US$12.8 mn)
UN

MDG Needs
Assessment and Cost
Prognosis

54

Integrating Protected
Areas and Landscape
Management in the
Golden Stream

Financial Sector

External
Partner

Macroeconomic
Policy

Productive Sectors

Infrastructure

Social Development

Environment/Disaster

Financial Sector

Watershed
Strengthening of
Disaster Preparedness
and Emergency
Response Capacity in
Belize
Strengthening National
Capacities for the
Operationalization,
Consolidation, and
Sustainability of
Belize’s Protected
Areas System (GEF)
OPEC Fund
for
International
Development

Southside (Belize City)
Poverty Alleviation
Project - Phase I, II,
and III
Belize/Guatemala
Border (Completion of
the Southern Highway
Project) (and Kuwait,
OPEC, CABEI)

Others

Santa Elena New
International Crossing
(CABEI)

55

HIV/AIDS
prevention, care,
treatment and support
(PAHO, UNICEF,
UNFPA, UNIFEM,
UNDP)

National Forest
Program Facility
(FAO)

Rural Finance Project
(IFAD/CABEI)

IBRD 33371
89°W

88°W

To
Lázaro Cárdenas
To
Chetumal

Chetumal

To
Xpujil

Bay

M EXICO

BELIZE

Corozal

Buena Vista
San
Jose

Ho

nd

o

COROZAL

Orange
Walk

Ambergris
Cay

18°N

18°N

Blu
eC
ree

k

San Pedro

Neustadt

Booth’s

Maskall

ORANGE
WA L K

Gallon Jug

Burrell
Boom

Belize City

BELIZE
Hattieville

Belize

Turneffe
Islands

BELMOPAN
Gales Point

San Ignacio
To
El Cruce

Caribbean
Sea

Middlesex

17°N

17°N

C AY O
l
Maca

Dangriga

S TA N N
CREEK

G UAT E MALA

Hopkins

Victoria Peak
(1,160 m)
Riversdale

t

s.
Ma

ya

M

0

Placentia

Punta Gorda

Sarstoon
This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

10

30

40 Kilometers

20

30 Miles

BELIZE

San Antonio

Barranco

20

Monkey River Town

TOLEDO

16°N

0

10

Gulf of
Honduras

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
DISTRICT CAPITALS
NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS
MAIN ROADS
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

89°W
SEPTEMBER 2004

