Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of

The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No: 51787 LS

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

THE KINGDOM OF LESOTHO

May 17,2010

Southern Africa Country Department 1
Africa Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

LESOTHO
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
The date of the last Country Assistance Strategy was March 27,2006
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
US$1 = LSL 7.55 as of May 17,2010
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
April l-March 3 1

WORLD BANK FISCAL YEAR
July l-June 30

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leaders:

Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili
Ruth Kagia
Larisa Leshchenko, Husam Abudagga

The CAS benefited from the contributions of the Lesotho Country Team: Preeti Arora, Sandeep
Mahajan, Louise Fox, Ian Gilson, Maria Benito-Spinetto, (AFTP 1); Ganesh Rasagam, Michaela
Weber (AFTFE); Luis Benveniste, Cristina Santos (AFTED); Gert Van Der Linde (AFTFM);
Kanako Yamshita-Allen, Feng Zhao (AFTHE); Elisabeth Shenvood (AFTUW); Marcus Wishart
(AFTWR); Juan Gaviria, Gylfi Palsson, Fang Xu (AFTTR); Marelize Gorgens (HDWGA),
Eugenia Marinova (AFTHE); Anush Bezhanyan (AFTSP); Lev Freinkman (AFTP3); Frode
Davanger (AFCRI); Luis Alvaro Sanchez and Robert Blake (Consultants); Edmund Motseki
(AFMLS); Herawaty Anderson, Elysee Kiti (AFCZA). Overall guidance for the CAS has been
provided by Ruth Kagia (Country Director) and Lilia Burunciuc (Country Program Coordinator).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ACRONYMS
AAA
AGOA
CASCR
CPI
CPIA
CRP
CRW
DFID
DPCF
EC
FTI
GEF
GOL
GTZ
IDA
IFC
LEWA
LHWP
LNDC
MIGA
MSME
NPV
NSDS
PEFA
PFM
PRSC
ROSC
SACU
SADC
WASA

Analytic and Advisory Activities
African Growth and Opportunity Act (US)
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Corruption Perception Index
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Common revenue pool
Crisis Response Window
Department for International Development (UK)
Development Partners Consultative Forum
European Commission
Fast Track Initiative (EFA)
Global Environment Facility
Government of Lesotho
German international cooperative agency
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
Lesotho Electricity and Water Authority
Lesotho Highlands Water Project
Lesotho National Development Corporation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Micro, small, and medium enterprise
Net present value
National Strategy for the Development of Statistics
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Public Financial Management
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes
Southern African Customs Union
Southern African Development Committee
Lesotho Water and Sewerage Authority

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without World Bank authorization.
i

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I

.

.

I1

INTRODUCTION

VI

.............................................................................................

1

1

A . Political and Economic Context ......................................................................................... 2
B . Poverty and Human Development ............................................................................................ 8

.
IV.
.

IV

......................................................................................................

COUNTRY CONTEXT

I11

V

..................................................................................................

..............................................................................................

LESOTHO’S VISION

LESOTHO’S DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

11

....12

A . Fiscal Adjustment to Absorb the Sharp Decline in SACU Revenue and Increase
Public Sector Efficiency ............................................................................................................ 1 2
B . Advance Human Development and Reverse the Spread of HIV/AIDS .......................... 13
C . Enhance Economic Competitiveness and Diversification ................................................. 15

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.

.

.......................................................

WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

18

Lessons from the Last Country Assistance Strategy ...........................................................
Current World Bank Group Program .....................................................................................
Principles of Engagement .........................................................................................................
Strategic Areas of Engagement ...............................................................................................
PROPOSEDIDA program ................................................................................................................
CAS program and results ..........................................................................................................
Results Monitoring and Management ....................................................................................
Development Partners .................................................................................................................

18
18
19
20
21
23
30
31

RISKS

........................................................................................................................

ANNEXES
Annex 1: CAS FY10-14: Result Matrix .................................................................................
Annex 2: CAS Completion Report .........................................................................................
Annex 3 : Consultation on Lesotho CAS, 20 10 - 20 14...........................................................
Annex 4: Donor Activities Matrix Breakdown by CAS 2010 - 2014 Areas of
Engagement .............................................................................................................

32
34
43
82
85

STANDARD CAS ANNEXES
Annex A2: Lesotho at a glance ...........................................................................................
87
Annex B2: Selected Indicators* of Bank Portofolio Performance and Management ............ 90
Annex B3 : IBRD / IDA Program Summary ........................................................................ 91
Annex B3: IFC and MIGA Program - FY2006-2009 ..........................................................
92
Annex B4 : Summary of Nonlending Services., ..................................................................
93
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators ..................................................................................
94
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators.. ................................................................................. 96
Annex B8: (IFC) - Committed and Outsanding Investment Portfolio .................................
97
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) ...................................................
98

ii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Kingdom of Lesotho for
FY20 10-1 4 is developed within the context of the Government’s strategy for growth and
sustainable development as expressed in the 2002 “Vision 2020” and its Interim National
Development Framework. The latter focuses on four strategic objectives: (i) accelerate
shared and sustainable economic growth, ensure employment creation and protect the
vulnerable; (ii) address the HIV/AIDS epidemic; (iii) foster good governance to improve
public sector service delivery; and(iv) improve the quality of life by promoting human
development. These reform priorities of the Government set an appropriate strategic
policy direction for the country, and form the basis of the Bank’s support under the
proposed CAS.
1.

..

The CAS comes at a critical time as Lesotho confronts the macroeconomic and
fiscal challenges arising from the global economic crisis. The crisis hit as Lesotho was
gathering economic momentum driven by greater political stability and structural
transformation of the last decade. The country had accumulated reserves from foreign
direct investment (FDI) and windfall revenues from the Southern African Customs Union
(SACU), and had become the largest exporter of clothing to the United States under
AGOA. The public sector, expanded rapidly, with public spending increasing to 64.7
percent of GDP in 2008/09. This progress is now threatened by the global crisis, which
has resulted in a significant contraction of export markets and SACU revenues. As a
result, Lesotho confronts the challenge of adjusting to a major economic shock while
finding new sources of revenue and growth.
11.

In the past, the Government of Lesotho (GOL) has demonstrated the resilience to
iii.
rise to similar challenges and adapt to new circumstances, notably when they had to
adjust to declines in remittances from the miners working in South Africa in the early
1990s. Between 1990 and 2005, remittances dropped by roughly 15 percentage points of
GDP, and an estimated 65,000 mining jobs based in South Africa were lost. The GOL
responded to this external shock by creating 40,000 new jobs, increasing public sector
spending and attracting private sector investments, fostered by a liberalized foreign trade
regime.
Displaying the same spirit of resilience, the GOL is responding to the current
iv.
external shocks with bold proposals of adjustment measures. To mitigate the impact of a
projected sharp decline of SACU revenues from 35 percent of GDP in 2009/10 to just 14
percent of GDP in 20 10/11, the GOL has responded with a bold medium term strategy of
aligning budget expenditures with enhanced capacity to raise non-SACU revenues while
reducing public spending in the short run. The budget for 20 10/11 acknowledges the
risks of continuing to treat the inherently unpredictable SACU revenues as an anchor for
expenditure planning. It also proposes significant spending cuts, especially in major
recurrent expenditure categories, in order to restore long term fiscal sustainability. At the
same time, the GOL recognizes a need to get better value for public resources by
increasing efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery. Implementation of such a
major fiscal adjustment will, however, not be easy and poses major risks for GOL. The
iv

proposed menu of interventions under the CAS is framed within the context of this
challenge.
The global economic crisis has highlighted the country’s economic vulnerabilities
v.
and points to the necessity of accelerating progress in laying the foundations for
economic competitiveness and export diversification. Towards this goal the GOL is
proposing in the short term to: (i) continue building effective institutions, and (ii)
improve service delivery by promoting efficiency and performance through the
introduction of a results-based budgeting and finance management in the health sector
and improved education quality. In the medium term the GOL has committed to: (i)
explore new opportunities for sustainable private-sector led growth through an improved
business environment and infrastructure development, (ii) position the rapidly growing
Maseru area as a competitive node for the region and a new driver of growth; and (iii)
target support to smallholder farmers, and exploit the potential for developing
commercial agriculture with strong links to value chains in South Africa.
vi.
The GOL and the World Bank have agreed on three areas of engagement under
the CAS: (i) fiscal adjustment and public sector efficiency, (ii) human development and
service delivery, and (iii) competitiveness and diversification. Within these three areas,
CAS activities will be grouped into six “results clusters” that take into account crosssectoral impacts and aim to achieve results by strengthening institutional capacity as a
cross-cutting issue. The CAS envisages increased budget support through annual Poverty
Reduction Support Credits (PRSC), which would promote enhanced efficiency and
quality of service delivery and economic competitiveness.
vii.
Given the difficult nature of the transformation that the country will be
undertaking, achieving visible results will take time. Therefore, the CAS follows the
approach of strategic incrementalism that focuses on delivering development outcomes in
key strategic areas, while supporting the Government to gradually shift direction toward a
new development paradigm. The Bank and the GOL will review the CAS
implementation annually to assess progress and define the next set of strategic steps. A
CAS Progress Report will be prepared at mid-term or before then if deemed necessary.
To enhance the effectiveness of assistance, the CAS will seek to achieve synergies from
the full range of Bank instruments, lending, technical assistance, and analytical work to
be delivered in partnership with the government and development partners.
viii. Effective approaches to promoting gender equity will be mainstreamed into the
Bank’s program. To maintain gender parity in primary education, the program will pay
special attention to addressing the issue of primary school enrollment related to “herd
boy” syndrome, where boys drop out from school to tend livestock. In health the Bank
will support Lesotho to address the issue of maternal and newborn morbidity and
mortality. As women continue joining the workforce, the Bank will support the GOL in
expanding training opportunities with a focus on women under the Private Sector
Competitiveness and Diversification Project. In FY2013 the CAS proposes a Poverty
and Gender Study to review progress on poverty reduction and gender equity.
ix.
The CAS will build on good practices established in the current CAS of
leveraging the limited International Development Association (IDA) resources through
strategic partnerships with the government and its many development partners using best
V

practices such as the Metolong Dam project where US$25 million of IDA resources
helped mobilize US$300 million for the project, or the HIVIAIDS project, where US$5
million of IDA grant is being used to improve the government’s capacity to implement
projects worth more than US$ 100 million financed through the Global Fund and
PEPFAR. In addition, the CAS will scale up successful ongoing interventions.

x.

The World Bank program in Lesotho faces risks from three sources: the difficult
scope and scale of the required adjustment; limited implementation capacity and weak
institutions; and low demand for improved governance in the public sector. Any or all of
these can undermine the achievement of the CAS objectives. However, the GOL is
cognizant of the changes required and, given Lesotho’s past history of effecting major
transformations, these risks, while substantial, are manageable.

vi

I.

INTRODUCTION

This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) provides a framework for World Bank
1.
Group support to Lesotho for fiscal years (FY) 2010-14. It is aligned with Lesotho's Interim
National Development Framework through 2012, when the Government intends to present a
formal National Development Plan. The CAS comes at a difficult time as Lesotho confronts
macroeconomic and fiscal challenges arising from the global economic crisis and a projected
sharp decline in fiscal receipts from the Southern African Customs Union (SACU)'. The
crisis has exposed the country's vulnerabilities to shifts in global markets and the continued
dependence of the public sector on SACU revenues.
2.
The CAS seeks to support Lesotho's efforts to sustain economic growth momentum
in the face of the global crisis and to address critical human development challenges by
supporting Government efforts to undertake fiscal adjustment and strengthen public finance
management, improve efficiency, quality and equity in access to basic services, and
strengthen the competitiveness of the economy.

11.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

Lesotho, a small country of 1.9 million people and an area of approximately the size
3.
of Belgium, is completely
surrounded by the
Figure 1: Share of Primary, Secondary and Tertiary Sectors in
Republic of South Africa.
Lesotho's GDP, 1996-2008
Highlands constitute more
than two-thirds of the
country less than 10
. ... .. . . . ... . ... ....... ..... .................. .... .. .......... .. . ............... ........
percent of which is suitable
__for cultivation. Lesotho,
with its relatively cost-Agriculture,
value
added (% of GDP)
effective labor and
Industry, value added
abundant natural resources
(% of GDP)
(diamonds and surplus
-Services,
etc., value
added (% of GDP)
wate?), is well placed to
take advantage of its
unique location inside the
,.B",.9"++@ ,.9",,4",,0",,0",,0",~~~~~~~
economic powerhouse in
the region.
Source: World Bank 2009, World Development Indicators 2009.

~

The Southern African Customs Union (SACU) is the world's oldest customs union with the first
agreement signed in 1910. It includes Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa, and Swaziland, and aims
to maintain the free interchange of goods among member countries. The SACU provides for a common
external tariff and excise tariff. All customs and excise revenues collected in the common customs area are
paid into South Africa's National Revenue Fund for distribution among members according to a revenuesharing formula.
* Water, an abundant natural resource in Lesotho, is being exploited through the 30-year Lesotho Highlands
Water Project, initiated in 1986. The project is designed to capture, store, and transfer water from the
Orange River system to South Africa's Free State and greater Johannesburg area.

1

4.
Over the last 15 years, Lesotho has demonstrated that it can seize opportunities as
they arise and has diversified its economy from a reliance predominantly on subsistence
agriculture and remittances to an economy based on manufacturing and water exports and
services (figure 1). It has achieved moderate economic growth, taking advantage of the
preferential trade regime under the 2001 US. African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA)
to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) and rapidly expand garment exports to the United
States. It modernized management of natural resources and transformed its water surplus
into sustained revenues by exporting it to South Africa. In addition, before 2009 Lesotho had
managed relatively well the revenue windfall3 from the SACU. However, these structural
transformations were not sufficient to enable the economy to achieve high sustainable growth
rates to withstand the external shocks, or to substantially improve Lesotho’s social indicators.
Poverty and inequality have remained high.
5.
Poverty in Lesotho is concentrated in population living in isolated rural areas with
limited income opportunities and high cost of service delivery due to the country’s difficult
terrain and scattered settlements. As a consequence, Lesotho’s highland population has been
migrating to the lowlands, attracted by economic opportunity and better services. As people
move, Maseru, the capital, is emerging as an important economic node with the potential to
become a growth hub and a key driver of Lesotho’s development.

A.

Political and Economic Context

i. Political Economy and Governance
6.
Lesotho is a constitutional monarchy. The king is the nominal head of state, and
executive power resides in a government led by the prime minister. At independence in
1966, Lesotho’s political institutions were fragile and untested. This has changed
significantly. Over the last decade, Lesotho has had three consecutive democratic elections,
which have maintained the Lesotho Congress for Democracy Party in power. During the
1990s, declining remittances from Basotho4 miners in South Africa combined with intense
political contestation and constant splits of political parties overstressed the governance
system and undermined stability resulting in elections-related protests in 1998. The
economic transformation at the beginning of the 2000s has expanded economic opportunities
and helped improve political stability.
As a small open economy within SACU and with its domestic currency pegged to
7.
the South African rand, Lesotho’s macroeconomic performance is closely linked with that of
South Africa. While maintaining a balance between economic integration and national
sovereignty, the GOL has harnessed opportunities arising from its geographical location
including through the Highlands Water Project, access to a large market and good
infrastructure to boost economic growth and create jobs.
8.
In the short to medium term, GOL will need to underpin its economic autonomy
with a dynamic reform agenda. However, a combination of several factors makes this
Large increase in SACU revenues from 25 percent of GDP in 2004/05 to about 40 percent of GDP in
2006/07 and 37 percent of GDP in 2008/09.
Basotho is a Sotho-speaking ethnic majority in Lesotho constituting 99 percent of the population.

2

politically difficult. Substantial external resources in the form of SACU revenues have
artificially cushioned the public finance system and weakened the Government’s drive for
needed reforms. Further internal demand for effective governance and accountability
remains weak because of the ready availability of better paid jobs and services across the
border. As a result, the society finds itself in a low level equilibrium in terms of government
accountability with no strong pressure for change.
9.
In order to strengthen the performance of public finance management systems and
institutions the GOL has embarked on several reforms to bring the state and non-state actors
closer together and to boost demand for good governance. Recent examples include
parliamentary reforms to improve oversight through portfolio committees, a pilot local
government and decentralization system (2005-1 0), and the Service Delivery Agenda. GOL
is also proposing to consult with a broad cross section of stakeholders on the country’s
strategic directions in the context of preparing the National Development Plan. The current
economic and fiscal shock is a trigger for a concerted effort by GOL to engage all
stakeholders in the reform effort as a means to engender ownership and support for what will
be a difficult period of adjustment.

ii. Growth and Macroeconomic Development
10.
Lesotho’s economic growth leading up to the recent global recession averaged a
respectable 3.4 percent a year during 2004-08. The main drivers of growth are described in
Box 1. The phase-out of the World Trade Organization Agreement on Textiles and
Clothing, of which Lesotho had been a major beneficiary, adversely affected economic
performance in 2005. However, performance picked up strongly in 2006 (GDP growth of
6.5 percent), driven by a recovery of the garment industry and increased diamond
production. There was also a sharp increase in SACU revenues due to strong growth in
South African imports in the midst of a booming global economy and restructuring of the
SACU revenue sharing formula in favor of smaller SACU countrie~.~
GDP growth slowed
to 2.4 percent in 2007 as agriculture faltered affected by a severe drought, and then
recovered well in 2008, reaching a growth rate of 4.5 percent. The current account recorded
a surplus of about 10 percent of GDP in 2008, and gross official reserves topped US$1
billion by end-2009, far exceeding the official Central Bank of Lesotho target of US$640
million required to keep the loti’s peg to the South African rand and providing more than
seven months of import cover. However, the impact of the global economic crisis now risks
unraveling this good overall progress.

The 2002 SACU Agreement, which went into effect on July 15,2004, revised the revenue sharing
formula in favor of the smaller SACU members.

11.

The global economic crisis hit the Lesotho economy hard. A sharp projected decline
Box 1: Recent Drivers of Growth in Lesotho

Lesotho’s recent economic growth illustrates that the country can seize opportunities when they arise:
Lesotho has attracted considerable FDI into manufacturing to support its economic growth. Over
the past two decades, capital injections (largely from South Africa and Asia) in textiles and clothing
manufacturing for export have driven GDP growth. More recently, foreign capital inflows have been
motivated by Lesotho’s eligibility for duty- and quota-free access to the U S . market for textiles and
clothing products under the 2001 U.S. African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). With exports
of US$365 million during October 2007-September 2008, Lesotho was the largest exporter of
clothing to the United States under AGOA, surpassing South Africa, Mauritius, and Madagascar.
Lesotho remains a leader in Africa in attracting FDI (in per capita terms), despite a drop in net FDI
inflows from the peak of US$287 million in 1996 to U S 8 1 million in 2009 (5 percent of GDP).
Given its tremendous comparative advantages related to access to South African and SADC markets,
Lesotho could still do better.
Lesotho capitalized on its abundance of water and its geographic proximity to South Afiica through a
series of progressive reforms that attracted South African investments to construct the first phase of
the Lesotho Highlands Water Project. Between 1998 and 2006, royalties from water exports
averaged some US$20 million a year. On a parallel track, the country developed a strong
institutional capacity, so that Lesotho Water and Sewerage Authority (WASA) is now widely
recognized as one of the best performing sector agencies in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Lesotho successfully exploited diamond mining. Beginning in 2003, as world diamond prices rose,
diamond mining attracted FDI. By the end of 2006, the sector generated revenues of US$90 million
a year by producing small quantities of high-value stones. This achievement positioned diamonds
behind only the clothing industry in export importance. In 2008 the global economic slowdown hit
the sector hard as diamond prices plunged 50 percent from the first to the second quarter of 2008.
Only the largest (Letseng-la-Terae) of Lesotho’s three operational diamond mines remains open
today.

in SACU revenues coupled with a slowdown in exports and declining remittances from South
Africa are threatening the country’s macro stability. In 2009, GDP growth slowed to 0.9
percentY6held back by a major drop in U S . demand for Lesotho’s textile exports. An
estimated 10,000 jobs had been lost in the textile sector as of end-2009, down from a peak of
50,000 jobs in 2004. Weak world diamond prices hurt production and exports, bringing the
mining sector to a standstill in the last quarter of 2008.
12.
The biggest impact of the crisis, which is expected to last through the medium term,
is the precipitous decline in SACU revenues. With the sharp decline in South African
imports since the onset of the crisis, the SACU revenue pool is shrinking, resulting in much
lower customs collection and reducing Lesotho’s projected revenues (figure 2). After net
repayments by Lesotho to the common revenue pool of approximately 5 percent of GDPY7net
SACU revenues are expected to drop from an estimated 35 percent of GDP in 2009/10 to just
14 percent of GDP in 20 10/11, This steep decline would move the fiscal balance from a
surplus in 2008/09 to an estimated deficit of 19 percent of GDP in 2010/11.
These estimates reflect a large downward revision in growth rates compared with pre-crisis projections of
5.2 percent for 2008 and 5.4 percent for 2009.
SACU payments are made on the basis of the next year’s projected common revenue pool (CRP), with
payments the following year reflecting the actual CRP. The actual CRP in 2008/09 was well below the
original projections, resulting in net repayments due by recipient countries.

’

4

13,
The fiscal stance of the
Government had been broadly
prudent in the past; although public
expenditures did shoot up during
the past few years as a result of
SACU windfalls. Initially the
government saved a portion of
additional SACU revenues by
reducing public debt and
increasing its deposits at the
Central Bank. However, an
expansionary stance in 2008/09
increased total expenditures from
48 percent of GDP in 2005/06 to
just below 70 percent of GDP in
2009/10, with most of the increases
coming in current expenditure
categories, which are typically
difficult to roll back.

Figure 2: Lesotho SACU revenues as share of GDP,
FY08-16

I

40 1
35

30

25
20
15
10
5
0

14.
Recognizing that very high levels of public expenditures were no longer sustainable,
GOL has already initiated several belt-tightening actions under the 20 10/11 budget to curtail
recurrent spending and align it with sustainable levels of domestic revenues. Viewing the
current financial crisis as an opportunity, the 2010/11 budget seeks to mobilize more
domestic revenues and cut wastefid expenditures and fraud and corruption in all its activities,
while also encouraging greater efficiency in delivering public services. The budget envisages
a major reduction in recurrent expenditures, largely through containment of the wage bill (to
bring it gradually from the current 18 percent of GDP to 14 percent of GDP in 201344) and
reduction of expenditures on goods and services. On the revenue side the GOL is planning a
wholesale revision of rates, charges and fines in line with inflation and is proposing
extending the mandate of the Lesotho Revenue Authority to collect all revenues for the
Government. These broad fiscal consolidation measures are promising, albeit necessary for
ensuring fiscal sustainability. A crucial challenge ahead lies in preparing specific supporting
proposals to ensure their proper implementation.
15.
Following trends in South Africa and global food and fuel price increases, consumer
price index inflation peaked at 12.1 percent in September 2008. Since then, again in line with
South African trends, inflation has moderated, and despite the recent upward movement in
international oil prices, inflation was recorded at 4.2 percent (year-on-year) in December
2009. Broad money growth moderated from approximately 35 percent in 2006 to
approximately 18 percent in 2009.

iii. Macroeconomic Outlook
Lesotho faces tough challenges in the medium term stemming from the uncertain
16.
global environment and lower SACU revenues. As the global economy recovers, Lesotho's
growth is expected to rebound modestly from the estimated 0.9 percent in 2009 to about 3.6
percent in 2010 and 201 1 (table 1). Recovery will be driven by moderate expansion in the
garment industry through product and market diversification, growth in the non-garment
5

manufacturing sector (although from a small base),’ a pick-up in construction driven by
public investment to support private sector growth,’ and resumption of mining. A surge in
mining and construction activity is expected in 20 12 as a new diamond mine comes onstream and the key works for the second phase of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project get
under way.”As a result, GDP is projected to grow about 3.9 percent in 2012. If the
highlands project is delayed, GDP growth would be about 2.3 percent instead.
17.
South Africa’s economic recovery will continue to affect Lesotho’s prospects, with
the most direct link being SACU revenues and workers’ remittances. The rebound in the
outer years will depend on how quickly the South African economy recovers from the global
crisis. South African growth will also be important for Lesotho’s external position;
Lesotho’s export diversification to cater to the South African market is expected to
compensate for the projected sluggish near-term recovery of the U.S. markets.
The drop in SACU revenues in the medium term will lead to large fiscal deficit
18.
beyond 2009/10 on the order of 20 percent of GDP in 20104 1 and 201 1/12. After 2012,
SACU revenues are projected to return to the pre-boom level of about 20 percent of GDP.
The buildup of government deposits at the Central Bank, estimated at more than 4 billion
Maloti (about US$500 million at the current exchange rate) and largely saved from SACU
revenue windfalls in the past few years, will provide a cushion in the short term and together
with the measures cited earlier is expected to ensure that the budget deficit is fully financed.

Phillips has started operations in Lesotho to manufacture light bulbs and television equipment for the
regional market. Other non-garment sectors showing potential are pharmaceuticals, footwear, and plastic
hangers to supply to the garment industry.
Donor-supported investment in the Metolong Dam and the second phase of Lesotho Highlands Water
Project are key elements of the public investment program.
lo As in the first phase of the project, South Africa is the key financier, with Lesotho expected to contribute
25 percent of the costs of the project (more than 1 billion rand).

6

Table 1: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2007-2013 1/
2007

2008

2009

2010

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
Real GDP
2.4
4.5
0.9
3.7
Consumer price index (period
average)
8.0
10.7
7.2
6.3
(As percent of GDP)
Government budget I’
Revenue and grants
62.1
49.0
66.2
66.3
SACU revenues
35.2
36.8
34.9
13.9
Non-SACU revenues
25.3
27.7
27.0
27.4

2011

2012

2013

3.5

3.9

2.1

6.0

5.7

5.0

57.0
21.1
27.5
8.4
64.0
40.4
-15.4
-7.0

52.8
19.9
27.5
5.4
55.5
38.6
-8.1
-2.7

1.5
53.3
40.3
7.2
8.7

1.7
64.6
47.9
-0.1
1.6

4.4
69.0
51.5
-7.2
-2.7

7.7
68.3
44.4
-27.0
19.3

-

50.1
11.6
27.5
11.1
68.4
41.5
-29.4
-18.3

-26.5

-35.2

-37.6

-33.2

-29.9

-28.2

-22.6

-25.7

-22.4

-32.3

-39.5

-33.9

-35.7

-26.4

14.0

9.5

-0.3

-22.1

-22.4

-18.5

-7.9

946.2

923.1

1131.0

854.8

650.3

650.8

712,5

6.6
6.2
7.7
Sources: Lesotho authorities; and IMF and WE! staff estimates and projections.
I / Fiscal data are reported on a fiscal year basis; the fiscal year begins in April.

5.2

4.0

3.8

4.3

Grants

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditures
Overall balance (excluding grants)
Overall balance (including grants)
Non-SACU overall balance
(including grants)
Balance of payments and reserves
Current account balance (excl.
official transfers)
Current account balance (incl.
official transfers)
Gross official reserves in millions of
U.S. dollars
As months of imports of goods and
services

19.
Over the medium term, the Government will need to embark on a course of strong
fiscal consolidation, balancing cuts in Government spending and financing to address
emerging fiscal deficits as represented by the fiscal framework agreed under the Article IV
consultations. That will involve increasing the efficiency of spending, especially capital
expenditures, and rationalizing the payroll, while improving tax administration to boost
compliance with the value-added tax (VAT), income tax collections, and other non-SACU
revenue collection (see par. 37-41for a more detailed discussion of fiscal consolidation).
The Government has indicated its intention to put in place measures to contain the projected
fiscal deficit (excluding outlays for Metolong Dam) to approximately 15 percent of GDP in
201 0/11. However, these measures will need to be sustained and reinforced beyond 20 10/11
for the fiscal deficit to reach sustainable levels.
20.
Declining SACU revenues and falling garment exports will worsen the current
account balance. While the impact will be countered somewhat by the resumption of mining,
risks to the external balance remain in the medium term. The current account balance is
expected to shift from a surplus of more than 9 percent of GDP in 2008 to a deficit of 22
7

percent of GDP in 20 10. Capital inflows, donor financing, and partial drawdown of reserves
would sufficiently cover the current account deficit in 20 10. The current account deficit
recovers to about 8 percent of GDP by 2013, largely because of some recovery in SACU
transfers, exports, and remittances, which would also enable re-accumulation of foreign
exchange reserves to more comfortable levels.
2 1.
Preliminary debt sustainability analysis shows Lesotho to be at moderate risk of debt
distress over the medium term. The risk has increased relative to 2009 assessment, reflecting
large fiscal and external deficits expected through 2012/13. Debt ratios are projected to
remain manageable over the medium term, assuming that the fiscal position returns to
balance. At end-2008, the present value of external debt stood at 33.2 percent of GDP.
Under the baseline scenario, Lesotho's present value of debt to GDP ratio is projected
22.
to increase from 29 percent in 2009 to 35 percent by 2012 as a result of debt incurred to
finance fiscal deficits. The present value of debt to GDP ratio is projected to rise to 43
percent by 2019, above the 40 percent indicative threshold," due almost entirely to
borrowing for the second phase of the Highlands Water Project. The ratio is then expected to
decline to 21 percent by 2029, as the fiscal position remains in balance. The present value of
debt to exports and revenues would also rise through 20 19 but remain well below indicative
thresholds for debt distress. There would also be a modest increase in the ratio of debt
service to exports (from 4 percent to 5 percent) and debt service to revenues (from 3 percent
to 6 percent), reflecting the increased stock of outstanding debt. The highly concessional
nature of both existing debt and new borrowing (except for the rescheduled SACU payments
and the borrowing for the Highlands Water Project) helps to contain the increase in debt
service ratios and contributes to their return to lower levels as the impact of the SACU
revenue shock begins to recede.

B.

Poverty and Human Development

Lesotho's progress in moving from predominantly subsistence economy relying on
23.
overseas remittances to a lower middle income, diversified economy exporting natural
resources and manufacturing goods has brought higher, more secure incomes to a significant
portion of the population, and the percentage of the population living below US$ PPP
US$1.25/day fell from 48 percent to 44 percent between 1995 and 2003.12 Opportunities in
the urban labor market have been especially important for women, with the textile sector
providing prospects for young women migrating from rural areas. But Lesotho's unequal
income distribution (the Gini coefficient of 0.63 is among the highest in the world) and high
level of unemployment (at 22.7 percent in 2008)13 dampened the effect of growth on poverty.
Poor agricultural performance and declining opportunities for low-skilled Basotho in South
Africa caused poverty to persist in rural areas, so that a substantial portion of the population
l 1 The indicative thresholds for debt sustainability, proposed under the fiamework for low-income countries
are 40 percent for the net present value (NPV) of the debt to GDP ratio, 150 percent for the NPV of the
debt to exports ratio, 250 percent for the NPV of the debt to fiscal revenues ratio, 20 percent for the debt
service to exports ratio, and 30 percent for the debt service to revenue ratio.
l 2 World Development Indicators Table 2.8
l 3 According to the Integrated Labor Force Survey in June 2008, the self-reported unemployment rate - not
an internationally comparable number - was 22.7 percent.

8

that was unable to diversify their sources of income did not directly benefit from economic
growth.
Lesotho has used public expenditures as a key tool in the fight against poverty. To
24.
reduce exclusion and inequality in opportunities, and ensure that all citizens are able to
benefit from economic opportunities, Lesotho has substantially expanded access to social and
economic infrastructure. The expansion of access to services led to progress in education and
water supply, but the health care delivery system remained weak and combined with the
scourge of HIV/AIDS caused Lesotho’s relative performance on the Human Development
Index (HDI) ranking to fall from 127 of 174 countries in 1998 to 156 of 182 countries in
2007.
25.
Lesotho has the third highest adult HIV prevalence in the world, at 23.2 percent: 26
percent of women and 19 percent of men ages 15-49 are infected. Each day, an estimated 62
people are newly infected and 50 people die due to AIDS. At the end of 2007, an estimated
270,000 people in the country were living with HIV, 11,800 of them children. The number
of AIDS orphans was estimated at 108,700 in 2007.

to 3 1 percent in 2007. Significant
N C
****:*:
@
:*&%
*4’ *,* p*.** *
70
progress has been made in the roll-out
****’*
O W
of antiretroviral therapy has made
VIm
&
2
8
6
0
good progress, with 38,586 people
*’*
m 3
tarnibla
receiving treatment by 2008. The
$
2
*$*e
South
-%50*
*
*
Africa
“Know Your Status” campaign
g,
, *Swaziland
Botswana
boosted the number of people being
-34o
Lesotho
tested for HIV to 229,092 by the end
30 4
of 2007, 12 percent of the population
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000 I2000 14000 16000 18000
and three times the number tested in
GDP per capita, US$ at purchasing power parity, 2005
2005. As a result, the annual rate at
Source: World Bank 2008, World Development Indicators,
which adults in the population who are
2008.
HIV-negative become HIV-positive
declined from 2.9 percent in 2005 to 2.3 percent in 2007, lowering the estimated annual
number of new infections from 26,000 to 21,560. These are the first signs of a decline in the
HIV epidemic, but it is not yet clear what accounts for these reductions in new infections
(most prevention programs were rolled out and scaled up after the reductions were observed;
see Box 2 for additional information).

-

-3:

l4 National HIV/AIDS Policy, National Orphan and Vulnerable Children Policy, HIV Testing and
Counseling.

9

HIV/AIDS has had a negative impact on social indicators. Lesotho has the lowest
27.
life expectancy at birth among countries with similar income per capita (figure 3), and other
indicators have also deteriorated. Infant mortality rose 2.5 percent, and under-five child
mortality rose 33 percent over the last decade. The most recent maternal mortality estimates
range from 762 to 960 per 100,000 live births, placing Lesotho in the 80thto 90* percentile
gl~bally.’~
Box 2: HIV/AIDS Pandemic: Trends, Challenges, Response, and Prospects

Following a steep increase in HIV prevalence through the 1990s, the epidemic stabilized after 2000 at very
high levels-almost a quarter of adults ages 15-49 are HIV positive. Migrant labor was the key driver of
epidemic, while multiple, concurrent sexual relationships before and during marriage are the main
contributing factors. Although the rate of growth in new infections declined fiom 2.9 percent in 2005 to 2.3
percent in 2007, many preventable HIV infections still occur each year in adults and children.
The Government’s policy fiamework for HIV prevention is comprehensive, but it has not yet been translated
into fully scaled-up programs. In 2006/07, only 10 percent of HIV/AIDS funding went to prevention, while
33 percent went to care and treatment, 24 percent to program management, 13 percent to support for orphan
and vulnerable children, and 11 percent to social protection, putting prevention in fifth place. Behavioral and
social change interventions received only 2 percent of prevention funding in 2006/07.
Recently, most behavioral messages have been related to the national campaign “Know Your HIV Status,”
which helped tens of thousands of people learn their HIV status but which lacked a proper referral system for
people testing positive and adequate post-test counseling for those testing negative.
Partner reduction must be at the center of a successful behavioral and social change strategy. The country
needs to redouble its efforts to reduce multiple partners among unmarried and married adults and youth. A
key complementary measure is male circumcision, which can prevent up to 60 percent of new infections in
men. Today, only about 15 percent of Basotho men are fully circumcised. Lesotho also needs more rigorous
evaluations to determine what works in changing behavior to reduce new HIV infections.
These actions to sharpen and refocus prevention are essential. In September 2008, antiretroviral therapy
reached just 45 percent of those in need. Unless more new infections can be prevented, it will be difficult for
Lesotho to maintain-let alone expand-access to treatment.

28.
There are some areas, however, in which the Government has been making progress.
Immunization coverage has remained above 80 percent, and antenatal care coverage is
among the highest in Africa, at 90 percent. The share of children with diarrhea who receive
oral rehydration therapy has nearly doubled since 2000. The Emergency Human Resources
Plan seeks to strengthen training and recruitment, improve remuneration, introduce quality
assurance mechanisms, and implement a ministry-led initiative to improve maternal health.
Lesotho has achieved substantial gains in education since introducing free primary
29.
education in 2000. The net primary enrollment rate rose from 60 percent in 1999 to 82
percent in 2008, among the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa. Lesotho has achieved gender
parity in primary education. Most importantly, the probability of attending primary school is
equal for the children from the richest and the poorest households. However, secondary and
tertiary enrollment rates remain low-50 percent and 4 percent in 2008-and budget
allocation is skewed toward tertiary education (some 35 percent of the education budget).
l5 World Bank 2008, World Development Indicators 2008. These child and maternal mortality indicators
are based on 2004 Demographic and Household Survey data; the next survey is expected to be finalized in
several months.

10

Legal and regulatory framework to support a demand-driven technical and vocational
education and training system is quite weak.
30.
Lesotho also has made notable advances in water services. Sustained investments in
urban water supply since the late 1970s have paid off. Approximately 80 percent of the
population has access to safe drinking water. A strengthened national Water and Sewerage
Authority has reduced unaccounted-for water loss from 40 percent to 26 percent over the last
five years. Lesotho was ranked 3rd among 24 African countries sampled over 1995-2005 in
moving populations away from the use of surface water to higher levels of service, including
increased access to piped water, longer hours of service and improved quality.
111.

LESOTHO’S VISION

The GOL development goals are reflected in its “Vision 2020” and the Interim
3 1.
National Development Framework. “Vision 2020,” issued in 2002, articulates the long-term
strategic priorities so that by 2020:

Lesotho shall be a stable democracy, a united andprosperous nation at peace with itself
and its neighbors. It shall have a healthy and well developed human resource base, a
strong economy, a well managed environment and an established technological base.16
Lesotho issued its Poverty Reduction Strategy in 2004 but has yet to fully implement
32.
it. In 2009, the Government developed the Interim National Development Framework, to
serve as an interim strategic plan for the next two fiscal years while the four-year National
Development Plan for 201 1/12-2015/16 is being drafted. The interim framework ratifies
four priorities: (1) accelerate shared and sustainable economic growth, ensure employment
creation, and protect the vulnerable; (2) address the HIV/AIDS epidemic; (3) foster good
governance to improve public sector delivery; and (4)improve the quality of life by
promoting human development.
33.
The Budget Speech for fiscal 2010/11 remained focused on the economic
fundamentals of pursuing high, shared and sustainable growth; reducing poverty; creating
jobs; and protecting the poor, orphans, and other vulnerable groups. l7 While dealing with
the consequences of the global economic crisis in the short term, the Government is also
addressing medium- and long-term development needs. The 20 1O/l 1 budget calls for belt
tightening and for using the crisis as an opportunity to mobilize more domestic revenues and
cut wasteful expenditures, fraud, and corruption in all Government activities by increasing
efficiency in delivering public services and collecting taxes, fees;and other charges. It calls
for reversing the growing culture of dependency on state hand-outs and for adopting a longterm fiscal strategy aligning expenditures and long-term domestic revenues and non-SACU
revenues. In the medium term, public expenditures will focus on promoting growth through
the development of a minimum infrastructure platform-roads, power, water, and
telecommunications-to support private sector investment and build the necessary skills,

l6

http:Nwww.lesotho.eov.ls/articlesNision%202020%20-Executive%2OSummarv.htm

l 7 “An aggressive domestic resource mobilization and expenditure prioritization is an Imperative,” Budget

Speech to Parliament for the 20 10-11 Fiscal Year by Minister of Finance Timothy Thahane.

11

institutions, and structures. As appropriate, private sector financing for some large projects
will be mobilized through public-private partnerships.
In response to a request from the Minister of Finance and Development Planning, the
34.
World Bank prepared a series of economic policy notes, “Reshaping Lesotho’s Position in
SACU to meet the Challenges of Sustained and Shared Growth.” The policy notes have
provided an analytical underpinning for the Government’s growth strategy and the 2010/11
budget. The main points deriving from the policy notes and from the recent poverty and
gender assessment are reflected in the next section.

IV.

LESOTHO’S DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

Lesotho’s opportunities to sustain growth in the wake of the global crisis depend on
35.
its ability to manage the fiscal shock caused by the decline in SACU revenues in the short
term and to develop new sources of growth over the medium and longer term, shifting its
development paradigm from reliance on the public sector to reliance on the private sector as
the chief economic engine. To do so, Lesotho needs to address three main challenges: (i)
undertake a fiscal adjustment to absorb the sharp decline in SACU revenue and increase
public sector efficiency, (ii) enhance economic competitiveness, especially within SACU,
and (iii) advance human development and reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS. In addition,
Lesotho will need to address its weak institutional capacity, a major bottleneck to sustainable
growth. Lesotho’s transformation path is likely to be long and bumpy, particularly in light of
a much changed external environment following the global crisis.

A. Fiscal Adjustment to Absorb the Sharp Decline in SACU Revenue and
Increase Public Sector Efficiency
Following a path toward fiscal sustainability over the next five years is critical for
36.
dealing with the major immediate challenge of the expected sharp decline in SACU revenues.
In the past, Lesotho authorities have demonstrated that they can effectively respond to such
challenges. For example, in early 1990s they successfully adjusted to a significant decline in
remittances from the miners working in South Africa. Between 1990 and 2005 remittances
dropped by roughly 15 percentage points of GDP and an estimated 65,000 mining wage jobs
were lost. The GOL responded by increasing public investments and attracting FDI, fostered
by a liberalized foreign trade regime, and creating 40,000 new jobs.
To mitigate the current fiscal shock, the GOL will need to reprogram its fiscal
37.
priorities, improve tax collection, mobilize alternative sources of financing, and increase
expenditure efficiency. The fiscal adjustment will require restructuring expenditures
(identifying spending categories that can be reduced or postponed), while protecting
allocations to social and growth-supporting activities. The Government has taken the first
steps with the 20 10/11 budget, which assumes aggressive cuts in expenditures by reducing
waste and inefficiency.
The short-term possibilities for increasing non-SACU revenues are limited because
3 8.
Lesotho’s tax system is already relatively well designed. Tax collection was recently
improved, and non-SACU revenues already constitute about 27 percent of GDP.” However,
l8

See Policy Note on “Fiscal Challenge in Lesotho: Diagnosis and Options for Reform.”

12

on the revenue side, the 20 10/11 budget assumes a comprehensive revision of rates, charges,
and fines and considers extending the mandate of the Lesotho Revenue Authority to collect
all revenue for the Government. Over the medium term, the tax system can be enhanced by
strengthening tax collection, improving the system of nontax revenues, increasing
transparency, and expanding the tax base by improving the business environment to attract
more investment.
39.
Fiscal consolidation on the expenditure side will need to be driven by cuts in both
recurrent and capital expenditures. Substantial downward adjustments in the public sector
wage bill and spending on goods and services should be the main elements of current
expenditure consolidation. Cuts in expenditures on goods and services will require careful
management and corresponding increase in the efficiency of expenditures to ensure delivery
of key public services.
Strengthening the effectiveness of public spending and the accountability framework
40.
is at the core of fiscal consolidation. Lesotho’s public sector is large, with expenditures of
approximately 70 percent of GDP (one of the highest in the world). The country has
historically had a poor record of public sector governance. Transparency International
ranked Lesotho 89 of 180 countries on its 2009 Corruption Perception Index. Lesotho’s
ranking has declined steadily since 2005, when it ranked 70, picking up only in 2009. To
address these concerns, the Government started a comprehensive reform program in 2005
covering the budget cycle from formulation to legislative scrutiny and audit. The 2009
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability scores showed only slight improvement
because of the complexity of reform and limited implementation capacity. Remaining
challenges include low utilization of the budget, especially of the public investment budget,
and weak institutional capacity in development planning and project implementati~n.’~
Compliance with procurement rules is weak. Decentralization has transferred procurement
decisions from the Central Tender Board to tender boards under the line ministries, while
delays in adopting the Audit Bill and Public Financial Management and Accountability Bill
have impeded oversight. In addition, the limited availability of budget information constrains
oversight by civil society, the legislature, and the media in assessing Government policy
implementation.
To mitigate the consequences of the fiscal adjustment on poor people, the
41.
government will need to continue improving service delivery, including better provision of
social safety nets, and to rely on the private sector to generate growth and employment
opportunities. These challenges are discussed in turn below.

B. Advance Human Development and Reverse the Spread of HIV/AIDS
42.
As mentioned earlier Lesotho’s human development indicators deteriorated over the
past decade despite high levels of government social spending. Major challenges in human
development stem from the country’s topography (about two-thirds of the population live in
the hard-to-access highlands), high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, and weak service delivery.
Facilitating access to social services while improving the quality and equitable coverage of
services will become more difficult because of the fiscal squeeze following the economic
l9 The recent public expenditure management reforms were triggered by.chronic underspending (72 percent
of the total budget in 2009/10), a reflection of major weaknesses of budget formulation and execution.

13

crisis. However, there is considerable room for efficiency gains in the provision of health,
education and social protection services.
43.
The health sector suffers from systemic weaknesses. Despite a serious HIV/AIDS
epidemic, demand for health care (outpatient visits per capita and bed occupancy ratios) is
very low. Quality of care, high transportation costs, long waiting times, and shortages of
some drugs and equipment limit access and create a false impression of a low demand for
services. The situation is exacerbated by severe human resources shortages, and even
available trained staff is used sub-optimally. The problem is not a lack of resources. Lesotho
spends about 6.4 percent of its GDP on health and social welfare, and the development
assistance to health” as a share of total health spending has progressively increased from 6.4
percent in 2002 to a high of 18.4 percent in 2008*l. At the same time, utilization of donor
and budget funds is poor (the execution of the health sector budget was 87 percent in
2006/07) mainly because of low capacity, weaknesses in public finance management and
incomplete decentralization. The main task is to introduce a system of results-oriented
budget planning and finance management using innovative models of performance-based
financing aimed at addressing the perverse incentives both for managers of health programs
and for the health personnel directly involved in service delivery.
Lesotho declared HIVIAIDS a national emergency in 2000 and has taken steps to
44.
reduce the incidence rate. Limited progress in containing the epidemic arises not from lack
of resources, which are abundantly available from development partners as mentioned above,
but from the complexity of implementation, which requires a coordinated, multisector
response that strains the Government’s limited capacity. The challenge is to improve
coordination to ensure that the substantial resources available to fight HIV/AIDS are used
effectively. Experience suggests that harmonized support could improve results. For
example, with the help of a previous World Bank HIV technical assistance project, which
focuses on strengthening the GOL’s capacity in the sector, performance of the Global Fund
grants has improved considerably.
45.
Important education challenges also remain. In recent years, Lesotho has
demonstrated considerable commitment and leadership in improving basic education, which
has delivered good results, especially in improving access. The next step is to improve the
quality of education (there is a dire shortage of school furniture, teaching materials, and
textbooks in the language of instruction for grades 1-3 and repetition rates average 20
percent and are as high as 29 percent for grade 1) by upgrading school infrastructure (only
48 percent of schools meet the minimum physical standards conducive to learning) and
enhancing the quality of teaching and learning (as much as 42 percent of teaching staff is
unqualified), which need to be addressed.
46.
Lesotho also needs to better align the curricula and skills mix with the needs of the
country. The higher education and technical and vocational education curricula are poorly
matched to labor market needs, and students perform weakly in mathematics and science at
all levels. Reforms-a training levy on industries, industry involvement in managing training
and staffing to align the sector with industry requirements-have faced strong resistance.

*’The most important sources of development assistance for health are: the Global Fund, the Government
of Ireland, World Bank, African Development Bank and the European Commission.
21 WHO, 2010, National Health Accounts Database.

14

There is no market-driven system to fund university education and technical and vocational
training. International migration, mainly to South Africa, exacerbates the skills shortages and
undermines Lesotho’s already weak capacity.
47.
Developing a social protection strategy and putting in place effective social safety
nets should be a key priority in an environment of economic downturn and fiscal squeeze.
Currently, the GOL spends about 4.2 percent of GDP on social protection, including old age
pension, public assistance scheme, school feeding program, disability and other programs.
The old age pension alone costs approximately 1.4 percent of the country’s GDP. However,
social protection programs remain fragmented, uncoordinated, limiting the GOL’s capacity to
respond quickly to new challenges. A review conducted by the CARE NGO in 2006
provides evidence that traditional village and family networks are increasingly strained by
new social vulnerabilities, and the piecemeal social protection approach currently in effect
excludes a part of the population in need of assistance. Consolidation and better targeting
would increase the efficiency of social protection programs in promoting inclusion and
protecting the poor.

C. Enhance Economic Competitiveness and Diversification
48.
Lesotho faces the challenge of creating an environment that generates adequate
employment opportunities for the currently unemployed and for those who will soon join the
unemployed ranks as a result of the fiscal squeeze. Although creating new jobs will take
time, an improved investment climate, combined with an educated, cost-effective labor force
and a strategy for harnessing new export opportunities, including better exploiting the
regional markets, will improve Lesotho’s growth prospects. To support growth over the
long term, Lesotho will need to address its infrastructure gap, especially for the rapidly
growing Maseru area, and position this area as a competitive node for the region and as a new
driver of growth. The country also can benefit from creating conditions for expansion in
local entrepreneurship, improving the environment for agribusinesses, targeting support to
smallholder farmers, and exploiting the potential for developing commercial agriculture with
strong links to value chains in South Africa. The GOL will initially have to rely on FDI to
support growth, while continuing efforts to strengthen the domestic private sector.
49.
Lesotho’s domestic private sector is small and weak A reliance on FDI as the driver
of growth led to the neglect of domestic entrepreneurship in the past. The large public sector
leaves little space for the domestic private sector, which is poorly organized and lacks
influence over Government decision making. The Government has tried to address this
challenge, through the Lesotho National Development Corporation (LNDC) and the Basotho
Enterprises Development Corporation (BEDCO). BEDCO in particular has a mandate to
train and support local enterprises to overcome the lack of skills and managerial capacity,
provides physical space for businesses, and creates links to larger firms in Lesotho. However
both these agencies have not been able to make significant inroads in supporting the domestic
private sector due to organizational capacity and other challenges. Efforts to strengthen
domestic entrepreneurship will need to be redoubled while working in parallel to attract
foreign investors.
A stable macroeconomic environment, a relatively low-cost and good-quality labor
50.
force, proximity to South Africa’s modern transport infrastructure, and a free trade
environment within SACU - the biggest market in Africa - make Lesotho attractive to
15

regional and global companies seeking access to regional markets.22Lesotho’s competitive
potential for agriculture, tourism, and other sectors remains largely unexploited.
5 1.
To harness new growth opportunities and attract FDI, Lesotho needs to become more
competitive, particularly within
SACU, where Lesotho performs the
worst in terms of Doing Business
Figure 4: Lesotho Lags behind SACU Neighbors on
Doing Business Indicators, 2008 and 2009
indicators (in 130thposition in 2009).
__
The Doing Business report reveals
140
striking variation in indicators.
120
Performance was worst on access to
1 on
land, trade across borders, company
start-up, licensing, and investor
80
protection. Inefficient customs
ti zoo3
60
OI inns
procedures and processes on
40
Lesotho’s borders with South Africa
20
hamper trade with this important
neighbor.
0
I_x

_ _ ^ _ -

I~

.x

GOL recent efforts include the
52.
Source: International Finance Corporation and
establishment in 2007 of a One-stop
World Bank 2009 Doing Business 2009.
Business Facilitation Center for the
issuance of import and export permits,
rebate certificates, trade enterprise
licenses, work permits (for textile companies), and residence permits for manufacturers. The
processing time has dropped from 2-3 days to 5-6 hours for export permits and from 4 days
to 1.9 days for import permits during the previous CAS period. Nonetheless, Lesotho still
lags behind other countries in the region (figure 4). An immediate priority is adoption of the
Companies Bill and the Industrial Licensing Bill, which has been held up by the political
process, which would facilitate registration and ease licensing requirements.
Besides the business environment, Lesotho needs to deal with other barriers to
53.
economic activity such as access to land, infrastructure bottlenecks, and a skills mismatch
exacerbated by the exodus of skilled personnel.
54.
Easing access to land is critical to promoting investment in industrial property
development and agriculture. Foreign investors have no direct access to land titles in
Lesotho, and there are sensitivities to foreign land ownership. With usable land scarce,
Lesotho’s land policy aims to prevent a few from acquiring excessive land. Although leasing
is a politically acceptable alternative, only citizens and firms with majority control by
Lesotho citizens may lease land. The present system, in which the Land National
Development Corporation leases land from the Government and subleases it to investors, is
not functioning well.

World Development Report 2009 highlighted that closer regional integration helps countries remove
some supply-side constraints by enlarging markets, generating economies of scale in infrastructure and
public good provision, and facilitating greater trade integration with the global economy.

22

16

Agriculture has significant growth potential in both the lowlands and the highlands
55.
and is the only source of income for many households in rural areas. Apart from land access,
other barriers to achieving Lesotho’s agricultural potential includes agro-ecological and
climatic conditions, including recurrent cycles of drought, erratic rainfall, hail and frost, and
limited areas of arable land. Poor farming practices, limited use of quality seeds, and
inappropriate selection of crops prevent achieving available production potential. In
addition, the development of viable, market-oriented crop and livestock production faces
multiple constraints. The land tenure system discourages investments in land improvements
(irrigation, soil and water conservation measures, and tree planting). Commercialization
efforts are undermined by market distortions caused by the Government’s involvement in
commercial activities that are either not viable or should be left to the private sector. The
Government is focusing on improving marketing infrastructure and the investment climate
for commercial agriculture, targeting support to smallholders to increase their income
opportunities, and addressing sustainable land-use practices.

56.
Overgrazing and climate change are likely to have a negative impact on agriculture
and the quality of water. Lesotho is the water tower of Southern Africa, but its fertile soils
are highly erodible. Inappropriate land-use practices and rising levels of human occupation
have resulted in considerable erosion, depleting topsoil, reducing the quality of arable land,
and contaminating water streams. In addition, several climate change models forecast that
global climate change will reduce precipitation in Southern Africa, leading to higher
evaporation losses and less runoff and groundwater recharge. Rangeland conditions may
deteriorate as a consequence of changes in climate, lowering the quality of livestock and
livestock products. Addressing soil erosion and increasing the resilience to climatic changes
can have multiple benefits, including restoring soil productivity and improving crop
production.
57.
To support long-term growth, Lesotho needs to reduce the infrastructure gap,
especially for the rapidly growing Maseru area, and position that area as a competitive node
for the region and a new driver of Lesotho’s growth. Fiscal constraints imposed by the
decline in SACU revenues mean that great selectivity is needed in prioritizing investment in
infrastructure to high-growth, high-potential areas. The rapidly growing Maseru region,
which is increasingly being held back by inadequate urban infrastructure, including the
availability of water services and lack of factory shells for new and expanded businesses-all
identified as bottlenecks to business development by potential South African investors.
Inadequate, irregular water service is a constraint on new growth, particularly in
58.
Maseru and its environs, where most textiles and light manufacturing are based. The
Metolong Dam and Water Supply Program, which will more than double the availability of
treated water by 2014, will eliminate the source constraints for the existing water network in
the greater Maseru area, but additional investments will be needed to accommodate new
households in peri-urban areas.
Lesotho also needs to complete its ambitious road network program and develop the
59.
institutional capacity of the Road Directorate. Road transport is the most common mode of
transportation in Lesotho, handling more than 90 percent of passenger traffic and some 66
percent of goods transport. The quality of the national road network improved from 27
percent good and 38 percent fair in 2006 to 34 percent good and 43 percent fair in 2009.
Average travel cost to services and markets along the Southeastern Corridor declined 20
17

percent between 2006 and 2009. In 2008, user fees accumulated in the Road Fund financed
72 percent of routine and periodic road maintenance, up from 50 percent in 2005. However,
falling SACU revenues will make it difficult to meet the substantial financing needs of the
sector without scaled-up donor support.

V.

WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. Lessons from the Last Country Assistance Strategy
The 2010 Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR) finds that Bank
60.
programs achieved good results in areas where World Bank involvement was sustained and
where institution building received strong attention, such as in water and education. The
CASCR also found that analytic and advisory activities (AAA) were well aligned with
country needs and priorities, that delivery of the lending program was on target, and that
portfolio performance was satisfactory.
61,
However, the CASCR notes limited progress on key challenges, many of which
remain as they were at the time of the 2005 CAS: high incidence of HIV, mixed likelihood of
reaching Millennium Development Goal targets, high levels of poverty and inequality, and
weak competitiveness. Efforts to catch up with structural reforms, delayed by the political
instability in the 1990s, were found to be straining limited government capacity, thus
weakening the impact of World Bank and other development partners’ efforts. Observing
that implementation has been impeded by the slow legislative process and incomplete
reforms, the CASCR advises focusing on areas of reform where the Government shows
strong leadership and building up capacity to ease critical implementation constraints in these
areas.
62.
In addition, the CASCR calls for a sharper focus on the shared growth agenda to take
advantage of the analytical work produced during the last CAS period. This work
emphasizes agricultural and rural development, encouragement of entrepreneurship, and a
rethinking of the role of the state, which now absorbs more than half of GDP. To bolster the
country’s competitiveness, the CASCR sees a need to harness regional trade opportunities,
beginning with trade facilitation and regional integration, especially with SADC.
63.
To better measure the development impact of the Bank’s program, the CASCR
emphasizes the importance of monitoring and evaluation to continuously assess the
development impact of the Bank’s program. The Bank should help the authorities develop
monitoring capacity to track progress and improve the policy dialogue.

B. Current World Bank Group Program
International Development Association (IDA). Lesotho’s IDA portfolio comprises
64.
six projects with net commitments of US$100.7 million as of May 1,2010. Portfolio
performance is mixed with is one problem project in the portfolio -the Water Sector
Improvement Project (FY2005). On the positive side, the disbursement ratio of 38.6 percent
in FY2009 was above the regional average of 24.0 percent.
The bulk of IDA financing is for infrastructure development-transport, water, and
65.
urban development. IDA is also funding projects in health and HIV/AIDS, and private sector
18

development. The Poverty Reduction Support Credit series has provided the overall policy
reform framework. The IDA portfolio is supplemented by several grants. A Fast Track
Initiative (FTI) grant supports primary education. A Global Partnership on Output-Based
Aid grant supports a public-private partnership to replace the country’s 50-year-old main
public hospital in Maseru through a joint undertaking with the International Finance
Corporation (IFC), the transaction adviser for this project. A pioneering initiative, the
project seeks to provide high-quality health care services to public patients at an affordable
cost to the Government. IFC has also provided technical assistance on private sector
development in tourism and export promotion.
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency’s (MIGA) portfolio consists of two
66.
guarantees totaling US$lO million in gross and net exposure in the services sector.

C. Principles of Engagement
67.
The CAS follows three guiding principles: partnership and alignment with
Government strategic priorities, leveraging of resources for greater impact, and selectivity.

68.
Partnership and alignment with Government strategic priorities. The Bank’s
engagement with Lesotho is demand driven and builds on a strong relationship with the
Government. In July 2009, the Prime Minister and Cabinet invited a Bank team to discuss a
series of Policy Notes prepared by the Bank on how to improve Lesotho’s competitiveness
and make its economy more resilient during a period of a global economic downturn.23That
discussion provided a framework for the CAS, opened new opportunities for engagement,
and ensured close alignment of the Bank’s program and Lesotho priorities.
This CAS benefited from extensive consultations with stakeholders in the country.
69.
Consultations, organized through two major workshops (at the onset of the CAS in
September 2008 and after the upstream review in March 2010) were attended by more than
150 participants-Government officials and representatives of academia, the private sector,
and civil society. Participants supported the CAS strategic focus and provided their insights
on Lesotho’s social challenges, growth potential, and the ways the Bank could better assist
the country. The GOL has endorsed the CAS’S strategic focus and program. Annex 3
describes the consultation process in more detail. The CAS aims to continue strengthening
the partnership with the Government and civil society through policy dialogue informed by
analytic work and through the involvement of civil society in project implementation. The
Bank will strengthen its communication strategy to improve its dialogue with state and nonstate actors.
70.
Leveraging of resources for greater impact. The CAS will continue to play a
catalytic role in leveraging other donor resources and building effective collaboration with
development partners. It will build on the comparative advantages of development partners
to complement IDA resources, particularly for large infrastructure projects; to scale-up
successful IDA and other donor projects; and to provide technical assistance to strengthen
23 The one-day seminar with the Cabinet, titled “Reshaping Lesotho’s Position in SACU to Meet the
Challenges of Sustained and Shared Growth,” considered four issues: fiscal challenges and options for
reform; effective use of public resources, particularly for capital expenditure supporting growth;
agriculture-challenges and directions for agribusiness; and realizing FDI to diversify Lesotho’s exports ,

19

Government capacity to use donor funds effectively. The CAS also seeks to achieve
maximum synergy among interventions by the Government, World Bank Group, and other
development partners by seeking complementarity across sectors and interventions, including
lending, grants, and AAA.
71.
Selectivig. Because IDA’S allocation is small relative to Lesotho’s needs, the CAS
strives to be selective in the number and choice of lending instruments, applying four
selection criteria to new operations: strong Government ownership and commitment,
improved governance and accountability mechanisms in the sector to support sustainability,
cooperation with development partners, and past success that can be scaled up. In line with
the latter, and taking into account the lesson from the CASCR that sustained engagement in a
sector is important for success, the CAS envisages additional financing for projects in sectors
such as water and transport that have made good progress in institution building and need to
consolidate achievements to enhance sustainability. The principle of selectivity will also be
reflected in a new approach to the AAA program, which will be more focused and better
coordinated than in the past. This approach is described in the section on the IDA program.

D. Strategic Areas of Engagement
72.
The FY2010-14 CAS seeks to assist the Government in addressing its short-term
needs to deal with the sharp decline in SACU receipts and improve social development
indicators. It will also work with the Government to enhance competitiveness and foster
private sector-led growth over the longer term. To achieve these objectives, the Government
and the Bank have agreed that the CAS would focus on three areas of engagement that are
fully aligned with the country’s Interim National Development Framework:

0

Fiscal adjustment and public sector efficiency.
Human development and service delivery.
Enhanced competitiveness and diversification.

73.
Applying the lessons of the previous CAS, this CAS will embed institutional
strengthening and capacity development in all interventions, including IDA credits, AAA,
technical assistance, knowledge sharing, and development partnerships. Project design will
be simplified and tailored to institutional capabilities. A Governance and Capacity
Assessment Study will be conducted early on to detect governance weaknesses, institutional
and capacity constraints, and bottlenecks that can inform the Bank program. The Bank will
support demand-side governance through involvement of non-state actors to the extent
possible in preparation and implementation of the Bank program.

The World Bank Group will follow the guiding principles of the Bank’s Regional
74.
Integration Assistance Strategy (MAS) to assist Lesotho in taking advantage of “win-win”
possibilities in the regional context created by specialization and higher efficiency levels not
accessible through the national development programs. To address the regional challenges of
Lesotho (e.g. HIV/AIDS, TB), the CAS will rely on country-specific as well as regional
initiatives be it AAA, knowledge sharing or the institutional complementarities of the
neighboring countries.

20

E. Proposed IDA program
75.
Lesotho’s IDA envelope for FY2010-14 is indicative and assumes that country
performance will improve. The CAS covers the last two years of IDA15 and the full three
years of IDA16. The indicative IDA15 allocation is approximately US$71 million (SDR44.8
million, including SDR20 million in grants and SDR24.8 million in credits) and US$15
million from the Crisis Response Window. US$55 million has already been committed in
FY2009 and FY2010. The indicative IDA16 allocation is assumed to be approximately
US$28 million a year. The proposed IDA program (lending, grants, and AAA) is presented
in table 2.
76.
The IDA envelope is small relative to the country’s needs. Therefore, as discussed
before, the Bank will seek to leverage other donor resources and tap into supplemental
sources of financing, such as grant facilities and trust funds. The program will also be
delivered in partnership with IFC. To enhance the effectiveness of Bank assistance, the CAS
will rely on synergies among lending, technical assistance, and analytical work to be
delivered in partnership with the Government, other development partners and the Bank
team, which itself will work as a one well coordinated team. In line with this, the policy
reform agenda supported by the Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSC) series, will serve
as an umbrella for other lending operations.
IDA lending will be complemented by a strong, demand-driven AAA program, which
77.
will follow a new approach. The AAA program will be developed with the Governance and
Capacity Study as the centerpiece with other tasks, such as Public Expenditure Review and
other AAA, being parts of the umbrella activity. The AAA studies are expected to be
mutually reinforcing. This will allow the analytical studies to be prepared in an integrated
manner, using the political economy angle, including strengthening the demand for good
governance, in all Bank activities. It will also help the team to better integrate the sectoral
analytical work under a common agenda. To illustrate this approach, the Public Expenditure
Review will be prepared in close cooperation with the GOL and will discuss strategic
expenditure choices and the Governance and Capacity Study will assess governance
constraints and capacities to implement these choices. Other studies, e.g., the Post-basic
Education Study and Poverty and Gender Assessment, will be informed by these two studies.
The Bank will pay greater attention to dissemination of AAA to large audiences and will use
it as a tool in strengthening communication with state and non-state actors in Lesotho.
78.
The CAS envisages some degree of flexibility to address the complexity of the
current challenges and the need to adjust to changing circumstances. CAS implementation
will be reviewed annually together with the GOL to assess progress and propose necessary
adjustments to the Bank program and strategic approach. A CAS Progress Report will be
prepared at mid-term or even before then if deemed necessary. Projected lending in the outer
years (FY2013 and FY2014) will be reviewed at the time of the CAS Progress Report and
may be adjusted depending on IDA allocations and progress toward CAS objectives. The
IDA portfolio performance will also be reviewed periodically and projects will be
restructured as needed and freed up resources will be redirected to emerging priorities.

21

Table 2: World Bank Program for Lesotho, 2010-14 CAS (US$ million)

Human
Development
Project
...........................................

.............

PRSC-III($15)
~

$10 fiom IDA CRW)
Additional Financing
Integrated Transport
Project ($15, incl. $5

($5)

.....................................................................

PRSC-IV

PRSC-V
($15)

....................................................................

Additional
Financing
Water Sector
APL-2, ($10)

Agriculture
Development
Project ($10)

County Economic
Memorandum, Policy
Notes
Investment ClimateAssessment

Public
Expenditure
Review
Governance and
Capacity Study

Report on the
Observance of
Standards and Codes
Accounting and Audit

Post-basic
Education
Study

Maseru Urban
Development
Study
.................................................
..............
Technical
assistance
..statistics
................................
Technical
assistance in
public
financial
management
..”

PRSC-VI
($15)

Maseru
Urban
Development
Project

Infiastructure
Development
($10)
$30
FTI I1 ($10)

.............................................................

$25

.l!i!.51 ...................

$30

County
Economic
Memorandum
Poverty and
Gender
Assessment

79.
Effective approaches to promoting gender equity will be mainstreamed into the
Bank’s program. To maintain gender parity in primary education, the Bank program will pay
special attention to addressing the issue of primary school enrollment related to “herd boy”
syndrome, where boys drop out from school to tend livestock. In health the Bank will
support GOL to address the critical issue of maternal and newborn morbidity and mortality.
As women continue to participate in the workforce, the Bank will support the GOL in
expanding training opportunities with a focus on women under the Private Sector
Competitiveness and Diversification Project. Finally, the Bank’s AAA program will look
into gender inequality from different angles be it access to tertiary education or poor
governance and institutions that often take higher toll on women. In FY2013 the CAS
envisages a Poverty and Gender Study to take stock of poverty reduction and gender equity.
80.
The Bank expects that positive and timely implementation of the CAS program will
pave the way for Lesotho to move to blend status under the next CAS. In the meantime,
Lesotho can benefit from IBRD financing through enclave projects, as was done in financing
the first phase of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project.

22

F. CAS program and results
The Bank will focus on specific achievements (outlined in the Results Matrix) in
8 1.
areas considered critical for success following an approach of strategic incrementalism.
Given the difficult nature of the transformation through which the country is moving,
achieving visible results likely will take time. Therefore, the focus will be on achieving
specific modest outcomes in key strategic areas which can then be built on over time.
The CAS results framework is organized in six results clusters, with attention to some
82.
early results to build momentum for reform. Figure 5 illustrates the CAS areas of
engagement, results clusters, and potential impact of the Bank’s program. Outcomes in the
three areas of engagement are expected to reinforce and complement each other. The CAS
will support Lesotho in unleashing potential for private sector growth with the focus on
improved business environment for FDI and local entrepreneurship development. It will also
assist in prioritizing the budget spending and increasing public sector efficiency to avoid any
major negative impacts of the fiscal adjustment on critical public services important for
human development and longer term growth. In turn, improved business environment will
allow expanding the tax base and increasing non-SACU budget revenues in the long run,
facilitating the fiscal adjustment. Better social outcomes will enhance labor force
competitiveness and facilitate sustainable growth. Special attention will be given to ensuring
that the needs of the most vulnerable groups of population, especially women, are taken into
account, particularly during the period of fiscal consolidation.
Figure 5: CAS Areas of Engagement, Result Clusters and Impact

ompetitiveness and
Diversification

improved public sector

23

i. Fiscal Adjustment and Public Sector EfJiciency
83.
To help Lesotho make the necessary fiscal adjustments in response to the sharp
decline in SACU revenues, the World Bank Group will support the Government?s efforts to
curtail budget spending, improve public sector performance and the efficiency of resource
use. The Bank?s engagement will be aligned with the key priorities of the Government?s
Public Sector Improvement and Reform Program.
84.
World Bank Group assistance in this area is grouped into two results clusters: fiscal
adjustment and increased public sector efficiency (results cluster 1) and stronger public
financial management, statistics, and institutional capacity (results cluster 2).
Long-term objectives
Undertake fiscal adjustment to ensure macro
stability
Use public resources effectively

Resultstoutcomes at end of fiscal 2014
Non-SACU revenues, including grants, increased
above 27 percent of GDP
0
Wage bill as share of GDP reduced
Reprogrammed capital expenditures and improved
capital budget execution
0
Improved selection of investment projects based on
the new project cycle management process
0

The CAS will support the Government?s efforts to develop options to address the
85.
decline in SACU revenues. To assist with fiscal consolidation, an expanded Poverty
Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) series will help to close the financing gap resulting from
the decline in SACU receipts by supporting policy reforms and providing additional
resources. The PRSC series will accompany expenditure restructuring into the medium term,
supported by a programmatic Public Expenditure Review prepared by the Bank and the
Government. The CAS emphasis on improving the business and investment climate is
expected to expand the tax base in the longer run.
With Government spending already high and prospects for new spending limited,
86.
public investments need to be prioritized. The CAS will support Government efforts to
reprogram capital expenditures, directing resources into investments and programs to
enhance growth and development. The CAS will focus on strengthening institutions and
removing capacity constraints that have slowed capital expenditures (only an estimated 72
percent of capital appropriations have been used in 2009/10). The CAS will support the
revival of the Project Appraisal Committee and provide technical assistance to strengthen
project cycle management across the Government. A joint team with World Bank Institute
will train officials in critical areas identified by the authorities, including project
management, contract management, procurement and financial management, and leadership,
87.
The Bank will support Lesotho?s effort to better protect poor and vulnerable groups
of population through analysis of social protection expenditures, social safety net targeting
and coverage, efficiency, and institutional arrangements. A resultant set of policy
recommendations will feed into Government effort to develop a comprehensive social
24

protection strategy for Lesotho. The Bank will also engage with other development partners
to assist Government efforts to address the needs of orphans and vulnerable children.
Results Cluster 2: Strengthen Public Financial Management, Statistics, and
Institutional Capacity to Deliver Better Services

quality financial statements

88.
With expenditures constrained over the medium term, to build institutional capacity
to deliver services and improve public sector governance, the CAS will focus on three areas
that are reducing the quality of outcomes and the efficiency of budgetary expenditures:
bringing transparency, accountability, and credibility to the budget; introducing policy-based
budgeting and improving the statistical system; and upgrading public investments. With
support from the World Bank (PRSC and technical assistance) and other development
partners, work is under way in areas from policy design to procurement and implementation.
The work emphasizes training in procurement, accounting, and financial management based
on an upgraded qualification framework.
89.
The CAS supports a public financial management reform agenda to improve
budgetary outcomes through fiscal discipline, strategic allocation of resources, and efficient
service delivery. To track progress in the Public Service Improvement and Reform program,
the Bank and other development partners will use Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability assessment^.^^ The emphasis will be on improving alignment between
budgetary allocations and national priorities, improving reporting and transparency,
modernizing procurement practices, and developing a culture of audit. A Report on the
Observance of Standards and Codes accounting and auditing diagnostic exercise and followup capacity building activities will strengthen accounting and auditing infrastructure.
Qualified personnel (including accountants and auditors), backed by high quality standards,
monitoring, and enforcement, are expected to become safeguards against malpractice and
instruments for improving governance and anticorruption programs, generating citizen
confidence and trust in public institutions. The Bank team will mobilize technical assistance,
including Institutional Development Fund grants, governance and anticorruption fimding, and
trust funds, to support Government capacity building and improve governance. The Bank
and other development partners are considering a basket fund to support public financial
management reforms.

24 The Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) program is financed jointly by the World
Bank, European Commission, and the UK Department for International Development.

25

ii. Human Development and Service Delivery
90.
During the CAS period, the Bank Group will assist Government efforts to enhance
human development. Bank Group engagement in Lesotho in human development and
service deIivery has covered a broad set of interventions in health and HIV/AIDS, water,
education, and skills development targeting improved access, equity, and quality of services.
Skills development has been progressing well, but social indicators have not improved,
signaling that more work lies ahead.
World Bank Group assistance in this area is grouped into two results clusters:
91,
reversing negative trends in health and improving access to services (results cluster 3) and
building skills to enhance competitiveness (results cluster 4).
Long-term objectives
Contain and reverse the incidence of
HIV/AIDS
Improve health sector outcomes and service
coverage through deepen sector reform
Improve efficient use of public resources
Increase access to clean, safe drinking water

Results/outcomes at end of fiscal 2014
Improved HIV awareness in the population
0
Increased coverage of effective HIV/AIDS
interventions
0
Increased access to hospital services
0
Improved quality of health services
0
Improved budget execution in health
0
Increased number of people with access to improved
sources of water
0

The CAS will support Government efforts to contain the incidence of HIV/AIDS by
92.
assisting the Government institutions responsible for the national HIV/AIDS response to
access international funds, use them effectively, and measure their impact. Better
coordination and implementation capacity are expected to increase disbursements and
satisfactory implementation of subprojects financed through the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis, and Malaria grant. Prompt evaluation will permit development partners to
adjust their approaches as needed. Although the Bank’s contribution in resources is small, it
can have a major impact by boosting the effectiveness of the substantial resources available
from other development partners. The CAS seeks to strengthen the capacity for
implementing the HIV/AIDS Strategic Plan and scaling up effective HIV interventions. In
addition, the CAS results will be reinforced through implementation of the regional IDF grant
(Regional Capacity Building and Knowledge Sharing in Strengthening Health Systems),
which includes capacity building support to Lesotho on TB lab strengthening.
93.
The CAS will continue assisting Lesotho’s efforts to increase access to hospital
services and improve their quality, comply better with health service standards, and reduce
post-operative infections. Progress will be measured through periodic surveys of client
satisfaction. IDA and IFC are helping the Government establish a public-private partnership
to build and operate Lesotho’s new National Referral Hospital, which will serve the bulk of
the population. Better management practices are expected to improve service delivery and,
complementing other efforts such as the fight against HIV/AIDS, should result in better
health outcomes. The Bank will focus on strengthening the foundation for this public-private
partnership through the ongoing grant under the Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid.
26

94.
A complementary program that will contribute directly to better health outcomes is
the Bank’s ongoing support to increase access to potable water. As mentioned under results
cluster 6 (below), the Bank will continue to implement phase 2 of the Water Sector
Improvement Project, which is part of a multidonor-funded program to improve the supply of
water to Maseru and nearby areas, and will support capacity building of an independent water
regulator and continued strengthening of water sector institutions and the policy framework.
Long-term objectives
Improve quality of primary education
Improve access to secondary education
Reform post-basic education to improve the
development of appropriate and relevant skills
for growth in the labor market

Results/outcomes at end of fiscal 2014
Improved teaching and schooling standards
0
Increased secondary schools enrollment
0

Reform program in post-basic education prepared
New forms for funding of post-basic education
oiloted

95.
The CAS will support Lesotho’s efforts to improve the quality of primary education,
boost enrollment in post-basic education, and better align higher education with labor market
needs. The country’s strategy is to deepen the reforms in basic education to improve quality,
as measured by periodic examinations, and to increase access to secondary and tertiary
education as more young people complete primary education. To improve primary
education, the CAS intends to increase the proportion of classrooms that meet basic standards
of adequacy and to upgrade teachers’ qualifications through the multidonor Catalytic Fund
Grant for the Education for All Fast Track Initiative (FTI) managed by the Bank. This
operation is expected to lay the foundation for a sector pool fund that will channel donor
funds to the sector strategy.
The Bank program will continue to emphasize skills development and capacity
96.
building so that the education and private sectors can better respond to labor market needs.
The CAS will support activities to improve the quality of university education and technical
and vocational training standards. The Bank will also assist in the process of reforming postbasic education so as to make it more consistent with the economy’s growth path, less
expensive, and more financially accessible for all. This work will be undertaken initially
through AAA (the Post-Basic Education and Growth Study), which will inform a proposed
education project later in the CAS period The CAS will also evaluate the experience of the
public-private partnerships in the skills development program for the textiles and garments
industry, supported under the Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification
Project and explore opportunities to expand this program
In partnership with the World Bank Institute and the Government of Lesotho, the
97.
Bank will customize its knowledge and learning program to enhance Lesotho’s capacity in
selected areas on a pilot basis. A governance and capacity assessment will examine capacity
constraints that limit sustainable growth. The Bank will work with Lesotho to develop and
implement a strategy to attract and retain qualified members of the diaspora from the region
and globally. The CAS will also support the Government in establishing incentive structures
to retain qualified staff and attract those who have left. Through a proposed Institutional
Development Fund grant, the Bank’s Africa Region Diaspora Team will work closely with
the Government to develop and implement its strategies for engaging the diaspora in selected
sectors, such as health and education.

27

iii. Economic Competitiveness and DiversiJcation
98.
The CAS will assist Lesotho to take advantage of its competitive labor costs,
proximity to South Africa’s modern transport infrastructure, and duty-free access to regional
markets. The CAS program targets two result clusters: improving the business environment,
trade facilitation, and export diversification (results cluster 5) and reducing the infrastructure
gap and improving capacity to regulate infrastructure services (results cluster 6). These
efforts will unleash the growth potential of the country and enable the Maseru area to attract
more investment. CAS support for a better business environment, improved interface with
South Africa, access to factory shells for new business, reduced transportation costs, and
increased availability of skills will all contribute to building Lesotho’s economic potential.

Results Cluster 5: Improve the Business Environment, Trade Facilitation, and Export
Diversification
Long-term objectives
Increase domestic and foreign investment

Facilitate regional trade
Increase agriculture production and marketing

Resultdoutcomes at end of fiscal 2014
Strengthened legal li-amework for private sector
development and Doing Business Indicators
improved (Company Bill and Industrial Licensing
Bill approved and under implementation)
Improved industrial infiastructure and new factory
shells developed
Fully functional One Stop Business Facilitation
Center as a single administrative unit
Computerized single-window and customs clearance
system established
Improved access to all season roads in targeted rural
areas
Increased private investments in agribusiness
Improved productivity and diversification from crop
production and livestock on pilot basis

The CAS will support improvements in the business environment, economic
99.
diversification and the capacity of small and medium-size enterprises through the ongoing
Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Project, PRSC series, and
targeted AAA. Strengthening the legal framework will be a priority, along with building
capacity to streamline the regulatory environment and implement the reforms. These steps
should help Lesotho improve its Doing Business ranking in at least four categories: trading
across borders, setting up a company, accessing land, and protecting investors. The CAS also
will support measures to ease access to land and promote investment in industrial property
development. The CAS will support strengthening the performance of the Land National
Development Corporation and Basotho Enterprises Development Corporation and the
charting of a path to a stronger and more effective role for both.
100. IFC will explore ways to facilitate access to finance for micro, small, and mediumsize enterprises in Lesotho and will strengthen ongoing discussions with stakeholders
including local banks, the Government, and multilateral agencies. Subject to economic
viability and identification of appropriate partners, IFC’s potential interventions in Lesotho
over the CAS period will include the following:

28

a

a
a

a

Apican Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise Program, to support financial
institutions in rapidly and profitably ramping up banking services for these
enterprises, while maintaining good asset quality.
Microfinance investment, to identify and invest in a commercial microfinance
institution.
Small and Medium-size Enterprise Risk Capital Fund, to replicate in Lesotho IFC’s
successful partnerships with fund managers focused on small and medium-size
enterprises in Kenya and Madagascar, subject to the underlying proposed h n d being
commercially viable.
Small and medium-size enterprise management solutions, to improve the business
performance and competitiveness of firms: the Small and Medium-size Enterprise
Toolkit, a web-based solution offering free business management information and
training to firms in accounting and finance, business planning, human resources,
marketing and sales, operations, information technology, and other resources to help
entrepreneurs start, finance, formalize, and grow their businesses; and the Business
Edge, a comprehensive set of practical and flexible management training products
and services to improve enterprise performance, including an international standards
curricula tailored to management training needs and local markets for small and
medium-size enterprises.

101. The CAS will support a trade and diversification agenda to develop the domestic
private sector and increase FDI. The strategy will encourage collaboration between the
Lesotho Revenue Authority and the South African Revenue Service, opening new
opportunities for trade and investment facilitation. A new area for Bank support, this is a key
component of Lesotho’s regional integration agenda designed to lower trade costs and
expand the private sector. To facilitate trade between Lesotho and South Africa, customs
infrastructure at the Maseru Bridge and Maputsoe can be transformed into a one-stop border
for processing applications from both agencies by establishing a computerized single window
and customs clearance system and reducing infrastructure constraints. If successful, this
partnership could become a model for the SACU/SADC region. To support this undertaking,
the Bank will provide financing through the recently launched Trade Facilitation Facility
managed by the International Trade Department and implemented by AFTFE.

102. Responding to the Government’s request, the CAS will step into a new area of
engagement in Lesotho with potentially high social returns and impact on wealth creation:
agriculture and rural development. The focus would be on increasing income and
employment opportunities in smallholder agriculture by boosting crop diversification through
attracting private investments and enhancing the productivity and marketability of
agricultural products and by encouraging sustainable land management. Support would come
from a World Bank-International Fund for Agricultural Development co-financed program
for investments in productivity improvements, agricultural technology, sustainable land
management, value chains, and market access.
103. In the area of environment and biodiversity protection the Bank will be prepared to
respond to potential GOL’s interest in mobilizing resources as part of GEF 5 to continue its
biodiversity activities.

29

Results Cluster 6: Reducing the Infrastructure Gap and Improving Capacity to

104. The CAS will continue to support the road and transport sector to consolidate
progress in improving key transport networks that open new corridors. The CAS will also
support upgrading selected rural roads to improve access to isolated areas and deliver a better
managed and more affordable transport system. These programs are expected to reduce
travel cost to social services and markets. The Bank will continue to support institutional
strengthening of the sector, including the recently established Roads Directorate and the
Road Maintenance Fund, and efforts to achieve sustainable financing for road maintenance
through the ongoing Integrated Transport Project and proposed additional financing.
105. The Bank will continue its engagements in the water sector to meet the growing
demand for good quality water from industrial users in the Maseru area and to increase
Lesotho’s water exports to South Africa. The Bank will follow a programmatic approach
involving the Government and development partners through the Ministry of Natural
Resources, the Commissioner of Water, and the Water and Sewerage Authority. The
instruments are the ongoing water projects and a proposed new operation for the Maseru
area. The CAS program will continue to provide technical assistance for the development of
regulatory tools and other capacity development for the water and electricity regulator. In
addition, the Bank is prepared to explore the possibility of a new IBRD enclave project in
support of the second phase of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project.

106. Finally, the Bank will provide support to the Maseru City Council to develop an
effective urban planning and transport system. Under the Integrated Transport Project, an
institutional and financial overview of urban planning and management activities will be
carried out, focusing on transport services to Maseru in the short and long terms. The Maseru
Urban Development Study will identify the gaps and bottlenecks expected to emerge as the
city grows and will propose solutions, including housing development and better urban
services.

G. Results Monitoring and Management
107. The CAS results matrix developed in partnership with the Government of Lesotho
tracks progress in the main areas of engagement. The Bank team will track progress through
annual impact reviews at the time of the joint GOL/Bank CAS review, using a recently
piloted Country Program Results Monitoring tool. The Bank teams will work directly with
Government agencies to track results and identify factors affecting them. The CAS Progress

30

Report will reevaluate the results framework in light of implementation, exogenous
developments, and adjustments to the Bank’s program.
108. In addition, the CAS will help the Government of Lesotho strengthen its statistical
capacity. The Bureau of Statistics has begun to develop a National Strategy for the
Development of Statistics based on the Paris 21 Principles. The Bank supports these efforts
through the PRSC series and will complement them with self-standing technical assistance
and a potential project in cooperation with other development partners. The 2006 census
provided solid benchmarks for tracking progress toward development outcomes, particularly
on social issues, for which results-tracking has been weak. To further address the issue of
data inadequacy to enhance the decision making, the Bank jointly with other development
partners stands prepared to assist in strengthening capacity for collecting regular and better
quality data and developing tools to analyze it.

H. Development Partners
109. Strong development partnerships will continue under the CAS. Donor coordination,
alignment, and harmonization have improved since the formation in 2005 of the
Development Partners Consultative Forum, co-chaired by the United Nations Development
Program and Irish Aid. The forum includes resident and nonresident development partners.
The resident development partners are the European Commission, UN agencies, World Bank,
Peoples Republic of China, German Technical Cooperation (GTZ), Irish Aid, Government of
Libya, U.K. Department for International Development, U.S. Government, and French and
Danish Honorary Consuls. The nonresident development partners include the African
Development Bank, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, and Japan, among
others. The forum seeks to improve communication and promote transparency between
development partners and the Government by strengthening aid coordination, promoting
harmonization, and supporting the Government in strengthening ownership of development
processes as set forth in the Paris Declaration and Accra Agenda of Action. The forum
enables partners to discuss current and planned activities, coordinate programs, and promote
efficient and effective delivery of projects to benefit Lesotho. The donor activities mapped
along the CAS areas of engagement are captured in annex 4.
1 10. World Bank partnerships with other donors will build on successful operations jointly
financed with other donors, such as the Integrated Transport Project (with the European
Commission) and the US$300 million Metolong Dam project (with the U S . Millennium
Challenge Corporation, the European Investment Bank, the Arab Bank for Economic
Development in Africa, the OPEC Fund for International Development, the Kuwait Fund, the
Saudi Fund, the Republic of South Africa, and the Government of Lesotho). The Bank’s
US$25 million credit for the Metolong Dam Program supports critical environmental and
social safeguards and finances the construction of a transmission main to the town of
Teyateyaneng. The Bank’s HIV/AIDS Technical Assistance Project, a US$ 5 million IDA
grant, helps to fill the capacity gap impeding implementation of the HIV/AIDS National
Strategic Plan.

11 1. Under the CAS, IDA funds will be used to catalyze donor resources through several
instruments, including joint donor budget support with the African Development Bank, UK
Department for International Development, and the European Commission; a joint
agricultural project with the International Fund for Agricultural Development; and sector31

wide approaches (SWAPS)with Irish Aid. The World Bank Group will explore possibilities
for other operations to be prepared and implemented in close partnership with donors,
building on successes and lessons learned.

VI.

RISKS

I 12. The Bank program in Lesotho faces substantial risks stemming from three sources:
the difficult scope and scale of the required adjustment; limited implementation capacity and
weak institutions; and weak demand for good governance. The issue of data inadequacy is a
serious constraint to effective monitoring of the program performance that exacerbates the
risks. The CAS program has been designed to help Lesotho sustain reforms while mitigating
these risks.
a) The sharp decline is SACU revenues will affect the macroeconomic framework and
the capacity of the GOL to carry out its development agenda. The GOL will confront
the need for substantial adjustments over the medium term which will reduce the
preponderant role of the government. Effectively, a new development paradigm will
need to be put in place, in which the role of the public sector is limited to the efficient
provision of key public services and growth is generated by the private sector. This
adjustment will necessarily take time and with general elections scheduled for 2012,
there is a risk that the needed reforms may not be sustained. The GOL is aware of
this risk and views the current situation as an opportunity to address long-standing
structural weaknesses. Lesotho’s success in the past in affecting such shifts offers
hope that this risk can be managed. The CAS, for its part, will assist the GOL by
providing additional resources within an agreed fiscal framework, and providing key
support in areas constraining this adjustment. Jointly with the International Monetary
Fund and other development partners, the Bank will work with the GOL to develop
options, ranging from fiscal consolidation and improved tax collection to greater
mobilization of external resources, including eventually from reaching IBRD status.
To expand the tax base, the CAS supports the GOL’s effort to penetrate new markets,
especially regional markets, and to position Lesotho as a regional hub for FDI.
b) The GOL’s limited capacity and weak institutions present an important risk to CAS
implementation, while its limited capacity for political follow-through can serve to
reduce impact. To address this risk, the Bank has aligned the CAS program with
GOL priorities and, through program selectivity, will try to avoid overwhelming the
GOL with too ambitious an agenda. In addition, all CAS activities focus on
institutional strengthening and capacity building, taking account of a key conclusion
of the CASCR. The Bank intends to continue working with development partners so
that their joint and complementary efforts leave in place self-sustainable institutions
that can carry on the sector reform agendas.
c) Governance in Lesotho remains relatively weak, and communication between the
Government and citizens is poor. The capacity building and institution strengthening
efforts built into the CAS program will be complemented by assistance to improve
dialogue between the Government and the citizenry, especially by fostering
discussion around AAA and program designs. In particular, the envisaged AAA
program with the Governance and Capacity Assessment at the center will provide

32

specific recommendations as to how to enhance the bottom up accountability. The
Government’s initiative to improve the citizen’s voice in service delivery, the Service
Delivery Agenda, and its commitment to engage in policy dialogue with the non-state
actors for the preparation of the National Development Plan represent encouraging
steps toward bottom up accountability. The coordinated AAA program will explore
how the new tools for monitoring and evaluating public sector performance in service
delivery could be used to enhance the dialogue between the Government and citizens.
Through the AAA program, the Bank jointly with development partners will leverage
new data collection and dissemination to enable citizens to more effectively
communicate and hold their government accountable for improving public spending
performance in delivering broad public goods.
1 13. Any or all of the above risks can undermine the achievement of the CAS objectives.
However, the GOL is cognizant of the changes required and, given Lesotho’s past history of
effecting major transformations, these risks, while substantial, are manageable.

33

v)

m

8

U

00

m

27

.3

.3
e

8

0

d

.*
5

3

Annex 2: CAS COMPLETION REPORT

Country: Kingdom of Lesotho
Date of CAS: March 27,2006
Date of Progress Report(s): None
Period Covered by the CAS-CR: FY2006-2009
I.

Introduction

The Completion Report for the FY06 Lesotho Country Assistance Strategy (CAS)
1.
builds on contributions from the World Bank Country Team plus available documentation on
projects, analytical work, and existing reviews. In addition, a Strategic Portfolio Review
Note (2008) provided valuable insights that fed into the analysis. A 2008 management
decision to produce a new CAS rather than prepare a CAS Progress Report meant that the
results framework was not adjusted during implementation.
11.

FY06-09 CAS: Background, Design, and Relevance

2.
Over the 10 years prior to 2005, Lesotho underwent major economic transformations,
and its economy grew at a rate faster than the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Garments
went from being a nascent industry to being a major source of export earnings. The growth
of this industry was aided in part by the 2000 African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA),
which attracted foreign direct investment (FDI) from East Asia. The mining sector attracted
FDI in response to rising world diamond prices and became one of the drivers of economic
growth from 2000 onward. In addition, South Africa’s investment in the Lesotho Highlands
Water Project (LHWP) attracted large capital inflows during construction. Even if the
project’s long-term impact on the labor and goods markets was limited, water exports have
become an additional source of revenue for the public sector. Strengthening the domestic
economic base to produce for export markets helped reduce reliance on remittances from
workers in South Africa. Until the late 1980s, remittances had amounted to 50 percent of
national income. By 2005, they had dropped to 20 percent of national income. Overall,
manufacturing and mining became dynamic sectors; but services stagnated, and agriculture
declined.
3.
At the time of the CAS design, despite these advances, Lesotho faced several major
challenges:

Risks to economic growth. By 2005 the stability of the international
agreements that had been sustaining economic growth came under threat from
(a) phasing out textile quotas under the World Trade Organization (WT0)’s
Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC); (b) the expected removal of
AGOA provisions on third-country fabrics; (c) the decline in Southern
African Customs Union (SACU) revenues following trade liberalization in
the region, and (d) the likely effect on remittances of proposed changes to
South African legislation covering immigrants. These risks called for caution
regarding growth prospects and for concrete actions to improve
competitiveness to ensure alternate sources of economic growth.

43

Vulnerability to the HIV/AIDSpandemic. At 23 percent, in 2005 Lesotho
posted one of the highest adult HIV/AIDS prevalence rates in the world,
much higher than the average of SSA countries. Ineffective Government of
Lesotho (GOL) and development partners’ HIV/AIDS prevention programs
contributed to the high incidence level. Besides the deleterious welfare
consequences for the victims and their families, the estimates of expected
long-term economic losses likewise were high. In addition, high HIV/AIDS
incidence was having a high negative impact on overall health indicators.
Life expectancy was decreasing.
High levels ofpoverty. The limited information available during CAS
preparation suggested that roughly two-thirds of the country’s people were
living below the poverty line (defined domestically). Most of these poor were
living in rural areas. There, approximately 70 percent of the country’s
population derived their livelihoods from working on plots of land smaller
than one hectare (ha) with declining productivity due to environmental
degradation. The deteriorating performance of the agricultural sector gave
reasons for concern.
Uneven access and quality of public services. Human development indicators
ranked Lesotho as 149 of 177 countries. In some sectors, such as primary
education, Lesotho outperformed most other African countries. In other
sectors, the country lagged them. This lag raised serious concerns about the
effectiveness of public expenditure, especially when Lesotho’s level of public
expenditure equaled approximately 50 percent of its GDP.25
In 2005 the Lesotho authorities drafted a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) in
4.
which they proposed ways to address these challenges. The authorities involved most of the
country’s key stakeholders and communities in the preparation of the strategy, which the
government organized around three main pillars:
a. Employment and income generation through higher economic growth
b. Sharing the benefits of growth: health, education, and the environment
c. Improving governance and public service delivery.
The PRSP also identified three cross-cutting issues: HIV/AIDS, gender, and children and
youth. In September 2005, the IMF’s and the Bank’s Executive Boards endorsed the PRSP.
5.
The CAS aligned its strategic objectives with those of the three PRSP pillars and built
the program of support around the perceived comparative advantage of the World Bank in
Lesotho: “analytical strength and convening powers, combined with development finance
and its ability to leverage other partners.”26The resulting CAS was grounded on four
strategic objectives:

a. Fight the HIV/AIDS pandemic
b. Establish sustainable pro-poor growth and job creation
Lesotho receives the bulk of its public revenues fiom revenue-sharing of customs collections within
SACU. South Afiica collects and distributes the shares. Lowering external customs fees and duties within
SACU affects Lesotho’s fiscal position.
26 Country Assistance Strategy for the Kingdom of Lesotho, March 27,2006.
25

44

c. Improve human development outcomes
d. Strengthen decentralization, service delivery, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).
As can be seen, the CAS followed the architecture of the PRSP but, to highlight the urgency
of facing up to the epidemic, elevated the HIV/AIDS efforts from a crosscutting theme to a
strategic objective.
The bulk of the results framework proposed by the CAS and summarized in a Results
6.
Matrix27relied on the contributions of then-active operations, which covered HIV/AIDS,
health, education, infrastructure (water and electricity), and the environment. Table A 1
presents the operations that were active at the time of the CAS preparation.
The proposed new operations under the CAS focused on development themes that
7.
had received less attention in the past, specifically: (a) economic growth and (b) management
of public resources. Given the challenges that Lesotho faced and the authorities’ emerging
priorities, the shift in focus, particularly the emphasis on economic growth and
competitiveness, was both timely and relevant. However, no major impact was expected
during the CAS period because it was foreseen that getting the new programs off the ground
would take the country and the development partners beyond the CAS timeframe.

8.
The proposed analytic work under the CAS was consistent with emphasizing
economic growth and diversification, improving management of public resources, and
reducing poverty. However, due to the absence of supporting analytical work, the CAS did
not provide an adequate roadmap of how the Bank’s program could help reduce poverty in
the country. Some of the analytical work needed to spell out a shared growth strategy was
subsequently prepared during the CAS period. With hindsight, the 2005 CAS program was
relevant to the strategy of the country and responded to emerging concerns, but its design was
affected by the limited analytical work available at the time.
9.
The CAS emphasized flexibility in program implementation, building the country’s
implementation capacity, harmonizing development partners, and improving M&E. Again,
the CAS was scarce in details on how these principles would be implemented. The CAS
could have spelled out with more precision the proposed approach to capacity building, and
M&E, or could have proposed a roadmap to strengthen donor coordination.

27

The partners did not modify the results matrix during implementation.

45

111.

Progress toward Development Goals

Lesotho posted mixed progress toward the PRSP goals. On the positive side, the rate
10.
of economic growth exceeded expectations. Between 2006 and 2008, the average rate of
economic growth was 4.5 percent. The CAS had foreseen an average rate of 3.0 percent,
which turned out to be unduly pessimistic.28Lesotho’s exports (garments and diamonds) and
large SACU transfers were the main contributors to the recent spurt in economic growth until
the global economic crisis hit Lesotho hard in 200849.
The 2008 global crisis affected the country through several channels.29As a result,
11.
GDP growth was expected to be only 0.9 percent in 2009. After rising sharply from 25
percent of GDP in 2004-05 to approximately 40 percent of GDP in 2006-07, SACU
revenues fell somewhat to 37 percent of GDP in 2008-09. They are expected to decline
sharply to approximately 14 percent of GDP in 2010-1 1. This steep decline in SACU
revenues is expected to translate into deteriorations in both the fiscal and the current account
balances.
12.
Access to primary education improved significantly, and universal primary education
and gender parity are within reach in Lesotho. However, as is typical in many developing
countries, educational quality is now the main concern, along with the provision of secondary
education as the number of graduates of primary education increases. Tracking progress in
the quality of education is difficult because a monitoring system is not in place and
information is weak and sporadic. Tracking the impact of economic growth on poverty with
certainty is impossible at this time. The last comprehensive information on poverty levels
came from the 2002-03 Household Budget Survey (HBS) and the 2004 Demographic and
Health Survey (DHS). The information available suggests that in 2002-03 roughly half of
the population lived below the national poverty line; poverty remains 50 percent higher in
rural areas than in urban areas; and inequality in Lesotho is very high.30The country’s
HIV/AIDS rate remains among the highest in Africa, with limited progress achieved only
recently, as described below. The likelihood of meeting the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) overall is mixed.
1.3.
Lesotho’s governance indicators consistently are far above the SSA average and,
recent progress in the governance rankings has been relatively limited.31More importantly,
Lesotho and Swaziland rank lower on governance than their neighbors: Botswana, Mauritius,
Namibia, and South Africa. Lesotho’s lower ranking represents a disadvantage as the
28 Estimates of the annual rate of economic growth stand between 5%-6%.
It was expected by the Bank
that (1) mining would continue to lead growth; (2) performance of manufacturing would depend on
improving the business environment; and (3) the recovery of agriculture after the 2007 drought would
contribute to economic growth.
29 The main channels of crisis impact are (1) economic slowdown in the United States (Lesotho’s main
export destination for garments) has hurt Lesotho’s textiles industry leading to job losses; ( 2 ) slump in
diamond prices and the global credit crunch have resulted in reduced production and export of diamonds;
(3) slowdown in the South African economy has led to a sharp decline in its imports and, as a result,
significant decline in SACU revenues; and (4) large-scale job losses have occurred in the mining sector, in
which Basotho are employed.
30 It is likely that, in Lesotho, the limited impact of high aggregate economic growth on reducing poverty
and improving social indicators is related to the high level of inequality.
3 1 As tracked by WBI Governance indicators.

46

country competes for investment within a common economic space. The country ranks
particularly low in regulatory quality (business environment). Its highest rankings (over 50
percent) come in control of corruption, voice, and accountability.
14.
Political stability also is a concern as evidenced by the highly contested elections of
February 2007, divided political support (rural support to the ruling party and urban support
for the opposition), and continuous splits of the political parties.
IV.

Results from the Bank Assistance Program

15.
This section of the CASCR takes stock of the results contributed by the World
Bank’s program under the CAS. To the extent possible, the section examines the
contribution of the program and its results toward reaching the country’s long-term
development objectives. For ease of presentation, table 1 presents a summary of progress
against the key result indicators, which are analyzed in the remainder of this section pillar by
pillar. A matrix in the appendix presents achievements against expected results in more
detail (table A7).
Strategic Objective 1: Fighting HIV/AIDS

Table 1. Key Results of 2006 CAS against expected outcomes, Strategic Objective 1
Strategic
Objective
Increase capacity
and effectiveness
of GOL, private
sector, and NGOs
to manage
national and local
HIV/AIDS
programs

Expected outcome and
performance indicator for
end-2006 CAS period
At least 50% of projects
financed by Global Fund for
AIDS, TB and Malaria
(GFATM) are to be
implemented satisfactorily.
26 VCT sites function
appropriately with required
test kits, counselors, and
following national protocols.

Progress to 2009

Achieved.
As of December 3 1,2008,
94 percent of GFATM
Grants had been disbursed.
14 of 15 total fmanced
subprojects rated
satisfactory.
Achieved.
102 sites had functional
VCT centers as of endDecember 2007; 50% of
them fully equipped.

Main instruments
HIV/AIDS Capacity
Building and TA
Project
Health Sector Reform
Project Phase I1

16.
Prioritizing the work on HIV/AIDS under the CAS was highly relevant. Had such
high levels of incidence gone unattended, the welfare and economic costs could have
escalated rapidly. The major concern was the low pace of implementation of the
government’s and development partners’ initiatives. To address this concern, the Bank
defined its role as helping the (a) National AIDS Commission (NAC) to implement the
GOL’s program and (b) GOL to mobilize resources from the Global Fund and other
development partners. To achieve these objectives, the Bank relied on its ongoing
HIV/AIDS Capacity Building Project, patterned after the Bank Multi-Country HIV/AIDS
Program under implementation in Africa. Consequently, the $5 million IDA grant focused
on improving the implementation capacity at the Ministries of Finance and Development
Planning, and Health and Social Welfare; and at the Secretariat of the National AIDS

47

Program. In addition, the grant targeted working with civil society and the private sector to
raise awareness and enhance the national implementation capacity.
17.
The IDA grant succeeded in meeting all of the project development objective
indicators. The capacity to implement and utilize resources under the Global Fund for AIDS,
TB and Malaria (GFATM) and assess the impact of resources for the national response
substantially increased for both governmental and non-governmental institutions. The
project disbursed 94 percent (US$32.25 million) of the Round 2 GFATM Grants by
December 3 1,2008, easily surpassing the 80 percent target. The project contributed to a
sharp turnaround in the Global Fund portfolio from poor performance to very good
performance. In addition, Bank assistance has contributed directly and indirectly to the (a)
design and approval of a National HIV/AIDS strategy, (b) communication and training of
youth (approximately 490,000 of young people out of school underwent life skills education;
number of condoms distributed to youth corners and general population increased 220 times),
and (c) advancing testing and retroviral treatment.
18.
As a result, the pace of implementation of the HIV/AIDS Strategic Plan is picking up.
By the end of the project, the number of sites with functional Voluntary Counseling and
Testing (VCT) centers reached 102 sites, almost doubling the project target of 5 5 sites and 50
percent of these sites are fully equipped. The antiretroviral (ARV) program was established.
The number of people receiving ARV treatment reached approximately 23,000, exceeding
the project target of 20,000. As to the impact of these efforts on the development objectives
of the country, the escalation of the epidemic appears contained. Nevertheless, the
magnitude of the problem is such that major gaps remain in both prevention and mitigation.
Thus, adult HIV prevalence remains stagnant: 2005 and 2007 surveillance data showed no
major differences in incidence among women attending antenatal clinics. On the positive
side, incidence among youth (ages 15-24) fell from 11 percent in 2005 to 8.9 percent in
2007. Regretfully, female incidence at 14.9 percent far exceeded male incidence at 5.9
percent. By the end of 2009, only 40 percent of eligible patients had been covered with
advance testing and retroviral treatment.
The limited impact of the project and the overall development partner support on
19.
prevalence is understandable given the time it took to speed up implementation. However,
other factors may be at work. The GOL and development partners should pay greater
attention to investigating the determinants of the epidemic through, if possible, joint
analytical work. Lessons that have emerged from assessments of past donor support include
avoiding unrealistic and over-ambitious project designs, ensuring that the institutions needed
to implement them are in place, and working continuously at capacity building. In August
2009, the Bank approved a follow-up project that continues to focus on helping to (a) draw
on international finds that are available to fight HIV/AIDS and (b) improve coordination and
implementation capacity. At this time, the ICR for the previous project is available. The
challenge for the new project will be to go beyond the previous efforts and seek impact on
the ground through the development and implementation of a good monitoring system that
would track changes of behavior in the population consistent with a future reduction in
HIV/AID S incidence.

48

Strategic Objective 2: Strengthen Sustainable Pro-Poor Growth and Job Creation
able
Strategic
Objective
Reduce
constraints and
associated costs to
private sector
development to
enhance domestic
and foreign
investment

Improve access to
services and
infrastructure to
rural households,
local
communities, and
rural enterprises
to foster growth in
rural sector

Results of 200'6 CAS against
Expected outcome and
performance indicator for
end-2006 CAS period
Days required to start up a
business reduced from 92 days
in 2005 to fewer than 38 days
by December 2007.

Progress to 2009

~~

Partially achieved.
Days required to start up
business reduced from 92
days in 2005 to 40 by
November 2009.
Transparent concessioning
Achieved.
procedures established for
Concessions manual
tourism investment
adopted; sets out
opportunities.
transparent procedures.
Concession agreements on
three sites have been
signed.
Number of customers with less Achieved.
than 18-hour water supply
Number of customers with
reduced from 94,000 in 2005
less than 18-hour water
to 76,000 in 2008.
supply fell from 94,000 in
2005 to 2,700 in 2009.
Average travel time to social
Achieved.
services and markets for
Average travel time to
beneficiary population in
social and economic
targeted areas along the South services in targeted area
Eastern Corridor reduced by
(Senqu-Senqunyane)
25%.
reduced from 5 to 1 hour
(80%).

Main instruments
Private Sector
Competitiveness and
Economic
Diversification
Project
PRSP

Water Sector
Improvement Project
APL
Integrated Transport
Project

Under the second pillar, Bank assistance sought to help Lesotho develop new areas of
20.
economic growth and employment opportunities. The CAS foresaw three results clusters
under this pillar. The first cluster centered on creating an enabling environment for private
sector development (foreign and domestic). The second cluster combined emphasis on
increasing access to good infrastructure and rural development. The third cluster concerned
the sustainable use of natural resources. As already has been mentioned, the Bank had not
been engaged in working on diversification directly, and no major breakthroughs were
expected. The main emphasis was on setting a good institutional foundation for
diversification in the future.

Improving the Business Environment
21.
To improve the business environment, the Bank aligned its support with GOL's
ongoing efforts to reduce behind-the-border constraints. The main instruments have been (a)
the Private Sector Competiveness and Economic Diversification Project (PSCEDP), FY0712 and (b) the PRSC series. PRSC I was approved in FY08 and PRSC I1 was approved in
FY 10. Analytical work including an Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) and a Private

49

Sector Development Strategy3*has informed the program design and provided underpinning
for policy dialogue. A second ICA is under preparation. In addition, at the request of the
government, the Bank prepared a series of Policy Notes, on various issues including an
examination of the conditions for attracting FDI and diversifying the sources of growth.
These notes were discussed with the Cabinet in July 2009.33
22.
The implementation of the PSCEDP was mixed. The project has been downgraded to
moderately satisfactory mainly because of the delayed process of finalizing and adopting the
Companies Bill and the newly separated Business Reporting Bill and Industrial Licensing
Bill. A draft Companies Bill has been approved by the Attorney General for submission to
Cabinet and is targeted for adoption by June 2010. Adoption of the new Companies Act
would reduce the time taken to register a business to fewer than 28 days as of December
2009. Likewise, the PSCEDP is supporting drafting new legislation on industrial licensing.
The new legislation is expected to be adopted and implemented in 2010. When it is, it will
significantly reduce the administrative burden and cost of obtaining industrial licenses in
Lesotho. The Ministry of Trade, Industry, Cooperatives and Marketing (MTICM) in
collaboration with Private Sector Development Division (PSDD) of the Ministry of Finance
and Development Planning and PSCEDP are amending the Trading Enterprise Regulation of
1999. The amendments could gain Lesotho 4 places in the World Bank’s 201 1 competitive
ranking in addition to gaining an additional 4 places through the new Companies Act.
A key achievement of the PSCEDP has been strengthening the dialogue with the
23.
GOL around financial and private sector development; and increasing coordination among
the development partners. The Bank has been working closely with DfID in supporting the
One-stop Business Facilitation Centre (OBFC) 34 under the Ministry of Industry. The
PSCEDP has supported the development of a strategic plan for the OBFC and is expected to
support the implementation of the OBFC strategic plan after DfID support expired in 2009.
The PSCEDP is also focusing on consolidating the gains made through DfID support by

32 Other analytical work included a Program to Reform the Company Registry and Licensing Regime, as
well as a study on skills requirements for productivity and growth, a program to reform the immigration
and customs services, and the value chain analysis for strategic sectors.
33 The one-day seminar with the Cabinet, titled “Reshaping Lesotho’s Position in SACU to Meet the
Challenges of Sustained and Shared Growth,” considered four issues: (a) Fiscal Challenges and Options for
Reform; (b) Effective Use of Public Resources, Particularly for Capital Expenditure Supporting Growth,
(3) Agriculture: Challenges and Directions for Agribusiness; and (4) Realizing FDI to Diversify Lesotho’s
Exports.
34 The One Stop Business Facilitation Centre (OBFC), previously called One Stop Shop (OSS), established
by MITCM is operational to facilitate issuance of manufacturing and trading licenses and process import
permits and export visas. OBFC manages issuing export permits, import permits, business registration and
licenses, and work permits. OBFC also provides application forms for residence permits for investors (the
actual processing is still done at Ministry of Home Affairs and Public Safety, or MHAPS). Since its
inception in 2007, OBFC has issued 692 export visas and 857 import permits. Average time taken to
process import permits has dropped fiom 4 days to 1.9 days. Time taken to process export visas has
dropped fiom 2-3 days to 5-6 hours. OBFC also has issued more than 5,000 business licenses through a
slightly simplified administrative process. Additional opportunities exist to streamline processes by
adopting new legislation and simpler procedures. The OBFC Steering Committee has approved the
appointment of a director for OBFC under MITCM-a key step to strengthen institutional capacity.

50

building an effective OBFC and by drafting legislation, as already noted, to achieve the CAS
objectives under the business en~ironment.~?
24.
In addition, satisfactory work is underway to increase the transparency of the
allocation of licenses, especially for tourism. The Ministry of Tourism has adopted a
Concessions Manual, which sets out transparent procedures for concessioning tourism sites.
A Task Force has been established under the Lesotho Tourism Development Corporation to
concession a pilot tourism site with the support of technical assistance (TA) provided under
the PSC Project. An information package had been prepared, and the concession process is
expected to be completed by May 2010.
25.
Concerning the impact of all of these efforts on long-term development objectives, at
130 in the 2010 Doing Business Database, Lesotho ranks the lowest among countries in the
Southern Africa region. The other countries are South Africa (32), Botswana (38), Namibia
(5 l), and Swaziland (108). The 2010 Doing Business Database continues to rank Lesotho
low at 130 of 183 countries, because the efforts underway, including the legislative
initiatives, have not been finalized. Nevertheless, the agenda under implementation is on
track and likely will improve the business environment and the institutional effectiveness of
OBFC through support for the implementation of the new Companies Act. The Act will
strengthen OBFC and focus on the delivery of quick wins in registration and licensing
requirements. The institutional strengthening includes the creation of the Private Sector
Development Division (PSDD in the Ministry of Finance and Development with support
from DfID. Finally, work under the project has helped identify constraints such as the lack of
built factory space to support the growth of the manufacturing sector. Through the PSCEDP,
the World Bank has initiated dialogue with the GOL to provide support for the Lesotho
National Development Corporation (LNDC) to develop and manage industrial facilities and
possibly restructure the LNDC.
26.
The challenge ahead is great. With public expenditure at 70 percent of GDP in
2009/10, the GOL has limited capacity to design and advance strategies for growth and
diversification through public spending. Therefore, the challenge continues to be to improve
the private business environment and promote domestic entrepreneurship. Given the size of
the GOL expenditure, many of the government?s activities impinge on or otherwise
negatively affect investment opportunities. Addressing the most critical reforms requires (a)
a strong capacity at the central government level to design and coordinate reform, because
today all of the initiatives are dispersed; and (b) interest and commitment in each agency to
carry out the necessary reforms. Only thus will GOL be able to deliver on its commitment to
open space for the private sector. Unfortunately, the domestic private sector?s weak capacity
to organize itself means that it cannot be an effective counterpart in identifying constraints
and proposing and implementing solutions.

??
The needed legislation covers a wide range of areas-registration

and reportinghndustrial licensing. The
approval and implementation of this legislation is expected in 2010. Work is underway to simplify the visa
requirements to enter and to work in Lesotho and the issuance of a National Identification Card. In
addition, the Ministry of Tourism adopted a concessions manual, which sets out transparent procedures to
assign concessions in tourist sites.

51

Improving Inpastructure Services
27.
For some years, the Bank has been working on improving the investment climate
through better infrastructure. The 2005 CAS continued this support through 2 ongoing
operations: (a) Phase 1 of the Water Sector Improvement Project Adaptable Program Loan
(APL) (WSIPl) and (b) the Lesotho Utilities Reform Project (LURP.) The strategy was that a
new initiative-the Integrated Transport Project (ITP), to be co-financed with the EUwould support institutional reforms in the transport sector. Second, and quite importantly,
the project would also finance rural roads as a key strategic move to link isolated rural areas
to the market. PRSC support for decentralization focused likewise on improving service
delivery. The Bank’s assistance in infrastructure has been and continues to be highly
relevant to creating a competitive investment platform in the sliver of land at the foot of the
mountains that surrounds the capital city (Maseru). The transport project also is relevant to
the connection of Lesotho’s rural areas to the main markets and the connection through the
mountains of the main industries around the capital city to the port of Durban in South
Africa.
28.
Water. The long history of World Bank support for the water sector began in the late
1970s with water supply to seven small towns.36This history continued with the Bank’s
involvement in the Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP), which supported the
implementation of the engineering studies in 1986. The first Bank project, approved in 1991,
was to support Phase 1 of the LHWP, a massive investment to build dam and transmission
infrastructure to export water from the water-rich Lesotho Highlands to Gauteng Province of
South Africa. Although it financed only 4 percent of the total investment, the Bank played a
central role in the completion of the project.37The Bank also financed similar assistance
through Phase 1B of the LHWP, approved in 1998, which included studies to investigate
potential sources of water supply to the Lesotho Lowlands.
29.
Afterwards, WSIPl, approved in 2004, focused on improving domestic supply in
Maseru and supported WASA, the public water company, to improve management practices.
By all accounts, WASA’s improvement has been a success story. Among other
achievements, WASA has lowered the number of customers who receive fewer than 18
hours’ supply, reduced the percentage of biological samples failing testing, reduced
unaccounted-for water, and increased the collection of water bills (to 96 percent.) WSIP 1
also has contributed to implement the institutional reforms outlined in the 1999 Water
Resource Management Strategy, in particular, the establishment of the office of the
Commissioner of Water (Cow). One of the COW’Skey outputs has been to draft the Water
Resource Bill, passed in December, 2008, which provides a comprehensive legal framework
for the sector.

36

The World Bank’s involvement in the water sector began in the late 1970s with support for the
construction of piped water systems in 7 small towns to serve approximately 50,000 inhabitants. This
construction was complemented by measures to strengthen the Water and Sewerage Branch, which
ultimately became WASA.
37 The Bank project that supported this initiative closed in 2007. The team’s ICR rated the project as
satisfactory on both outcomes and Bank performance. IEG concurred on Bank performance but rated the
outcomes as moderately satisfactory.

52

30.
Regarding long-term development goals, the evidence is that, regarding quantity,
Lesotho’s water service coverage has remained at approximately 80 percent of the population
for the last 5 years. However, the quality of the services has improved. Indeed, of 24
African countries sampled between 1995 and 2005, Lesotho ranks third in moving
populations away from surface water to higher levels of service. The country’s annual gain
in piped water has been approximately 2.7 percent over the last decade. As the population in
the Lowlands increases through immigration, the challenge will be to provide these new
residents with adequate services. This challenge is being addressed in part through Phase 2
of the WSIP (WSIP2), approved by the Board of Directors in May 2009. This is part of a
multidonor program of support to the GOL’s Metolong Dam and Water Supply Program
(MDWSP). The MDWSP finances construction of the Metolong Dam; a water treatment
plant; and downstream conveyance to the Maseru and the surrounding towns of Roma,
Morija, Mazenod, and Teyateyaneng. The MDWSP will provide 75,000 m3 per day of
additional treated water to the region.
3 1.
Lesotho’s experience in the water sector yields valuable lessons. First, the good
results achieved at WASA follow from the use of targeted incentives and innovative
management tools. The use of incentives was combined with an independent performance
audit function, requirement to publish results, and dual oversight agreement. The approach
has not only produced results but also built confidence, developed leadership skills, and
raised awareness among decision makers of the efforts and inputs needed to improve public
utility performance. Most important, the improvements at WASA were internally driven by
dynamic management with the support of government stakeholders. These changes could not
have been achieved through the support of the World Bank project alone. This experience
highlights the importance of government-driven and donor-supported initiatives.

Electricity and telecommunications. The Lesotho Utility Reform Project (LURP)
32.
(FYO 1) focused on improving service delivery in electricity and telecommunications. It
sought to help to consolidate the privatization of the Lesotho Telecommunications
Corporation (LTC). It also sought to privatize the Lesotho Electricity Corporation (LEC). In
both sectors, it fostered the introduction of regulatory institutions.
The strategy to improve the delivery of electricity was, first, to engage a private
33.
operator through a management contract and then to privatize. However, in 2003 the GOL
decided against an outright sale.38The existing management contract continued until
December 2006.39It yielded major improvements in the quality of the service and the
finances of the company.40Many of these achievements took place during this CAS period.
From 2001 to 2007, the number of customers doubled-to approximately 55,000. Bill
collection stands at approximately 100 percent. The percentage of electricity losses dropped
from 35 percent to 11 percent. The electrification rate rose from 1 percent in 2001 to 18
percent at the end of 2009.
381nthe meantime, however, Lesotho continued to issue a concession.
management contract was extended continuously for brief periods-an approach that created undue
uncertainty.
40 The original project did not include investment funds as the funds were to be provided by the private
concessionaire. The project was not reprogrammed to provide these funds. Fortunately, resources
generated internally financed an effective investment and expansion program. Still, the Bank and the
AfDB funded approximately 1 1,000 connections, slightly above 50% of the 20,000 connections that LEC
had built.
39 The

53

34.
After the management contract ended in 2006 and LEC’s concession failed, the GOL
hired individual managers and appointed a managing director in 2007. The development
partners have highlighted the risks that this strategy introduces to the achievement of
national commitments, such as reaching 35 percent nationwide electricity coverage by 201 5.
The partners have called on the GOL to hold the new managers to the same standards of
accountability as it did the management company. Given the critical importance that the
electricity sector plays in the country’s economic growth strategy, it is important for the
partners to address the concerns about the sustainability of the reform efforts.41In hindsight,
the Bank could have moved faster to accept the shifting attitude toward privatization of
utilities, in which Lesotho’s position mimics the position of other countries in the region.

Transportation. Lesotho has faced the challenge of improving and maintaining the
35.
road network, particularly the connection of isolated rural markets. A previous Bank
operation42developed the conceptual groundwork, tested the options, and drew the lessons
that underpinned the design of the Integrated Transport Project (ITP) (FY07) relevant to this
CAS. ITP objectives include (a) improving transport sector institutions, (b) connecting
isolated (mountainous) areas to services and market opportunities, and (c) mainstreaming the
fight against HIV throughout the project components. The project is on target to deliver the
results set by the CAS, but it is too early to report definite outcomes.43Contracts for civil
works aimed at reducing the travel time to markets and social services have been awarded,
and the work has commenced. All civil works contracts include clauses calling for actions
to increase workers’ awareness of HIV/AIDS prevention methods.
With the creation in 2005 of an independent Roads Directorate (RD) in the Ministry
36.
of Public Works and Transport (MPWT), institutional reform of the road sector is underway.
The Roads Directorate operates on commercial principles and is a proxy of the Road
Authority but with its own board. The Roads Directorate is in the final stages of becoming
fully staffed. All indications are that, when hlly operational, it will catapult Lesotho road
sector management from a traditional departmental and politicized entity to one of technical
excellence. The long-term benefit to the Lesotho economy is that the professional approach
and technical and resource-based planning for the network-including prioritization of
maintenance, rehabilitation, and development of the network-will result in optimal use of
available resources at any time. A less pronounced but gradual improvement is found in the
Road Fund functions. The government is increasing the user fees for the Road Fund, which
are used to finance routine and periodic maintenance of the road network. Coverage of
maintenance by user fees is up from 50 percent to approximately 72 percent.

Other concerns include (a) weakening the regulator by removing an independent source of finance; (b)
weakening monitoring and reporting (previously done by the concessionaire); and (c) closing the
Privatization Unit, which held valuable experience in managing IDA and AfDB projects.
42 Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project (RRMP).
43
Results on the ground will come in the next CAS. However, due to escalation of costs, additional
financing will be required to complete the works that already have been programmed.
41

54

Sustainable Development
The majority of the population and the poor live in the highlands. Given the limited
37.
arable land in a fragile environment, the strategy for sustainable development centers on
enabling local communities and authorities to better manage their natural assets. Through the
Maloti-Dakensberg Trans-frontier Project (MDTP), the Bank supported efforts in targeted
areas to develop and test mechanisms to empower communities to manage their
environmental assets. The CAS had foreseen an additional operation to support the
environment financed with regional GEF funds. However, that funding went to a different
program.
The MDTP closed in December 2009. It met its development objectives: (a)
38.
community-based planning principles were adopted to facilitate management of natural
resources in the areas supported by the project; and (b) good cooperation between South
Africa and Lesotho helped to address threats to biodiversity and conservation such as fires.
In addition, the MDTP contributed to the development of the 20-year bio-regional transfrontier conservation strategy, development of the tourist strategy, and conservation measures
for threatened species. The current challenge is to work on the sustainability of these
initiatives and expand achievements beyond the targeted areas under the project. Much
hinges on the success of the decentralization strategy and the effective empowerment of the
local communities to manage their natural resources.

Strategic Objective 3:.Improve Human Development Outcomes
Table 3. Key Results of 2006 CAS against expected outcomes, Strategic Objective 3
Strategic
Objective

~

~~

Improve health
systems
management and
efficiency to
provide essential
health services
Increase access
and performance
in primary and
secondary
education

Expected outcome and
performance indicator for
end 2006 CAS period
Reduction in average waiting
period from 4.5 hours to 2.0
hours at health facilities by
2009.
Increase in TB cure rate from
52% to 60% by 2008.
National Performance Level
(NPL) in numeracy at grade 6
increased from 49% in 2003 to
55% by December 2007.
NPL in Sesotho literacy at
grade 6 increased from 58% in
2003 to 65% by December
2007.

Progress to 2009

Partially achieved.
Average waiting period
reduced to 3 hours and 20
minutes in 2009.
Achieved.
For 2008/09, the average
TB cure rate reached
66.5%.
Achieved.
NPL in numeracy at grade
6 was 58% in 2006.
Achieved.
NPL in Sesotho literacy at
grade 6 was 69% in 2006.

Main instruments
Health Sector Reform
Project Phase I1
PRSP

Second Education
Sector Development
Project Phase I1
PRSC
ITP

As mentioned, Lesotho’s challenge was to deliver better outcomes in education and
39.
health. In primary school education, Lesotho ranked high among SSA countries in access,
but quality was a concern. On the other hand, low enrollments in secondary and tertiary
education did not bode well for an economy aspiring to compete and grow into middleincome status. The health of the population appeared to have declined over the previous
55

decade. Morbidity and mortality from communicable deceases had increased, a problem
made even more critical by the high incidence of HIV/AIDS.

Health
40.
Bank support for health came through the Health Sector Reform Project (HSRP)
Phase I1 (FY06) operating as a sector-wide approach (SWAP) agreement with other
development partners. The five triggers for moving to Phase I11 of the APL have been
Nevertheless, performance of the 15 key indicators tracked by GOL and partners under the
SWAP is mixed. Based on the original design, Phase I11 would have provided support
mainly to the national referral hospital, which already has been supported by the publicprivate partnership (PPP). Thus, it is planned that a Health Sector Results-based Financing
Project, instead of Phase I11 of HSRP, will be prepared.
41.
With the support of the CAS program, major achievements include (a) improved
capacity for service delivery at the district level; (b) higher immunization rates; (c) improved
access to essential health services, that is, antenatal care and preventing mother-to-child
transmission (PMTCT); (d) increased HIV testing coverage and TB detention rates; and (e)
improved M&E and fiduciary capacity.45Despite the work and progress in putting in place
new institutional arrangements that emphasize local responsibility for health services, the full
impact on the ground has yet to come. Lesotho remains behind in reaching the MDG
targets-with low life expectancy, high child mortality, and the third highest adult HIV
prevalence in the world.
42.
As with HIV/AIDS, the achievement of development outcomes such as moving
closer to MDG targets and reversing declining trends will depend on removing capacity
constraints. For instance, the shortage of health professionals is severe. The country needs to
develop a medium-term plan rather than rely on stop-gap measures-ften
under the advice
of development partners to produce immediate results. The decentralization of health
services, a basic pillar of the reform design, hrther illustrates how capacity limitations hinder
delivery of outcomes. Three years after decentralization commenced, the District Health
Management Teams are not yet fully operational. Transferring responsibility for delivery to
the district level requires very intensive coordination (planning, implementing agencies,
budgeting). Such coordination does not happen by itself, and health authorities currently are
not able to implement it by themselves. In addition, the lack of health professionals is even
more severe at the local level than at the center. The Bank, under the GPOBA grant, and IFC
The 5 triggers are (a) the District Health Management Teams have their own budgets and authority to
incur expenditure; (b) the TB program has been strengthened. The latest data (2008-09) indicated a
treatment success rate of 67%, somewhat lower than in 2006 (73%); (c) the PPP contract for the new
national referral hospital achieved financial closing; (d) disbursement stands at more than 90%; and (e)
formulation of the national health fmancing policy is in progress.
45 In greater detail, progress under the project includes (a) District Health Management Teams (DHMT)
have been established in 10 districts and provided with equipment and in-service training; (b) a five-year
Emergency Human Resources Plan has been developed and aims at fast-track recruitment of the resources
needed to effectively deliver health services; (c) the PPP to replace the National Referral Hospital Queen
Elizabeth I1 is on track; (d) key studies on how best to allocate resources to districts has been completed;
(e) the MOHSW has undertaken a functional review of its administrative structure; and (f) procurement of
incineration equipment and incinerator repairs to properly manage medical waste has been completed.
44

56

are helping GOL to put in place a PPP to build and operate Lesotho’s National Referral
Hospital, which serves the bulk of the Basotho population.

Education
43.
As stated in Vision 2020, the overall aim for education in Lesotho is to develop and
implement “education policies which ensure the acquisition of functional literacy among all
Basotho and the development of a productive, quality human resource base through
education and training.”
44.
The Bank has provided support for the country’s education efforts since 1975.
Significant progress has taken place, especially with regard to basic education. Free primary
education was introduced in 2000. Progress in access and retention led to gross and net
enrollment rates of 118 percent and 82 percent, respectively, in 2008. Completion rate for
the same year was 93 percent. Gender parity has been achieved, and Lesotho is expected to
reach the MDGs for education on time. Bank support during the CAS period came through
an IDA operation-the Education Sector Development Project (ESDP) Phase 11-and two
sequential grants from the EFA Fast Track Initiative (FTI) Catalytic Fund.
The outputs of these interventions are visible in the (a) construction and renovation of
45.
classrooms and a new campus for the Lesotho College of Education in the mountainous area
of Thaba-Tseka; (b) provision of primary school textbooks and learning materials; (c)
increased number of teachers including qualified teachers; and (d) introduction of a distance
education teacher training program.46The proportion of the total education recurrent budget
devoted to primary education increased from 57 percent in 2004 to 64 percent in 2008-09.
The share of budget allocation to education was 22 percent in 2008. However, important
challenges are still to be faced. Repetition is very high, especially in first grades (29 percent
repetition rate in grade 1). More than half of the school infrastructure for primary education
(52 percent) does not meet basic standards. Forty-two percent of the teaching staff is
unqualified. Enrollment in post-basic education in general is still low (42 percent gross
enrollment rate for secondary education), and there are questions about the quality of basic
education.
46.
Bank assistance has been hampered by the limited capacity in the Ministry of
Education and Training (MoET). To support implementation of ESDP Phase 11, a Project
Support and Coordination Unit (PSCU) was established with project and counterpart funds.
This unit grew substantially over time. It became a parallel structure to MoET, on which it
depended not only for project implementation but also for M&E, overall procurement, and
financial management. This unit was dismantled in December 2008. Since then, MoET has
been going through a transition aimed at creating in-house capacity. As stated in the ICR, in
2008 MoET’s capacity was diminished by the closure of the project, resulting in the loss of
In greater detail, 38 new primary schools were constructed under the ESDP 11; 29 schools were
reconstructed or extended under the FTI funds. However, a significant number of pupils remain in
temporary structures and overcrowded conditions. In 2007 FTI funds helped provide 389,000 books for
core subjects (English, Sesotho, mathematics, and science). The number of teachers has increased to over
10,000, reducing the average pupil: teacher ratio to 41. The number of unqualified teachers has stabilized
at approximately 41 percent. The Distant Teacher Education program produced its first 450 graduates in
2006.
46

57

most of the PSCU personnel. In 2007 the MoET began to create public service posts to
replace some of the tasks, and many of the PSCU staff was absorbed. However, there were
significant losses of expertise in financial management, procurement, and supervision of
construction.
Resistance to reform in post-basic education was another factor that hampered Bank
47.
support. ESDP I1 was expected to advance the reform agenda in post-basic education, but
both internal and external resistance prevented it from moving forward. The lack of progress
has important consequences. Current post-basic education is both inefficient and quite
costly. The expenditure line for the bursaries scheme is approximately 35 percent of the
overall education budget.
48.
Donor coordination in Lesotho has been very successful in the education sector. The
local education donor group has supported the preparation of the Education Sector Strategy
2005-2015, and its update, the Education Sector Medium Term Plan 2009-2012. Both have
been endorsed by the donor group and the FTI partnership. Three applications for grants
from the FTI Catalytic Fund were submitted and succeeded. Annual joint technical reviews
take place regularly, and joint supervision has taken place regarding the implementation of
the FTI grants. Irish Aid is the lead donor.
49.

Looking forward, education in Lesotho faces three major challenges:
a. Improve the quality of primary education to complement the significant gains in
access.
b. Improve access to secondary education. As primary completion rates improve, larger
cohorts move into secondary education, in which fees and lack of infrastructure
(buildings, teaching materials, qualified teachers) limit access, especially by the poor.
c. Increase the relevance of tertiary education and its ability to support growth. To date,
the sizable allocation of public resources has not been followed by the emergence of
qualified graduates.
Strategic Objective 4: Improve Service Delivery through Government Reform

Table 4. Key Results of 2006 CAS against expected outcomes, Strategic Objective 4
Strategic
Objective
Improve capacity
for management
of public
resources at
central and
decentralized
local GOL levels

Expected outcome and
performance indicator for
end 2006 CAS period
MTEF introduced in at least
10 ministries by 2009.

Government approves and put
in place a harmonized
mechanism for monitoring the
PRS by June 2008.

Progress to 2009

Achieved.
All ministries used MTEF
and produced Budget
Framework Papers for
2009-10 and 2010-1 1.
Achieved.
Joint Government-donors
PAF has been developed
and progress annually
reviewed.

58

Main instruments
used
PRSC
PEFAR
CPAR

Under the fourth pillar, the CAS foresaw support for GOL’s commitment to involve
50.
local communities in their own development, following on the election of district and local
councils for the first time in 2005. 47 These elections proved that the GOL was committed to
decentralization. It follows that attention to decentralization was highly relevant for two
reasons. It was a priority for GOL, and effective decentralization was important to achieve
various objectives of the strategy, including in health and environment. However, the Bank
had not previously worked to develop the capacity of local governments. Of the other
development partners, only Gessellschaft h r Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) had.
5 1.
The Bank’s strategy was to accompany decentralization through a PRSC series, while
strengthening the capacity of the GOL to manage public resources. The latter also was an
area in which the Bank had had limited engagement. However, other development partners
such as UNDP and DfID had been engaged in this area.
‘

52.
The Bank’s Board approved the first (of three) PRSC operations for Lesotho in May
2008 and the second on March 30,2010. The PRSC I operation covered three themes: (a)
creating a conductive environment for private sector growth, (b) improving the public
expenditure management and fiduciary framework, and (c) improving access to basic
services through decentralization and empowerment of communities. Work under the last
two themes supports this pillar. Although GOL has made significant progress in
implementing its reform program supported through PRSC I, the approval of only the first
operation and preparation of the second during this CAS means that outcomes under the
program will not manifest until the new Country Assistance Strategy.

Most recently, the PRSC has successhlly promoted the adoption of better budgeting
53.
practices.. They include the adoption of the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF),
and as an integral part of MTEF development, the annual preparation of a Medium Term
Fiscal Framework (MTFF). On April 1, 2009, a new Integrated Financial Management
Information System (IFMIS) became operational. All ministries now prepare their MTEF
budgets by using the budget module of the IFMIS, the new chart of accounts, and the new
budget classification system. Individual ministries also prepare Budget Framework Papers
(BFPs), which set out their visions, objectives, proposed revisions to their programs, and
proposed changes to their pattern of resource use.
54.
Six pilot ministries prepare MTEF information on a program basis. In 2007 Lesotho
revised its Public Procurement Regulations to align them with international practices. The
new procurement system is decentralized and supported by a Procurement Policy and
Advisory Division. A Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) identified areas in
which some fine-tuning will improve and clarify the design of the procurement system during
the PRSC implementation. Amendments to the Public Procurement Regulations have been
drafted; however, their finalization is awaiting passage of the revised PFM Act. To provide
an appeal mechanism, instead of the proposed establishment of an Independent Procurement
Regulatory Authority (IPRA), the GOL is establishing a Procurement Tribunal.

Note that the title of this pillar differs between the main text and the results matrix found as an appendix
in the CAS. The title in the main text is “Decentralization, Service Delivery, and Monitoring and
Evaluation.”

47

59

55.
On decentralization, the most notable result was the enactment into law of the Local
Government Service Bill, which is highly relevant. Local elections and the establishment of
Community and District councils in 2005 launched a variety of local activities and
expectations that could not be properly addressed under the existing institutional framework.
The Local Government Service Act of 2008 helped clarify responsibilities as it was the first
law to clarify the roles and responsibilities of local officials and central GOL officials
working at the local levels. As GTZ is the key partner and the Bank does not have ongoing
support in the area of decentralization, the prior actions identified for PRCS-2 no longer
cover support in this area.
56.
Lesotho has been a relative latecomer to public sector reform and is trying to catch up
quickly. As a result, the remaining PRSC agenda is daunting. In other countries, similar
agendas have required considerable coordination, technical assistance (TA), time, and
commitment. The challenge for Lesotho will be the speedy delivery of results that improve
governance through a more efficient and effective public sector to make Lesotho more
competitive in the region. More efficient public spending is even more relevant today when
the availability of public resources is decreasing as SACU revenues shrink. In moving
forward, the Bank and other donors should take into account GOL’s capacity limitations and
strive to keep the program designs simple.
V.

Bank Performance

Actual lending has followed the CAS program, with the exception of the proposed
57.
GEF operation, which could not be delivered for reasons noted. Appendix tables A1 and A2
provide information on the projects that were active at the beginning of the CAS and the
projects that were approved during the CAS. Table A5 compares planned with actual
lending. As of May 1,2010, 6 IDA operations and 1 GPOBA48grant (in the amount of US$6
million) were active in the Lesotho portfolio. The PRSC I has been closed and the PRSC I1
was approved by Board on March 30,2010. Total lending commitments are approximately
$100.7 million, of which as of May 1,2010. The bulk of the disbursements in FY06-07 had
come from operations under implementation at the beginning of the CAS (table A3). In
FY09 new operations approved during the CAS implementation took off and outperformed
the old ones on the disbursement front. The disbursement ratio in FY09 reached 38.6
percent, which was above the Sub-Saharan Africa average. Nevertheless, the bulk of the
results came from the operations active at the beginning of the CAS period since half of the
portfolio is young.
58.
Likewise, delivery of the AAA program is roughly on target. Two studies were
dropped: Justice and Law Reform, and a Transport Sector
The analytical work on
poverty (shared growth) and vulnerability was direly needed and is now available to inform
the preparation of the coming 2010 Country Assistance Strategy. The work on creating
shared growth by reducing inequality and vulnerability analyzes a broad range of relevant
topics and provides recommendations based on the international experience. An Investment
Climate Review (ICR) and a Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) in the form of the
The Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid grant in support of Lesotho Queen Elizabeth I1 Hospital
PPP project aimed at improved access and quality of medical services in Lesotho.
49 Table A6.
48

60

Policy Notes (with a focus on trade, regional integration, fiscal challenges, and agriculture)
were delivered during the CAS period and buttress the increasing emphasis on growth.
59.
The current portfolio of six projects shows mixed performance. There is one problem
project-the Water Sector Improvement Project Phase 1 (WSIP I). In addition, the rating of
the Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Project recently was
downgraded, for reasons stated in para. 22 above. Thus, the commitment at risk amounts to
$14.1 million and constitutes 18.6 percent of the portfolio. The index of proactivity stands at
100 percent, which means that the response of the country team to emerging problems is
timely and effective. At the same time, the latest weakening of portfolio performance calls
for increased staff and management attention to the portfolio quality and implementation
support.

60.
The last formal Country Portfolio Review (CPR) took place in June 2008. Its
recommendations provided a comprehensive and strategic overview of portfolio performance
and the portfolio’s alignment with CAS objectives. The CPR also pointed out persisting
implementation issues (implementation delays, project management difficulties, institutional
issues, FM) that may not have been reflected in the project ratings but which could affect
projects’ performances. The CPR Note highlighted the necessity to ensure good alignment
among portfolio, CAS, and other DP programs. The CPR Note also urged that the
government and other DPs agree on a modus operandi for systematic, coordinated and
integrated portfolio/program and CAS implementation monitoring. However, the same
Portfolio Review Note warns against complacency and calls for closer and timelier tracking
of the program and its impact on development outcomes. The review note recommends that
the team informally track performance on a continua; basis; and formally track it with the
authorities and other development partners periodi~ally.~~
More proactive tracking helps to
(a) promptly address delivery delays and (b) fine-tune the results framework to improve the
program’s alignment with the development outcomes.
Reviews of projects already completed show mixed results. Four projects were
61,
completed during the CAS period and reviewed internally by the teams. The country teams
rated two of them (HIV/AIDS and Highland Water) as satisfactory on both outcomes and
Bank performance. The team rated the Education Sector Development Program (EDSP 11) as
satisfactory on outcomes and moderately satisfactory on Bank performance. The team rated
the Utilities Sector Reform Project moderately satisfactory on both counts. The team rated
Maloti Drakensberg GEF moderately satisfactory on outcomes and moderately unsatisfactory
on Bank performance. Health Sector Reform Project I1 was closed in FY 10 and not has been
rated yet.
62.
Lesotho’s current performance is in line with the average of Sub-Saharan Africa
countries. However, the evidence points to shortcomings in, among others, institutional
development impact and performance at entry. The evidence here refers to the project
reviews undertaken by the Bank’s Independent Evaluation Office (IEG). The most recent
moderately unsatisfactory rating for EDSP I1 on outcomes and mixed portfolio performance
calls for the teams to pay more attention to (a) project design, that is, to make an upfront shift
in quality design and (b) institutional sustainability, given cases of backsliding after projects
50

The last formal Country Portfolio Review dates fiom 2005.

61

are completed. IEG also reviewed the Utilities Sector Reform Project and rated it
Moderately Satisfactory on outcomes and implementation performance.
63.
The Bank has been working closely with development partners on multiple fronts.
The Bank?s role in partnering with other donors differs from sector to sector. In HIV/AIDS,
the Bank is helping to build the GOL?s capacity to effectively use available resources from
Global Fund, Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC), and PEPFAR. In water, it is
helping to mobilize and leverage sizable resources from MCC, the European Investment
Bank (EIB), Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA), OPEC Fund for
International Development (OFID), Kuwait Fund, Saudi Fund, and Republic of South Africa
to continue investment in infrastructure and increase coverage. In the education sector, the
Bank works closely with FTI, Irish Aid, and Japan International Cooperation Association
(JICA). As the CAS foresaw, overall, the Bank has succeeded in leveraging development
partners? aid inflows. The Development Partners Consultative Forum (DPCF) proved to be
an effective way to achieve the stated goals, and the Bank plays an important role in
coordinating and harmonizing aid. However, the leadership of the authorities, particularly
the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, is essential to enhance the donors?
coordination.
VI,

Looking Forward: Lessons and Recommendations

The Bank program has contributed significant results in the areas in which it has been
64.
involved longer, including water, electricity, and education. In these areas, the Bank has
made a sustained effort and focused on institution building. The new areas of Bank
engagement, mainly competitiveness and strengthening the capacity of the state, are very
relevant, but the program has yet to deliver solid results. AAA work is well aligned with
country needs and priorities: shared growth, effective management of public funds, and
decentralization. However, this work has not always been timely in terms of project
preparation and the country stills lacks updated information on poverty incidence. Portfolio
performance is mixed, with 1 problem project and 2 projects out of 5 having been
downgraded in their performance ratings.
65.
The paradox is that in spite of the broadly positive economic performance during the
CAS period, the development challenges remain roughly the same as when the CAS was
designed. HIV/AIDS incidence remains high as do poverty and economic inequality, despite
a rate of economic growth higher than expected. The likelihood of reaching the MDG targets
is mixed across the targets. Competitiveness continues facing the same challenges and risks,
and Lesotho is missing a refined strategic vision of how best to profit from the regional and
global opportunities. At the same time, the global economic crisis brought new challenges of
sharply declining SACU revenues with a potential threat to the country?s macro and fiscal
stability.
At the heart of this paradox is the fact that Lesotho?s political difficulties until the end
66.
of the 1990s meant delays in starting reforms in critical areas, such as public sector
governance and competitiveness, in which other countries have been working for a longer
time. As a consequence, Lesotho faces a catch-up problem, which in turn leads to the design
of ambitious agendas that test the country?s limited capacities. Therefore, the main lessons
and recommendations center around two actions. The first is to build capacity. The second

62

is to prioritize and streamline the reform agenda to avoid over-ambitious undertakings that
create fatigue and a feeling of failure, as was the case in the CAS under review. Third, it also
should be kept in mind that no Progress Report was prepared. Hence, there was no mid-term
opportunity to bring greater realism to the results framework.
VII.

Develop a Credible Capacity Building Strategy

67.
Bank country teams and the GOL share the consensus that lack of capacity is a major
constraint to program effectiveness and to the advance of reform initiatives. The present
Completion Report finds that the evidence supports this consensus. Moreover, since results
are interconnected across themes, delays in one area, such as decentralization, slow progress
in others, such as service delivery.
68.
The emphasis on capacity is not new. The FY06-09 CAS called on partners to think
how best to break (release) the capacity constraints. The avenues tried included improving
capacity within projects. This approach has worked well in repeat operations and when the
emphasis includes putting in place the incentives to sustain institutional designs. The
accomplishments in the water sector are an example.
Another approach was to use IDA h n d s to break capacity constraints and facilitate
69.
access to international f h d s and their implementation. This approach has worked in
HIV/AIDS by helping to mobilize and use external funds. However, the AIDS efforts
initiated at mid-stream have yet to make an impact on development outcomes. The lesson
that emerges is that it takes time to establish a modus operandi of how to break the capacity
constraints to deliver results on the ground. The challenge is to shorten the learning lag.
70.
In tackling capacity constraints, it is important to bear in mind that capacity is a catch
word that covers a variety of concerns. Examples include the lack of trained personnel, such
as physicians; weak program design; weak incentives and institutions; and commitment from
the authorities. Hence, any approach must take account of the specifics at the sector and the
project levels. For instance, it is necessary to understand the drivers of brain drain, the
factors that delay adopting new legislation, and the reasons behind slow implementation of
the reforms. Doing so enables the design of effective tailor-made capacity building
interventions as a prerequisite for successful implementation of the Bank program.
VIII. Rethink and Sharpen the Growth (Competitiveness) Strategy

Rethinking the current competitiveness strategy beyond its emphasis on improving
71.
the business environment and putting in place the required infrastructure should acquire a
focus on shared growth-one of Lesotho’s greatest challenges. The lesson is that shared
growth is not likely to happen by itself. It needs a determined focus. The previous CAS
raised the issue but did not articulate a strategy due to lack of supporting analytical
underpinning. Recent reviews provide some ground upon which to begin to think about
shared growth. However, an updated understanding of poverty incidence is needed, because
the most recent information is seven years old (April 2003).’l
51 The precise title of the study is “Lesotho: Sharing Growth by Reducing Inequality and Vulnerability: A
Poverty, Gender, and Social Assessment” (May 30,2008). Its wide range of themes include, most notably,

63

72.

A shared growth strategy should include attention to:
0

0

0

0

IX.

Agriculture and rural development, for which a roadmap beyond the last CAS is
needed.
Encouragement of local entrepreneurship, including focus on the development of
adequate skills and increasing the relevance of tertiary education.
Thinking through the role of the state, which absorbs 70 percent of GDP. The state’s
expenditures leave very limited space for private economic activity, leading to very
weak internal constituencies to promote economic activity. One possibility that other
countries have used is to create strong pro-growth advocates-whether government
agencies or NGOs-within the state itself.
Sustained efforts are needed to increase public sector effectiveness, catch up with
improving public expenditure practices, and get a handle on decentralization. These
moves not only would improve service delivery but also would prepare for a possible
decline in the resources available to Lesotho from regional agreements.
Think Regionally

73.
One lesson from the past is that Lesotho’s success in utilizing the opportunities
offered by the 2000 African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) turned the country’s
attention to international markets, possibly at the expense of thinking regionally. Therefore,
some rebalancing is needed to counter the continued risks in the global economy. That
rebalancing may come in the form of strategies that exploit the considerable positional
advantages that Lesotho has in the region given its wage levels, access to markets, and past
experience of profiting from opportunity, as in the case of water. Thinking regionally will
mean making sure that institutional mechanisms work. An example would be enhancing
customs cooperation between Lesotho and South Africa. Thinking regionally also means
learning from other countries in the region that have developed more competitive business
environments.

X.

.

Improve the Effectiveness of the Bank’s Interventions

74.
The limited resources that the Bank provides to Lesotho call for thinking creatively
about effectiveness. Besides a continuous focus on addressing capacity constraints and the
simplification of objectives, the Bank will aid the effectiveness of its interventions by taking
a proactive advocacy position in critical areas such as shared growth to help build ownership.
In Lesotho, as elsewhere, the central government’s ownership, through the commitment and
allocation of political priority and economic resources, is a fundamental driver of success in
delivering results. Ownership, however, is not automatic even when the authorities have
made public statements on desired outcomes. Through AAA, dissemination, and TA, the
Bank can do much more to sharpen clarity of objectives and intended results. In this regard,
the Bank can help in providing space for the internal dialogue (Basotho-Basotho), which is
now quite limited and for which the Bank could help develop a culture of dialogue and
coordination.
agriculture and rural development, delivery of public services, and an in-depth review of the status of
HIV/AIDS.

64

75.
In turn, the Bank can strengthen its position as a strategic partner to Lesotho by
supporting the authorities in addressing the immediate challenges that the country will face in
the coming years. First, regional rearrangements will lead to a loss of public revenue, calling
for a major restructuring of the public function. Second, the country is facing a weakening of
its international privileges and must look for alternative ways to participate in the global and
the regional economies. Third, the political balance may suffer under drastic internal
readjustments.

76.
The Bank also can encourage the GOL to take a more active leadership role in donor
coordination. Today the country works with donors mainly at the sector level in water,
education, AIDS, PFM reform, and PSD. However, the coordination is largely donor driven.
Lesotho needs to be in the driver’s seat through more determined leadership by the Ministry
of Finance and Development Planning.
Last, continued progress should help prepare Lesotho to move from IDA funds to
77.
access World Bank fbnds on IBRD terms, especially for enclave projects. Lesotho already
has taken this step for the Highlands Water project.

65

Appendixes
Table A l . Projects under Implementation at Beginning of 2005 CAS

1

I
Project name

HIVIA'DSCB
and TA

Uater Sector
Improvement
4PL
Highlands
Water
ESDP 2 Phase
2 APL

Utilities
Reform

MalotiDrakensberg

(W

1

1
1

I

Board
approval

07/06/04
10126104

06/04/98

07/17/03

03/29/01

09113/01

I
1

1

1

1

Dates
Board
effectiveness

01/31/05
03/07/05

06/09/99

09115/03

05/17/01

07/06/02

I
1

1
1

1

ICR rating
(outcomeslBank
performance)

IEG ratting
(outcomeslBank
performance)

Satisfactory/
Satisfactory

Not yet rated

Not yet rated

Not yetrated

12/31/06

Satisfactory/
Satisfactory

Moderately
satisfactory/
Satisfactory

12/31108

Satisfactory/
Moderately
satisfactory

Moderately
unsatisfactory/
Moderately
Satisfactory

Actual
closing

12/31/08

12/31/07

1213 1109

Moderately
Satisfactory/
Moderately
satisfactory
Moderately
Satisfactory1
Moderately
Unsatisfactory

66

Not yet rated

Not yet rated

If not closed,
expected
closing date

1

Comments

I
0613012010

1

Table A2. Projects Approved during Implementation

Projects foreseen
originally in the
CAS by fiscal year

Dates
Project name

Board approval

Effectiveness

Closing

Lesotho Health Sector
Reform

10113105

02123106

03131109

Lesotho Integrated Transport
Project

10119106

0211 9107

30106111

Private Sector
Competitiveness

03121107

10105107

06130112

FY08

PRSC I

05122108

08120108

FY 09

Water Sector Improvement
Project II

0511 8109

0911 8109

FYO9

PRSC II

0313011 0

TBD

FYO9

Technical Assistance Project
for HlVlAlDS

08127109

19/01I1 0

FY06

FY07

I

67

01131I1 5

Notes if needed

Closing extended
till 30109109

Table A3. Disbursement by Year Differentiating between Projects in Place at Beginning of CAS
and Projects Approved during CAS Period (US$ m)

Projects

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Under implementation
at the beginning of CAS
period

7.48

14.96

10.85

16.50

7.01

28.3

Approved during CAS
period

0.00

0.00

0.60

2.80

2.75

42.2

Total disbursement

7.48

14.96

11-45

19.30

9.76

38.6

Table A4. Total Disbursements by Each CAS Pillar ('US$)
Disbursements
2004-1 0

Objectives
Strategic Objective 1: Fighting HlVlAlDS Pandemic
HlVlAlDS CB and TA

-

4.1

Strategic Objective 2: Sustainable Pro-Poor Growth and Job Creation
- PRSC I
- Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification
- LT Integrated Transport Project
- Highlands Water
- Water Sector Improvement APL
- Maloti-Drakensberg Transfrontier Conservation and Development Project

45.6

Strategic Objective 3: Improve Human Development Outcomes
- Health Sector Reform
- ESDP 2 Phase2 APL

27.5

Strategic Objective 4: Decentralization, Service Delivery, and Monitoring and Evaluation
- Utilities Sector Reform

29.6

I

Total

68

106.8

Table A5. Planned I D M B R D Lending Program and Actual Deliveries, FY06-09
FY

CAS plan

2006

v a a c t u a l d a l i v e r i e s

Project

US $(MI

Status

US$m

Health Sector Reform Project
Phase II

IDA allocation 15.6 million
(olw 7 million grant)

Approved

6.5

Approved

8.1

Private Sector Competitiveness
2007

IDA allocation 31.3 million
for FYO7-08 (olw 13.9
million grant) + appr. 4

Approved
Approved

I

2008

Community-based Environment
and Natural Resource
Management (GEF) Project

Poverty Reduction Support Credit
I1
Technical Assistance Project for

2009

HIVlAlDS. .. . . . ..-

No GEF project

IDA allocation of 46.9
million for Fy09-10
million grant)

21

to be signed during Spring
Meetings 2010

25.052

Approved

5.0

The project has been closed; ICR
submitted.

Education APUSwap

52

I

Includes US$lO million of additional IDA allocated through Crisis Response Window.

69

Table A6. Planned AAA and Actual Deliveries

Year

2006

2007

2008

I

CAS plan

CASCR

Product

Completion and date delivered
to client

Public Expenditure Management and Financial
Accountability Review (PEMFAR)

Delivered FY06

Justice and Law Reform

Dropped

Poverty Assessment (including gender and social
assessment)

Delivered FYO9

Decentralization and demand-driven service delivery

Delivered FY07

Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR)

Delivered FY08

Incidence and Impact of HlVlAlDS

Delivered FY07

Transport Sector Study

Dropped

Health Sector Review

Delivered in FYO9

Investment Climate Assessment (repeat of 2004 ICA)

Ongoing -extended until FYI0
Delivered in FY10

2009
for Orphans

70

Did not take off

3

I

I

I

I

I

>

P

G
9
3
Q

.b
U

8

F
0

o

s
-0
sa
B
80
8

3
0

*ti

E
Q

I

I

9”

.-C

W
0
0

c1

.9

2
m

f

\o

3b
Y

cd

I

I

I

I

I

0
00

E

.e

m

0

U

4-

c)

rd

I

I

I

I

I

I

Annex 3: CONSULTATION ON LESOTHO CAS, 2010 - 2014.

1.
As part of the preparation of the CAS, 2010-14, a series of consultations were
organized over a period of eighteen months with key stakeholders. The first of these took
place on September 29-30,2008 and involved representatives from the GOL, donors, civil
society and the private sector, and the World Bank. This meeting served to define key
objectives that the GOL wished to pursue over the medium term and constraints to their
achievement. The GOL identified two priorities in the area of poverty reduction: improved
social protection and the promotion of shared and sustainable growth. Much of the discussion
focused on the latter objective.
2.
At the session, there was agreement that the promotion of shared and sustainable
growth required actions in several areas. The first of these was a more efficient public sector
framework which would focus on facilitating and encouraging the private sector. In this area,
several domains of public intervention were identified: improved business climate, enhanced
access to finance, addressing the HIV/AIDs pandemic, alignment of the education system with
economic needs, better infrastructure, and improved land management. Another key area for
the promotion of shared and sustainable growth was private sector development through the
promotion of labor-intensive sectors. In this area, specific sectoral constraints were identified
and concrete actions proposed for addressing these constraints. The third area identified as
central to the promotion of shared and sustainable growth was regional integration. Here, as
well, specific actions were identified to allow Lesotho to take fuller advantage of its regional
context.
3.
A broad theme that was discussed during the September 2008 meeting was the need
to improve implementation of policies and strategies. Much of the discussion here focussed
on capacity weaknesses and the actions that could be taken to enhance local capacity.
Specific solutions were proposed for capacity problems in the public and private sectors as
well as in civil society organizations. The need to improve public sector institutions received
considerable attention. There was also recognition of the need for better communication
among key stakeholders; e.g., between the GOL and civil society, between donors and the
Government, and within the private sector.
4.
Finally, the meeting generated specific suggestions for the World Bank CAS, notably
the need to be more explicit about how results are to be achieved and the need to improve the
approach to capacity building in Bank activities.
At the September 2008 meeting, Finance Minister Thahane suggested that before
5.
moving on with the CAS preparation the Bank should prepare a series of policy notes which
can help Lesotho increase its productive capacity in response to the possible decline in SACU
revenue, address constraints to growth, and explore prospects for new growth sectors such as
agriculture and tourism. These policy notes were subsequently prepared and discussed with
the Minister and the Lesotho delegation during the Spring Meetings in 2009 and then with the
whole Cabinet on July 20,2009. The GOL has acknowledged that the policy notes provided
the analytical underpinning for the development of the Government's growth strategy and the
GOL's budget for 2010/11

82

More recently, the World Bank (WB) and Government of Lesotho (GOL) organized a
6.
multi-stakeholder forum on Lesotho’s country assistance strategy (CAS), on March 18-19,
2010. The participants of this development dialogue platform comprised GOL officials,
academics, private sector representatives, international and local NGOs, faith based
organisations (FBOs) and youth organisations.

7.
In the opening session of the forum, Minister Thahane expressed the GOL’s
appreciation for the well established development partnership with World Bank that is based
on openness, frankness and honesty. In the 2009- 10 periods, Lesotho is dealing with a multifaceted crisis given the adverse impact of an external economic crisis and deepening poverty
and inequality and the imperatives of fiscal adjustment and public service efficiencyTo
address these interrelated challenges, the GOL needs to have clear policies and strategies.
Given the GOL’s limited resources, its role is to create an enabling framework for private
sector led growth, level the playing field, provide a minimum infrastructure platform and
develop a skilled and healthy human resource base. Meanwhile GOL still needs to enhance its
service delivery to poor and vulnerable citizens and combat HIV/AIDS effectively.
Ms. Lebona, Director-MOFDP, then outlined Lesotho’s long term and medium term
8.
development challenges that are based on a clear appreciation of threats and constraints as
well as opportunities facing the Country. In summary, GOL’s current priorities are;
A shared growth strategy which is broad based and addresses inequalities.
Expanding the production base by improving the investment climate for the private
sector and enabling the doing of business
Human development that also protects the poor, vulnerable and youth.
Effective public service delivery at the central and local levels
Effective strategies to combat HIV/ADS.
9.
The Government Secretary, Mr. Sekhamane presented the background, rationale and
major components of GOL’s service delivery agenda (SDA) to be implemented by the Public
Service at the central, sectoral and local levels. SDA is a radical approach to achieve the
MDGs and is an appropriate response to the multi-faceted crisis facing Lesotho in 2010 20 14. The key SDA principles are; ethos of efficient service to citizens, accountability,
monitoring and evaluation, listening to the people and addressing their needs. Accordingly,
the Prime Minister and GOL’s cabinet are fully committed to the overall goals of the SDA
campaign. While appreciating the SDA, Participants wanted the full involvement of NonState Actors (NSAs), Faith Based Organizations (FBOs) and Traditional AuthoritiedChiefs in
the implementation of the SDA.
10.
The World Bank representative presented the key themes of the envisioned CAS for
20 10-14: fiscal adjustment and public sector efficiency; human development and improved
service delivery; and economic diversification and improved competitiveness. These themes
were endorsed as appropriate by the forum participants.

83

11.
The key messages, issues and questions that emerged in plenary discussions were the
following. While Lesotho’s long term Vision 2020 goals are appreciated, these 2010
consultations provide an opportunity for a mid-term review of Vision 2020 goals. Lesotho
needs to derive lessons from implementing the 8 priorities of the poverty reduction strategy
(PRS) since 2004/05. Lesotho must manage brain drain through effective human resource
retention strategies while taking full advantage of its location within RSA, SACU and SADC
region. Lesotho faces a crisis of worsening poverty, high unemployment, deteriorating human
development indicators, inequalities and chronic vulnerability and environmental degradation.
To achieve shared growth in this context, serious choices and strategic options have to be
pursued, such as investment climate reform to enable private sector and FDI led growth,
supporting growth of SMMES, commercializing agriculture, reducing economic and social
costs of rural to urban mobility, adjusting the size of the public sector equitably to ensure
effective service delivery to poor, rural and marginalized communities. Generally, there is
need to do much more with much less resources.

84

Annex 4: DONOR ACTIVITIES MATRIX BREAKDOWN BY CAS 2010 - 2014
AREAS OF ENGAGEMENT
Area of Engagement 2:
Advance human development
and improved service delivery

0
0

Management (PFM)

0

0

0

PEPFAR
Global Fund
(GF)
GTZ

Capacity Building & Inst.

HIV&AIDS
HIV & AIDS and TB

0

Governance

0

0
0

Government of
Japan
RSA

0

Kuwait Fund

Human Development
Support to orphaned and
vulnerable children

0

0

0

Agriculture
HIV&AIDS
Social Protection

0

Area of Engagement 3:
Economic Diversification and
improved Competitiveness

0

Trade

0

ITP
Water and Sanitation

0

Agriculture

0

Agriculture

FTI Catalytic Fund
Health
Governance
HIV&AIDS
Education

Health

0

0

Saudi Fund

0

OPEC

0

0

Investment Climate
ROSC -Accounting &

0

0
0

0

0

HIV/AIDS TA project
FTI Catalytic Fund
HSRP
Governance & Capacity
Assessment Study
Poverty Assessment

Democratic governance
HIV/AIDS

85

0
0

0

0

Metolong Dam (water
sector)
Metolong Dam (water
sector)
Road Transport
Metolong Dam (water
sector)
Metolong Dam (water
sector)
PSCproject
ITP
WSIP I1
PPP referral* hospital
construction

Energy & Environment

0
0

Poverty & Food Security
Support to orphaned &
vulnerable children
Health

86

I

Metolong Dam (water
sector)
Private Sector
Development

Annex A2
Annex A2 - Lesotho at a glance
Key Development Indicators

1.esotho

~2009)
Population, mid-year (millions)
Surfacearea (thousand sq. km)
Populationgrowth (%)
Urban population (%of total population)

2.1

30

0.9
25

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNIpercapita(Atias method, US$)
GNipercapita(PPP,intemalional$)

SubSaharan
Africa

Lower
middle
income

68
24,242
2.5

3,702
32,309
12
41

3s

665
1082
1891

2.1
1020
2,000

GDP growth (Oh)
GDP per capita growth ( O h )

I

0.9
0.0

5.0
2.5

7.6
6.3

43
62
43
66

51
73
52
89
27

66
48
26

in

71
54
03
93

68
77
12
r6

78
36

58
31

e5

n

Adult literacy, male (%of ages 16 and older)
Adult literacy,female (%of ages 15 and older)
Gross pnmaryenmiiment, male (%of agegroup)
Gmss primaryenroiiment,female(%of agegroup)

115

Access to an impmvedmtersourca(%of population)
Access to improved sanitationfaciiities (%of population)

Net A i d F l o w .

(US$millions)

Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2007):
United States
ireiand
European Commission

IS80

ISSO

93

'09

8

14

2000

37

Female

Male

I
I

52

200s

.

Under4 mortalityrate (per 1,000)
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40

20
0

1990

1995

2000

2007

'00

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

3

1
9
0

B
B

'0.4
72

16.4
67

3.8
B

6.5

16.7
415

116
116

6.1
2.4

7.2
3.4

Exchangerate (annual average,local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 0 0 )

0.6

2.6
72

6.9

w

8.7
'67

Population, mid-year(million8)
GDP (US$ millions)

13
431

16
541

19
748

2.1
1579

2.1
4.4

16
4.0

3.1

2.8
5.5
7.9
4.5

-2.4
3.6
5.7
3.7

Aid(%of GNi)
Aidpercapita(US$)

-

95

- . c a p

-aPP.rc.#t.

O5

10

(%ofGDP)
24.9
34.4
n.6
40.7

2.3
316

8.4
34.1

58.1

57.5

0.0
8.9
9.4
2.5

Household final consumption ewenditure
Genera gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

n2.1
0.0
37.0

P3.3
25.8
M.1

83.3
417
44.2

76.9
50.4
33.2

-0.1
'6.2
9.3

18
6.1
0.2

6.4
-0.5

Ewrts of goods and services

210
10.1
718

8.1
P3.2
39.6

34.2
03.4
23.6

512
Ill7
32.9

4.0
2.4

0.3
2.7

0.0
P.2

7.0

n5

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary.Group data are through 2008. ..indicates data are not available.
%Aid data arefor2W7.
Development Economica, Development Data Group (DECDG) and A F T P l

87

2

I,

IS80-SO ISSO-2000
2000-0s
(average annualgmwih O%)

22.4
24.2
7.7
53.4

Imports of goods and services
Oms8 savings

I

64

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

51.0

1;

n

Long-Term Econornlc Trends
Consumer prices (annualOhchange)
GDP implicit defiator (annual%change)

I'

a

n

4
5

I:

7,692
2,076
4,592

( m o r t recent *rtlmat*, 2003-2009)
Povertyheadcount ratio at $125aday(PPP.%)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life eqectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortalily(per IWOiive births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)

&e distribution. 2008

Annex A2
V I

B a l a n c e o f P a y m e n t s and T r a d e

(US$millions)
Totai merchandiseexports (fob)
Totai merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

ZOO0

I

2009

j
Lesotho i
t

Volceand accwntabiiity

-58

738
1,758
-855

-53
-20.5

-5
4.3

Regulatoryquality

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

252

379

Reserves, including goid

458

101

Central Qovarnment Finance
(In Calendar Years)
(%of GDP)
Current revenue (exci. grants)
Taxrevenue
Current expenditure

49.2
37.3
46.5

83.4
57.4
52.8

Overaii surpius/deficit

-8.8

-7.8

Current account balance
as a % o f GDP

Poliucal stability

Rule of IN

Control of wrruption

T e c h n o l o g y and Infrastructure
Paved roads (%of total)
Fixed line andmobile phone
subscribers (per 0 0 people)
Hightechnoiogyexports
(%of manufactured exports)

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

External D e b t and R e s o u r c e Flows

(US$ millions)

872
62

Totaldebt (%of GDP)
Totaldebt service (%of exports)

90.1
112

48.8
4.2

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

18

82

C 0 2 emissions percapita(mt)

I

2000

2008

8.3
2

21

0.3

0.0

77
0.2

0.3

Environment
Agricultural land (%of land area)
Forest area (%of land area)
Nationailyprotected areas (%of land area)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Totaldebt service
Debt relief (HIPC,MDRI)

Foreign direct investment (net i n f l o w )
Portfolio equity(net inflows)

I!

Governance lndlcators, 2000 and 2008

212
768

-

..

740
34

-

0

2,707
0.1

0.2
2,607

GDP perunit o f energyuse
(2005PPP $ perkgofoilequivalent)

I

Composltlon of total external debt, ZOO9

,.

77

Energyuse per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

(US%miBons)
IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt servlce

US$ millions

Prlvate Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (%of GNi per capita)
Time required to register property(days)
Ranked as amalor constraint to business
(%of managers surveyed who agreed)
Access to/cost of financing
Crime

'
'

Stock market capitalization (%of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

-

zoo0

2008

40
37.8
01

2008

..

54.1
45.0

..

14.6

.,

iFC (ffscal9ar)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repaymentsfor IFC ownaccount
M IGA
Gross eposure

Note: Figures in italics arefor years otherthan thosespecified. 2008dataare preliminary
..indicates data are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics Development DataGroup(DECDG) andAFTP1

88

59

3

4
3

0

0

0
I

183

303

4

8

8

0

0

n

0
0

0

0

0

0

24

0

4/2 f 1)
I

Annex A2

'1

Mi I I enni um Deve Iop ment Goa Is

Lesotho I

with selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015

(estimate closest to date shown, % 2yeam)

G o a l 1: h a l v e c e Etcs-f_Or-e_xtLeme pove'tyand m-aLn!trition_
Povertyheadcountratio at$125aday(PPP,%ofpopulation)
Povertyheadcount ratio at national poverty line (%of population)
Shareof income orconsumption to the poorest qunitile(%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (%of children under 5)

G o a I 2 i o 5s u r g t h c t c hLldrtn-8 re !bl_e to-co
Prlmaryschool enrollment (net,%)
Primarycompletion rate (%of relevant agegroup)
Secondaryschool enrollment (gross, Sa)
Youth literacyrate(%of people ages 5-24)

_ _ - --

~

30
56

15.O

pl_.t a-pr!m a_ry-s c_ho_o_lln_g-

-G o-a-l 3-: eLLm?nate-gender

Ratio of girls to boys in pnm
Women employed in the nonagncultural sector (%of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held b y w m e n in national parliament (%)
educe under.6 m o r t a l i t y by two-thirds
mortalityrate (per 1,000)
rtalityrate (per 1000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportionof one-yearolds immunized. %)
I

Goa! ~ : ~ e d ~ ~ c e ~ am_orialcy
b r ~ n pby>hreme*-fourths
I
M sternal mortalityratio (modeled estimate, per 00,000live births)

I

02

x
.I.

I
I

G o a l p : h a l t _sn! b e g i n ' 0 reverse t h e s p r e a d ofwHIVLAJDmSa n d %tbeI majo! d i s e a
Prevalence of HIV(%of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per x)O,OOO people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

:i/r
50

25

2000

2002

2004

2008

2008

-C Pnmarf net enralmnt mlo

-Lt Rad0 of girl6 to b q s n pmary h wsmndarf
adwatlon

-

02

0n
0.0

Motile phone subscribers (per DO people)
Internet users (per DO people)
Personalcomputers (per DO people)

"

I

960
55

37

I

553
78

63

77"
33

-

_ _ 23 B

142

323

G o a l 7-; halve the propoJt!2wn 0-f p e t p l e wlthout_s_us_ta?n~bl~
aec~~s~to-ba~lc-nee
Access to an improvedwater source (%of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (%of population)
Forest area(%oftotal landarea)
02
Nationally protected areas (%of total land area)
C02emisslons (metnc tons percapita)
GDP per unit of energyuse (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

"

60
30

50

23

8468
85

74

"

I
I I

Births attended byskilled health staff (%of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (%of w m e n ages 15-49)

Education indicators (%)

6784

61
83

0.0

00

"

23 2"
637

d

77

34
02

7i36
03
02

11

28 8

3.6

02

03

01

I C 1 Indicators (per I 0 0 people)

Measles lmmunlratlon (Oh of 1-year

75

20

50
10

25

0

0
1980

.Lesotho

1985

2000

.SubSaharan

2007

2000

.Fired

Alia
I

I

2002

2004

2006

2008

+ mobik arbralbenmlntemet Usem

Lesotho
Annex B2 - Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of April 5,2010
Indicator

2007

Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)

8
3.0
12.5
12.4
12.5
12.4
32.2

Portfolio Assessment

Percent of Problem Proiects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
cts at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e

-

*

3'

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (total US$) **
Average Superision (US$/project) **

no

1300.0
162.5
Since
FY80

Memorandum Item
Proi Em1 by OED by Number
Proi Em1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

29
375.5
34.5
23.7

2008

8
3.2
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

18.9
Yes

736.0
92.0

2009

6
3.5
0.0'
0.0
0.0
0.0
39.7
no

797.0
99.6

2010

6
2.2

16 7

14.0

16.7
14.0

19.4
no

391 .O
55.9

Last Five
FYs
3

72.8
33.3
31 .O

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andlor implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

90

Lesotho
Annex B3 - IBRD / IDA Program Summary
As of April 5,2010
Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal Year
2010

Proj. ID

US$(M)

HN/AIDS TAL
PRSC I1

Strategic Implementatio
Rewards b
n b Risks
(H/M/L)
(H/M/L)

5.0
25.0

H
H

M
H

15.0
10.0

H
M

H
M

15.0
5.0'
5.0

H
H
H

H
M
M

ng
2011
2012

*PRSC I11
Ag ric ult ure/Rura I Development
PRSC IV
Water Sector APL 2
Human Development

TOTAL

95.0

/a This table presents the proposed lending program for FY10- 12
/b For each project, the strategic rewards and implementation risks are indicated according t o
expectation: high (H), moderate (M), or low (L)

91

Lesotho
Annex B3 - IFC and MIGA Program - FY2006-2009

Commitments (US$m)
Gross
Net**

2006

2007

2008

2009*

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

MlGA facilitated inwstments financed by
inwstors by Basotho Inwstors

0

0

0

0

MIGA Gross Exposure (US$ mil)

0

0

0

0

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
MlGA facilitated inwstments into Lesotho

* As of February 28, 2010
** IFCs Own Account onlv

92

Lesotho
Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services
As of April 5,2010
Product

Comdetion FY Cost IUS%OOO)

Audience a

Ob iective

Recent completions
Decentralization & Demand Driven Service Delivr
HIV/AIDS Incidence Analysis
IF FOIIOW-UP
CPAR
Poverty Gender Social Assessment
Health Sector Review & PER

FY07
FY07
FY08
FY08
FYo9
FYI 0

100
32

FYI 0
FYI 0
FYI 0
FYI 0
FYI 0
FYI 0
FYI 0

200
200
50
70
50
287

60
50
170

G. D. B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B

KG. PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

G, D, B
G, D, B
G, B, P
G, B, B
G ,B, P
G, D, P
G, D, P

KG, PS
KG, PD
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD
KG, PB
KG, PS
KG, PD

G, D, P
G, D, P
G. D. B

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD
KG. PS

Underwav
Country Econom ic Memorandum/Policy Notes
Country Assistance Strategy
ICA Policy Notes
Accounting and Auditing ROSC
PPP Industrial Space Development
P P W Reg Model Power and Water Sector
Health Sector Review
Planned
PER
Post Basic Education Study
Governance and C a n Assessment

FYI 1
FYI 1
FYI 1

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

93

Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators

lndkam

Actual

wo6

WIS

2W

Btimare

2009

2008

RQjeCled
2011
2012

2010

2013

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services

100
9
35
56

100
IO
37
54

100
8
39
53

100

8
38
54

100
8
34
58

100
8
35
57

100
8
36
56

100
8
38
54

100
7
39
54

Total Consumption
Gross domestic f m d investment
Government investment
Private investment

130
24
8
16

125
25
8
17

125
28
10
18

124
30
13
17

127
33
16
18

127
40
22
18

117
44
26
18

118
42
24
18

112
38
19
19

Exports (GmSjO

53
I07

54
103

56
109

59
113

51
112

51
117

50
110

48
109

50
100

Gross domestic savings
a o s s national savings’

-30

-25
29

-25

-27
33

-17

-18

-12

42

-24
40

-27

16

16

21

23

30

1315

1417

1577

1594

1579

1677

1782

1894

2010

760

900

960

1050

1020

1010

1050

1100

1150

Real annual growth rates
calculated from 95 prices)
Gross domestic product at market pnces
1.1
Gross Domestic Income
0.6

6.5
9.7

2.4
7.7

4.5
11.5

0.9
-1.7

37
4.0

35
61

3.9
5.0

2.1
46

Real annual per capita growth rates (“A, calculated kom 95 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
0.1
5.5
Total consumption
3.1
3.4
Pnvate Consumption
2.0
1.7

1.5
8.4
10.0

36
7.6
1.1

00
2.2
2.2

2.9
5.8
11.1

26
-3 0
-2 2

3.0
4.0
5.4

1.2
-4.0
-4.5

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports ( M S f
Merchandise FOB

Imports (GNFS)

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

.

e?,

703
651

759
699

880
804

936
870

809
739

849
771

892
813

918
837

1002
919

1411
1307
-708
300
-104

1462
1367
-703
389
66

1713
1603
-833
628
22 1

1796
1687
-860
511
152

1764
1656
-955
52 1
-5

1966
1848
-1117
308
-392

1967
1847
-1075
212
-413

2060
1934
-1142
334
-355

2006
1879
-1004
370
-158

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

93
38
-11
49
1

112
-111
1
-112
70

130
-43
13
-56
-25

109
-67
16
-83

-138

-282

-154

66
-97
78
-175
257
187

82
9
45
-37
145

-29

64
-52
56
-108
189
190

80
44
94
-50
247

Change in reservesd

81
26
8
17
108
-210

-16

-78

-53.8

-49.6

-52.8

-54.0

-60.5

-66.6

-60 3

-60.3

-50.0

-8.1
-0.4

2.0
3.3

3.7
11.9

0.0
7.8

-18.5
-1.1

1.6
9.6

-5 5
-2 7

-7.6
1.5

06
-6 2

Imports (GNFSjO
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

Memorandum itemy
Resource balance (“hofGDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)
Merchandise eqorts (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

94

-40

Lesotho - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

PuMic finance (as % of GDP at market pricesy
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (t)or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Overall balance (including grants)'
Foreign fmancing
Monetary indicators
MUGDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (?h)
Price indices( YR95 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms oftrade index

AnnexB6

Page 2 of 2

51.1
39.5
11.6
7.6
4.1
-3.0

60.9
38.8
22.0
6.9
15.2
-2.5

62.1
40.3
21.8
11.1
87
0.2

66.2
47.9
18.3
13.8
1.6
1.3

66.3
51.5
14.8
16.1
-2.7
0.2

49.0
44.4
4.6
24.0
-19.3
3.9

50.1
41.5
8.6
26.9
-18.3
40

57.0
40.4
16.6
23.6
-7.0
4.0

52.8
38.6
14.2
16.9
-2.7
1.1

31.0
9.1
656.8

36.6
35.4
-25.4

36 7
16.4
-19.2

37.0
19.7
-81.8

42.9
20.8
102.0

44.4
14.0
11.2

46.1
14.4
25.0

47.8
13.6
59.0

49.7
13.2
65.5

176.2
98.5
178.9

185.6
98.8
187.9

205.8
103.4
199.0

222.6
100.6
221.3

232.3
99.9
232.6

238.6
101.6
234.8

266.2
104.5
254.7

296.6
107.9
274.9

323.5
112.0
289.0

7,2
3.4
6.3

6.9
6.1
7.6

7.8
8.0
13.3

9.8
10.7
13.4

10.8
7.2
3.4

11.8
6.3
6.2

12.8
6.0
6.3

5.7
5.5

5.0
6.6

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (YOchange)
GDP deflator (?Achange)

Sources: LDB and in tum fromLesotho authorities, IMF and WB staff estimates and projections.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

GDP at factor cost

"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."

Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use ofIMFresources.
Data is in fiscal years which begin in April and refers to consolidated central government.
f. Includes unidentified expenditure.
g. The average effective rate on three-month treasury bills.

95

Annex B7- Key Exposure Indicators
Page 1 of 1

Indicator

2005

Actual
20%
2007

Estimated

2009

,308

PrOJCCtd

2012

2011

2010

2013

Total debt outstandmg and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

718

773

925

738

740

810

975

1140

1249

Net dlsbursemnts (uS$m)a

-44

-8

4

0

5

53

75

91

46

79

46

98

47

35

36

45

46

663
546

650
546

659
587

503
463

581
469

619
483

703
547

803
602

81 6
621
30
49 1

52
321

93
560

42
308

27
753

21
790

20
788

17
715

16
650

07
586

04

04

03
4

01
3

01

01

01

01
0

00
0

0

0

0

0
0
325

0

323

0
0
324

0
0
332

0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0

O*

0

0

0

(%I

TDO/XGSb
TDO/mP

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DSipublic DS
Preferred creditor DS/pubhc
DS (%)c
IBRD DSKGS
Ofwhich present value of
guarantees (uS$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

IFC (US$m)
Loans

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm)

0
0
258

0
0
275

0

0

0
0

0

293

0
303

0

0

0

0

0

0

3

0

311

0

Sources LDB and m turn from Lesotho authonties, IMF and WB staff estimates and projections
a Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, pnvate nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital
b "XGS denotes exports
ervices, lncludlng workers' rermttances
IDA, the regional multilateral de
p m n t banks, the IMF and the
c Preferred creditors are d
Bank for International Settlemnts
d Includes present value of guarantees
e Includes equity and quasi-equity types ofboth loan and equity mstruments
* as ofMarch 30,2010

96

0

Lesotho
Annex B8 : (IFC) - Committed and Outsanding Investment Portfolio
As of April 6, 2010
(in USD Millions)
Committed
FYApplOvaI Company

Loan M

"Quasi

Eauih,

.OTIRM

Outstanding
Participant

none

97

Loan

&!&

"Quasi
&A&

Participant

z5
0

.-H
e
n

P)
W

Q

.-ae,

n
CI

P
I

n

MAP SECTION

IBRD 33434

L E S O TH O
LESOTHO

27°E

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

MAIN ROADS

DISTRICT CAPITALS

RAILROADS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

RIVERS

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

28°E

29°E

S OU TH AF R I C A
To
Fouriesburg

on
Caled
Libono

Butha-Buthe

To
Senekal

Leribe

Mont-auxSources
(3,282 m)

BUTHABUTHE

Maputsoe

To
Clocolan

LERIBE

Peka

29°S

29°S

Pitseng

BEREA

MASERU
ok
ar
e

M

Machache
(2,885 m)

Mazenwood
Roma

oh
M

a

ThabaPhafane
(3,250m)

Seqoqo
(3,394 m)

Thaba-Tseka

MASERU

Ranko

Mantsonyane

Matsieng

Thabana
Ntlenyana
3,482 m)

THABA-TSEKA

Dr

Mashai
To
Dewetsdorp

MAFETENG

ak

e

b
ns

er

s

.

To
Ladybrand

Njesuthi
(3,446 m)

MOKHOTLONG
Makheka
.
(3,461 m)
tns
M Mokoeng
ti
Mokhotlong
lu
O ra n
ge

Mapoteng

Teyateyaneng

g

M

tn

To
Himeville

Thaba
Putsoa
(3,095 m)

Semonkong

Mafeteng

Sehlabathebe
Tsoloane

30°S

To
Zastron

ng e
Ora

MOHALE’S
HOEK
Mohale’s Hoek

Sekake

Q A C H A’ S N E K
Qacha’s
Nek

30°S

To
Matatiele

To
Matatiele

To
Zastron

Mount
Moorosi

Mekaling

QUTHING

Quthing

SO UT H A FRICA

To
Sterkspruit

Sinxondo

0

0

27°E

10

20

10

30

20

40

50 Kilometers

30 Miles

28°E

29°E

This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

SEPTEMBER 2004

