Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIAL, USE ONLY

Report N o 42847-CO

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA
FOR THE PERIOD FY2008-2011

Public Disclosure Authorized

March 4,2008

Colombia and Mexico Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

The last CAS Progress Report was discussed by Executive Directors in October 2005.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective March 3,2008)
Currency Unit = Colombian Peso (Col$)
US$ = 1,845.17 COP

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 to December 3 1

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
CAS
CONPES
CPS
CPPR
DNP
DPL
ELN
ESW
FARC
FDI
GDP
GEF
FTA
IBRD
IADB
ICETEX
IFC
IMF
ICB
MDB
MDGs
MIC
MIGA
MHCP
NCB
NDP
NLTA
PFM
PIU
SENA
SIGOB
SINERGIA
SISBEN
SME
TA
'
TAL
UN
WBG

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Country Assistance Strategy
National Council for Economic and Social Policy
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Department o f National Planning
Development Policy Loan
National Liberation Army
Economic Sector Work
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
Foreign Direct Investment
Gross domestic product
Global Environment Facility
Free Trade Agreement
International Bank for Reconstructionand Development
The Inter-American Development Bank
Colombian Institute for Education Credit and Technical Studies Abroad
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
International Competitive Bidding
Multilateral Development Bank
Millennium Development Goals
Middle Income Country
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Finance and Public Credit
National Competitive Bidding
National Development Plan
Non-LendingTechnical Assistance
Public Financial Management
Project ImplementationUnit
National Training Institute
Goals-and Results-BasedProgrammingand Management System
National System for Evaluation of Public Sector Performance
System for Identification of Potential Beneficiariesof Social Programs
Small and Medium-sized Enterprise
Technical Assistance
Technical Assistance Loan
United Nations
World Bank Group

IBRD
Regional Vice President: Pamela Cox
Country Director: Axel van Trotsenburg
Task Manager: Laura Kullenberg
Country Manager: Miguel Lopez-Bakovic

IFC
Vice President for CAL: Farida Khambata
Director, CLADR: Atul Mehta
Task Managers: Miguel de PomboPierre Nadji
Country Manager: Roberto Albisetti

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Republic of Colombia
COUNTRYPARTNERSHIPSTRATEGY
Table o f Contents
I.
I1*

I11.

.........................................................................................................................
Introduction.......................................................................................................................................
Country Context ................................................................................................................................
A . Recent Economic Developments and Future Prospects .............................................................
Executive Summary

B. Macroeconomic Outlook and Debt Sustainability .....................................................................
C . Poverty, Inequality, and the MDG’s ..........................................................................................
D. Political and Governance Developments ..................................................................................

1
3

5
5
6
7
8

I V.

A Shared Vision .............................................................................................................................. 10
A . The National Development Plan..............................................................................................
10

V.

The CPS Program ...........................................................................................................................
A . The Current Program ...............................................................................................................
B. Summary Findings from Completion Report, Consultations, and Client Survey ....................
C . Rationale for WBG Support to Colombia ................................................................................
D. Strategic Elements ofthe Proposed CPS ................................................................................
E. W B G Areas o f Concentration and Collaboration ....................................................................
F. The WBG’s FY08-FY09 Indicative Program..........................................................................
G. Fiduciary and Safeguard Implementation ...............................................................................
H. Other Partners and the Paris Declaration .................................................................................
I. Program Envelope and Projected Exposure .............................................................................
J. Results Monitoring ..................................................................................................................
K. Risks ........................................................................................................................................

11
11
11
13
14
15
22
23
24
25
26
27

Annex A
Annex B
Annex C
Annex D
Annex E
Annex F
Annex G
Annex H
Annex I
Annex J
Annex K
Annex L

Private Sector Strategy ....................................................................................
Governance Challenges ......................................................................
Colombia at a Glance ..............................................................................
Key Economic Indicators.....................................................................
I F C M I G A Program Summary ................................................................
Summary o f Lending and Non-Lending Services ................................................
Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ...........................
Fiscal Sustainability and Debt Management................................................
Results Matrix ..................................................................................
Key Exposure Indicators......................................................................
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) .............................................
CAS Completion Report......................................................................

30
-46
53
55
57
58
59
60
67
71
72
73

Table 1.
Table 2 .
Table 3 .
Table 4 .

Key Economic Indicators for Colombia ...................................................................... 5
Macroeconomic Projections for Colombia. 2008-201 1............................................... 6
Colombia’s Priorities per Pillar in the National Development Plan .......................... 10
Indicative WBG Lending and AAA Program ........................................................... 23

Graph 1.
Graph 2 .

Poverty Indicators for Colombia ................................................................................. 7
FY04-07 IBRD Commitments in Colombia .............................................................. 11

Box 1.
Box 2 .
Box 3 .
Box 4 .

World Bank Group/Colombia Partnership: Successes Create N e w Opportunities .....4
Stakeholder Consultations and Client Survey ...........................................................
13
World Bank Approach to Governance Issues., ............................................. 21
Debt and Risk Management ...................................................................................... 25

Annexes

Tables

Graphs

Boxes

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties . I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization .

Republic o f Colombia
Country Partnership Strategy
Fiscal Years 2008-2011

I.

Executive Summary

1.
The last World Bank Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Colombia was
presented to the Board in December 2002. At that time, President Alvaro Uribe had just
been elected with a strong mandate to restore security and economic stability. The country
was s t i l l recovering from i t s worst economic crisis in seventy years and grappling with
spiraling violence.
2.
During the CAS period, Colombia’s economy rebounded from near stagnation in
2002 to achieve a growth rate o f around 6.6 percent in 2007. This turnaround was due
partly to a favorable external environment, but improved internal security and sound
macroeconomic management also played a critical role. High growth rates have reduced
poverty and raised social indicators, while reduced violence and enhanced government
effectiveness and rule o f law have resulted in increased consumer and investor confidence.
This combination o f economic recovery, increased state presence and successfil security
measures against illegal groups have worked together in a virtuous cycle to significantly
improve the quality o f l i f e o f millions o f Colombians.
3.
During the last CAS period, the World Bank Group made an important
contribution, more than doubling average annual bank lending and providing the new
administration with a strong package o f advisory services. The challenge for Colombia
now i s to consolidate these important gains and the challenge for the Bank Group i s to
continue i t s strong partnership and remain a relevant partner to this dynamic middle
income client. W h i l e the immediate economic and political outlook i s positive, the
Government s t i l l faces daunting problems. First, it s t i l l continues to combat various armed
groups, while at the same time reintegrating thousands o f former combatants into civilian
life, providing them sufficient incentives not to re-engage in violent or illegal activity.
Extreme poverty and deep inequities continue to haunt the country and could, if l e f t
unattended, fie1 new cycles o f instability.

4.
The Government recognizes these challenges and aims to address them through i t s
2006-20 10 National Development Plan (the NDP), the outcome o f broad-based
consultative process. The N D P lays out a comprehensive set o f costed programs built
around six main pillars-Peace and Security, Equity, High and Sustainable Growth,
Environmental Sustainability, Good Governance and Transversal Themes. These form the
basis for the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY08-11.
5.
In line with the Bank’s middle-income country (MIC) strategy a rolling
programming approach i s proposed, under which the CPS pipeline will be determined
during annual reviews held in conjunction with results-based Country Portfolio

Performance Reviews.’ Results will be measured using the Results Matrix in Annex Iand
NDP’s monitoring indicators, which will be tracked through SIGOB, the national
monitoring system.2 Thus, the success o f the CPS will be coterminous with the success o f
the Government’s programs that the WBG i s supporting. Provided the Government
sustains a commitment to strong macroeconomic management and effective poverty
alleviation, the Bank Group proposes to maintain an active IBRD lending program o f up to
U S $ 4 billion this CPS period (about U S $ 1 billion per year) and I F C financing o f up to
U S $ 300/400 million per year, complemented by a diverse set o f analytical and advisory
services and specialized grants.
The CPS embodies the World Bank Group’s strategy for working in middle-income
6.
countries and features many o f the characteristics expected for new CPSs. There i s a focus
on flexible programming and exposure management, quick-response and jointly prepared
knowledge products; and frontier products (including initiatives in sovereign asset
management, sub-national finance, private-public partnerships, contingent lending and
insurance instruments). In addition, strong continuity with successful operations will be
maintained through several second and third-generation operations.

7.
Most o f the risks identified in the 2002 CAS-increased
conflict, economic
deterioration, stalled reforms-did not materialize; instead the country made important
gains in growth, security and economic stability. Nonetheless, risks remain. Peace has not
been secured and poverty, corruption, and the drug trade remain significant challenges for
the country. The external environment could change as a result o f the slow down o f the
U S economy and/or potential reduction o f trade with Venezuela, which could cause a
deterioration o f Colombia’s fiscal situation. As the Bank Group increases i t s engagement at
the sub-national level, moreover, reputational, fiduciary and safeguard risks will increase,
posing increased portfolio management challenges.
8.
At present, however, Colombia appears well positioned to absorb likely external
and internal pressures, rendering the risks to the Bank Group manageable, including IBRD
exposure risks. Over the last four years the Government has made important advances in
addressing the challenges highlighted above and the current National Development Plan
has comprehensive programs (organized by pillar) dedicated to each o f these issues.
Further, the President’s policies have been widely debated and approval for them i s
reflected in strong, sustained popular support.
In sum, while political, economic, and operational risks are present, as they were in
9.
the previous CAS, they appear manageable and warrant Bank Group commitments o f the
envisaged scale. The potential rewards o f continued large-scale engagement in Colombia
are very high, as demonstrated clearly by the successes achieved over the last CAS period.

’ W h i l e this CPS i s not fully programmed in advance, there are areas in which the Government has asked for or indicated
it will seek WBG support, including tackling extreme poverty and regional inequality, infrastructure and public services,

competitiveness, public sector management, the environment, education, social protection, housing, transportation, energy
and mining, agriculture, and peace-building. In addition, collaboration on financial services, banking and risk
management products i s likely to intensify.
http://www.sigob.gov.co/pnd/pnd.aspx,under “Objetivos y Estrategias del PND” contains all o f the NDP monitoring
indicators organized by pillar.

2

11.

Introduction

10.
The last World Bank Group’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Colombia
was presented to the Board in December 2002. At that time, President Alvaro Uribe had
just been elected with a strong mandate to restore security and economic stability. The
country was s t i l l recovering from i t s worst economic crisis in seventy years and grappling
with spiraling violence associated with the armed conflict. Under the FY 2003-07 CAS,
the World Bank Group (WBG) more than doubled average annual lending to Colombia,
providing the administration with a strong package o f advisory services, investment and
lending in four strategic areas-Sustained Growth, Equity, Governance and Peace.3
11.
Since 2002 a combination o f factors-economic
recovery, an increased state
presence and successful security measures-have worked together in a virtuous cycle to
significantly improve the quality o f l i f e o f millions o f Colombians. Through its support, the
WBG has been able to accompany the administration in many o f its most important policy
initiatives and continue a substantial program o f financial assistance.
12.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) covers fiscal years 2008-1 1 and i s aligned
with the country’s development goals as expressed in the 2006-2010 National
Development Plan and longer-term development strategy “Colombia Vision 2019”. This
CPS proposes to maintain an active IBRD lending program o f up to US$ 4 billion (about
US$ 1 billion per year), with an increasingly active I F C program in the range o f U S $
300/400 million per year, complemented by a diverse set o f analytical and advisory
services and specialized grants.
The CPS embodies the World Bank’s evolving strategy for working in middle13.
income countries and features many o f the characteristics expected for new CPSs.
Programming i s done on an annual basis, synchronized with the national budget process,
and based on a demand-driven “menu” approach. Frontier products will feature strongly
(including initiatives in sovereign asset management, sub-national finance, private-public
partnerships, contingent lending and insurance instruments) and emphasis will be placed on
jointly prepared, quick-response AAA. In addition, strong continuity with the previous
CAS will be maintained, capitalizing on past successes through several second or thirdgeneration operations. Examples o f some o f the successful initiatives which are expected to
continue into this CPS period are summarized below.

A CAS Progress Report was submitted to the Board in September, 2005 (report 32999-CO). I t was at this stage that a
new “Peace Pillar” was introduced at the Government’s request.

3

Lox 1: World Bank Group/Colombia Partnership: Past Successes Create New Opportunities
Health, Education and Social Protection. Building o n earlier work to mitigate the social consequences o f
the 1999 crisis, IBRD participated in extensive policy dialogue and financed a highly successful D P L
series which promoted a comprehensive approach t o social protection, and supported reforms in health,
education, and labor force training. Lending in the area o f social protection focused o n a national
conditional cash transfer program called Familias en Accidn, which has been expanded t o cover some 1.5
m i l l i o n poor families. Complementary operations help strengthen rural education and expand coverage in
higher education. These operations are expected to have fiuther phases during this CPS.
Financial Sector and Competitiveness. Continued restructuring o f the financial sector was high o n the
Government’s agenda in the aftermath o f the 1999 crisis. IBRD provided support to restructure public
banks, strengthen banking supervision and, with the IFC, helped the Government develop the regulatory
framework for the insurance industry and capital markets. These efforts were largely successful,
particularly in restoring the banking sector’s financial viability. Continued support under the Business
Productivity and Efficiency D P L series focused o n increasing economic competitiveness.
IFC issued the f i r s t Colombian peso-denominated bonds, helped establish Colombia’s f i r s t secondary
mortgage company, continued to back the transformation o f the mortgage sector through partial credit
guarantees, and supported the issuance o f non-performing mortgage-backed securities (the f i r s t in the LAC
region). Additionally equity and medium-term facilities have been provided t o local financial groups
covering the whole range o f financial services and asset management companies. IFC i s exploring in
collaboration with the Colombian Association o f Hydrocarbon and ECOPETROL, a project to help oil-rich
municipalities improve their management o f o i l royalties.
Urban Infrastructure. IBRD provided U S $ 457 m i l l i o n for the expansion o f the Transmilenio rapid mass
transit system within B o g o t i and t o five additional cities. The Transmilenio i s an innovative system o f
articulated buses which run o n designated routes with fixed stops. Since i t began operation in Bogota i t has
reduced traveling times, crime, congestion and air pollution and i s being emulated in other major cities
such as Lima, Mexico City, and Jakarta. Follow up operations are anticipated.
Water Supply and Sanitation. IBRD and Government are finalizing a national program t o modernize
water sector management at the departmental level. This flagship initiative is the result o f a concerted
engagement between the Bank and Government authorities over the last decade t o develop replicable
models for addressing problems o f water supply and sanitation in urban areas. Colombia has emerged as a
leader in L a t i n America in the sector in part as a result o f its close work with the IBRD.

Environmental Management. IBRD has provided grant support (under the GEF, Montreal Protocol, and
Carbon Fund facilities) t o address land degradation and encourage biodiversity conservation, renewable
energy production and the reduction o f ozone depleting substances. A D P L series focusing o n
mainstreaming environmental sustainability policies, complemented by a recent Country Environmental
Analysis, provided the analytic underpinnings for many o f the activities presented in the NDP’s
Environmental Pillar. A third o f the D P L series i s expected during t h i s CPS.
Peace and Development IBRD has been supporting a series o f pilot projects since the mid 1990s which
have demonstrated that participatory development can b e undertaken successfully in the midst o f conflict
zones. This model inspired similar initiatives throughout the country and was incorporated into the
Government’s Democratic Security Policy and National Development Plan. In addition, recent ESW led
the Government to request Bank assistance t o design its National Reintegration and Reparations Program.

4

4

111.

Country Context

A.

Recent Economic Developments and Future Prospects

14.
The near stagnation o f the economy during the early 2000s has given way to
sustained economic growth and a strengthening o f consumer and investor confidence. The
turnaround was influenced by an improved global economic environment in which demand
for Colombia’s primary exports has risen along with prices, while the cost o f international
borrowin has fallen.4 Sound macroeconomic management has played a major part in the
recovery and improvements in internal security helped as well.

F

15.
Real GDP growth accelerated from 1.9 percent in 2002 to 6.8 percent in 2006, with
private investment rising from 7.7 percent o f GDP in 2002 to over 16 percent in 2006.
Unemployment has fallen from over 17 percent in 2002 to below 11 percent currently,
while inflation declined from 7 percent in 2002 to below 4.5 percent in 2006; however,
progress in reducing unemployment stalled during 2007.6

Public sector
Private sector

7.6
7.7

8.2
9.0

5.6
13.6

5.8
14.9

7.0
16.4

7.1
15.7

The economy remained strong in 2007 with GDP growth estimated at 6.6 percent
16.
for the year. Significantly improved factors supporting both. domestic demand (internal
peace, healthy investment and credit levels) and external demand (rising exports and
foreign direct investment) should result in sustained economic growth in the 5 percent
range through 201 1. Foreign Direct Investment has increased five-fold since 2003 and
strong flows are anticipated in the wake o f recent business climate reforms, provided that
positive security conditions are maintained and the Free Trade Agreement with the U S is
eventually ratified.7 The current account deficit rose to about 4 percent o f GDP in 2007,
however, on the back o f a sharp increase in imports o f both consumer and investment
goods.
4

A recent review o f growth performance in Colombia “Economic Growth in Colombia: A Reversal of ‘Fortune”’ by
Mauricio Cardenas can be found on Fedesarrollo’s website: www.fedesarro1lo.org.
The Government had a US$ 2.34 billion Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) with the IMF covering 2003-05 followed by a
US$ 613 million SBA through November 2006 and treated both agreements as precautionary and did not draw on the
funds available.
Recent (2006) changes in the survey methodology have complicated the analysis of employment trends.
In the interim the United States has extended the Andean Pact Trade and Drug Enforcement Agreement for 10 months,
preserving the current preferential tariff treatment for Colombia.

’

5

17.
The combination o f domestic economic growth, improved international conditions,
peso appreciation, and revenue-enhancing policy reforms have benefited the country's
fiscal accounts, as did improvements in tax administration8 Revenue growth has continued
to outpace GDP growth, and as a result the general Government deficit' decreased from 4.9
percent o f GDP in 2002 to about 1.9 percent o f GDP in 2007. To further strengthen fiscal
performance, the Government has been introducing measures to improve the fiscal
balances o f regional governments and public enterprises, and the non-financial public
sector deficit (which includes the surpluses o f public enterprises and regional governments)
fell from 4.2 percent o f GDP in 2002 to a projected l o w 1.O percent o f GDP in 2007.
Due to budget and legal rigidities, expenditures have continued to grow in two
18.
areas: transfers to sub-national governments and the pensions system. Congressional
approval o f an Acto Legislativo last year limited the growth rate o f transfers to sub-national
governments to 4 percent in real terms in 2008-09, 3.5 percent in 2010, and 3 percent in
201 1-16. From 2016 onward the growth rate o f transfers will be calculated based on the
weighted average o f the previous four years. In addition subnational governments will
receive additional resources earmarked for education (to meet national coverage and
quality goals) and childhood development programs. Transfers to the main state pension
system will continue to expand over the next decade as payouts will greatly exceed new
contributions; a 2005 constitutional reform, however, reduced the net present value o f
pension liabilities by 19 percentage points o f GDP, from 162 percent to about 143 percent.

B.

Macroeconomic Outlook and Debt Sustainability"

The rapid growth o f 2007 i s expected to subside to more sustainable growth rates o f
19.
around 5 percent o f GDP during the remainder o f the CPS period, as domestic demand has
been growing faster than GDP, inflation has accelerated and the current account deficit has
widened substantially. The main external risk to the economy would be a slowdown in the
global economy, particularly if key trading partners like the United States or Venezuela''
were affected. Adverse commodity price shocks represent a related risk.

Source: IMF Article I V StaffReport for 2007; World Bank staff calculations for projections.

* Tax revenues increased b y 4.7 percentage points o f GDP from 2002 to 2007.
The sum o f the central Government balance plus the balance o f the social security system.
also the IMF's 2007 Article I V Consultation with Colombia, discussed by the IMF Board in January 2008.
I' Total exports to Venezuela were USs3.2 billion from Jan-Sep. 2007 (about 2 percent o f GDP), total imports were US$
1.2 billion from Jan-Sep. 2007 (about 0.7 percent o f GDP). Exports were dominated b y automobiles (21 percent o f
exports), chemical products (10.9 percent o f exports), and food, beverages and tobacco (8.7 percent o f exports).
loSee

6

20.
Colombia s t i l l has an important gross debt burden; however, effective debt
management to lower the foreign currency exposure and to lengthen the average maturity
o f the debt has resulted in reduced risk. As noted in the Debt Sustainability Annex H, the
public debt burden i s sensitive to a combination o f shocks, but even in a worst case
scenario the debt ratios would stabilize at sustainable levels. On the external front, the
Bank's base case debt projection includes deterioration in the current account deficit from
an already sizeable 4.0 percent o f GDP in 2007 to 5 percent o f GDP in 2008. With nondebt creating inflows projected to decline from high levels (which allowed financing the
current account deficit fully in 2006 and to a large extent in 2007), external debt would
marginally increase to 27 percent o f GDP in 2008 under the base case presented in the
annex. Actions to moderate domestic demand--in particular, a succession o f interest rate
increases by the Central Bank--imply that high domestic demand growth, accelerating
inflation and the widening current account would be restrained during the latter part o f the
CPS period.
C.

Poverty, Inequality, and the MDG's

21.
Colombia's high rate o f economic growth has had a positive impact o n poverty. By
2006, the nationwide poverty rate dropped to 45 percent o f the population, and the extreme
poverty rate to 12 percent (see Graph 1 below). National estimates o f 2-dollar and 1-dollar
per day poverty levels reveal the same story, with a decline from 18 to 8 percent and 10 to
2.5 percent respectively between 1999 and 2004. With these trends Colombia i s moving
towards achieving its Millennium Development targets, though this will require the
sustained increase in social spending and targeting that occurred under President Uribe's
first term.
Graph 1: Poverty Indicators for Colombia
Poverty

Extreme Poverty

I

I

Urban

National

A

Rural

Source: MERPD, 2005. Like many countries, ColombiaS official poverty line is much higher than the $1-2$per day measurement.

22.
Improvements in national averages, however, mask serious ethnic, gender, and
regional differences and overwhelming disparities remain. Poverty in rural areas remains
high at 68 percent (2006), compared with 42 percent in urban areas. Afro-Colombians
(1 0.5 percent o f the population), indigenous peoples (3.4 percent), and female-headed

7

households experience poverty disproportionately. l2W h i l e the country as a whole should
be able to reach most o f i t s Millennium Development Goals by 2015, this i s not likely to be
the case for Afro-Colombian and indigenous populations who inhabit regions o f the
country where poverty and economic exclusion are most entrenched. l3
23.
With the poorest 20 percent o f the population receiving only 3 percent o f total
national income, Colombia has a highly unequal income distribution. This i s reflected in a
Gini index o f 0.575, the third-worst in Latin America behind Paraguay and B r a ~ i 1 . l ~
Reducing these gaps and promoting social and economic inclusion o f vulnerable groups
remain one o f Colombia’s most critical unmet challenges.
D.

Political and Governance Developments

Security. When the Uribe administration took office in 2002, the armed conflict
24.
was the most important issue facing the nation. I t i s widely acknowledged that President
Uribe’s tough security policies and commitment to forcefilly tackle the conflict brought
him high levels o f popular support in the 2002 and 2006 elections. Over the last five years,
the expansion o f the armed forces and the establishment o f state presence throughout
Colombian territory have resulted in a significant reduction o f violence, particularly in
urban centers. l5Uribe’s first administration oversaw a 40 percent reduction in homicides,
a 49 percent decline in households forcefully displaced, an 83 percent fall in kidnappings,
and a 63 percent reduction in terrorist attacks on towns and infrastructure. By way o f
comparison, Bogota now has a lower homicide rate than Washington DC, Caracas, Mexico
City, Detroit, and Rio de Janeiro. These achievements are mirrored by significant
improvements in social indicators.

25.
Governance. Since 2002, Colombia has also shown steady improvements in
government effectiveness, control o f corruption, and r u l e o f law. Political stability and
voice/accountability indicators have improved, with regulatory quality remaining stable.
26.
Elections. In October 2007 free elections were held in all o f Colombia’s 1099
municipalities and 3 1 departments and the coalition o f arties that support President Uribe
increased their dominance in larger cities and provinces7 6 (though the mayorship o f Bogota
went to the opposition Polo Dernocratico party). While these victories are a show o f
political support for the current administration, there are uncertainties surrounding the 2010
elections and whether this coalition will remain intact.
l2 For example, illiteracy among indigenous and Afro-Colombian populations is estimated to be nearly double the
national average, and the infant mortality rate among indigenous is about 50 percent higher than in the general population.
l3 To illustrate this point, one can compare national progress on M D G s with that o f the department o f Choco-whose
population o f 400,000 i s 90 percent Afro-Colombian and 4 percent indigenous. According to departmental officials,
Choco trails national averages in nearly every MDG category; infant mortality nationwide is 20 deaths per 1,000 vs. 44 in
Choco, maternal mortality i s 99 per 1,000 births nationally vs. 417 per 1,000 in Choco. Households in precarious
settlements are 16 percent nationally vs. Choco’s 39 percent (2003); water coverage i s 88 percent nationally vs. 37.7
percent in Choco (2003), while sanitation coverage is 74 percent vs 25.3 percent for Colombia and Choco respectively
(2003). In another measure, the U N ’ s Regional Human Development Index places Colombia 73rd from the top, with
Bogota’s ranking an even higher 38th place (similar to Hungary) while the department o f Choco i s ranked 148th.
l4 Furthermore, Colombia’s Gini index hasn’t moved below the 0.55 mark for the past fifteen years.
Rural violence, however, remains at pre-Uribe levels in some parts o f the country.
l6 Parties o f the Uribista coalition increased their share o f elected officials from less than 113 to more than 2/3rds in
departments and won more than half o f the major city mayoral contests, up from 1/4thin 2003.

8

Peace Process. Today, over 42,000 ex-combatants have been demobilized, most
from paramilitary forces. The Government has taken steps towards peace negotiations with
a much-weakened ELN (Ejkrcito de Liberacidn National). Recent attempts to arrange a
humanitarian prisoner exchange with the F A R C (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia) have resulted in the liberation of two important political figures. However,
even in the absence of a negotiated settlement, the influence o f the F A R C and ELN has
been reduced significantly as a result o f the military actions by the Government and lack o f
public support.

27.

28.

Current Challenges. Despite i t s remarkable success in pulling the country back
from the brink o f economic crisis, spiraling violence and social upheaval, the Government
s t i l l faces daunting and simultaneous challenges to achieving sustained peace, security and
economic stability.

As a result o f successful demobilization negotiations, the Government must now
29.
reintegrate thousands o f former combatants into civilian life and provide them with
sufficient incentives not to re-arm or re-engage in illegal activities. This i s a costly process
which involves i)complex reconciliation and reparation arrangements to compensate the
victims o f political violence and ii)creation o f conditions to reintegrate ex-combatants into
society and into the labor market. This implies the creation o f incentives for the private
sector to incorporate former combatants into productive activities.
30.
The guerilla and paramilitary activities and the narcotrafficking which have haunted
the country for decades continue to be the leading obstacles to achieving sustainable
development in Colombia. The authorities are working on the complex task o f promoting
lasting peace and socio-economic development in those areas where the Government has
gained the upper hand militarily, while continuing military operations in those areas o f
continued guerilla activity.

This task i s being complicated by narcotrafficking in which both the F A R C and
31.
paramilitary forces are involved. l7Sustaining security and military gains and consolidating
state presence throughout the country were achieved through a major build-up o f security
forces (military and police) from about 297,825 in 2002 to about 405,729 in 2007. The
budgetary implications o f combating guerrilla forces, paramilitaries, and narcotrafficking
are reflected in substantial military and security-related spending, representing almost 5
percent o f GDP.I8 A sustainable peace process would hold the promise that, over time,
more resources could be channeled to the deeply embedded structural problems o f extreme
poverty and inequity, whereby all vulnerable groups, (including the demobilized, the
internally displaced, victims o f the conflict, and excluded groups living in deep poverty)
are better incorporated into society and the labor market and given opportunities to develop
their productive capacities.
” In recent years the FARC, as well as paramilitary forces, have come to fund their activities primarily from the drug
trade (extortion and kidnapping having diminished under President Uribe). Though some o f the trade has shifted to
Mexico and other South American drug cartels, narcotrafficking i s s t i l l said to generate enormous revenues per year in
Colombia, and constitutes a major source of continued financing for illegal groups.
These figures are drawn from“Logros D e La Politica De ConsolidacidnD e La Seguridad Democrhtica” a presentation
made by Colombia’s Ministry o f Defense in December 2007.

’*

9

IV.

A SHARED VISION

A.

The National Development Plan

32.
The Government fully recognizes all o f the challenges elaborated above and is
trying to address them in the 2006-2010 National Development Plan (the NDP). The N D P
lays out a comprehensive set o f costed programs for the 2006-2010 period and provides
guidance for monitoring results and outcomes. The NDP is the result o f a broad-based
consultative process” overseen by the National Planning Council.2o
’able 3. Colomb 1’s Priorities per ’illar in the Natic ial Developmenl ?lan
Peace and
Security for
Citizens

Promotion of
Equity

Consolidate
“Democratic
Security” Policy

Poverty and
Vulnerable
Populations

Displacement,
Human Rights and
Reconciliation

Market and Labor
Relations
Social Protection
Access to Credit
Livable Cities

Equity and Rural
Development
Infrastructure for
Development

Risk Management

High Sustainable
Growth
Macroeconomic
Conditions
Productivity and
Competitiveness
H i g h Impact
Sector-Specific
Programs
Agrolcompetitiveness and Growth
Saving, Investment
and Finance
Physical Capital
Formation
Energy Supply
Institutions and
National Policies

Environmental
Sustainability
Integral
Management of
Water Resources
Territorial
Environmental
Planning

A State at the
Service of its
Citizens
Requirements o f a
Communal State
Challenges o f a
Communal State

Sustainable and
Competitive
Production
Processes
Prevention/ Control
o f Environmental
Degradation
Strengthen
National Systems
(SINA) to Promote
Environmental
Governance

Transversal Themes run throughout the pillars and include Gender, Youth, Ethnic Groups and Intercultural
Relations, Culture Demography and Development, Science and Technology, Migration Policy, Foundations
and Cooperatives, Promotion o f Economic Solidarity, International and Regional Dimensions o f Development.

33.
The Government has articulated clear goals and progress indicators for each o f
these pillars and has developed mechanisms to continuously monitor progress throughout
the CPS periodq2’
l 9 Consultations on the NDP were carried out between September 2004 and December 2006 in 27 departments and 24
large and mid-size cities. An estimated 21,000 people participated, representing a wide range o f non-state organizations
such as academia, religious groups, private sector, trade unions, and youth.
The National Planning Council (NPC) i s a constitutionallymandated body created to promote civil society participation
in public policy. The NPC i s made up of 18,000 community and social organizations, representing 24 sectors nationwide.
Further information can be found on i t s website www.cnDco1ombia.org.
2’ A detailed description of the NDP goals can be found in Chapter 7 of the NDP on the Government’s website
httD://www.dnD.nov.co. SIGOB, the Government’s system for monitoring progress against all country goals, including
the NDP, i s also accessible on the web at httD://sigob.Dresidencia.gov.co.

*’

10

V.

The CPS Program

A.

The Current Program

The previous CAS envisioned a maximum IBRD lending program o f US$ 4 billion
34.
for the FY04-07 period. Commitments eventually totaled US$ 3.1 billion, split 40/60
between investment and policy lending respectively, and spread fairly evenly across four
main sectors as per Graph 2. BRD exposure reached US$4.7 billion at the end o f FY07.
Graph 2: FYO4-07 IBRD Commitments in Colombia
EeaRh and
Mucation. 26%1

2004

2005

2006

hfraestructure,
22%

2007

/ a D R s (p104-07 60%) t IL WO4-07: 40%) 0 Total (Averwe of Total: US77Om) 1

35.
I B R D ' s portfolio consists o f 16 projects under implementation for a net
commitment o f US$ 1.65 b i l l i o n - o f which US$ 715 m i l l i o n remains undisbursed. In
addition, 4 GEF grants (US$ 42.4 million) are under implementation. At the end o f January
2008 only one project in the portfolio was at risk. The overall portfolio for F Y 0 7 had an
average annual disbursement ratio o n investment projects o f 34 percent. Proactivity and
realism ratios have remained in l i n e with Bank best practice, at 100 percent for both
categories at the end o f January 2008.
I F C operations have broadened in scope as improvements in security and strong
36.
growth have triggered a surge in investment, creating new opportunities for I F C support.
Colombia i s now IFC's tenth largest exposure, and fourth largest in L A C . In FY07, new
I F C operations amounted to US$ 274 million, and at the end of the fiscal year, IFC
commitments totaled U S $ 860 million which was directed to companies in the financial,
oil, manufacturing, agricultural and infrastructure sectors. L i k e IBRD, IFC's portfolio has
performed well throughout the CAS period. See Private Sector Strategy Annex A for
details o f I F C and MIGA programs.
B.

Summary Findings from Completion Report, Consultations, and Client Survey

37.
Preparation o f this CPS was informed by four types o f external consultation: i)the
country-wide consultations on the N D P conducted by the Government and the National
Planning Council, ii) in-country interviews for the CAS Completion Report, iii)issuebased Stakeholder Consultations, and iv) a Client Survey.

11

38.
The CAS Completion Report for the 2002 CAS ranks the WBG’s overall
performance as satisfactory. The report’s findings and recommendations which informed
this CPS are summarized below:
a
a
a

a

a
a
a

Build on what works and deepen the continuity between the previous and the
present country strategy;
Synchronize the CPS with the national planning cycle;
Set realistic short and medium term targets for programmatic operations, given the
difficulty o f designing relevant policy triggers for the outer years o f the CAS;
Retain the flexibility to reprogram as conditions change;
Build strong consensus for new initiatives, using pilot operations;
Reemphasize work in the rural sector;
Internalize equity and social exclusion concerns into Bank analytical work and
operations.

39.
The WBG organized ten direct Stakeholder Consultations to guide CPS preparation
and a complementary Client Survey o f 170 respondents was also commissioned.22 The
main opinions and messages expressed are summarized in Box 2 below.

Stakeholder consultations involved 128 representatives o f diverse groups including Afro-Colombians and indigenous
communities, regional governments, NGOs and civil society organizations, the private sector and multihilateral donors
and were held in Bogota and in the depments of Boyach and Valle del Cauca. IFC also held three panel discussions
with private/public entrepreneurs on infrastructure, oil and gas, and finance-related issues.

22

12

13ox 2. Stakeholder Consultations and Client Survey
M a i n Messages:
Image and Outreach. The Bank receives very high ratings for its overall image in Colombia.
Stakeholders perceive the Bank as respectful, responsive, and collaborative with Government and other
donors. The two main sources o f information about the WBG are work-related exchanges and the Bank’s
website-which
i s seen to offer timely and easily accessible information o n the country program.
However, policy messages do not travel far beyond official circles and academia to the broader population
and better use could be made o f alternative media (such as periodicals). Stakeholders are in general
unclear about the procedures to apply for Bank-related grants, scholarships, and training opportunities and
would l i k e easier access to this information, particularly those living outside Bogoti.
Products and Services. The Bank i s valued for its financial resources, technical advice, and knowledge;
though it i s felt that it should improve the price, terms and processing requirements o f i t s loans as well as
non-financial services. (Note: the client survey was conducted prior to recent changes in I B R D ’ s pricing
policy.) Respondents see the Bank as needing to become more competitive in a M I C country that has other
financing alternatives. The Bank’s strategies and recommendations, moreover, are not always seen as
realistic or well-tailored to country circumstances.
Country Priorities. Poverty reduction and the lack o f employment opportunities are the main
development challenges for Colombia-and the Bank needs to be more involved in poverty eradication
through the provision o f education, jobs and basic infrastructure (although, at the same time poverty
alleviation was the area where the Bank was seen as relatively less effective).
Specific Areas of Intervention. The WBG should address land policy (a priority for the rural poor),
provide more nuanced advice to tackle disparities at the regional level (a view widely held by AfroColombians and indigenous groups consulted), give greater focus to promotion o f science and technology
for competitiveness, and focus more on youth.

C.

Rationale for World Bank Group Support to Colombia

40.
The World Bank Group and the Government o f Colombia have built a productive
and dynamic dialogue on a wide range o f development issues and this has led to a strong
lending program. IBRD i s currently Colombia’s largest single creditor, its market-share
among multilaterals having increased steadily since 2001 from 24 percent to 44 percent
today. Through i t s long engagement, the WBG has gained significant knowledge and
expertise in the areas most critical to the country’s development. The synergies offered by
the combined services o f IBRD, IFC and MIGA constitute an unmatched suite o f country
experience and strategic, financial, and technical support which i s accessible within a stable
and long-term multilateral relationship.

41.
Today, there i s s t i l l a significant demand for WBG services to help the Government
consolidate i t s achievements and address ongoing challenges. Furthermore, aligning the
CPS with the NDP offers the WBG an opportunity to fully harmonize i t s program with the
country’s o w n plans and budget cycle. Moreover, a NDP developed with broad popular
consultation i s consistent with Paris Declaration commitments.
I t i s important to highlight that while there has been an intensification o f WBG
42.
engagement with Colombia over the last CPS period, the Government has been very
successful in changing its debt profile, favoring domestic currency debt, and managing its
debt strategically, using local currency instruments and accessing international capital
markets. W h i l e the Bank remains competitive in terms o f pricing, the challenge will be to

13

continue reducing the non-financial transaction costs imposed o n the client country and
ensure that the Bank’s technical expertise and advisory services i s cutting-edge, and
responsive to rapidly-changing needs. A sophisticated middle-income country like
Colombia i s an important test case for demonstrating that the WBG can deliver on its M I C
strategy o f faster, more flexible client-driven support.

D.

Strategic Elements o f Proposed CPS

43.
When President Uribe was re-elected in May 2006, the Bank had already prepared a
series o f 18 Policy Notes, “Colombia 2006-2010: A Window of O p p o r t ~ n i t y ” . These
~~
were discussed with the President and his cabinet shortly after his reelection. In December
the WBG country team and senior Government officials convened for a day-long workshop
in Washington DC, at which the Government presented i t s National Development Plan and
outlined how the WBG could best support i t s goals under a new CPS.

The authorities requested WBG support for five pillars o f the National
44.
Development Plan-Peace and Security for Citizens, Promotion o f Equity, High and
Sustainable Growth, A State at the Service o f its Citizens, and Promotion o f Environmental
Sustainability, as well as support for i t s Transversal Themes. Under each pillar i t was
agreed that the Bank would provide a flexible menu-based m i x o f financial and analytical
services tailored to the country’s evolving needs. New frontier products would also be
offered, particularly in the area o f financial and risk management.
In line with the Bank’s MIC agenda, the Government and the WBG have agreed to
45.
a rolling programming approach whereby the CPS pipeline will be determined and adjusted
on a yearly basis in conjunction with results-based CPPRs. Results will be measured using
the monitoring indicators o f the NDP,24 and these indicators will be tracked through the
national monitoring system (S1GOB)-thus
the success o f the CPS will be coterminous
with the success o f the Government’s programs that the WBG i s supporting. A mid-term
CPS Progress Report will also provide an opportunity for adjustments.

46.
Bank interventions will be designed in conformity with Paris Declaration principles
o f donor alignment and harmonization with national systems. Where country systems have
not evolved to international standards, the WBG will provide technical assistance to help
build institutional capacity at the local, provincial, and national levels.
The CPS also incorporates the main tenets o f the Bank’s Governance and Anti47.
corruption Strategy and L A C regional policy as a complement to Colombia’s efforts on this
front, including i t s recent ratification o f the U N ’ s Anti-Corruption Convention and the
Governance Pillar goals o f the NDP. WBG support to governance at the subnational level
is expected to increase over the CPS period, as discussions have already been initiated with
several newly elected mayors and governors (e.g. Medellin, Bogota, Cartagena), which has
led to requests for assistance with several public sector management and governance
-

~~

~~

Copyright World Bank 2007, also available at www.worldbank.ordco
24 http://www.sigob.gov.co/pnd/pnd.aspx under “Objetivos y Estrategias del PND” contains o f all o f the NDP monitoring
indicators organized by pillar.
23

14

initiatives, through lending and AAA. (see Section V. and Governance Annex B for
hrther details).
48.
While this CPS i s not fully programmed in advance, there are areas in which the
Government has either asked for or indicated i t intends to seek continued active Bank
support, including tackling extreme poverty (particularly in income generation for the poor
and vulnerable groups), infrastructure and public services, competitiveness, (including
trade promotiodbarriers) public sector management, the environment, education, social
protection, housing, transportation services, energy and mining, agriculture, sustainable
tourism and p e a ~ e - b u i l d i n g .In
~ ~addition, collaboration o n financial services, banking and
risk management products i s likely to intensify. The lending program anticipated for 20082009 i s expected to take advantage o f recent changes in Bank lending instruments (e.g. the
new D D O and maturities policies). The Bank i s also exploring with the Government other
program innovations such as the joint IFC/IBRD subnational Sub-national Finance Facility.
New product lines, taken together with the diversity o f engagement the WBG can offer,
positions the WBG to responds to Colombia's need for cutting-edge, multi-sectoral
solutions to i t s major development challenges, such as resolving striking regional
inequities, competitiveness, stimulating regional development as a source o f poverty
reduction, and adapting to global climate change.
E.

WBG Areas o f Concentration and Collaboration

The following section focuses on the type o f financial and AAA services the WBG
49.
i s positioned to offer under each pillar, identifying areas where discussions are underway or
where the Government has said it intends to seek support. The l i s t i s indicative, as
explained in previous paragraphs.

I. Sustained Equitable Growth26

50.
The overall objective o f WBG support under this pillar i s to help improve
Colombia's competitiveness in order to maintain high and sustainable GDP growth over
the medium term. This agenda involves close collaboration between the Bank and IFC,
who have a shared interest in improving infrastructure and social services, developing
sources o f renewable energy, and strengthening the financial and private sectors. This
level o f collaboration i s expected to intensify.
Examples o f how the synergy between IBRD and IFC products could be
51.
leveraged during this CPS are highlighted below and described in greater detail in the
Private Sector Strategy, Annex A:
e

Competition and Doing Business. The central vehicle for IBRD support to the
competitiveness agenda has been the Business Efficiency DPL series.27 The
~~

W h i l e the range o f potential IBRD engagement i s broad, the Bank will exercise selectivity, in line with its comparative
advantage and resource capacity to provide high-quality support.
26
The main focus in this section i s on growth as another pillar addresses equity issues more directly.
27 T h i s has underwritten reform in five areas: (a) enhancing the business environment and improving the regulatory
framework; (b) increasing the soundness and depth o f the financial system; (c) promoting access to financial services by

25

15

Government requested a third phase in FY08, which will be presented with this
CPS, and there i s potential for continued support through follow up operations, if
requested. M u c h o f IFC’s country program also revolves around strengthening the
business environment and private sector competitiveness. IFC’s Bogota-based pilot
to reform the inspections systems i s expected to be expanded to the municipalities
o f Cartagena, Cali, Medellin, Bucaramanga and Santa Marta (through a multi-donor
initiative). IBRD reports on infrastructure, logistics and regional competitiveness,28
have been complemented by the recent regional Doing Business report, prepared in
collaboration with USAID. IFC plans to undertake studies in areas such as Public
Private Partnerships, Simplification o f Business Processes, and Management o f
Petroleum Royalties. In addition, the rural dimension o f competitiveness i s being
addressed by IBRD projects which support small-holder involvement in the
agricultural production chain and quality and technology improvements needed to
compete globally (via the Productive Partnerships and Agricultural Transition
projects respectively).
a

Infrastructure. IBRD and IFC are supporting Government policies to improve
utility management, particularly public-private models o f service delivery in the
water sector, where IFC is also a potential investor in small and medium sized
private operators. IFC and IBRD are also helping to structure infrastructure
concessions, with IFC focusing on private sector participation and IBRD providing
technical assistance to the G~vernment.~~
Further infrastructure collaboration can
be envisaged in such areas as ports and airports, additional roads, energy and
telecommunications. IFC/IBRD involvement has several advantages; it helps attract
long-term investors, helps the Government negotiate fair contracts and provides
added assurance that technical, social and environmental standards are observed.

a

Urban Services. In addition to ongoing support for specific jurisdictions
(Cartagena, L a Guajira, Bogota), IBRD i s expected to provide assistance to several
departments through a Water and Sanitation APL in FY08. IBRD would also
support a follow-up operation to provide urban services for the poor in Bogota, as
well as a project to manage solid waste. IBRD support could also be provided
through a Housing DPL, which could address land access, housing finance,
improved targeting o f housing subsidies and other sectoral issues. In urban
transport, IBRD i s financing the expansion o f Bogota’s Transmilenio system to
five additional cities, some o f whom may be interested in borrowing from IFC or
mobilizing market resources without a central Government guarantee. The city o f
Bogota i s working with the IFC on a new loan agreement o f around US$45 million.
This financial package (which does not have a central government guarantee) will
be used to support urban street rehabilitation and maintenance, an approach which
could be replicated. All o f the initiatives above are aligned with the Government’s

underserved groups; (d) adoption o f quality standards and innovation for export products; and (e) improving the
regulatory framework for investment in infrastructureand transport logistics.
28 Reports include the “REDI” Colombia: Recent Economic Developments in Infrastructure (2004), followed by
Infastructura Logistica y de Calidadpara la Competitividad de Colombia (Report No. 35061-CO, 2006), and Colombia:
Inputs for Sub-regional Competitiveness Policies (2007).
29 IFC i s currently advising INCO and the Ministry o f Transport on the structuring and financing o f Colombia’s largest
road concession project-Ruta del Sol- a 950km highway which runs from Bogota to the Caribbean coast.

16

Macro Projects Program. Also, IBRD, jointly with IFC, has an ongoing dialogue
with Bogota on their plans for a new metro system.
0

Financial Sector. IBRD has supported the Government’s efforts to strengthen the
financial sector in multiple ways, including support to issue and implement a new
Capital Markets Law, consolidate supervision across all financial markets and
develop a new financial sector law. To support country efforts to promote
sustainable access to financial services, IBRD produced a study which investigates
Colombia’s relative performance (compared to other L A C countries) in banking
sector finance to SMEs. IBRD is also exploring a potential contingent credit l i n e for
Disaster Risk Management and i s collaborating with an inter-agency committee to
carry out simulations o f potential financial crises to ensure Government readiness to
adequately manage risks. IFC is evaluating private equity players to identify strong
business models that will generate efficiencies in industries with strong growth
potential. IFC will also continue to focus on capital market development, as well as
investment in firms at the pre-IPO stage. Finally, expanding access to finance for
housing solutions for the poor is an area in which the WBG could offer support,
possibly through a joint operation with FINDETER and the National Savings Fund.

11. Poverty Alleviation and Equity o f Opportunity

52.
The overall objective o f WBG support under this pillar i s to support Colombia’s
efforts to achieve i t s MDG and NDP goals to reduce poverty and increase equity. This
involves a broad array o f activities in many sectors, as summarized below:
0

e

Extreme Poverty and Vulnerable Groups. IBRD collaboration with Colombia on
i t s strategy to eradicate extreme poverty i s expected to be extensive. IBRD and
IDB have been asked to finance the expansion o f an innovative and highly
successful conditional cash transfer program (Fumilius en Accidn), 30 with IBRD
potentially providing around U S $ 300-600 million in FY09. The Bank has been
asked to support analytical work o n labor markets and income generation for the
poor under an ongoing NLTA and Social TAL, and to assist the Government in
developing incentives for local governments and the private sector to promote
greater social and economic inclusion o f the extreme poor and vulnerable groups.
To increase access to finance by the poor, IFC i s supporting microfinance
institutions to promote SME and micro-credit products through the formal banking
system and extend their reach to the poor.
Regional Dimension o f Poverty.
Colombia’s poorest regions are
disproportionately rural with a high proportion o f indigenous andor AfroColombian populations. These persistent pockets o f hard poverty remain a growing
challenge for regional and national authorities. WBG engagement in the coming
CPS period will include a deeper and more systematic series o f activities to address
issues o f social exclusion and poverty, through analytical work and potentially

30See Attanasio, “Evaluating a Conditional Cash Transfer Program: T h e Experience o f Familia en Acci6n in Colombia”
2006

17

through regionally-based comprehensive poverty programs such as those now under
discussion with the department o f Choc6 and municipality o f Cartagena. The Bank
will complement lending and analytical work with grant-financed activities, such as
the recently approved Japanese Social Development Fund (JSDF) capacity building
grant for Afro-Colombian communities.
e

Bank support for the health financing system i s expected to continue, with
additional technical assistance and possible investment lending for information
systems development, health insurance, and hospital restructuring.

e

In education, operational support i s planned through a second Rural Education
APL, including pre-school, basic and secondary levels. Secondary education in
particular suffers from serious retention problems, and further incentives would be
piloted under the Antioquia Secondary Education Project planned for FY08. The
Bank will also provide programmatic AAA on Education Quality. In the tertiary
sector the Bank-financed student loan program (ACCESS) has significantly
increased university enrollment among the lowest three deciles o f the population.
A follow-up APL o f U S $ 300 million to I C E T E X (Colombian Institute for
Education Credit and Technical Studies Abroad) in support o f student loans was
approved in March 2008, which will have a central government guarantee. I F C i s
also supporting this program with technical advice o n accessing private capital
markets.

e

Social Protection. The Bank will continue to support the redesign and
rationalization o f the social protection system and improve targeting o f subsidies.
Through the Informality AAA, the Bank will explore the dynamics o f informality
and how social protection coverage can be extended to informal sector workers; at
the same time the ongoing Social Safety Net I1program is supporting a redesign o f
the safety net system, while NLTA is looking at alternative ways o f extending
pension coverage. If requested, this analytical work could potentially form the
basis o f an operation to follow the successful Labor Reform and Social
Development Policy (PLaRSSAL) programmatic D P L s . ~ ~

e

Agriculture and Rural Development. Support for agriculture competitiveness and
rural poverty reduction i s expected to continue. The Government has requested
second hases o f the Productive Partnerships and the Agriculture Transition
Projects' and has asked for technical support to design an agriculture and rural
development strategy. This strategy would develop, among other dimensions, a
poverty and income generation strategy for rural areas, policies for productive land
use and protection, use o f innovative rural technologies, potential mechanisms o f
social protection for the rural poor, and incentives for local governments and the
private sector to accelerate economic inclusion and productive opportunities for the
rural poor.

31

See CAS Completion and Progress Reports for the results achieved through the PLaRSSAL series.
A detailed review o f the Productive Partnerships, Agricultural Transition and Peace and Development Projects can be
found in the CAS Completion Report.

32

18

111. Environment and Natural Resource Management

53.
The Bank’s key objective under this pillar i s to support Government’s N D P and
MDG goals o f ensuring environmental stability. The Bank and the Government enjoy
considerable convergence on the environment agenda, and this has led to an active grant
program with many innovative features, and a deepening o f support for environmental
reform under a series o f Sustainable Development DPLs. Complemented with a technical
these DPLs are helping to improve the effectiveness o f the National
assistance
Environmental System and to integrate principles o f environmental sustainability into
policy making throughout critical sectors o f the economy.
In this CPS period, the Bank will continue to offer a wide array o f instruments
54.
based on emerging demand. Operations and AAA under discussion for FY 08 and 09 are
highlighted below:
0

Environmental Policy. Phase I11 o f the Sustainable Development DPL series
(described above and in the CCR) with a particular emphasis on protecting the most
vulnerable, i s a n t i ~ i p a t e dand
~ ~ may be co-financed by the Dutch Government. A
third phase o f the Natural Disaster Mitigation operation i s being explored. In the
broader sense, the WBG could offer i t s convening power and international expertise
to help the authorities consolidate their thinking and strategy in the areas o f climate
change and global public goods in general.

0

Climate Change. Colombia has been a pioneer among middle-income countries
in its approach, and during the CPS period the Bank i s expected to significantly
expand i t s support for national and local climate change initiatives. In principle, the
energy, water, and transport sectors would be areas o f focus, with special emphasis
on developing a comprehensive climate change energy strategy which takes into
account, among other things, the country’s critical paramos and mangrove
ecosystems.

0

Renewable Energy. Strengthening the resilience o f the power sector to climatic
changes, thereby enabling Colombia to maintain i t s l o w carbon footprint, could
involve market-based reforms to attract investment flows in renewable energy and
new technologies such as C02 capture and sequestration or integrated gasification
combined cycle power plants (IGCC). Analytical work in the areas o f biohels and
alternative energy are likely to emerge during the CPS period. Colombia will
continue to access opportunities under the Kyoto Protocol via the Global
Environment Facility (GEF) and the Prototype Carbon Fund in order to reduce

Sustainable Development Investment Project supports SINA (Sistema Nacional Ambiental) in the design and
implementation o f policy reforms and related investments in line with the D P L Program framework.
34 Triggers for the 3rd D P L in this series include implementation o f a national policy on environmental health, a system
to monitor and evaluate national and regional environmental management, approval o f an Urban Environmental Policy,
strengthening D N P and the Vice Ministry of Environment structures to better manage environmental policies and N D P
environmental goals, strengthening the Water Resources Unit in MAVDT in line with new water management reforms,
developing a national policy for air pollution control, strengthening MAVDT’s Climate Change Unit to meet N D P goals.
33

19

carbon emissions while fostering important technology transfers to the renewable
energy sector.35LFC will support new initiatives for production o f biofuels (ethanol
and biodiesel) and the development o f carbon credits projects, and could potentially
finance institutions and companies interested in energy efficiency and renewable
energy projects.

IV. Peace
55.
The Bank’s main goal is to help the Government provide the social and economic
foundations for national reconciliation and a lasting peace. For the last ten years the Bank
has been helping Colombia advance i t s peace agenda through a combination o f grants,
studies and lending operations across several sectors. Experience gained from these
initiatives was integrated into the NDP o f the first Uribe administration and influenced
Government strategy for assisting rural populations in conflict zones.
56.
During the 2005 CAS mid-tern review the Government asked the Bank to
consolidate i t s activities and intensify its support under a new Peace Pillar. Since then the
Bank has scaled up i t s flagship Peace and Development LILs into an APL series, and has
produced fresh analytical work on the demobilization and reinsertion o f ex-combatants
(used in the redesign o f the national demobilization program) and reparation to victims o f
the conflict, which was recently discussed with cabinet authorities, and i s expected to help
shape Colombia’s National Reparation Program.

57.
This experience positions the Bank to support a more comprehensive peace
program that addresses social and political inclusion as well as the economic rehabilitation
o f conflict-affected populations. Such a program could address three key elements:
a

Prevention could involve the expansion o f the Bank’s current Peace and
Development project as well as the Protection o f Patrimonial Assets grant (which
focuses on land ownership for rural families at risk), the pursuit o f universal access
to basic education and health for families in high conflict zones (through Familias
en Accidn investment loans), and protection o f the assets o f the poor.

a

Reintegration could involve the revitalization of municipalities andor regions with
high numbers o f demobilized individuals via rural infrastructure provision (roads
and markets), education and psycho-social support for ex-combatants, as well as
credit and technical assistance for productive asset accumulation. The Bank has
been asked to support the Government in designing and, administering a Multidonor Trust Fund for Peace-Building, which i s also expected to catalyze significant
private sector participation.

a

Bank assistance for reparation and reconciliation could include the design o f a
program for victim reparations in line with the options presented in recent

35 The GEF-funded Silvo Pastoral project developed “ago-eco-tourism” activities that could be expanded to enhance
service provision and incomes in remote areas. Emerging international carbon markets also offer opportunities to capture
value-added from environmental assets, as well as carbon sequestration and storage via land use, land use change and
forestry activities.

20

completed ESW, complemented by resources from the Familias en Accidn loan for
eligible internally displaced families and victims o f the violent conflict. Post
Conflict Fund and IDF Grants could be used to support consensus building efforts,
knowledge sharing and institutional strengthening-leveraging the convening role
o f the WBG to bring together key parties to build consensus o n the best options and
lines o f action for the country to move out o f the conflict.

All activities under this pillar would be developed with multiple Government
58.
stakeholders and would also include technical and financial support to enhance the
effectiveness o f both control and judicial mechanisms related to peace activities.
V. A State at the Service o f i t s Citizens: Efficient and Effective Government

59.
This pillar i s a cross-cutting thematic area that supports the achievement o f the
Government’s goals in social and economic development. Institutional reforms to improve
governance and public sector management are necessary ingredients for improved service
delivery and economic policy making.

public sector management and good governance and has supported initiatives in justice and tax
administration, financial management, procurement, asset management, legal defense o f the State, public
investment, evaluation and results-based management, among others. Procurement i s a key area o f
governance and IBRD has supported improvements to the national procurement law, and helped strengthen
the institutional framework for procurement while at the same time working jointly with other MDBs to
harmonize bidding documents. In addition to these efforts, the Bank w i l l respond to Government requests to
support its good governance goals36and will focus on areas o f comparative advantage highlighted in the L A C
region’s Governance Strategy, which include initiatives in civil service, external control, social monitoring,
monitoring and evaluation, building statistical capacity, public asset and income disclosure and combating
money laundering, among others.

60.
The Bank and Government are currently exploring ways in which the Bank can
support next-generation efforts to promote good governance over the next CPS period and
stimulate citizen participation the various stages o f public policy making. Some potential
areas o f involvement, which coincide with the World Bank L A C Region’s governance
strategy, include initiatives in c i v i l service, external control, evaluation and social
monitoring, public asset and income disclosure, as well as an increased engagement at the
subnational level. Activities in progress or under discussion include:
36 The National Development Plan includes an Anti-Corruption program, the main elements of which include, i)
promoting normative reforms to achieve better coordination with territorial entities at the national level, ii)updating the
Anticorruption iii)strengthening the involvement of the Presidential Program for Fighting Corruption in the monitoring
and investigation o f corrupt practices, iv) private sector adopts self-regulation agreements that promote exemplary
entrepreneurial practices and provide a transparent framework for relations between public and private administration,
and v) provide early childhood education in moral and ethical concepts to build a culture o f legality.

21

Tax Administration and Public Sector Institutional Reforms. IBRD has been
supporting Government efforts to improve tax administration which has yielded
substantial gains in both revenue performance and reductions in the administrative
cost o f paying taxes. The key instrument has been the first and second public
administration projects (“MAPF” I1 & 11). These projects also supported broader
public reforms and additional financing i s under discussion to support efficient tax
and customs administration and public expenditure management. Also under
consideration are NLTNloans to support implementation o f transfers reforms,
pension reform and/or results-based budgeting.
Procurement Reforms for Improved Expenditure Efficiency. IBRD has also
been supporting improvements to the National Procurement Law and the
institutional framework for procurement through NLTA and direct advice from its
regional procurement specialists. The Bank i s also working with other MDBs
towards harmonization o f bidding documents.
Royalty Management. IFC’s Enhancing Local Benefits Program aims to maximize
the socio-economic benefits communities can derive from large private sector
operations (mainly extractive industries). I F C works with i t s client companies,
private associations and governments to improve the management o f local
government revenues derived from clients’ operations, to achieve more effective
local investments and greater transparency. IBRD has prepared a study on
decentralization (which includes an analysis o f the royalties issue) to which I F C
could contribute i t s royalties management experiences in the o i l and mining sector.
Decentralization. A variety o f instruments could assist Colombia in improving
Government performance at the subnational levels: these include sector- specific or
multi-sector TA focused on departments or municipalities, and/or multi-sector
DPLs. Ongoing (and planned) decentralized service delivery operations in the solid
waste and water sectors also have important governance goals. Recent AAA on
decentralization could lay the groundwork for future initiatives, including assistance
to DNP in implementingthe reform o f the intergovernmental transfer system.
Anti-Corruption, Transparency, Results Monitoring and Judicial Sector
Strengthening. The Government has been stepping-up efforts to improve
governance and the WBG has been supportive o f those efforts at a country and
project level (see Box 3). A FY08 TA loan to support monitoring, evaluation and
information systems i s intended to mainstream new processes in budget and policy
design, including subnational governments. In addition, a second phase loan for
Justice Sector system strengthening is under preparation.

The WBG’s FYO8-FYO9 Indicative Program

61.
The WBG and Government have agreed on a proposed program o f up to U S $ 4
billion for the next four years from IBRD (approximately U S $ 1 billion per year) and U S $
300-400 million annually from IFC. In line with the Bank’s M I C agenda, a rolling
programming approach will be used, whereby the CPS pipeline will be determined during

22

annual reviews held in conjunction with results-based C P P R S . ~Results
~
will be measured
using the NDP's monitoring indicators3*in line with the Results Matrix in Annex I.
62.
In addition to traditional ESW, the AAA program i s likely to include a number o f
shorter, fast response, studies or policy notes or non-lending technical assistance. In the
past, the Bank has worked closely with local research institutes and the central bank in both
the preparation and dissemination o f AAA. These cooperative approaches are expected to
intensify in the coming years.
The table below summarizes the potential areas o f WBG support in FY08-09 which
63.
have been discussed with the Government.
rable 4: Indicative WBG Lending and AAA Program
FY-08 Lending Program
Commitment US$ million
Antioquia Education (approved)
20
Productive Partnerships (approved)
30
Increasing Access to Higher Education (approved) 300
Promoting Rural Education
40
Business Efficiency I11D D O
u p t o 650
Departmental Water and Sanitation
75
Building National M & E Systems
9
IFC Financinghnvestments
300/400

FY-08 AAA
Education Quality
Informality Programmatic
Poverty and Jobs for the Poor
SME Finance (delivered)
Alternative Energy
IFC - Business Climate
IFC - Public Private Partnerships
I F C - M S M E - Access to Finance
I F C - Business Simplification

FY09 Lending Program
Familias en Accion I1
Solid Waste Management
Macro-Urban Projects
Improving Municipal Services
Justice Sector Strengthening
Peace and Development I1
Sustainable Development I11D P L D D O
IFC FinancingAnvestments

FY-09 AAA
Education Quality I1
Health System Modernization
Financial Sector Access
Poverty and Jobs for the Poor I1
Peace Programmatic I11and NLTA
IFC - O i l Royalties Management
IFC - Technical Assistance
IFC - Regional Competitiveness
Subnational Capacity Building
Private Pension Costs and Regulation
Sumort to Transfer Reform

G.

Fiduciary and Safeguard Implementation

64.
During this CPS period, use o f country systems in financial management,
procurement and safeguards will be increased as the Bank works closely with the
Government to support i t s efforts to continue strengthening i t s policy and institutional

While this CPS i s not fully programmed in advance, there are areas in which the Government has either asked for or
indicated it intends to seek Bank support, including tackling extreme poverty and regional inequality, infrastructure and
public services, competitiveness, public sector management, the environment, education, social protection, housing,
transportation services, energy and mining, agriculture, and peace-building. In addition, collaboration on financial
services and banking and risk management products i s likely to intensify.
38 http://www.sigob.gov.co/pnd/pnd.aspx, under "Objetivos y Estrategias del PND" contains all o f the NDP monitoring
indicators organized by pillar.
37

23

framework to enhance the development effectiveness o f Colombia’s public expenditure^.^'
These efforts will be supported by on-going joint capacity building activities (IBRDIADB/others).
In financial management, Colombia i s moving rapidly towards the full use o f
65.
country systems. Agreements between the Bank and the Government during the December
2005 CPPR, followed by Bank technical assistance, have led to (i)
most project financial
accounting and reporting being generated from the central government’s own financial
information system (SIIF); (ii)the widespread use o f national institutions for project
management (with PIUs used only under exceptional circumstances); and (iii)
agreement
that the Controller General will be the default external auditor o f Bank-financed projects.
The intention i s to extend such provisions to the sub-national level, with suitable
adaptation. The Bank i s in the process of agreeing o n national Standard Bidding
Documents which are consistent with both Bank policy and national law and incorporate
acceptable features o f the latter. This will be an important step to make further progress on
country systems.
In relation to safeguards, the Bank has begun to promote the progressive
66.
alignment o f Colombian systems with Bank policies through support for targeted actions
that would be carried out during the upcoming CPS period and beyond. While not
representing formal country systems piloting as per O P B P 4.00, these actions center on the
policy reforms and institutional capacity improvements needed to adopt Colombia’s own
norms and institutions for managing social and environmental opportunities and risks in the
long term. As a first step, a rapid assessment o f Colombian safeguards systems and
institutions that was recently undertaken found an overlap o f at least 80 percent between
the country’s legal and regulatory frameworks and the Bank’s safeguards policies. This i s
partly due to the Bank’s strong engagement and support during the last CAS period, in both
AAA and policy lending. During this CPS, safeguard issues will be addressed through a
more consistent programmatic framework based on country-wide diagnostics. This i s
expected to contribute to improved quality and consistency in individual projects, simplify
project processing, and reduce transaction costs.

H.

Other Partners and the Paris Declaration

The Colombian Government has signed the Paris Declaration and is committed to
67.
implementing i t s principles. The Government exercises full ownership o f i t s development
agenda and has taken a strong lead in coordinating international donors. The Bank’s
ensuing program i s aligned with the country’s development plan and thus automatically
complements other international cooperation programs.

39 Regarding procurement in particular, reform launched by the GOC i s promising and the Bank will continue to monitor
and support it with the objective of increasing progressive reliance on the country systems within the CPS period and
beyond. However, the level o f this reliance will depend on the outcome o f the regulatory and intuitional reforms
underway and the Board’s approval of the proposed policy for use country systems for procurement. The Bank and the
Government will carry out a full assessment of the domestic procurement system using the OECD-DAC benchmarking
tool and will continuously update this baseline as reforms progress.

24

Results based management i s also high on the Government’s agenda. The
68.
Government’s monitoring system (SIGOB) assesses progress against the national
development strategy goals. A three-party (Government, international cooperation, and
civil society) coordination mechanism known as the “G24 Coordination Group” meets
regularly to discuss strategy and track the delivery o f all international cooperation provided
to Colombia. The Government and the Bank also hold annual portfolio reviews (CPPRs)
which will in hture be results rather than project-based. Progress towards the Paris
Declaration commitments i s presented at the end o f Annex B.
I.

Program Envelope and Projected Exposure

69.
The Government’s track record regarding macroeconomic and debt management
has been strong. The economy has been growing at close to 7 percent annually, the
investment rate is above 20 percent o f GDP, and the consolidated public sector deficit i s
about 1 percent o f GDP. W h i l e potential risks s t i l l exist, the Government has made
significant progress to improve i t s debt profile. Gross Non-Financial Public Sector Debt
has been reduced to about 38 percent o f GDP, with the average maturity profile increasing
to 3.7 years and foreign currency exposure reduced to 28 percent o f total debt. IBRD has
increased i t s share o f debt to 5.5 percent o f the total, making the IBRD the Government’s
largest single creditor, followed closely by the IADB which holds 5.3 percent o f total debt.
box 4. Debt and Risk Management
The Colombian authorities have been actively managing a number o f potential risks o n the
Government’s balance sheet, including currency, interest rate, and refinancing risks, as w e l l as contingent
liabilities related t o infrastructure guarantees and sub-national debt. Potential natural disaster risks are also
being addressed and the authorities are looking at potential commodity price risks a l l with in their MTEF.
Colombia has been a leading country in LCR in taking f i l l advantage o f IBRD’s banking products and
financial services in order to manage some o f i t s balance sheet risks, particularly interest rate and currency
risks. Colombia has signed the f i r s t Master Derivatives Agreement with the W o r l d Bank that would allow
managing the risk at the balance sheet level. I t has executed numerous risk management transactions
using the flexibility o f IBRD Fixed Spread Loans and has taken a leading role in using local currency
financing. To date, Colombia’s sub-national borrowers have completed 4 currency conversions into
Colombian pesos (COP) o f USD-denominated IBRD loans, with an aggregate amount exceeding the
equivalent o f U S $ 145 million. This in turn has helped to reduce the currency risk exposure in the
contingent liability at the central level due t o the guarantees o f these loans.
Collaboration between Colombia and IBRD o n banking products and financial services i s likely to
intensify. Discussions are currently underway t o continue such local currency conversions as w e l l as t o
potentially implement innovative financial structures that could further assist the funding and risk
management needs o f the Colombian Government at the central as w e l l as the sub-sovereign level.

70.
The Government and the WBG have agreed that as long as the Government
maintains strong macroeconomic performance, effective poverty alleviation programs, and
a well-managed WBG portfolio, an overall financial envelope o f up to U S $ 4 billion in new
commitments from IBRD will be made available over the four year CPS period.
71.
Given a program o f US$ 1 billion in annual commitments (of which half would be
quick-disbursing loans and the other half investment loans), I B R D ’ s exposure could
increase to U S $ 7.4 billion by the end o f FY11. The increase in exposure will be
continuously monitored consistent with Bank credit risk practices.

25

The Government has also expressed interest in the use o f contingent financing
72.
mechanisms as a risk management mechanism. I B R D ' s revised Deferred Drawdown
Option would constitute an attractive mechanism for the Government to secure low-cost
contingent finan~ing.~'

73.
Should the Government's financing needs be lower, or should macroeconomic
management, the effectiveness o f i t s social programs or the quality o f the Bank's portfolio
deteriorate, IBRD would reduce the overall financial envelope.
J.

Results Monitoring

In addition to annual CPPRs, the mid-term CPS Progress Report, the Bank intends
74.
to monitor the results under the CPS from three additional angles, in conjunction with the
Results Matrix in Annex I. First, NDP monitoring: The Government o f Colombia i s
strongly committed to monitor the implementation o f its development program. Towards
this end, the Government developed a system called Sistema de Seguimiento a Metas de
Gobierno" (SIGOB-Management and Monitoring System of the Objectives of the
G~vernment).~'It i s regularly updated and provides the basic framework for resultsoriented monitoring and evaluation. Since the CPS i s driven by the Government's NDP,
the Bank would evaluate, as one dimension under its results-monitoring o f the CPS, how
effective the Government i s in achieving i t s own development vision and objectives.
Those objectives have been detailed in the NDP and the Bank will monitor the overall
progress o f the Government's own benchmarks.

75.
Second, AAA monitoring. The Bank's knowledge products are meant to contribute
to the public policy process. These products will not be linked to the country outcomes per
se but rather be judged on criteria o f their quality, relevance, and sustainability. The
quality o f the Bank's AAA can be assessed based on (i)
the feedback from the client; (ii)
periodic evaluations o f a sample o f knowledge products from outside experts, from
Colombia, the region, and globally; and (iii)
the Bank's internal evaluations. The relevance
o f the Bank's knowledge products can be assessed by whether the Government invites the
Bank to contribute to Colombia's high-priority policy issues and whether the policies that
the Government pursues reflect Bank's advice. The Bank does not expect directly
attributable outcomes, but does believe that when advice has been useful the Bank's input
will be evident in the resulting policy reform. Finally, the sustainability o f the Bank's
provision o f knowledge products will be the market test, i.e. whether the Government will
continue demanding the Bank's AAA services.

Third, project monitoring. The Bank's active investment program constitutes a
76.
third dimension in monitoring CPS results. At the individual project level, the Bank will
track key results indicators for each project. In this context, only fully satisfactory
performance will be acceptable with respect to the Development Objectives and
40See Board Paper "Proposal to Enhance the IBRD Referral Drawdown Option (DDO) And To Introduce A DDO Option
for CatastrophicRisk" dated March 4, 2008.
4'

www.sigob.gov.co/vn,nd/vnd.asvx

26

Implementation Performance indicators. The Bank and the Government will jointly
monitor this part o f the CPS implementation with the annual CPPRs. I t is important to note
that Colombia i s a leader and innovator in sharing project successes with other countries
through various forms of south-south
and i t is expected that this trend will
continue during this CPS, with Bank support where requested.

K.

Risks

77.
Most o f the risks identified in 2002-increased conflict, economic deterioration,
stalled reforms-did not materialize, other than difficulty gaining congressional support for
some key reforms, Instead, Colombia made impressive gains over the last CAS period and
now enjoys greatly reduced risks on both the security and economic front. However, risks
do remain, the major elements o f which are summarized below.
External

78.
Trade. The external environment that has proved so favorable since the last CAS
(commodity prices, interest rates, and strong demand from Colombia’s two main trading
partners, the U S and Venezuela) could change, affecting Colombia’s fiscal accounts. In
particular, any major disruption o f trade with Venezuela could have a significant effect on
Colombia’s trade balance as Venezuela represents the second largest destination o f
Colombia’s exports (about 2 percent o f GDP). Efforts to improve the country’s
competitiveness, in general, reduce these risks. Colombia i s also actively engaged in
negotiating bilateral free trade agreements with a number o f large economies while the
Free Trade Agreement with the United States i s pending ratification by the U S Congress.
Further, despite the real appreciation o f last two years, the real effective exchange rate
remains near historical averages for the last two decades and it i s substantially less
appreciated than the level that preceded the economic crisis o f 1999.

Finance. The ongoing problems in U S and European financial sectors stemming
79.
from the subprime mortgage crisis could lead to increased borrowing costs by developing
countries like Colombia. The current global financial environment could adversely affect
net capital flows to Colombia and other emerging market economies. To minimize external
risks, the Government has reduced the foreign currency share o f its public debt, and the
combined external debt o f both the public and private sector i s now about 30 percent o f
GDP. In addition, international reserves have increased substantially and stand at over
U S $ 20 billion at the end o f January, 2008. Bank debt sustainability analyses show that
Colombia i s likely to be resilient to a number o f shock scenarios.

42 For example, Colombia hosted a study tour to share the design o f their Conditional Cash Transfer program with
countries as diverse as the Philippines and Ecuador. Similarly Colombia’s Social Targeting System i s being replicated in
the Dominican Republic and Ecuador, while the Transmilenio Mass Transport System has attracted significant
international attention and i s being replicated in several large cities around the world.

27

Domestic

80.
Overheating o f the Economy. Continued rapid economic growth brings with i t
the risk o f overheating-the current account deficit reached about 4 percent o f GDP last
year. FDI flows last year exceeded the size o f the current account deficit, and total external
debt i s below 30 percent o f GDP, making it likely that the country will be able to manage
this potential problem without serious dislocation. Additional efforts at fiscal consolidation
could also lower the risk o f overheating. Other domestic risks include Colombia’s
vulnerability to natural disasters and rising inflation. Since M a y 2006, the Central Bank
adopted measures to alleviate demand pressures on prices. Twelve increases o f 25 basis
points in the rate o f the monetary policy have taken place, and at the beginning o f 2007
additional measures were adopted to correct the high growth rate o f banking sector loans.
Regarding natural disasters, Government i s working with local authorities (with IBRD
support) to improve land use planning and regulation to reduce the costs o f and
vulnerability to potential future natural disasters.

81.
Political. Peace has not been secured throughout the entire country and poverty,
corruption, and the drug trade remain significant challenges. The Government has recently
suffered setbacks on the political front with the arrest o f several congressmen and one
senior official for l i n k s to paramilitary organizations. Should the scandal widen or come
closer to the administration or the security situation deteriorate, political consensusparticularly between the Executive and Congress-could unravel.
82.
However, the Government recognizes these challenges and has launched major
initiatives to address them, particularly within the context o f the National Development
Plan. The President’s major policies are on strong footing and the fact that he was reelected in M a y o f 2006 with 56 percent o f the popular vote and has maintained strong
popular support (around 70 percent) signals a fairly strong consensus for advancing his
Government’s social/economic reforms and for continuing his democratic security policy.
Also, in the October 2007 elections, the coalition o f parties that support President Uribe
increased their dominance over Colombia’s larger cities and provinces.
83.
Social Cohesion. While the immediate economic and political outlook i s positive,
the Government still faces daunting problems. First, i t must continue to combat various
armed groups, while at the same time reintegrating thousands o f former combatants into
civilian life, providing them sufficient incentives not to re-arm or re-engage in illegal
activity. Secondly, despite some improvements, narcotrafficking s t i l l flourishes in
Colombia, financing both guerilla and paramilitary forces and contributing to violence,
poverty, corruption, insecurity and illegal spin-off activities. And long standing structural
problems o f extreme poverty and inequality continue to haunt the country, and could, if l e f t
unattended, fuel new cycles o f instability.

28

Risks to the World Bank Group
84.
Working at Subnational Level. As the Bank intensifies i t s engagement at the subnational level, fiduciary and safeguard risks will increase-as will the costs o f attendant
mitigation mechanisms. The Bank may also face potential reputational risks as i t expands
i t s support into regions where local governments are subject to the influence o f illegal
groups and other actors. The central government’s commitment to work with the subnational authorities and the Bank to embed strong fiduciary measures will help offset these
potential risks.

85.
MIC Strategy. The Government has been very successful in changing i t s debt
profile and managing i t s debt strategically, using local currency and accessing international
capital markets, with a clear eye o n competitiveness. While the Bank remains competitive
in terms o f pricing, the challenge will be to continue to reduce the non-financial transaction
costs to the client and ensure that the Bank’s technical expertise and advisory services are
cutting-edge, and responsive to rapidly changing needs. Thus, a sophisticated middleincome country like Colombia is an important test for demonstrating that the WBG can
deliver on i t s M I C strategy of more flexible, focused and fast client-driven support.
In summary, political, economic, and operational risks are s t i l l present, making i t
86.
essential that practical mitigation measures are implemented and that risks are continuously
and openly assessed. The annual reviews o f the WBG’s program would also allow for
reassessment o f both risks and the appropriate risk mitigation measures. However, i t is
important to emphasize that while risks exist, as they have in previous CASs, the potential
rewards o f large scale engagement in Colombia are very high, as demonstrated clearly by
the successes achieved over the last CAS period.

***

29

CPS Annex A
Private Sector Strategy

1.
Colombia's private sector development suffered greatly from the macroeconomic
and banking sector crisis of the late 199Os, early 2000s, as well as the tremendous costs
associated with the deteriorating security situation over that period. Private sector
investment was a mere 8 percent o f GDP in 2002. It has doubled since then as both the
macroeconomic context and business climate have improved.
Private Sector Trends and Challenges
Real GDP per Capita, IS60 to 2006
1960=100

2.

Macro Context. Colombia's long term
macroeconomic performance i s known for its
moderate but relatively stable growth compared
to other Latin American countries. Colombia
avoided debt defaults and the hyperinflation that
numerous countries experienced, and economic
growth varied less dramatically despite largely
following regional trends over the last 45 years.
Colombia's most severe economic crisis since
1960 was without doubt the 1999 crisis that led
to stagnating growth for several subsequent
years.

I3

0

250

0

1

1

200

150
100

3.
The deceleration o f growth o f the 1980s and 1990s was accompanied by a
deceleration in total factor productivity. The growth accounting below shows how
productivity gains have been much slower in the 199Os, and in recent years, as compared to
the rapid productivity gains o f the 1970s.
Colombia: Growth Accounting
Colombia

GDP
Capital
Labor
TFP

19701975

19761980

5.65
-1.39
3.23
4.04

5.37
0.29
3.27
3.15

19811985

19861990

19911995

19962000

20012005

2.24
2.12
3.12
-0.52

4.94
2.60
2.53
2.39

4.13
4.35
2.44
1.03

0.92
2.44
2.25
-1.40

3.42
2.07
2.07
1.36

I

Source: World Bank. (2007a), as cited in World Bank (2007b). Calculations use WDI data for GDP, labor
growth and gross investment. Capital i s computed using an inventory rule assuming a 7 percent depreciation
o f the capital stock and an initial capital to output ratio o f 5. The share o f capital comes from Loayza, et. al.
(2004).

4.
As noted above, at the end o f the 199Os, Colombia faced its worst economic crisis
in decades. Growth had been strong in the mid 1990s; however, there were major asset
bubbles - particularly in the housing sector - that proved to be unsustainable. The crisis
i t s e l f was caused by a combination o f factors, including: a deteriorating security situation
and ensuing political stress, a crisis in the banking system, and an earthquake in the coffeeproducing region o f the country.

30

Investment as a share o f GDP plummeted when the crisis hit in the late 199Os, and
5.
only in recent years the ratio has returned to a level above 20 percent. With last year’s
investment rate o f 23 o f percent o f GDP, sustained growth o f around 5 percent may be
feasible. Several key factors have contributed to the positive developments: first and
foremost, the improved security situation domestically; global liquidity and increased
foreign direct investment; and the recovery o f the financial system. These trends have
continued into the first h a l f o f 2007. One concern has been that capital inflows have
resulted in an appreciation o f the real exchange rate. Part o f this has been reversed
recently, and in general terms, the real exchange rate is not out o f line with historical
averages.

With real exchange rates appreciating but s t i l l not out o f line from historical
6.
averages, the focus o f attention i s o n the microeconomic determinants o f productivity.
Colombia has made progress in reducing the administrative cost o f doing business through
a variety o f reforms, including landmark anti-bureaucratic process legislation (‘Ley Antitrdmite”) that was approved in 2005. The Government also established “one-stop shops” to
make i t easier for firms to register and license their businesses. Progress in financial sector
stability, regulation and expansion has led to lower financing costs and broader access to
credit. The Government has also improved the system for product quality standards, and
there are plans for major transport infrastructure investment to facilitate international trade.
I F C has provided extensive advise support to the municipality o f Bogoth’ in piloting a
successfwl program for the reduction and simplification o f trdmites that now i s being
expanded to other cities.
Despite this progress, Colombia’s performance in Doing Business indicators reveal
7.
a broad range o f outcomes relative to regional and international comparators. The table
below displays some o f the relative indicators. Colombia performs relatively well in terms
o f the cost o f starting a business, including the cost o f registering the business; however,
licensing requirements are s t i l l very costly relative to regional and OECD averages.
Colombia i s also a relative outlier in terms o f the cost to export. Part o f this i s driven by
the fact that export production centers are located far from ports; however, part o f this cost
i s driven by less than ideal transport infrastructure along with regulatory problems in the
trucking industry (as noted in last year’s World Bank report o n transport logistics).

Source: Doing Business 2008 (datafor 2007)

The Bank also conducted an enterprise survey o f investment climate variables. The
8.
analysis o f the data (conducted in 2006) indicates that variables related to red tape,

31

corruption and crime and to infrastructure present the higher relative impacts on
productivity. The results show that for infrastructure the three most important factors for
average productivity are: (i)
days to clear customs; (ii)
wait for electricity supply, and (iii)
shipment losses. Under the general category o f “red tape”, crime and corruption, court
conflicts, security costs and crime losses have a relatively high impact on aggregate
productivity. Finally, regarding the category o f product quality, innovation and labor
skills, the overall relative impact i s lower than what has been found in other Latin
American countries.

9.
Colombia has made important strides in increasing both traditional and nontraditional exports over the last decade. Total exports (goods and non-factor services) as a
share o f GDP increased from 13 percent in 1996 to 20 percent in 2006. This has been
achieved despite substantial geographic challenges for transport with major industrial
centers located in the Andean highlands (two separate mountain ranges) distant from
coastal ports. Lowering the cost o f the movement o f goods i s a key factor for export led
private sector development.
10.
The main weaknesses in the freight logistics system in Colombia are not restricted
to hard infrastructure, but deal with regulations and government-managed processes. A
recent Bank report showed that the freight logistics complex should be approached with a
broader perspective, including transport infrastructure and services, business logistics
development, and trade facilitation processes. Three main problems were found to be
particularly critical: (a) the trucking industry, (b) public use ports, and (c) inspections in
international gateways (see World Bank, 2006).
Figure: M a i n freight logistics problems in Colombia, key problems underlined
HIGHWAYS

Bottleneck in critical segments, geometry

TRUCKING INDUSTRY Low efficiency and quality of service

Bottlenecks for coal: no participation in other
markets
INLAND NAVIGATION Great potential, navigational constraints
AIRPORTS

PORTS

Need to expand freight facilities
A 2“dgeneration regulatory reform badly
needed

Lack of efficient standards, procedures and
information systems: i.e.: port-truck
SCM

SMES with logistics costs three time higher
than averaoe

Source: Adaptedpom World Bank (2006~).

11.
A recent worldwide survey o f operational staff in freight forwarding shows that
Colombia logistics performance i s frail, even by L A C regional standards, particularly in the
management o f customs and border procedures. The Logistics Perception Index (LPI) was
estimated for 150 countries, based on seven sub-indexes. Hard data on the logistics
environment and physical performance indicators were collected as well for 110 countries,

32

including Colombia.’ Colombia ranked 82 out o f 150, with some sub-indexes performing
very low, particularly “Efficiency o f Customs and Other Border Procedures”. Sub-indexes
reveal that Colombia’s weaknesses are not just infrastructure, but mostly in the inspection
procedures and logistics service organization.
Finance

12.
Though financing to the private sector has been increasing during the last two years,
the system remains very shallow when compared to other countries in the region and lack
o f financing remains a key bottleneck to firm’s expansion as reflected on most enterprise
surveys. Increasing such depth and efficiency o f the financial system will require lowering
the costs associated with financial sector activities and continuing implementation o f
policies for markets development while ensuring that prudential supervision continues to be
strengthened.
Domestic Credit to the Primte Sector
(% of GDP)
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Source: World Development Indicators, data for 2005

13.
W h i l e there has been substantial progress on the financial sector, credit to the
private sector represents about 25 percent o f GDP, less than the 60 percent average for
middle income countries. Debt markets have deepened considerably-average annual bond
issues (including private and public) in 2004-05 where almost three times the average
reached in 2001-03. However, penetration i s still somewhat low: total bond issues in 2005
totaled US$2.2 billion, or about 2 percent o f GDP. Forty-three percent o f these were placed
by private sector companies in eight issues. The equity market i s s t i l l underdeveloped as
only 98 companies are listed and only one industrial conglomerate account for 60 percent
o f the market capitalization.
Government Strategy and Programs

The Government has placed a strong focus on competitiveness. The National
14.
Development Plan and the earlier “Colombia Vision 2019” led to an “Internal Agenda” for
World Bank - GFP - Turku: Measuring Global Connections.

33

improving competitiveness. This was based on consultations that involved some 22,000
participants over the 2004-2005 period. The process identified 293 critical productive
sectors at the regional level, 108 strategies for intervention, 1,287 “necessities” for regions,
etc. Implementing the recommendations clearly represents an institutional challengeespecially in terms o f focusing on detailed regional or sectoral initiatives.
15.
That said, on a national level, Colombia has made progress in reducing the
administrative cost o f doing business through a variety o f reforms, including landmark antibureaucratic process legislation (“Ley Anti-trhite”) that was approved in 2005. The
Government also established “one-stop shops” to make it easier for firms to register and
license their businesses. Progress in financial sector stability, regulation and expansion has
led to lower financing costs and broader access to credit. The “Opportunities Bank”
program (Banca de Oportunidades) has helped to coordinate the efforts o f existing
financial intermediaries to expand access to bank services in numerous regions. The
Government has also improved the system for product quality standards, and there are
plans for major transport infrastructure investment to facilitate international trade.

Recent progress was validated by the Doing Business 2008 team, and Colombia
16.
was named one o f the top 10 reformers. The main areas o f improvement cited were in the
areas o f protection o f investors, ease o f paying taxes and trade across borders. I t should be
noted, however, that in the latter two categories there i s substantial room for improvement
with the rankings at 167 and 105 respectively.
The Government’s tax reform last year was intended to provide stronger incentives
17.
for private sector investment. The treatment o f investment expenditures by f i r m s in the
corporate income tax i s certainly favorable. With the combination o f partial up-front
expensing and gradual depreciation, there i s an implicit subsidy to new capital investment.
There remains unequal treatment across sectors due to a wide array o f special exemptions
for particular sectors.
In transport and logistics, there i s a major effort to launch a concessions program
18.
for regional highways. The National Development Plan highlights a number o f highway
routes that would be top priority in this process. In addition, the Government i s working
with subnational governments to improve secondary roads. The Plan also outlines
activities to improve river transport, better transport connection nodes and portdairports.

19.
The financial sector has consolidated, systemic stability has been restored but the
coverage o f the sector remains limited. The Government i s seeking to address this through
three sets o f policies:
a.

Increasing financial sector eficiency by preparing a Financial Sector Reform Law
to (a) liberalize the type o f products that can be offered by financial institutions; (b)
allow the creation o f multiple portfolios in the private pensions industry
(multifondos); (c) facilitate cross-border financial transactions allowing the creation

o f foreign branches and the acquisition o f insurance abroad by Colombian entities;
and (d) strengthen the independence o f the Superintendencia Financiera by
increasing the legal protection to its staff,

34

b.

Strengthening creditor rights and credit supply through (a) the preparation o f a
legal reform to the C i v i l Code to streamline executive processes to liquidate

collateral (procesos ejecutivos); (b) implementation o f the Habeas Data L a w
through the issuance o f the decrees necessary to regulate the L a w including the
definition o f standard information to the reported for each counterparty; and (c)
issuance o f a decree by M H C P liberalizing the interest rate regime by establishing
risk-adjusted predatory lending interest rate caps; and
c.

Fostering access to financial services for the poor through the (a) enactment o f a
tax reform law exempting from financial transactions tax basic savings account for
the poor; (b) issuance by M H C P o f a decree democratizing access to the capital
markets by allowing the creation o f brokerage agencies; (c) issuance by M H C P o f a

decree streamlining data requirements to open savings accounts; and (d) budgetary
allocation o f resources to subsidize on a declining basis the opening o f banking
branches in underserved areas.
20.
In terms o f policy formulation, the Government plans to establish a Technical
Support Committee for Transport and Logistics comprised o f public and private sector
representatives. They are also in the process o f preparing two CONPES, one for toll roads
and another for a National Logistics Plan (expected in March 2008).
IFC and the Colombian Private Sector - Five Decades o f a Strong Partnership

Colombia joined the I F C in 1956 and three year later, IFC committed its first
investment operation in the country: a US$ 0.5 million loan to a pulp and paper company.
Since then, the Corporation has provided US$1.72 billion, including syndications, for 66
companies in 75 projects. About half o f these commitments were made in the period after
opening our Bogota office in 2001. During the past five decades, IFC provided risk capital
and long-term finance, as well as technical assistance, to infrastructure, financial sector, o i l

21.

and gas, and general manufacturing.
Colombia i s one o f the countries that for decades has sought and followed WBG
22.
advice on several fronts, including private sector development. For instance, in the 1960s
the World Bank provided support to develop the mortgage sector. In the 1970s and early
1980s, a similar approach took place with the Development Finance Corporations with the
World Bank coming in to advise and establish these financial intermediaries, and IFC
providing both equity and debt. These institutions played a catalytic role in channeling
financing to emerging local companies and groups during those years. During the late
1990s Colombia went through a severe recession and the WBG responded with strong
support. W h i l e the World Bank provided policy advice and budget support lending, the
IFC provided critical support for the restructuring o f the backbone o f Colombia's industrial
and financial sectors.
These activities included, among others, support for the
modernization and expansion of Bavaria, the Grupo Empresarial Antioqueiio conglomerate,
2"d tier banks like Davivienda, and emerging 2ndtier groups like Grupo Carvajal.
In Colombia, IFC has introduced and implemented some o f the most innovative
23.
products and services in the region and worldwide. I F C was the first supranational
institution to issue bonds in Colombia, known as El Dorado and has also provided partial
credit guarantees to diverse entities in order to facilitate access to local capital markets,

35

including the first securitization o f Non Performing Loans from several mortgage
institutions. IFC has also supported key projects in housing finance, provided direct
investments in companies that promote growth and employment but have limited access to
finance, and funded infrastructure projects. IFC’s clients in Colombia have been leaders in
the areas o f corporate governance.
24.
I F C support during the last CAS period. IFC’s strategy, outlined in the FY2003
CAS, aimed to help in broad-based “reactivation” o f the country’s economic growth by
promoting an increase in private sector investment and activity, and more broadly-based
growth. The strategy was updated in the FY2006 Progress Report, centering on: (i)
strengthening and deepening of financial sector institutions and local financial markets to
better serve the needs o f local companies, including SMEs and micro enterprises; (ii)
the
development o f infrastructure, including potential public-private partnerships and support
to sub-national entities in the provision o f infrastructure, in coordination with the Bank as
warranted; (iii)investment in extractive industries; and (iv) the modernization o f
Colombian businesses to help improve their competitiveness and support their expansion
both domestically and abroad.
25.
Consistent with these priorities, IFC committed a total o f U S $ 720 million, in
January 2003 - June 2007, diverse sectors, including the financial sector, infrastructure, o i l
and gas, and manufacturing; and helped improve the competitiveness o f the Colombian
private sector.
In the financial sector, I F C played a key role in helping shape a more efficient
26.
capital market in Colombia and in developing a sound regulatory framework, both in
collaboration with the Government, the private sector and LBRD. Support was provided
through innovative ways, including: initiating first Colombian Peso-denominated bonds
issued by a multilateral financial institution- El Dorado, assisting with the establishment o f
Colombia’s first secondary mortgage company, strengthening institutional investors, and
consolidating the domestic capital market with partial credit guarantees for corporate bonds
as well as debt and equity facilities to leading financial groups.
During the CAS period, IFC supported housing finance, micro and SME finance,
27.
and domestic securities market, providing U S $ 228 million in equity investments and U S $
350 million in debt facilities. Financing was mostly in local currency. In housingfinance,
aiming to deepen the liquidity o f the mortgage market and foster Colombia’s capital
markets, IFC continued to back the transformation o f the mortgage sector. IFC’s primary
support was through partial credit guarantees. I t included IFC’s support for the issuance o f
non-performing mortgage-backed securities, a first in the L A C region, which received a
very favorable response from investors. I F C also assisted a former savings and loans
institution which was shifting i t s business focus from financing mortgages to origination
and securitization and repositioning i t s e l f as a universal bank. Inmicro and SMEfinance,
I F C placed a greater focus on this sector starting in FY2006, with the aim to broaden
address access to financial services to lower-income groups. A total financing o f U S $ 57.5
million was provided to microfinance institutions and other well-established local players
promoting SME and micro credit products through the formal banking system to support
expansion o f their operations. In addition, in FY2006-07, IFC offered a partial credit
guarantee for the first bond issue by a leading local brokerage (pending disbursement) and

36

invested equity in the company to help it reduce i t s reliance on commercial bank funding,
and further facilitate market liquidity and activity in the domestic securities markets.

-

28.
Improving the Business Enabling Environment In 2004, Colombia started a
program for the Simplification o f the Procedures to start operating a business that has
reduced the time needed to register a new business to 44 days. With the leadership o f the
Chambers o f Commerce, the country has achieved good results in terms o f the time
required to register a new business. The city o f Bogota asked the IFC L A C Facility to
support the 2nd stage o f the program consisting o f improving and simplifying the system o f
municipal inspections. This initiative, launched in 2006, aims to improve Colombian
business competitiveness and promotes formalization. The next step i s to replicate the
experience in other major Colombian cities.
29.
IFC’s support for infrastructure included three projects undertaken by leading local
players. The first project helped an innovative public-private partnership company
contribute to the water and sanitation services for the poorer areas in the southwestern part
o f Barranquilla. As the company explored a non-traditional source o f funding for public
infrastructure services in the domestic capital market, IFC provided an US$ 18 million
equivalent partial credit guarantee to enhance the company’s local currency bond. The
second operation, a U S $ 50 million senior loan, supported an IFC’s longtime client and
one o f the few locally-owned, experienced gas transmission companies in Latin America.
Supporting the company’s expansion strategy in natural gas transmission and distribution
in the country and south-south investments in the region, IFC i s helping achieve
enhancement o f basic infrastructure services, promotion o f job-creating economic
activities, and considerable environmental benefits. The other project i s a U S $ 15 million
debt facility to a private port concession company to improve its technical and container
capacity output.
30.
In oil and gas, IFC invested US$ 27 million in equity commitments and U S $ 25
million in debt facilities, in two small local companies with significant experience in
Colombia’s energy industry, currently dominated by large foreign and state companies.
IFC also provided technical assistance: (i)
to enhance the use o f o i l and gas royalties paid
to municipal governments, with the support o f the hydrocarbon association, the state
regulator, and (ii)
to help the company’s adoption o f best practices in environmental and
social standards, with funding from IFC’s Corporate Citizenship Facility.
31.
IFC’s support for manufacturing consisted o f three projects with two leading
Colombian pulp and paper products manufacturers operating regionally. The companies
were in need o f long-term financing and faced challenges as they further expand business.
To help with both ends, IFC provided U S $ 142 million total financing, and along with the
financing, supported strengthening their competitiveness and financial fundamentals by
assisting with multiple areas in operational sustainability, such as financial reporting and
restructuring, corporate governance, and environmental, social, health and safety standards.

32.
Throughout i t s activities, IFC placed a special emphasis on helping improve
corporate governance across the different sectors in Colombia as an integral part o f
strengthening the country’s capital market framework. IFC’s assistance was provided
directly to several o f its client companies in Colombia, as well as through training

37

programs sponsored for senior executives in coordination with the local Chamber o f
Industry and Commerce, Confecamaras.
33.
I F C Portfolio. As o f end June 2007, IFC's total committed portfolio stood at U S $
755 million, with an outstanding balance o f US$ 456 million, or more than three times the
level o f FYO1. Colombia is the fourth largest country exposure in Latin America after
Brazil, Mexico and Argentina. The quality o f the portfolio i s good with no N o n
Performing Loans (NPL's) and loss provisions during the last four fiscal years.

The trend o f I F C commitments in Colombia, and its portfolio composition are
34.
illustrated by the graphs below.

Portfolio b y sector as o f
June-07

Portfolio by product as of June-07

Chemcak
hlp8hper-

16%

i

~

-

j--

7%

1

Wholesale and
Retail Trade

A ban
41%
_..

Guarantee

Finance 8
hsurance
52%

-

I
-

hformbn
0%

I
">.-.

L

--

Mneral Rcduct
1%

300
250
200

150
100
50
0

2Wl

2032

2033

2We

2W5

2oc8

2W7

35.
The I F C pipeline in the region has not only increased by the total amount in U S $
millions but also by the total number o f commitments and new potential clients. IFC has
built an important sector diversification in i t s pipeline, increasing the amounts and number
o f investments in the real sector especially in Oil and Gas, General Manufacturing and
Infrastructure.

World Bank Group Private Sector Strategy
36.
The objective i s to build on the recent successhl economic performance to improve
competitiveness and secure growth in the 5 to 6 percent range over the medium term.

38

IBRD, IFC and MIGA can build on synergies and the broader variety o f instruments that
the World Bank Group has to offer in helping the Government to achieve this objective.
37.
The overall objective o f WBG PSS, focused mainly o n the Sustained Equitable
Growth pillar, is to help improve Colombia’s competitiveness in order to maintain high and
sustainable GDP growth over the medium term. This agenda involves intimate
collaboration between the Bank and IFC, who have a shared interest in improving
infrastructure and social services, developing market-based reforms to attract investment
flows in renewable energy and new technologies such as integrated gasification combined
cycle power plants (IGCC), and strengthening the financial and private sectors. PSS
support to the CPS pillar i s illustrated below:
Pillars/PSS
Focus

Financial
Markets

Infrastructure

Local Tier I BEE
Companies

Sustained
Equitable
Growth

MSMEs,
L o w Inc.
Housing,
Interm.
Bks.,
LOC.
Cap.
Mkts.

Tsptl Logistics,

Agribusiness

WaterISanitation

SoutWSouth

MSMEs,
Low Inc.
Housing

Access to basic
utilities

Enhancing
Local
Benefits

Enhancing
Local
Benefits

Renewable
Energies and
New
Technologies

Sustainab.
Standards,
Ecofuels

Sustainab.
Standards

Pov. Allev.
& Equality
of
Opportunity
Env. & Nat.
Res. Mngt.

Renewable
Energies and
New
Technologies

Bus.
Simplif.,
Export
Competitive
ness

Peace
State at the
Serv. of its
Citiz.

Bus. Simplif.

Municipal
Utilities

Education.

Health,
Education

jm/l
Royalties

I

-

38.
World Bunk Group Synergies There are numerous examples o f where these
synergies can be expanded in the coming years. Following the financial crisis o f the end o f
the 199Os, the IBRD worked with the authorities on improvements in the regulatory
environment for the financial system, while the I F C made strategic investments in the
sector. A new study i s almost finished o n SME finance, and the IFC i s also working in this
area. Continued support for loans for students to finance higher education (with I F C
advisory inputs) will help increase the skill level o f the workforce-aligned with actions to
improve the quality and coverage o f secondary education at the departmental level.
Ongoing and future work o n private pension fund regulations and investment in the sector
could lead to pension fund financing o f infrastructure investments. IBRD and I F C have

39

worked together on advisory services for transport infrastructure concessions. The
regionalization o f the Doing Business report is complementary to I B R D ’ s recent regional
competitiveness study. Interms o f regional competitiveness, MIGA has provided T A to the
city o f Bogota for the creation o f a regional economic development agency for investment
promotion. These examples provide the path for future work across the World Bank Group
to support sustained growth.

IFC Strategy. Going forward jointly with IBRD, I F C will continue building on this
strong partnership with an active engagement in areas where i t can provide the highest
value-added for further development o f Colombia’s private sector. The thrust o f I F C
support will be in 3 key areas to: (i)
improve access to finance through the development o f
domestic financial and capital markets including microfinance and l o w income housing
finance; (ii)
investments in infrastructure (transport/logistics, renewable energies, water and
sanitation, including support to PPPs); (iii)Local tier I companies particularly in
agribusiness with an emphasis in SoutWSouth investments, and sustainability. In addition
I F C will also allocate resources to: (iv) improve the business enabling environment; (v)
selective investments in extractive industries promoting sustainable resource management,
enhancing local benefits, and facilitating royalties sharingmanagement; (vi) develop
human capital - health and education.

39.

40.
Some o f IBRD/IFC joint efforts will be reflected in a more
comprehensive/multisectoral approach in support o f subnationals, mainly municipalities:
e

Improving access to basic utilities: I F C advisory services and investments, IBRD
AAA will support PPPs and private sector investments in infrastructure - water and
sanitation, urban transport. This maybe further extended to electricity supporting
investment in renewable energy.

e

Maximizinghmproving municipal revenues via: business simplification - IFC L A C
Facility and IBRD, institutional building - IBRD DPLs, extractive industries
royalties sharing and management - IBRD and I F C L A C Facility.

e

Microfinance: supporting local business benefiting from business simplification,
facilitating access to basic services (e.g. microlending for household connection to
water) - IFC support to intermediate private banks

e

L o w income housing via I F C support to intermediate private banks.

41.
Throughout the implementation of the PSS, to address climate change issues, IFC
will emphasize environmental improvement and preservation in i t s project selection. I F C
will support new initiatives for production o f ecofuels (ethanol, biodiesel) and identify
opportunities to develop carbon credits projects. It will also consider financing leading
financial institutions and companies interested in energy efficiency, renewable energy and
new technologies (IGCC)2 projects. Another potential area is in the forestry sector.
Implementation and impact will be hrther strengthened by the L A C Facility
through the advisory work done under its main three pillars: (i)
Enhancing Local Benefits,

42.

Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle power plants

40

(ii)
Improving Business Environment through simplification o f processes and (iii)
Access
to finance.
43.

Enhancing Local Benefits (ELB) applies essentially to the manufacturing,
agribusiness, and extractive industries sectors. ELB leverages the socio-economic benefits
that communities derive from the operations o f large private sector investments that are
significant with respect to the local economy. ELB provides services, capacity building
support and advice to companies to help them more effectively respond to the challenges o f
deepening their development impact. The services ELB offers are structured in two areas:
e

Revenue Management. Assisting local governments improve the use o f revenues
received as a direct result o f extractive industry operations, and collaborating with
c i v i l society organizations to increase the social accountability o f local
governments. IFC is supporting two clients in the o i l and gas sector by providing
technical assistance and advisory services to improve the management o f royalties
in selected municipalities.

e

Linkages. Assisting the development o f SME’s to supply large companies so that
more local economic activity can be generated.

1.

Improving access to finance through the development o f domestic
financial and capital markets

44.

I F C will continue to support the consolidation o f the banking sector and provide
technical assistance to develop financial markets, facilitating S M E access to long-term
finance and supporting the development o f micro enterprises through investment and noninvestment products.
I F C i s pursuing a program developing access to finance for microenterprises and
45.
SMEs. In microfinance, the IFC L A C Facility i s working with MFIs committed to
institutional transformation to help build their capacity to operate in a more commercial
environment as regulated financial institutions. Advisory projects are implemented in
parallel with I F C investments and interventions are based o n shortcomings identified in
institutional needs. Their main focus i s o n corporate governance, risk management,
funding, product development and information systems.

The Facility is considering Colombian banks for inclusion in its pilot SME lending
program, in which IFC will work with a small number o f banks to help with down-scaling
to serve the SME segment. The Facility is currently developing a shortlist o f potential
partner banks in ten l o w and l o w middle income countries in the region. The program
would provide a bundled package o f technical assistance and investment. Technical
assistance covers: streamlining credit policies and procedures, risk management, product
development, market and sales strategies, credit scoring and training o f lending staff.

46.

Microfinance (Banca de Oportunidades) - WB has engaged the Government and
47.
prepared studies o n the negative impact o f interest rate ceilings o n microfinance lending.
The Consultative Group to Assist the Poor i s currently assisting the Government in

41

thinking through the policies that will constitute the Banca de Oportunidades. This will
facilitate IFC support for investment in microfinance, notably via intermediate banks

48.
Deepening Capital Markets - IBRD provided TA for the new Capital Markets L a w
and is assisting M H C P to issue a secondary regulation to implement the law. Additional
TA supports consolidated supervision across all financial markets (banking, capital
markets, insurance, etc). A recent study investigates Colombia’s relative performance
(compared to other L A C countries) in banking sector finance to SMEs. There i s analysis
underway that looks at how to improve the regulatory environment for private pension
hnds. IFC i s evaluating private equity players to identify strong business models that will
generate efficiencies in industries with strong growth potential. IFC will also continue to
focus on capital market development - in particular the insurance market.
2.

Infrastructure and Public Private Partnerships

49.
As most Latin American countries, infrastructure needs in Colombia are significant.
A recent WB report indicates that, in order to attain coverage levels similar to Korea,
Colombia would need to invest between 6 and 9 percent o f GDP in infrastructure every
year for the next 20 years. This i s above the 4-6 percent for the region and substantially
above the current Government’s fiscal capacity to invest in these projects.
50.
The Government i s determined to address this gap through an increased private
sector participation in infrastructure projects. WB supported road concessions in the past
and has recent AAA on logistics demands related to FTA and broad infrastructure studies
including recommendations on PSP (see Colombia: Recent Economic Developments in
Infrastructure, 2004study). IFC has an active investment pipeline for infrastructure sector
including ports, road concession (investment and advisory), airline, airport, and hydro. I F C
i s also supporting the creation o f public-private partnerships.

5 1.
IBRD/IFC has engaged actively with the Government indicating their availability
for financing and advisory services. Joint IFC/IBRD involvement has several advantages; it
helps the Government negotiate fair contracts and ensure that adequate technical, social and
environmental standards are observed and helps attract potential long-term investors.
This PSS will have a special focus on transportation and logistics projects (roads,
52.
airports, ports and railroads) to improve the competitiveness o f the private sector. IFC and
IBRD are helping to structure toll road concessions-with I F C focusing on private sector
participation and IBRD providing technical assistance to the G ~ v e r n m e n t . ~

53.
The IFC has actively participated in reviewing road and port infrastructure projects
in Colombia. O n the analytic side, the IBRD has worked in a quasi-programmatic fashion,
with a series o f reports starting with Colombia: Recent Economic Developments in
Infrastructure, 2004, followed by a report on transport logistics (Infraestructura Logistica y
de Calidad para la Competitividad de Colombia, Report No. 35061-C0, 2006), and a
recently completed regional competitiveness report (Colombia: Inputs for Sub-regional
Competitiveness Policies). Dissemination o f the regional competitiveness report will help
IFC i s currently the sole advisor to INCO and the Ministry o f Transport to structure the largest Colombian
road concession project Ruta del Sol which runs from Bogota to the coastal town o f Santa Marta.

42

establish a more nuanced policy agenda for h r t h e r work at the regional level. Additional
advisory work on the public-private partnerships in transport (jointly with the IFC) may
help the Government construct improved transport infrastructure at the lowest possible
cost.

54.
The Bank and I F C are both advising o n toll roads, including joint work o n a
concession structure for the Ruta del Sol highway from Bogota to Santa Marta - 9OOkm.
Currently IFC i s the advisor to the Ministry o f Transport and I N C O o n the “Ruta del Sol”
concession estimated to be largest infrastructure project in the country.

-

55.
Urban transport systems IBRD helped Bogota’s Transmilenio and i s now also
financing five additional cities (Pereira, Medellin, Cartagena, Barranquilla and
Bucaramanga). Some cities may be interested in borrowing from I F C or mobilizing market
resources without central government guarantee. There are opportunities with private bus
operators (often new companies).

56.
Ports -joint IBRD/IFC work has resulted in long term strategic financial partner to
support Port expansions (Muelles el Bosque and Cartagena). I F C recently made a U S $ 10
million loan to a private port facility in Cartagena. IBRD i s advising o n port reform and
advised on integrated development o f Buenaventura. There m a y be scope for further joint
work o n airports.
Furthermore, IBRD and I F C are focusing o n improved delivery of urban services notably water and sanitation. IBRD, together with the Ministry o f Environment developed
and i s supporting PSP models for different size utilities. This includes private operators for
small and medium sized companies (usually originally construction firms) for which I F C
funding and financial management support may be usehl.

57.

58.
Municipal utilify financing - The Bank i s lending directly to municipalities in
water (Cartagena, Bogota in the past, L a Guajira) with other water and energy utilities
expressing interest. Coordination with I F C may b e based o n Bank involvement for broader
reform and reform based investment and IFC focus on financial management and needs o f
utilities.
59.
Other areas of investment may include electricity generation and distribution, gas
transmission projects, and utilities at national and municipal levels. The main focus will be
on renewable energies
3.

Supporting the Modernization and International Expansion o f Leading
Colombian Groups - Agribusiness, South/South, and Sustainability

60.
There are eleven Colombian representative conglomerates mainly family owned,
most o f them created in the 50’s and currently managed professionally. Aggregated sales o f
the eleven groups represent approximately 14 percent o f GDP and only three are listed in
the Colombian Stock Exchange.
61.
I F C has been able to build relationships with six o f the eleven groups providing
either equity or debt financing, and w e are currently in advanced conversations with at least
three o f the remaining groups. I F C investment in f i r m s has been particularly valuable at the

43

pre- P O stage. The strategic business development I F C plans for Colombia targets
continuous support to the local and international expansion o f these conglomerates, with a
priority for agribusiness groups notably involving ecofuel industries. Preference will be for
projects where IFC can add value by promotinglenhancing sustainability standards, as well
as enhancing local benefits.

62.
Large and medium size corporations are increasing their access to local financial
and capital markets due to the overall economic recovery, higher liquidity and the
strengthening o f local financial intermediaries. I F C will continue supporting them via
equity and long-term financing to facilitate their expansion overseas and help the
consolidation o f certain sectors. Besides agribusiness, IFC may also consider investments
in construction materials, retail, pharmaceuticals, petrochemical and tourism.
4.

Improving the Business Enabling Environment

63.
The central vehicle for IBRD support to the competitiveness agenda i s the Business
Efficiency DPL series. This DPL series has supported the Government’s reforms in five
areas: (a) enhancing the business environment through improvements in the regulatory
framework and a reduction in the administrative burden on enterprises; (b) increasing the
soundness and depth o f the financial system; (c) promoting access to financial services,
including capital markets, by f i r m s and underserved segments o f society; (d) increasing the
country’s export competitiveness by promoting the adoption by f i r m s o f quality standards
and technological innovation; and (e) lowering f i r m s operational costs by improving the
regulatory framework to increase investment in infrastructure and facilitating transport
logistics. A third phase is expected in the near future. The Government has requested a
third phase in the first year o f the CPS period.
64.
M u c h o f IFC’s country program also revolves around strengthening the business
environment and private sector competitiveness. IFC’s Bogoth-based pilot to reform and
simplify the inspections systems i s expected to be expanded to the municipalities o f
Cartagena, Cali, Medellin, Bucaramanga and Santa Marta (through a multi-donor
initiative). IBRD has produced a series o f reports on infrastructure, logistics and regional
competitiveness5, and these have been complemented by the recent regional Doing
Business report. I F C plans to undertake studies in areas such as Public Private Partnerships,
Simplification o f Business Processes, Management o f Petroleum Royalties, and Technical
Assistance to PYMES

4

There i s also a rural dimension to competitiveness. The Productive Alliances projects support small-holder
involvement in the agricultural production chain and the Agricultural Transition projects support the quality
and technology improvements needed to compete globally.
5
Reports include the “REDI” Colombia: Recent Economic Developments in Infiastructure, 2004), followed
by Infiastructura Logistica y de Calidadpara la Competitividad de Colombia, (Report No. 35061-C0, 2006)
and Colombia: Inputs for Sub-regional Competitiveness Policies.

44

5.

Extractive Industries and Sustainable Resource Management

65.
Colombia has the fifth-largest o i l supply in Latin America. Oil reserves and
production have been declining since peaking in 1999. Therefore a new regulatory
framework and fiscal measures have been implemented by the Colombian Government to
open up the sector which led to increased investment in o i l and gas. Under the new
regulatory framework, the country has signed 32 E&P contracts out o f an expected 30 E&P
in FY06. Crude production this year has risen to around 600,000 barrels per day (bpd) up
from 500,000 bpd last year.
66.
The IFC’s strategy for o i l and gas in the next years aims to support local medium
sized companies via equity and long term financing, while assuring that the projects meet
high environmental, social, and governance standards, and that revenues from the projects
are used transparently and effectively. In the gas sector, IFC plans to support opportunities
for private investment that have been created by a new contract model that reduces the
state’s share o f hydrocarbon production.
67.
IFC provided equity and debt to two o i l and gas companies (Petrotesting and Kappa)
to support their expansion plans. IFC i s also providing technical assistance to improve the
municipal management o f o i l royalties in the regions where Petrotesting and Kappa
operate. Supporting o f Ecopetrol, Kappa and Petrotesting, IFC has launched a project for
effective municipal management of o i l royalties. IFC is also assisting Petrotesting to
develop an Annual Sustainability report, and to upgrading i t s environmental and social
systems.
68. Municipal development (extractive industries revenue sharindmanagement) - WB i s
preparing decentralization study (including analyzing “regalias” issue) where IFC could
also collaborate with i t s own revenue management experiences at the client level in the o i l
sector. In addition, Colombia offers interesting opportunities to replicate the study on
Environmental and Social Impacts o f the Mining industry, done jointly with IFC in Peru.
6.

Human Capital and the CompetitivenessAgenda

69. Better health and education improves the competitiveness o f the private sector. While
private sector investment opportunities maybe more limited in health and education, the
private can play a role in improving the quality o f and access to health and education,
especially in the realm o f PPP where joint IBRD/IFC work can add value. Continued
support for loans for students to finance higher education (with IFC advisory inputs and
potential investments notably via private bank commercial lines) will help increase the skill
level o f the workforce-aligned
with actions to improve the quality and coverage o f
secondary education at the departmental level.

70. IBRD i s implementing a student loan operation through ICETEX, a public sector
institution that plans to turn to private markets in the mid- to long-term. IFC may
accompany this process and/or finance expansions o f higher education capacity.
Furthermore, IFC has offered the Ministry o f Social Protection support to facilitate the sale
o f publicly owned health facilities to private operators.

45

CPS Annex B
Governance Challenges
Introduction

1.
This annex presents some o f the key governance challenges being faced by
Colombia, as well as the current efforts at addressing them and their potential implications
for World Bank group operations in the country. For the purposes o f this annex
governance i s defined as the traditions and institutions by which authority in a country i s
exercised. This includes the process by which governments are selected, monitored and
replaced; the capacity o f the Government to effectively formulate and implement sound
policies; and the respect o f citizens and the state for the institutions that govern economic
and social interactions among them.6
Main Governance Challenges in Colombia

The single most influential challenge not only to governance but also to economic
2.
and social development in Colombia i s the armed conflict, which has pitted democraticallyelected governments against left-wing guerrilla movements (the F A R C and ELN). Over
the last two decades paramilitary forces have evolved from self-defense groups assembled
by landowners, into organized armies living o f f extortion and drug trafficking. The
growing economic and political influence o f illegal armed groups, coupled with ruthless
violence and intimidation, gradually opened up opportunities to capture the Colombian
State, most notably at the municipal and departmental levels.
National-level institutions o f every kind are also susceptible to capture from illegal
3.
armed groups as well as more traditional mafias such as drug-trafficking cartels.
Institutions such as Congress and the national intelligence service have been seriously
undermined by alleged linkages with paramilitary groups, and recent investigations by the
Ministry o f Defense have discovered a significant level o f penetration o f drug cartels into
the armed forces, and cases are being prosecuted. This level o f state capture disrupts
governance at every level, undermining democratic institutions.
4.
Proper control o f campaign financing is important to at least partially reduce the
influence o f illegal groups o n public policy. According to the 2006 annual report o f the
Colombian chapter o f Transparency International, transparency in the financing o f political
campaigns i s the single major challenge to combating corruption in the country. The same
report highlights the major influence o f paramilitary and drug-trafficking interests in the
1994, 2002 and 2003 elections, as well as allegations o f illegal financing o f congressional
campaigns in 2006.’
The lawmaking process itself has frequently been singled out as a major obstacle to
5.
good governance in Colombia. Weak party discipline and fragmentation o f political
representation arising from l o w vote thresholds for access to Congress were serious
challenges to orderly, transparent, and programmatic lawmaking. Reforms to the
WBI: Governance Matters 2007.

’L a Transparencia en la Financiacidn de la Politica, in Corporacibn Transparencia por Colombia: Informe
Anual2006.

46

governance o f political parties and voting thresholds have taken place, but their impact
seems to be less than anticipated. Furthermore, Congress voting rules are not transparent,
making i t difficult to track individual voting records and ensure accountability to voters.

6.

In terms o f rules that control the proper use o f public funds, Colombia has advanced
considerably in the modernization o f key national-level institutions. The national tax
administration has undergone dramatic improvements over the last five years, not only in
the combat o f tax evasion but also in the implementation o f internal probity regulations.
Public expenditure is in turn subject to controls through a comprehensive integrated
financial management system. There i s still, however, room for streamlining transactional
controls through the ongoing implementation o f risk management tools. Capacity to
implement these new financial management and control frameworks can vary among
entities, particularly at the subnational level.

7.
However, there i s a widespread public perception among Colombian society that
corruption in Colombia’s country procurement system is abundant. The regulatory
framework o n fraud and corruption exists, but corrupt practices are s t i l l present within the
system and often mixed with local politics. Lack o f training o f auditors and narrow political
motivations are important obstacles to the scope and credibility o f their work. There are
also issues with the institutional framework, as there is n o dedicated, centralized agency in
charge o f procurement regulation, control and supervision.
The Government’s Strategy to Address These Challenges

8.
Reestablishing State control over the entire Colombian territory i s a key element o f
the Government’s Democratic Security Policy. As established in the current National
Development Plan, the Government will continue i t s frontal fight against drugs, terrorism,
kidnapping and all forms o f organized crime, as well as strengthening the support
mechanisms for populations displaced by violence and for the reintegration o f demobilized
members o f illegal armed groups into society.
This last point is one o f the most important components o f the policy to deal with
all forms o f violence and organized crime. Reintegration o f demobilized combatants i s
done through two types o f actions: (a) a peace dialogue with those groups that are willing
to cease hostilities and (b) a path for individuals who decide to give up arms on an
individual basis. The final aim o f these actions i s to “create a virtuous circle o f recovery,
The Justice and Peace L a w (Law 975)
presence, and consolidation o f state control.”
provides the legal framework for the Government to demobilize illegal armed groups and
to guarantee the right to truth, justice and reparation for victims whose human rights have
been seriously violated.
9.

10.
Congress recently reformed the Procurement Law, making considerable
improvements to the procurement system, such as the application o f merit evaluation as the
sole criteria for selection o f consultant’s services, thus creating an opportunity to converge
with international best practices. Framework contracts are also foreseen, which should
translate into important savings in terms o f public procurement. However, there are several
aspects o f the reform which are still underway and will need to be fully evaluated as their
implementation progress.

47

11.
The National Development Plan contains a number of other important initiatives to
consolidate the model o f democratic governance. Some of its most important elements are:
e

Consolidation of the democratic model, including initiatives in personal
identification o f Colombian citizens, strengthening the political and electoral
systems, promotion o f c i v i l society participation and social control, and support to
local and sub-national democratic institutions.

e

Improved justice systems.

e

Combating corruption, including initiatives contained in the proposal for a State
anticorruption policy prepared by the Presidential Anticorruption Program.

e

Ongoing improvements to public management, including the areas o f budgeting,
legal defense o f the State, asset management, procurement, internal control, and
results-based management.

The World Bank Group’s Role in Helping Address These Challenges

12.
The Bank has been engaged with Colombia for many years in the improvement o f
public sector management. Through several investment and policy-based operations, the
Bank has supported the implementation o f reforms in justice administration, tax
administration, financial management, procurement, asset management, legal defense o f
the State, public investment and results-based management, among others. Alternatives are
also being explored with the Government o n h o w the Bank can support next-generation
efforts to promote good governance; these elements, which are part o f the Bank’s L A C
region governance strategy, include initiatives in c i v i l service, external control, evaluation
and social monitoring, public asset and income disclosure and combating money
laundering, among others.
13.
Specifically in the area o f procurement, the Bank has been supporting
improvements to the national procurement law and the strengthening the institutional
framework for procurement through a technical assistance loan and direct advice from i t s
regional procurement specialists. Support i s being provided to the National Planning
Department to develop implementing regulations for the amendments to the law, and joint
efforts with other MDBs are being carried on for the harmonization o f bidding documents.
Finally, the Bank is financing “quick gains” studies in the country to promote more
efficient and cost-effective procurement in certain sectors.
Effect of the Overall Governance Context on the Bank’s Portfolio and Individual
Operations

14.
In general, Bank operations implemented through entities o f the National executive
branch or major local governments have faced relatively l o w risks associated with the
governance challenges mentioned above. Despite the ongoing armed conflict, key entities
such as the National Planning Department, the Ministry o f Finance, and sector ministries
involved with Bank projects have maintained a clear orientation reflected in publiclyavailable policy and strategy documents, several o f which have been extensively reviewed

48

and commented by Bank staff. This open process reduces the probability o f the interests o f
illegal groups filtering into the design o f Bank-financed operations. Implementation o f
these operations hinges upon a careful review of the capacity o f executing agencies to
properly implement financial management and procurement processes and controls.

15.
Colombia has made progress over time in the enhancement o f public financial
management (PFM) regulations and systems, particularly through the development o f the
integrated financial management system (SIIF). These improvements are reflected in
improved financial management arrangements for Bank-financed projects, which now
make extensive use o f S I I F for accounting and reporting purposes at the national level.
Looking ahead, it would be advisable to strengthen the country’s external audit h c t i o n
and i t s application in Bank-financed investment projects and introduce a framework o f
PFM performance measurement against internationally recognized benchmarks,
contributing to the design o f future reforms and to the Paris harmonization targets’. The
framework could also be adapted to the specific needs o f subnational governments.
In terms o f portfolio-specific issues, progress has been made in reducing the use o f
16.
project implementation units, find administrators and private external auditors. The Bank
and Government have agreed on a decision framework that promotes capacity building
with exceptional use o f separate structures when these are justified in response to
documented risks.

17.
While procurement in Bank projects i s relatively safe and conducted under Bank
Guidelines, International Competitive Bidding (ICB) and National Competitive Bidding
(NCB) are usually not competitive enough due to the lack o f bidder participation,
especially in civil works tenders. In most projects, procurement capacity in the executing
agencies i s weak, and project staff who have benefited from procurement training and
experience often leave after one or two year o f practice, switching to different activities
both in the Government system or the private sector. The risk o f confusion as to how and
when to apply national procurement law or Bank Guidelines is, therefore, not unusual in
Bank-funded projects.
18.
The recent amendments to the Procurement Law include the mandatory registration
o f bidders, which may create an obstacle for the use o f country systems as it could
constitute a barrier for the participation o f foreign bidders, and, in terms o f procurement o f
goods and civil works, there are s t i l l legal provisions that are not consistent with Bank’s
confidentiality and bid evaluation policies.

19.
Bank-financed projects implemented by local or sub-national entities that are
susceptible to capture by illegal groups face a different set o f challenges and require
particular design considerations. These must be made on a case-by-case basis and must
balance the achievement o f quality results at reasonable costs and times with the need to
establish increased control mechanisms that protect the project from external influences.
Often, these mechanisms will go against the tendency o f reducing reliance on external
administration or execution agencies and adopting country systems where possible, in order
to ensure as much independence as possible from captured Government entities and “ring
fencing” the flow o f h d s under special procedures with abundant external oversight.

* Progress on Harmonization targets i s found at the end o f t h i s Annex.
49

20.
Possibly the highest profile case has been the L a Guajira Water and Sanitation
Infrastructure and Service Management Project (P09695), approved by the Bank’s Board o f
Directors in 2007. The Department o f L a Guajira, in northeast Colombia, has been
regularly singled out as one o f the most severe cases o f capture o f a sub-national
government, and linkages between elected officials at the departmental and municipal level
and illegal armed groups are often cited. Many millions o f dollars have been spent there to
improve basic public services over the last decades but have not borne fruit, likely
reflecting serious problems o f capture and corruption.
21.
The L a Guajira Project aims to improve the quality o f basic services in the water
and sanitation sector throughout the Department. L a Guajira, l i k e many departments in
Colombia - and particularly in Colombia’s Caribbean coastal area - has a reputation for
weak governance, corruption, and the continued presence o f parallel institutions which
have prevented public sector efforts to meet citizen needs in an equitable and effective
manner. Analysis undertaken during preparation - and the clear messages which emerged
through dialogue with stakeholders at all stages o f Project preparation - clearly indicates
that corruption, public sector malfeasance, capture by elites and special interests, and the
paucity o f accountability and transparency in L a Guajira are among the greatest obstacles
to economic and social development in the Department. The Department is historically
among the worst performing in the country as regards sectoral achievements.
22.
To address these obstacles to achieving the Project Objectives, the operation
includes 10 concrete design elements which aim to ensure the project benefits reach their
intended beneficiaries and that the Bank and central Government authorities are well
positioned to take action in the case o f malfeasance:

i.

..

11.

...

111.

N o Bank funds will pass through the hands o f a public official at the national,
departmental, or local level. All Bank loan proceeds will pass from the Bank,
though a commercial fiduciary account Wduciaria), and direct to contractors.
The use o f fiduciaries - specialized trust banks supervised by the banking
regulator in Colombia and with extremely high levels o f financial
management capacity - has been used successfully in other Bank and
internationally-financed operations in Colombia. The fiduciary would be a
commercial entity, competitively selected to play the role o f financial
intermediary.

All project funds, including royalty revenues, are ring fenced. Under the
operation, royalty (regalia) revenues will be passed directly to the Jiduciaria,
without passing through the departmental budget. Such an approach not only
enhances the creditworthiness o f the Department and ensures the availability
o f cash flow for investment and repayment but adds an important measure o f
transparency in an environment in which the ineffective use o f royalty
revenues has been a major impediment to achieving poverty reduction and
equity enhancing outcomes.
The key project implementation entity i s an independent management team,
contracted through a competitive bidding process, which brings independent
technical management skills from outside o f the Department. This unit, staffed

50

by qualified Colombian professionals with experience in the sector, in public
procurement, in financial management, and project management, brings k e y
technical knowledge as well as independent management to the Project.
iv.

The technical management unit will maintain a public website which will
include all relevant contract award information, including the publication o f
comparator prices for similar works. The team believes that a key corruption
r i s k imbedded in the Project is the risk o f inflated bid prices which might
reflect the cost of doing business in L a Guajira including the payment o f
kickbacks, protection, and patronage. The technical management o f the
Project will publish comparative prices for similar public works in other
departments to make publicly known any major cost variations.

v.

The Bank’s procurement approach for the operation includes several specific
actions identified during preparation to enhance both transparency and
control, including: (a) all N C B contracts will include audit rights for the Bank
as well as standard Bank fraud and corruption clauses; (b) the prior-review
threshold will be set to capture all N C B and I C B contracts; (c) the annual
investment plans will be reviewed by the Bank with special attention to the
r i s k o f contract splitting and opportunities for packaging o f contracts will be
given regular review; and (d) information related to all bids - including nonwinning bids - will be included in agreed-upon reporting formats to enhance
the identification o f patterns which might indicate collusion, among others.

vi.

The Project includes a strong role and presence o f central Government
institutions. Stakeholders interviewed during preparation repeatedly referred
to the credibility which Central Government institutions bring to the
operation. As such, representatives o f the Ministry o f Environment, Housing,
and Territorial Development and the National Planning Department sit o n
both the Project’s Executive Committee - which provides overall supervision
and oversight to the Project, as a whole - and the Technical Committee, which
i s involved in the detailed technical review o f the investment plans prepared
by operators.

vii.

The Project includes explicit avenues for citizen participation and
accountability. In addition to specialized social staff within the Program
Implementation Unit, an ongoing campaign o f public outreach, dissemination,
and feedback will be financed. This community oversight mechanism
complements the existing robust regulatory framework for water and
sanitation but allows for a Project-specific mechanism under which citizens
can voice concerns about Project implementation and the performance o f
utility operators.

...

v111.

In advance o f the formal contracting o f the technical management unit, a
broad Communications Strategy was launched with the objective o f informing
stakeholders as a whole, with particular emphasis o n interested groups, public
opinion shapers, and the media, on the strategic objectives o f the project and
the detailed design elements which aim to reduce corruption risk.

51

i x,

A major risk o f corruption in infrastructure projects comes from the upstream
use o f inappropriate technology and technical designs and from poor
supervision and technical oversight during construction which can result in
such problems as poor quality works or the fraudulent use o f substandard
materials or inputs, etc. The Project thus relies o n a redundant system o f
technical oversight.

X.

The World Bank will employ a more-intensive-than-usual supervision
approach to the Project, including (a) the contracting o f a full-time local staff
to work exclusively o n the supervision o f the Project; (b) quarterly, rather than
the usual biannual, supervision missions; and (c) the use o f a multidisciplinary team which will include dedicated fiduciary, social and
environmental specialists to complement the technical water sector team.

Yes
Yes
100%
Peace and Development
(IADB-EU); “Familias en
Acci6n” (IBRD-IDB), Higher
Education ICETEX (IBRDIFC)

Procurement

79%

Environment (IBRDHumboldt Institute), Peace:
(IBRD-EU), Education:
(IBRD-ICETEX),
Monitoring and Evaluation:
(IBRD-Universidadde Los
Andes)

-

8b. Percent o f AAA products (or ESW) completed in FY07 that were prepared
jointly with one or more donors
Managing for Results
9a. At the national level, does the country have performance assessment framework
for assessin ro ess a ainst the national develo ment strate
9b. At the sector program level, does the country have performance assessment
framework for assessin ro ess a ainst i t s sector strate
Mutual Accountabili
1Oa. Was there a mutual or independent assessment o f progress in implementing
a eed commitments on aid effectiveness accountabili undertaken in FY07?

52

100%

CPS Annex C
Colombia at a Glance

Colombia at a dance
Colombla

Latin
Amerlca
8 Carlb.

LowermiddleIncome

45.6
2,740
124.8

555
4,767
2.650

2,276
2,037
4,635

1.5
2.5

1.3
2.1

0.9
1.4

73
73
17
7
93
93
112
113
111

78
73
26

47
71
31
13
81
89
113
117
114

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2006
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Aflas method, US$)
GNi (Atlas method, US$ billions)

10118107

Development diamond'

Life expectancy
7

Average annual growth, 200006
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year avallable, 200006)
Poverty (% of populationbelow national povetfy line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancyat birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,Wolive births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improvedwater source (% ofpopulafion)
Literacy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of schod-age population)
Male
Female

91
90
118
120
116

GNI
per
capita

Gross
prima?
enroilmenl

Access to imoroved water source

-

Colombia

Lower-middle-incomewouo

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERMTRENDS
1986

1996

2005

2006

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital format1onlGDP
Exports of goods and services1GDP
Gross domestic savings1GDP
Gross national savingdGOP

34.9
18.0
18.8
24.9
23.2

97.1
22.2
15.2
16.5
15.1

122.9
20.4
21.4
19.3
18.2

135.8
19.4
20.8
20.2
18.2

Cunent account balancdGDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debtlGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debtlGDP
Present value of debtlexports

1.8
2.8
44.0
32.0

-4.8
1.8
29.7
36.9

-1.8
2.1
30.6
35.3
33.2
141.6

-1.2

1986-96

199646

2005

2006

2006-10

4.2
2.2
7.4

2.3
0.7
4.2

4.7
3.3
5.5

6.8
5.4
4.4

4.1
2.6
4.5

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

18.0
37.3
23.2
44.7

13.8
30.8
15.5
55.4

Household final consumptionexpenditure
General gov't final consumptionexpenditure
Imports of goods and services

65.3
9.8
12.0

65.0
18.5
20.8

I

Economlc ratlo$*

indebtedness
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

-

Colombia

__ Lower-middle-income group

1__

Growth of capital and GDP (X)

1986.96

15.5
53.3

14.4
54.3

61.9

72.2

22.2

19.9

199606

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

-0.1
3.5
0.2
4.7

1.4
2.5
2.8
2.3

3.1
5.1
3.9
3.8

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Imports of goods and services

3.9
7.6
7.7
14.7

2.2
1.3
2.7
3.0

4.7
4.8
25.6
21.7

:;

10.2
-10.1
7.2
2.4

:w

Growth of exports and Imports (X)

-10

-Exports

-9-imports

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current granfs)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusldeficit

1986

1996

2005

2006

189
29.2

20.2
16.9

5.0
5.7

4.3
5.3

9.6
2.2

11.8
0.0

15.0
-4.0

1996

2005

2o06

5,467
2.988
463
817
3,852
187
143
1;393

10,648
1.578
2,945
3,430
13,684
1,440
413
4,586

20,815
1.471
5,559
7,687
21,204
1,874
544
7,702

23,941
1.712
6,434
8,453
22,492
1,907
496
8,314

10
9
109

51
50
101

44
36
122

48
37
128

O i

I

02

01

-GDP

@3

deflator

W

05

06

+CPI

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Coffee
Petroleum products
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade [2000=100)

~ x p o rand
t import leveis (US$ mill.)

1

30.0w
20'0w

0

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
'996
lsS6

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

2005

20°6

6,542
5.326
1,217

13,158
16.443
-3,285

24,392
24.887
-495

27,342
26.256
1,085

-1,371
784

-2,062
706

-5,525
4.089

-5,910
3,203

Current account balance

630

-4,642

-1,930

-1.622

Financingitems (net)
Changes in net resewes

872
-1,502

2,920
1,721

202
1,729

494
1,128

3,512
194.3

9,939
1,036.7

14,957
2,320.8

13,659
2.361.1

1986

1996

2005

15,362
3,261
17

28,896
2,177
10

37,656
3,896
4

2,252
489
1

5,401
520
1

10,172
392
1

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

26
655
964
674
0

61
-111
4,167
3,112
292

157
-722
-272
10,375
86

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Princip'al repayments
Net flows
interest payments
Net transfers

640
529
253
276
237
39

334
152
351
-199
170
-369

953
705
219
486
174
312

Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

current account balance to GDP (Y.)

'T
1

O

-,
-2

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
[US$ millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.

54

I

20966

E - Bilateral

683
210
473
10116/07

CPS Annex D
Key Economic Indicators
~

Actual
2004

2003

Indicator
Vational accounts (as YOof GDP)
3 o s s domestic product
a
Agriculture
Industry
Services

2005

Estimate
2007

2006

100
13
32
59

100
12
34
57

100
12
34
53

100
12
36
52

1O(
1(
2!
6(

83
17
8
9

81
19
6
13

60
21
6
15

79
23
7
16

7’
2:

3xports (GNFS)
mports (GNFS)

21
22

21
22

22
22

22
25

l!
2(

3ross domestic savings
jross national savings

17
17

19
18

40
39

21
20

2:

rota1 Consumption
3 o s s domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

I

It

Memorandum items

3oss domestic product
US$million at current prices)
3NI per capita (US$,Atlas method)

85,434

115,154

122,937

136,008

174,245

1,910

2,230

2,600

3,120

3,300

teal annual growth rates (%, calculated from 94 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income

3.9
4.5

teal annual per capita growth rates (“A, calculated from 94 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
2.3
Total consumption
0.2
Private consumption
0.8

4.9
6.4

4.7
7.1

6.8
8.0

6.6
11.0

3.3
3.3
4.5

3.3
3.4
3.6

5.4
4.1
5.2

5.2
0.c
-1.6

3alance of Payments (US$)
Exports (GNFS)
Merchandise F O B
Imports (GNFS)
Merchandise F O B
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

14,855
12,934
16,152
12,792
(1,298)
3,052
(974)

18,698
16,442
19,259
15,324
(561)
3,455
(906)

23,482
20,8 18
24,197
19,43 1
(715)
3,822
(1,881)

27,303
23,930
26,829
23,976
474
4,450
(3,222)

30,071
25,049
3 1,733
26,2 14
(1,662)

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors ommissions)
Change in reserves

1,720
369
2,052
(1,683)
(932)
(1 84)

3,016
(823)
84
(907)
(3,828)
2,541

10,240
(882)
(722)
(161)
(9,206)
1,729

6,463
90 1
1,114
(213)
(4,165)
23

4,884
2,396
(526)
2,922
657

-1.5

-0.5

-0.5

0.3

-1.1

27.1
22.7
34.4
19.8

26.6
31.6
19.2
26.8

14.9
13.6
17.1
23.4

4.7
-14.5
-2.0
9.3

6.4
7.7
7.0
11.2

(6,077)

(1,860)

[emorandurn items

Lesource balance (% o f GDP)
Leal annual growth rates ( YR94 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

55

Indicator

Actual
2004
2005

2003

'ublic finance (as % of GDP a t m a r k e t prices) e
30.0%
Current revenues
Current expenditures
32.6%
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
-2.6%
Capital expenditure
7.5%
Foreign financing
1.7
rlonetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth o f M2 (YO)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (YO)
'rice indices( YR94 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index
Real exchange rate (USWLCU)
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
G D P deflator (% change)

2006

30.3%
33.3%
-3.0%
7.2%
-2.4

30.8%
25.1%
5.7%
5.8%
-0.5

32.8%
26.9%
5.9%
6.9%
0.7

33.3%
27.0%
6.3%
7.1%
0.5

32.6
10.6
56.9

34.5
19.2
54.8

36.7
18.0
47.7

38.5
18.0
-276.3

41.;
21.5
-29.;

329.5
345.2
95.5

342.2
33 1.7
103.2

385.5
320.4
120.3

366.f
254.7
143,s

84.9

92.8

354.4
308.9
114.7
105.3

103.6

98.5

6.5
8.1

5.5
7.6

4.9
5.7

4.5
5.4

5.;
5.1

. G D P at factor cost
. "GNFS" denotes ''goods and nonfactor services."
. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
. Includes use o f IMF resources.
.

Estimate
2007

Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in U S $ / L C U denotes appreciation.

56

CPS Annex E
IFC/MIGA Program Summary

?CCommitments (US$ million)
Gross
Net

2005

2006

2007

2008*

59.2
59.2

291.5
291.5

374.3
274.3

336.4
206.4

85%

6%
62%

11%
65%
7yo

16%
61%
9%

15%
100%

11%
21%
100%

17%
100%

14%
100%

et Commitments by Sector (YO)

Oil, Gas, Mining
Pulp, Paper
Utilities
Industrial and Cons. Products
Finance and Insurance
Total
et Commitments bv Investment Instrument (%)

Equity
Guarantee
Loan
Quasi equity
Quasi loan
Total

42%
1%
33%

38%
1%
50%

25%
100%

18%
7%
47%
7%
21%
100%

24%
100%

11%
100%

Infrastructure

62.4

62.4

62.4

62.4

Transfer Restriction
War & Civil Disturbance

20.0
62.4

20.0
62.4

20.0
62.4

20.0
62.4

62.4
1.2%
31.2
1%

62.4
1.2%
31.2
1%

62.4
1.2%
31.2
1%

62.4
1.2%
32.2
1%

15%
60%

4IGA Outstanding Exposure (Gross Exposure US$ million)
ectoral Distribution

[IGA's Risk Profile

[IGA's Gross Exposure in Country
% Share Exposure in C o
MIGA N e t Exposure in C o
% Share o f MIGA's N e t Expos.

57

CPS Annex F
Summary o f Lending and NowLending Services

Investment
Bogota Urban Services
Higher Education - Improving Access

100
200
3oo

~ y 0 3 Adjustment
Program. Fiscal and Instit. Adj. I
Program. Financ. Sector Adj. I
Social Sector Adj.

300
150
155
605
905

Total FY03
Investment
Peace and Development APL I
Integrated Mass Transit Systems
Cundinamarca Educ. Quality
FY04

30
250
15
295

Adjustment
Labor and Social Reform PSAL I
Program. Fiscal and Instit. Adj. I1

200
150
350
645

Total FY04
Investment
TAL to support 2nd PSAL
Agricultural Transition
Water and Sanitation Support APL I
Disaster Vulnerability Reduction I
:yo5

2
30

70
260
362

Adjustment
Labor and Social Reform PSAL I1
2nd Program. FSAL
Sustainable Development DPL I
Prog. Fiscal and Instit. SAL I11

AAA
Improvement in Public Expenditure
Land Policy in Transition
Public Training Reform Issues
Colombia CFAA
Agricultural Competitiveness
Rural Finance I1
Afro-Colombians, Social Inclusion, and MDGs
Recent Economic Developments in Infrastrattucture

AAA
Labor Reform Agenda
Education Study
CO CEM
CO CPAR

200

100
150
100
550

Investment
Social Safety Net
Sustainable Development TAL
Disaster Vulnerability Reduction I1

86
7
80
173

FY06
Adjustment
Business Prod. And Efficiency DPL I
Total FY06

AAA
Country EnvironmentalAnalysis
Competitiveness Study
Policy Notes
Peace Programmatic (Desmobilization)

250
423

Investment
La Guajira Water Supply
Social Safety Net (Add. Financing)
Integrated Mass Transport Systems (Add. Financing)
FY07

AAA
Gender Portfolio Review
Rural Finance
Coffee Sector Work
Voices of the Poor Colombia
The Economic Foundation of Peace (policy Notes)

90
105
207
402

Adjustment
PLaRSSAL I11
Business Prod. And Efficiency DPL I 1
Sustianable Development DPL I1

200
300
200
700
1102

Total FY07

58

AAA
Regional Competitiveness
Decentralization
Peace Programmatic I1 (Reparation)
Informality

CPS Annex G
Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator*
Portfolio Assessment

2005

2006

2007

200

Number o f Projects Under Implementatiofi
Average Implementation Period (years$
Percent o f Problem Projects by Numbdl C
Percent o f Problem Projects by AmourA, C
Percent o f Projects at Risk by Numb&) d
Percent o f Projects at Risk by Amou&l d
Disbursement Ratio (%y
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/proj ect)

20
2.8
10.0
3.5
10.0
3.5
21.0

20
2.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
29.5

20
3.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
38.3

1
3.
5.
4.
5.
4.
27.

Memorandum I t e m
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
123
21
9,551.6
1,272.1
24.0
15.0
19.9
10.1

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).

b. Average age o f projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent o f projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andor implementation progress
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio o f disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance o f the Bank's portfolio at the

*

beginning o f the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception o f Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

59

CPS Annex H
Fiscal Sustainability and Debt Management

1.
A debt sustainability analysis was conducted for both the public and external debt.
At 38.3 percent o f GDP at the end o f 2007, Colombia’s Government has a fairly
substantial gross debt burden.’ To reduce risks associated with this debt, the Government
has reduced the foreign currency exposure by issuing a greater share o f debt in local
currency and entering into “swap” contracts. The foreign currency component o f public
debt has been reduced to 28 percent o f public debt, and average maturity has been
increased to about 3.7 years. Total external debt i s fairly moderate at about 27 percent o f
GDP at the end o f 2007.
Public Debt

We analyzed the public debt prospects in three different ways: i)a baseline
2.
projection with historical average values o f key parameters; ii)an analysis o f policy
responses that would be necessary for the Government to meet the debt reduction target
o f 30 percent o f GDP by 2012 in the face o f possible economic shocks; and iii)
projections o f what would happen to debt ratios if there were no fiscal policy response to
economic shocks.
Debt Sustainability with Shocks and Policy Adjustment
Primary surplus required to achieve
Baseline/ Shock scenarios
the target debt ratio (30.0 percent b y
2012)
Baseline scenario (see above)

2.0%

Real effective exchange rate depreciation o f 15
percent in 2008 with maintenance o f other variables
at the values described in the baseline scenario

2.3%

GDP growth shock: in 2008 o f historical growth
average minus two standard deviations (implies -0.8
percent growth). In 2009, historical average minus
one standard deviation (implies 1.6 percent growth). 2.9%
In2010, a growth rate o f 2.5 percent i s assumed, with
201 1 o f 3.5 percent. Afterwards the historical growth
rate i s assumed. All other variables are kept at the
values o f the baseline scenario.
Real interest rate shock. In 2008, we assume a real
implicit interest rate o f 9 percent. Afterwards, it

gradually declines to 6.8 percent. All o f the other
variables are kept at the values described in the
baseline scenario.

2.8%

Combination o f all three shocks

4.1%

9

Public Sector Debt net o f financial assets i s on the order o f 28 percent o f GDP.

60

If these shocks materialized and policy remained passive, with primary balances
3.
unchanged at 2.0 percent, debt ratios would jump initially and then decline, but the
Government would not achieve the target for reducing the debt ratio to 33.2 percent o f
GDP. With each o f the individual shocks, the debt ratio would be below 36 percent by
2012. With the combination o f all three shocks, the ratio would peak at close to 44
percent o f GDP in 2009, and then slowly fall to about 41.5 percent in 2012. This level o f
debt i s certainly high and would put considerable fiscal pressure o n the Government, but
i t i s not explosive and could be contained by maintaining a primary balance o f 2.0
percent o f GDP ,which i s within the historical experience o f Colombia.
Figure 1: Public Debt Sustainability Even Without a Policy Response to Shocks.
55.0%

50.0%

8n 45.0%

40.0%

i.-

3n
z

35.0%

30.0%

25.0%

4
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

The previous exercise showed us how policy could respond to certain dynamics
4.
that could occur in the economy. However, in reality, the Government i s affected by
these dynamics. For this, we created a “worst case” scenario, in which the Government
could not respond by using fiscal policy during the time period o f the shocks. This i s a
plausible scenario because o f the extent o f the expenditure rigidities, and also the shocks
to the growth rate would have a negative impact on Government revenues. We will
assume that the primary balance falls to 0 percent in 2008, and then will gradually
increase to 2 percent in 201 1. We found that even under this scenario the debt i s not
explosive, given the medium term resumption o f economic growth.

61

Colombia Public Debt Sustainability Framework (In percentages o f GDP, unless
otherwise indicated.)
Gross Public Debt
Interest Payments

2005
45.7%
4.1%

2006
43.1%
4.4%

2007
38.3%
4.7%

2008
37.4%
5.8%

2009
35.6%
5.1%

2010
33.9%
5.1%

2011
31.8%
4.2%

2012
30.0%
4.0%

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions
Inflation
GDP growth Rate
Nom. Exchange Rate (COP/USD)Av
Nom. Exchange Rate (COP/USD)EO

4.9%
4.7%
2,320.8
2,284.2

4.5%
6.8%
2,361.1
2,225.4

5.7%
6.6%
2,076.6
2,014.8

4.5%
5.2%
2,170.0
2,213.4

4.0%
5.0%
2,256.8
2,299.7

3.8%
5.0%
2,342.6
2,383.6

3.5%
4.8%
2,424.6
2,460.9

3.0%
4.0%
2,497.3
2,534.8

45.7%
45.7%
45.7%
45.7%
45.7%
45.7%

43.1%
43.1%
43.1%
43.1%
43.1%
43.1%

38.3%
38.3%
38.3%
38.3%
38.3%
38.3%

37.4%
38.8%
39.6%
38.9%
42.8%
45.4%

35.6%
37.0%
39.4%
38.4%
44.1%
49.0%

33.9%
35.4%
38.5%
37.3%
44.0%
50.0%

31.8%
33.2%
36.8%
35.6%
43.0%
49.5%

30.0%
31.5%
35.2%
34.3%
41.5%
48.8%

Bound Tests
Baseline
Shock RER
Shock Growth
Shock Interest Rate
Combo Shocks
Worst Case Scenario

.
’

Source: Bank Staf Projections

External Debt

5.
Analyzing the sustainability o f the external debt requires a model that
incorporates a different set o f key macroeconomic variables, such as Colombia’s current
account, and allows u s to model another set o f different shocks, for example, a reduction
in net international capital inflows. External Debt has fallen from a high o f about 52.3
percent o f GDP in 2002 to more manageable levels o f around 27 percent o f GDP in 2007.
Despite a sharp increase in the current account deficit this year, Colombia’s total
6.
external debt profile (public and private) i s likely to be sustainable, given that the recent
external imbalances have been financed largely by non-debt flows. Total external debt i s
expected to decline to about 27 percent o f GDP under our baseline scenario. A potential
risk associated with external debt sustainability i s a sharp exchange rate depreciation. A
depreciation o f the real exchange rate in excess o f 15 percent within one year would
increase the total external debt to GDP ratio from about 27 percent at end-2007, to over
30 percent o f GDP, which is manageable level. In a worst case scenario, where the
current account deteriorates to more than 5 percent o f GDP while the non-debt flows
decline would put considerable pressure on external indebtedness. Under this scenario,
external debt will jump from about 27 percent o f GDP up to 35.2 percent o f GDP.
Although this represents a sharp increase, it is not likely to generate a crisis.

62

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

110

zP

9

9

P

v!o

m +

hl

I

o\

09

op

v!

-7
m

9
00

m

9 9
m o

9 9
m o

m o

9 9

$8

cy9
m o

9

P

20
v)m

4

q
c;'

-

I

3

a!

go
9
00

m

- 0

9 9

m

a

cd

Y3

e

Y

w

a

Q

a
c

8

8

cd

VI

e

1

.3

0
.Y
3

3

3

5u

.
I

a

22

0

h

\

a

0

.
I
I

I

0

a

3

.
I

c,

;ff

0

CI

Y

8

&

>

0

3

0

B
F

z
cd

.3

2

U

m

a

x

U

Y

a

a

.I?
rn

d

a

rn

U

m
W
U

3

K!
0

w

.3

Y

B
$
El

Q)

a

0

E

Y

U
Y

3

8
E
9
n
E

a
0

Q)

#

2

a

CPS Annex J
Colombia - K e y Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)

Actual
2004
2005

2006

40,553

43,030

43,832

44,520

163

-227

-1781

8645

7688

219.6
47.5
46.8
0.0

2003

Estimate

2007

Projected

2008

2009

2010

44,800

49,300

50,300

51,300

-1352

2100

2500

500

500

10172

10640

5904

6282

5310

6190

190.9
37.4
34.1
0.0

157.3
32.8
36.5
0.0

136.1
29.0
32.5
0.0

125.5
28.8
16.5
0.0

128.8
27.5
16.4
0.0

127.1
27.2
13.4
0.0

125.1
26.4
15.1
0.0

(uS$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators

(%.)
TDOIXGS~
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$mld

6.4
28.8

10.9
38.7

6.0
39.5

8.2
27.0

12.4
41.6

10.7
36.5

11.3
35.0

12.6
33.1

1.9
3241

1.8
3490

1.4
3896

1.4
4563

1.2
4835

1.1
5626

1.1
6124

1.3
6234

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share o f IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

2.8
5.3

3.1
4.6

3.7
3.9

4.6
3.2

80
4.8
2.5

81
5.9
1.8

81
6.3
1.1

41
6.1
0.4

72.0

27.0

58.0

290.0
115
175

274.0
92
182

207.3
103
104

300.0

325.0

62.4

62.4

62.4

62.4

IFC (US$m)*
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
*Fy 2008 as of February 2008
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f I M F credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

71

a

c,
m

n

8
Q

n

U

c

I LII

I

CPS Annex L
COLOMBIA CAS COMPLETION REPORT
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Introduction
This report presents the self-evaluation by the Bank Group Colombia country team o f
the Country Assistance Strategy for Colombia for FY03-FY07. I t refers to the original
CAS, number 25129-C0, dated December 24, 2002, and the CAS Progress Report,
number 32999-C0, dated September 9,2005.
CAS Obiectives
The Bank Group’s 2002 CAS was geared to support the country’s quest for peace by
helping to: (1) achieve fast and sustainable growth; (2) share the h i t s o f that growth; and
(3) build efficient, accountable, and transparent governance. Operations were expected to
have a tangible impact on poverty reduction, help Colombia meet i t s Millennium
Development Goals, restore macro-stability and sustainable growth, and incorporate
lessons o f ongoing pilott interventions with important demonstration effects. The 2005
Progress Report extended the CAS by one year, while consolidating and expanding the
original focus on the peace process and on a result-based culture in the public sector. The
results o f the CAS are presented below.
Country Context
An important dimension o f this self-evaluation i s to position the 2002 CAS in the
context o f conditions in Colombia when the CAS was prepared. First, a new
administration was taking over, just after peace negotiations with the main insurgency
force broke down. President Uribe was elected with a sizeable majority and a mandate to
address Colombia’s ever increasing levels o f violence and armed conflicts. Second, the
economy has not yet recovered from the deep difficulties confronted in 1999. Markets
for emerging markets were shaken by the crisis in Argentina; Colombia’s growth in 2001
was s t i l l weak; and poverty and unemployed remained high. Fiscal discipline, at the end
o f the previous administration, had deteriorated significantly in the first half o f 2002.
Third, constitutional changes, adopted in 1991, had been transforming Colombia’s
administrative and judicial structures, giving fiscal and administrative responsibilities to
sub-national governments and empowering independent judicial bodies that increasingly
acted as checks on executive powers. These three factors influenced considerably the
shape o f the CAS with respect to the Bank’s role and the planned support for Colombia.

Country Outcomes
In contrast to the start o f the CAS period, conditions in Colombia have substantially

73

improved, even though many indicators are no better today than they were in the early
1990s. The greatest gain has been in the area o f peace and security. As shown in the
2005 Progress Report and in the Government’s evaluation o f i t s 2002-2006 National
Development Plan, violence has fallen sharply, even though the situation remains fragile.
O n the side o f economy, growth, employment and poverty reduction have seen sizeable
gains. Still, Colombia faces very high levels o f poverty and, despite recent progress,
income inequality remains pervasive. The country advanced in meeting i t s Millennium
Development Goals, providing the poor with a more extensive safety net and expanding
access to social services. In terms o f fiscal performance, a combination o f strong global
markets, high o i l prices, falling interest rates, increased domestic confidence because o f
the quelling o f violence, and the Government’s o w n fiscal and tax reforms, supported by
the Bank and the other IFIs, the situation has much improved. The main text o f the report

provides details on these outcomes.
The Group Bank’s Contribution
The 2002 CAS outlined a program o f US$3.3 billion, more than doubled average
annual Bank lending to Colombia, peaking at close to US$1 billion in FY05. Similarly,
IFC’s support grew rapidly, especially as the economy revived. The CAS was not
resulted based but geared towards realizing a series o f measures expected to contribute
towards the overall goals which, in turn, were to support the country’s realization o f its
National Development Plan and i t s M D G s on the long term. Interim M D G s were set. As
shown in the 2005 CAS Progress Report, and updated here, Colombia has done well in
implementing i t s development plan and has progressed in meeting most MDGs.
However, there were few quantitative benchmarks set in the CAS and little direct linkage
between the Bank’s interventions and the M D G s per se. As a result, the Bank’s
contribution and i t s performance are assessed on the basis o f country level indicators,
feedback, product outcomes, and available quantitative data.
Evaluation o f CAS Performance
With the above limitations in mind and taking into account the weight that can be
attributed to different dimensions o f the Bank’s work in Colombia, the country team
concludes that the Bank Group’s CAS performance was satisfactory, Based on the
evidence found, the Bank Group has had a positive impact on Colombia’s overall macrosituation, the solidness o f i t s financial sector, the promotion o f the private sector, and
access to better quality and affordable transport, water and sanitation services. The Bank
was also influential in shaping new public policies and programs for sustainable
development and disaster vulnerability reduction. Importantly, the Bank helped shape
Colombia’s emerging social policy framework, improving the coverage and quality o f
social services, and devising a more cohesive social safety net for the poor. The Bank
has further had a positive impact, via pilot operations, on finding workable solutions for
Colombia’s long-standing problems o f conflict: a notable example i s the scaling up o f
the Peace and Development Program. Also, although the route taken by the Bank to
demonstrate how to incorporate equity and inclusion into public policy analysis took a
different turn, the approach o f incorporating M&E and the concerns o f marginalized

74

peoples into specific operations, most notably in the social sectors and GEF, has spurred
attention to these groups. These accomplishments are described in the main text.

That i s not to say that there are not areas that did not advance as originally planned.
The Bank’s support for the third pillar o f the program-building efficient, accountable
and transparent govemance-showed the least progress even though there have been
advances in establishing a results-based management culture and in realizing other areas
o f the Government’s Administrative Reform Program not directly supported by the Bank.
There was little contraction o f the public sector and/or reduction in mandated spending
per se, one o f the goals set under the macro- program. Yet, spending has been controlled
especially at the sub-national level; there has been a shift in spending towards the social
sectors, US$1 billion per year or roughly 3.4 percent o f total spending; and the quality of
this spending has fhrther improved via targeting. Moreover, the efficiency o f public
services, such as tax administration, has increased considerably. Further, the Bank’s
planned support to address corruption did not advance, nor did anticipated Bank support
for SMEs. Programs focused on the rural sector were less ambitious than planned, while
progress in the pilot judicial sector development project has been slow to trigger more
widespread reforms.
The portfolio, consisting o f 23 operations, has confronted few problems during
implementation. All performance indicators, including project outcomes, are better than
Colombia’s historical average and above the average for the Bank as a whole and for the
Latin America and Caribbean Region. The introduction o f country systems has been
welcomed by the Government and has facilitated implementation. Generally, Bank
financing has been more selective than originally planned. Some areas identified for
support, mentioned above, f e l l by the way side. Responding flexibly to opportunities as
they arose, new thrusts were added, building on those areas in which the Bank has a long
standing presence.

Lessons for Future Country Partnership Strategies
This evaluation demonstrates the benefits o f solid analytical work and effective and
flexible country collaboration. Lessons that might be usefhl for the preparation and
design o f the coming Country Partnership Strategy are as follows:
Exercising Fiducialy Responsibilities
0

The Bank, along with the IMF, has a fiduciary responsibility, especially on debt
sustainability, fiscal performance, the financial sector, and monitoring o f public
expenditures, poverty and the MDGs to which the Bank should remain committed. In
the case o f Colombia, the Bank was effective in keeping issues on the front bumer
once the worst o f the 1999 crisis was over.

Tempering Zeal with Realism

New administrations tend to have ambitious plans, as was the case o f the first Uribe

75

Administration’s initial approach to fiscal and institutional reforms. In retrospect, i t
may not have been realistic to agree-in the early months o f a new administrationto policy triggers, covering action four years ahead. In fact, many reforms confronted
serious legal and political hurtles and have taken longer than originally anticipated.
On the other hand, the Bank cannot stand in the way, so this lesson i s nuanced to
specific country circumstances.
Setting Targets and C a r v i n g out Intermediate Evaluations of Programmatic Loans

Programmatic operations may pose a challenge in terms o f agreeing ex-ante to
triggers and measuring impacts. To the extent possible, expected outcomes should be
established at the start. Ex-post, individual evaluations o f each loan in the series as
they are completed might be too short term a time frame for impacts to be realized.
Some form o f mid-way, intermediate assessment and/or ESW might be needed to
reconfirm the direction and/or make mid-term corrections.
Buildingon What W o r h

Looking broadly at where the Bank has been effective in Colombia, working in
sectors with a history o f Bank involvement and with established institutional
responsibilities and capacities seem to work best in Colombia. This argues for
continuing an evolving, programmatic approach and concentrating on and deepening
those areas with continuity from one CAS to another.
Building Consensus and Institutional Homes for New Initiatives

The lack o f progress in areas such as anti-comption and judicial reform calls for
rethinking the Bank’s approach to new initiatives. The analytical ground for an
initiative needs to be solidly and convincingly established and the institutional base
established ex-ante. For the new CAS, the lesson might be prior ESW and consensus
building plus continuing investment to inform policy makers and the public during
implementation o f pilot operations so that the growing evidence o f what works can be
shared with a larger audience.
Refocusing on the Rural Sector: Closing the Gaps

A new approach to the rural sector, with attendant attention to Colombia’s extremely
poor and marginalized, may be timely, as the security picture improves. I t was a
priority in the 2002 CAS but little materialized in terms o f specific lending.
Nevertheless, the Bank undertook ample analysis o f the sector: the policy notes for
the CAS and other analytical work have provided evidence that the rural sector was
important, dynamic, and disadvantaged. Importantly, the Bank has supported a
number o f successful pilot rural development and peace initiatives which could be
scaled up. Looking ahead, i t may be helpful to segment strategies across rural and
urban sub-groups as was done in education. Other sectors amenable to this approach
are housing, water and sanitation-typified
by the L a Guajira Project now under

76

preparation-and

transport.

Relying on Local Capacity
0

Colombia, as a Middle Income Country, is capable o f assuming the lead in
developing and implementing the CAS in ways that other countries might not. This is
particularly the case in participation. The Bank can ‘piggy-back” on those efforts
rather than do own parallel exercise. Moreover, the case o f Colombia demonstrates
that MICs with solid institutional capacity can be entrusted to use country based
systems.

Retaining Flexibility

Another hallmark o f working with a Middle Income Country i s flexibility. The Bank
has been flexible i s responding to Colombia’s changing economic and social
conditions especially as the country’s conditions improved beyond what was expected
and when some aspects o f the original CAS were not feasible andor did not enjoy
full ownership. The CAS Progress Report i s an example o f how to accommodate
M I C needs and conditions. This i s an attribute which should be carried over to the
next CAS.
Synchronizing Timing and Monitoring of Development Planning Instruments

The 2002 CAS was prepared at a critical moment in Colombia, compounded by
transitions at senior levels in both the Bank and the Government. The benefit o f
preparing the CAS quickly was i t s timely assistance to the country. But the cost was
a lack o f internalization and reinforcement among the key development strategy
instruments that the country employs, notably the National Development Plan, and a
lack o f common monitoring definitions, tools and benchmarks. Admittedly,
development i s an evolving process and new needs can be address over time. The
new CAS i s the opportunity to avoid the gaps in timing and to focus on results.
Internalizing Equity and Meaningfully Measuring Poverty
0

The Bank’s efforts at internalizing equity considerations into i t s operations and
analytical work, while taking a different track, seem to have energized Bank staff and
local authorities to take up the concerns o f the extremely poor and marginalized as
part o f a growing M&E culture. This momentum can be elevated to the next stage by
generalizing analysis o f equity, not just in social sector and GEF operations, but in
other proposed policies. In addition, agreement on targets presumes agreement on
methodologies for measuring poverty, among other indicators, which i s now lacking.
The focus o f targeted programs, moreover, can be tightened with continued
refinement o f Colombia’s system o f classifying eligible beneficiaries.

77

COMPLETION REPORT
THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
COLOMBIA

FYO3-07

1. Introduction

This report assesses the experience o f the World Bank Group in implementing the
Country Assistance Strategy for Colombia, number 25 129-C0, dated December 24,
2002, and discussed by the Board o f Directors on January 16, 2003. That CAS has been
updated in the Progress Report, number 32999-C0, dated September 21, 2005, and
discussed by the Board on September 29, 2005. The original CAS covered the period
FY03 to FY06 but was extended under the Progress Report to include FY07. A new
Country Partnership Strategy i s anticipated before the end o f this fiscal year or early
FY08.

2.

Colombia’s Development Strategy

At the start o f his Administration in August 2002 (after elections in M a y 2002),
President Uribe announced a comprehensive development strategy for h i s term. This
strategy, entitled “Towards a Communal State”, laid out the broad goals for the
Government from 2002 to 2006. I t was reinforced by more detailed programs in the
national investment program covering the authorized investments to be financed with
public resources, including borrowings from the World Bank and other multilateral
development banks. Colombia’s development strategy was further enhanced by the
Millennium Development Goals Action Plan and the results o f the 2004 Commission on
the Strategy to Reduce Poverty and Inequality. The strategy emphasized the following:
(a)

(b)

(c)

delivering, in a democratic context, safety and security for the people,
including enhancing military and investigative capacities, strengthening
judicial services, reinforcing values and peaceful ways o f coexistence,
securing control over and developing the areas o f the country affected by
conflicts, and protecting human rights;
promoting sustainable growth and employment, including housing,
infrastructure, public services, science and technology, competitiveness, trade
policy, natural resource use, conservation and ‘green” production;
constructing an equitable society, with emphasis on improving the quality,
efficiency and access to education, social security and health, recovering

78

losses in vaccination rates, advancing the public health agenda, developing

(d)

small and medium enterprises, improving the quality o f urban life, enhancing
planning and protection against natural disasters, rural development and
strengthening ethnic groups; and
instilling transparency and efficiency in the public sector, covering public
administration reforms, fiscal adjustments, public enterprise/entity
restructuring and decentralization among other things.

These priorities reflected Colombia’s situation as o f 2002 and were designed to
address those factors keeping Colombia from realizing its development potential. The
first was the breakdown o f peace negotiations with the main insurgency group in
February 2002, after three years o f negotiations, and the continuing escalation o f
violence.
Disappointment and frustration were widespread.
Many indicators
demonstrated the worsening conditions: the land devoted to growing coca, the number o f
persons displaced by conflicts, the number o f armed combatants, kidnappings, murders,
attacks, and stealing o f cars. All had increased during the 199Os, especially after 1999.
Second, the economy, while doing better than in 1999 when Colombia faced its worst
economic crisis in 70 years, was s t i l l struggling: in 2001, growth was only about 1.4
percent and decelerated in the first quarter o f 2002; unemployment was in the range o f 15
percent; and poverty reached 60 percent o f the population as compared to 50 percent in
1997. Moreover, the fiscal and debt situation was on a downward spiral, exacerbated by
the economic crisis in 1999, increased costs relating to security, and the slow economy
recovery. Importantly, the 199 1 Constitution, optimistically looking ahead to an inflow
o f petroleum revenues, had set in motion a new dynamic that increased mandatory
spending for pensions and decentralized social programs. As a result, the gap between
revenues and expenses stood at more than 6 percent o f GDP as o f 2000, with a
commensurate increase in Colombia’s public debt.
I t should be noted that Colombia’s Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) were not
explicitly referenced in the National Development Plan. Indeed, the Government’s action
plan to meet those goals by 2015 was only prepared in March 2005, well after the
National Plan was approved. Further, the country’s Strategy to Reduce Poverty and

Inequality was elaborated in a subsequent stage and was approved in September 2005.
As a result, there was considerable evolution on the side o f the Government on i t s
development priorities since the 2002 CAS was prepared. W h i l e many MDGs were
addressed at that time, such as education, vaccinations and other public health issues,
several areas, notably reducing maternal mortality, were not explicitly addressed. These
are areas where the Government’s MDG Action Plan indicates that a more aggressive and
concerted stance needs to be taken.
3. The World Bank Group’s Assistance Strategy
The original CAS, covering FY03-06 and an anticipated US$3.3 billion in new
lending, was supportive o f the Government’s strategy and was designed in parallel to the
preparation o f the National Development Plan. Both documents shared a number o f

79

common analyses and benefited from the policy notes prepared by the Bank in
anticipation o f the new administration.
There was congruence in many areas.
Nevertheless, there was discontinuity in timing, with the CAS finalized before the
National Plan. This created a gap between the CAS and the Government’s specific plans
and limited the ability to gain a common appreciation o f what it would take to advance in
new areas, such as anti-corruption, where there was not already a track record and an
established institutional base. Finally, there were significant changes in senior positions
in both the Bank and the Government that coincided with the preparation o f the CAS. It
i s therefore not surprising that the CAS program was modified during implementation as
described in subsequent sections. Nevertheless, the core o f the program, especially its
focus on policy reforms, remained in tact.

The 2002 CAS established the following four pillars:
(a) Achieving Fast and Sustainable Growth

Macro-economic framework: correcting fiscal imbalances and monitoring debt
sustainability
Financial Sector:
restructuring public banks, developing capital markets,
strengthening banking supervision and banking resolution, easing judicial and
procedural impediments, reforming the pension system and developing sustainable
banking systems for the rural areas
Infrastructure to Foster Competitiveness and Improve Services for the Poor:
expanding and improving mass urban transport, water and sanitation, reducing
logistic costs, management and mitigation o f national disasters, analyzing the
knowledge framework
Private Sector Development: supporting reactivation o f the economy, fostering a
conducive business environment, promoting SMEs, facilitating investor response,
especially by underserved segments
Rural Development: boosting competitiveness o f Colombia’s agricultural sector,
promoting productive alliances, strengthening local leadership and community
development, supporting small-holders, increasing access to land and to credit, and
improving land management and forestation
Environmental and Natural Resource Management:
mainstreaming sound
environmental management, reforming the licensing system, and capturing valueadded from environmental assets
(b) Sharing the Fruits o f Growth

Education and Health: enhancing quality, coverage, equity and efficiency, increasing
completion rates o f primary students, piloting decentralized school management in
vulnerable areas, expanding rural education, and restructuring hospitals, transforming
health financing to demand side subsidies
Social Protection: pioneering new approaches to cash transfers, workfare, child
protection, developing a risk management system o f social protection, revamping
targeting and delivery systems

80

Empowerment and Inclusion: opening a dialogue with government o n implementing
targeting programs, continuing to focus on indigenous and Afro-Colombians in GEF
and Bank-financed operations, and emphasizing disaggregated analysis o f marginal
groups in public policy
Forced Displacement: supporting efforts to fulfill preventative and coordination
responsibilities at the local level, creating incentives for displaced people to return to
their homes
(c) Building Efficient, Accountable and Transparent Governance

Anti-corruption: helping to broaden the focus and scope o f the country’s anticorruption program and assisting in other related areas such as procurement,
budgeting, financial management, and information systems
Judicial Reform: transforming competencies, improving the information base,
enhancing the timeliness o f conflict resolution services while piloting resolution
methods
The 2005 CAS Progress Report extended the timeframe o f the original CAS by one
year to FY07, adding a net of about US$800 million in Bank lending and bringing total
potential lending to US$4.1 billion under the high case scenario. The program’s
extension provides for continuity while giving more time for the incoming
administration and the Bank to develop the next CAS. The progress report also
introduced modifications to the thrust o f the original CAS, adjusting to the latest country
conditions and new emphases. In the case o f the IFC, its updated strategy centered on: (i)
strengthening and deepening o f financial sector institutions and local financial markets to
better serve the needs o f local companies, including SMEs and micro enterprises; (ii)
the
development o f infrastructure, including potential public-private partnerships and support
to sub-national entities in the provision o f infrastructure, in coordination with the Bank;
(iii)investment in extractive industries; and (iv) the modernization o f Colombian
businesses to help improve their competitiveness and support their expansion both
domestically and abroad. O n the side o f the Bank, the first change was to expand the
agenda for supporting improvements to Colombia’s competitiveness, with a new series o f
DPLs, not anticipated in the original CAS. In addition, the Progress Report added a
component under the Governance pillar to strengthen and systematize the Government’s
approach and capacity to monitor and evaluate public programs. This new component fit
well within the CAS’S original emphasis on instilling results-based management in the
public sector.
The other modification was to add a new pillar explicitly to support the Government’s
peace effort. In effect, this new pillar consolidated actions anticipated under other CAS
pillars and provided continuity to programs that have aimed to support peace and
development under prior CASs. This change gave an explicit focus to the peace process
and an enlarged scope o f potential Bank support as follows:
e

Peace and Development: scaling up o f the community focused pilots that have
proved to be successful, protecting assets o f displaced people, integrating delivery o f

81

0

0

social services for the displaced, sharing knowledge and studies to develop viable
strategies, studying the impacts on particular groups, such as women, children, and
ethnic groups
Rebuilding the Presence o f the State: exploring options for strengthening local
government capacities and promoting security
Demobilization and Reintegration o f Ex-Combatants: tapping into international
experience and documenting what i s happening on the ground in Colombia.

4. Colombia’s Progress towards its Goals
The Government has made very good progress in realizing the goals o f i t s 2002-2006
National Development Plan. Its own evaluation shows that 85-90 percent o f the
measures and resources under the Plan have been realized. The Government has pursued
close monitoring o f the Plan’s execution and undertook dedicated evaluations o f major
social programs, with Bank support. Such focus i s evidence o f the growing culture o f
monitoring and evaluation within the Government. Highlights o f the results o f the
National Development Plan are listed below.
Citizen Safety and Security

The Uribe Administration has had striking success in reducing the level o f violence
and conflict in society and in reinvigorating the peace process. Examples are:
0
0

0

0

0

Homicides f e l l from 66 per 100,000 inhabitants in 2001 to 39 in 2005.
Kidnappings decreased from almost 3000 in 2002 to 800 in 2005.
Attacks fell from an average o f about 1,400 per year from 1997 to 2003, to just over
600 in 2005.
Persons displaced by conflicts had risen sharply from 1999 to 2002, peaking at more
than 400,000 new refbgees annually. Since 2002, the number o f new refbgees has
fallen to about 140,000 persons per year.
Area dedicated to coca cultivation reduced from about 160,000 hectares in 2001 to
80,000 in 2004.
Sustainable Growth and Employment

The economy responded to the greater sense o f peace and stability. Solid macropolicies and positive international economy conditions also helped. Reactivation has
been most noticeable in the jump in private sector investment. As a result, the economy
has grown faster from 2003 to 2006 than it had since the early 199Os, with attendant
effects on unemployment, poverty, and income equality. At the same time, the
Government has advanced in its agenda for natural resource management and
environmental protection and expanding infrastructure services. Some indicators o f
progress are:

0

Growth in 2005 reached 4.7 percent, up from 1.4 percent in 2001.
Spreads on Colombian public debt (EMBI) fell from 1043 basis points in mid 2002 to

82

about 200 basis points as o f the end o f 2006.
Investment by the private sector rose from 7.8 percent o f GDP in 2002 to 14.9 percent
in 2005.
Unemployment fell from 15.6 percent in 2002 to 11.8 percent in 2005.
About 5.8 million hectares o f land were placed under the system o f protected areas, a
50 percent increase over the amount in 2002.
Equity and Social Reactivation

After seeing the effects o f the 1999 crisis on the poor, the Uribe Administration made
a concerted effort to consolidate and expand i t s social protection network, focusing on the
Familias en Accion Program which provides conditional grants to poor families. It also
invested considerable resources in expanding access to education, decentralizing
educational services, adding to the rolls o f the poor who obtained subsidized health
insurance, expanding nutritional support and focusing more attention to displaced
populations. Major achievements are:
The percentage o f the population below the poverty line fell from 57 percent in 2002
to 49 percent in 2005.
The Gini coefficient peaked in 1999 at over 0.59 but fell to 0.55 in 2005.
Some 70,000 families have been added to the Familias en Accion, not including
displaced families. Intotal, 515,000 families benefited as o f 2005.
By 2005, 8 million more poor people have been added to the subsidized system o f
health insurance since 2002, bringing total coverage o f the bottom two income rungs
to 73 percent, up from 47 percent in 2002. 5.8 million beneficiaries receive 100
percent subsidy, as compared to 400,000 before 2002.
The rate o f vaccinations, which had fallen during the 1999 crisis, recovered and
increased from 82 percent in 2002 to 89 percent in 2005.
One million poor children are now served breakfasts, up from only 78,000 in 2002,
and 400,000 poor elderly benefit from nutritional support, a new program since 2002.
About 1.6 million poor rural families benefit from nutritional support, another new
program since 2002.
Education has been expanded, covering some 1 million new primary students and
200,000 new secondary students.
Professionhechnical training has expanded to 3.9 million students, up from 1.1
million in 2002.
Transparency and Efficiency of the Public Sector

The fragile fiscal situation, growing debt, and worries about competitiveness and the
quality o f public services put the reform o f the public sector at the fore o f the
Administration’s agenda in 2002. The Government embarked on a program o f
Administrative Reform in order to consolidate ministries, reduce staffing, put in place
information systems, reinforce internal controls and reorient the bureaucracy’s culture
towards results. W h i l e progress was uneven and expenditures have remained relatively
fixed as a percentage of GDP, pension surpluses have increased as have tax collections,
83

thanks to reduced evasion, increased rates and greater efficiency. There has been progress
in a number o f areas, as follows:
Administrative overheads reduced from 4.4 percent o f GDP to 4.1 percent from 2001
to 2005, albeit short o f the goal o f 3 percent.
Almost 30,000 civil service positions have been eliminated since 2002.
Red-tape and bureaucracy has been reduced: the number o f steps to export products
and the steps to start a new enterprise has fallen from 29 to one and from 17 to one,
respectively. The average time to secure an environmental license dropped from 130
days in 200 1 to 16 days in 2005.
The share o f public investments evaluated ex-post rose from 4 percent in 2001 to 24
percent in 2006.
Tax collection efficiency has gone up with overall taxes increasing by 34 percent in
real terms from 2002 to 2005. 750,000 new tax payers were added as o f 2006. The
cost o f collections has been reduced by about 10 percent.
About US$lOO million in assets have been recovered as part o f the asset management
program. 10,000 buildings have been inventoried.
More than 175 public entities now use the electronic portal for bidding and
processing procurement.
5. CAS Outcomes: The WGB’s Contribution to Colombia’s Progress

The 2002 CAS was designed to support the Government’s overall development plan.
The CAS was broadly linked to the realization o f country-level interim M D G s and did
not contain many specific monitorable indicators o f CAS outcomes. Most benchmarks
were stated in qualitative terms, as actions or general progress in implementation. As a
result, this section relies on a m i x o f country-level indicators, including those from the
Government’s evaluation o f i t s National Development Plan summarized above, outcomes
o f operations completed during the CAS period, data on the MDGs, and other
quantitative and qualitative assessments. A synthesis i s presented in the following.

84

CAS PILLAR
Achieving Fast and
Sustainable Growth
Macro-framework
Financial Sector

Infrastructure

Private Sector
Development

Rural Development

Environment and Natural
Resource Mgt.

DIAGNOSTIC AS OF 2002
Large fiscal imbalances
Increasingdebt burden
Public banks need to be
restructuredandor
privatized
Slow judicial procedures
Capital markets
underdeveloped
Gaps in regulatory
framework and banking
supervision
Lack o f water and sanitation
roads, electricity and
telephone
Impediments to private
sector
Lack of integratedsupply
chains in rural sector
Lack of opportunities and
access to land
Slow legal framework for
environmentallicenses
Country not prepared for
major disasters

PROGRESS DURING CAS
T h e Bank Group’s main focus was on
encouraging sound macro-fiscal policies,
stimulating a supply response, and shoring
up the financial sector after the 1999 crisis.
T h e economy has responded well and so has
the financial sector. The Bank supported,
via a series of Fiscal and Institutional DPLs
and a TAL, improved fiscal management.
T h e results were most evident on tax policy
and administration and keeping spending incheck. Pension reforms have led to higher
surpluses, transfers to sub-national
governments curbed, and the public debt
burden has fallen as a share o f GDP. The
Bank worked to strengthen banking
supervisionand resolution and encourage
development of the regulatory framework
for the insurance industry and capital
markets. Continued support for financial
sector reform, based on recent analytical
work, i s provided under the Business
Environment and Competitiveness DPLs
which also address ways to bolster the
private sector, complementingIFC and
MIGA. IFC continues to have a robust level
of activity, supporting capital markets,
SMEs, manufacturing, water and sanitation
services, and oil and gas. The Bank has
further provided support to improve and
expand urban infrastructure, especially in
transport, water and sanitation,
environmentalmanagement, disaster
planning and mitigation. There was less
progress on expanding the rural
development agenda, despite the extensive
analysis of its problems. Still, rural
programs under implementation are
performing well and offer potential for
scaling up.

Continued...

85

CAS PILLAR
Sharing Fruits of Growth
Education
Health
Social Protection
Labor Markets

Building Efficient,
Accountable and
Transparent Government
Anti-corruption
Judicial Reform
Results Oriented Mgt.

Promoting Foundations of
Peace
Peace and Development
Restoring Local Presence
Demobilization

DIAGNOSTIC AS OF 2002
Scope for enhancing quality
and coverage of education
Need to reinforce
decentralization
Financial sustainabilityof
health insurance
Need to implement a
comprehensive safety net
Afro-Colombians and
indigenous people l e f t out
Labor market rigidities
Gap between formal and
informal labor markets

Successive attempts to curb
corruption not effective
Introduction o f oral judicial
procedures need to be
complemented with
organizationaland logistical
reforms
Ambitious program o f
reforms adopted to address
HR management,
procurement, performance
budgetingand evaluation.

As of 2002
Peace negotiations with
leading insurgency group
broke down
Increasing number of people
displaced from their homes
and livelihoods
Violence, murders, and
kidnapping rampant

Forced Displacement
As of 2005
Security conditions vastly
improved
The pilot Peace and
Development program
proving successful
Negotiationsopened with
paramilitary forces, agreeing
to demobilization

86

PROGRESS DURING CAS
W h i l e levels are s t i l l high, and no better than
they were in the early 199Os, poverty and
inequality have fallen since 2002. Building
on the Bank’s earlier work on mitigating the
social consequences ofthe 1999 crisis, the
Bank engaged the Government in an
extensive policy dialogue and financed
series of Social and Labor Adjustment DPLs
that encouraged adoption and
implementation of a comprehensive
approach to social protection, and supported
reforms in health, education, and labor
training. In addition, it complementedthis
support with financing for expansion of
higher education, rural education,
decentralizing education services, and the
social safety net.
There has been general but uneven progress
in the Government’s Public Administration
reform program, part of which has been
supported under the FIALs, TAL and
investment programs. Efficiency o f some
public services (e.g. tax administration and
education) seems to have gone up and there
has been a shift to targeted social programs.
According to the Bank’s Governance
indicators, Colombia’s relative rating has
improved during the 2002-2005 period. The
Transparency Internationalindex of
corruption has also moved in the right
direction. However, progress in the specific
areas identified for support from the Bank
has been mixed. Progress has been slow on
piloting judicial reforms and Bank support
has not materialized for anti-corruption. On
the other hand, there has been progress in
results-basedmanagement. T h e Bank’s
support for these efforts has been via the
ongoing Financial Management I1 TAL and
the new M&E operation.
The Government has been effective in
reducing the level of violence in the country
and has made progress in reaching
agreements with para-military forces. The
Bank’s contribution over the years, starting
in the mid-l990s, has been to build up a
knowledgebase on the nature of the
conflicts and to focus on the people affected
by the conflicts. The successful approach,
piloted under the two Magdalena Medio
projects, has scaled up to six regions. The
Bank also helped focus attention on
integrating social programs for displaced
persons. More recently, work has begun on
an expanded agenda agreed with the
Government in the CAS Progress Report.
However, the situation remains fragile and it
i s too soon to measure further progress in
implementing the peace pillar.

Pillar One: Achieving Fast and Sustainable Growth

Overall. Increasing the pace o f economic growth was a high priority in the 2002 CAS
and country results have been encouraging. A s shown in Table 1, the growth rate
steadily increased over the 2002-2005 period with exports, especially non-traditional
ones, almost doubling the level o f exports in 2006 as compared to 2002. Growth has
been broad based, led by the petroleum-mining sector, construction, telecommunications
and agro-industries. While the agriculture sector was not among the fastest growing
sectors, i t showed positive results with a substantial increase in both production and the
total area cultivated: due to the lack o f security, the amount o f land being cultivated had
sharply dropped since the early 1990s. Increased economic growth had positive impacts
on unemployment, poverty and income equality.

Source: IMF, DNP, M i n i s t r y o f Finance, Central B a n k

Macro-economic Performance. Restoring the macro-underpinnings o f Colombia’s
growth strategy was a fundamental consideration when framing the 2002 CAS. Without
solid fiscal management, i t was concluded that growth could not be sustained and,
without greater growth, the public’s lack o f confidence and the grinding effects o f
poverty and violence would undermine a successful outcome o f the country’s efforts to
achieve peace. Two dimensions stood out in the 2002 CAS: the fiscal deficit and the
public debt burden. Public spending had increased almost 10 percentage points o f GDP
since 1990, the result o f constitutional changes that mandated transfers for pensions and
to sub-nationals and rising interest charges, without commensurate increases in revenue,
resulting in growing deficits. O n a functional basis, the sectors seeing the largest
increases in public spending were education, health, defense, security and justice. The
rising public sector debt burden further aggravated the fiscal situation by increasing
interest expenses. There has been considerable progress on both fronts, thanks in part to
the IFIS’support over this CAS period and the previous one.

87

Source: Bank Staff

First, on the deficit, Table 2 shows the fiscal space created since 2002. These data
demonstrate that much o f the reduction in the overall fiscal deficit has been generated by
the Government’s reform effort: improving the tax system, reforming the social security
system, and strengthening sub-national finances under the Constitutional Amendment in
2001 and the 2003 Fiscal Responsibility Law. These areas were the focus o f Bank
support under the FSAL (FY02) and the series o f Fiscal and Institutional Adjustment
(FIAL) DPLs (see B o x 1). Improved tax collection alone is estimated to represent one
percent o f GDP (see C E M 2005). This table further shows that: (1) while the
Government was not able to reduce current expenditures as a share o f GDP, it held the
line after even allowing for a modest increase o f 0.2 percent o f GDP for military
expenditures; (2) changes to Colombia’s cost o f borrowing did not have an appreciable
affect on the net result; and (3) increased revenues from petroleum royalties and o i l
profits, while having a positive effect, were not the determining factor in explaining the
positive outcome o f Colombia’s public finances in the 2002-2005 period. I t i s also
important to note that, although expenditures did not increase significantly as a share o f
GDP, there has been a shift in the sectoral distribution o f that spending, with about US$1
billion per year or about 3.4 percent o f total expenditure redirected in favor o f spending
in the social sectors, as described in later sections.

88

Box 1: Outcome of Fiscal Adjustment and Fiscal and I n s t i t u t i o n a l A d j u s t m e n t (FIAL) DPL

Series
A cornerstone o f the 2002 C A S was a series o f Development Policy loans t o support fiscal and
institutional reform. The Bank has supported such reforms since the 1999 crisis. The f i r s t operation,
the FSAL, was a two-tranche, US$400 m i l l i o n loan, approved December 2001 and closed M a r c h 2003.
I t acted as a bridge between the two CASs and the two administrations, and formed the basis for a new
series o f loans: FIAL I,US$300 million, approved M a r c h 2003 and closed April 2003; FIAL 11,
US$lSO million, approved November 2003 and closed February 2004; and FLAL 111, US$lOO million,
approved March 2005 and closed June 2005. The F S A L also laid the basis for reforms in health and
education supported by the other DPLs addressing social and labor concerns. The original intention in
the C A S was to have four FIALs, totaling US$900 million, but the program ended after the third loan,
with total support reduced t o US$550 million. The reason for this was that the Government was not
able to meet fully the triggers for the 31d operation: as a result, the fourth operation was dropped and
the amount o f the third reduced f r o m US$150 to US$lOO million. The t w o unmet triggers were
adoption o f an organic l a w t o enhance budget management and a n e w procurement law. B o t h
measures had languished in Congress and neither was likely t o see passage in a reasonable time-frame.
As a result, at the end o f 2005, the Bank and the Government decided t o shift resources t o other reform
efforts with chances for timely implementation. Nevertheless, the Government continues to pursue
expenditure reforms, o n b o t h budget management and procurement, as w e l l as other aspects o f the
FIAL-supported program.
These operations have been individually rated as satisfactory or moderately satisfactory with the
exception o f the last one, FIAL 111, rated moderately unsatisfactory by IEG. A comprehensive
evaluation by IEG o f the whole series i s pending. There are several sticking points: (1) whether
Colombia’s improved fiscal position i s the result o f reforms o r cyclical factors such as o i l prices; (2)
whether or not some tax measures are o f the desired quality in terms o f their distortionary and social
impacts (the extension o f the VAT t o cover food, health and educational services was declared
unconstitutional so alternatives such as a tax o n bank transactions and a wealth tax were adopted to
close the fiscal gap); (3) whether or not the caps o n sub-national spendingltransfers will be
sustainable, since the constitutional measure expires in 2008; and (4) whether o r not the lack o f
progress o n the expenditure side, blocked by the courts and not endorsed in the 2003 referendum,
outweighs the positive results o n the revenue side. That said, and despite the set backs, the end results
are a much improved fiscal situation which, in turn, has created fiscal r o o m for new priorities and
reduced crowding out o f the private sector. This has likely contributed towards a virtuous circle o f
increased confidence, investment, growth and poverty reduction, the ultimate goal. Thus, f r o m the
perspective o f this C A S Completion Report, the Bank’s overall support for improving Colombia’s
macro-economic situation and restoring growth under the f i r s t C A S pillar i s considered moderately
satisfactory, acknowledging that there i s s t i l l m u c h to do t o address the misalignment between the
central and decentralized levels o f governments and t o build better budget and expenditure
management processes.
The experience under the FIALs i s r i c h with lessons. First, severe austerity measures, such as a freeze
o n c i v i l service salaries-even if proposed by a popular executive-may n o t be supported by the
legislature or the general public, especially when the sense o f urgency has dissipated. I t also shows
that a public referendum o n a complex reform package, containing 15 measures, m a y prove to be
impractical for gaining support for reforms, despite the intention o f promoting direct democracy. Also,
as development partners, the Bank and the Government may not have been realistic in committing to a
series o f measures, extending over a four year period, so early in the l i f e o f a new government. I t
should be noted that the first FIAL, like the CAS, was approved before the presentation o f the National
Development Plan to Congress and that the FIAL I1 loan, six months later, was negotiated just before
the October 2003 Referendum. Moreover, the intent o f the reforms and the tools used need t o be clear:
conceptual and semantic difficulties, notably o n the notion o f fiscal rigidity and inflexibility, remained.
Finally, the FIAL series demonstrates that changing roles may be very hard in a country such as
Colombia with entrenched institutional responsibilities.
Source: IEG, Bank documents

89

Improvement in the fiscal balance combined with a growing economy has had a
marked effect on Colombia’s public debt burden. Under the slower economic growth
predictions contained in the original CAS, Colombia’s gross public debt burden was
expected to reach 52.9 percent o f GDP by 2005, up from 50 percent in 2001. In 2002,
given disappointing fiscal performance at the start o f that year, gross public debt burden
jumped to 53.9 percent of GDP. Since then, thanks to improved debt management, use o f
alternative financing sources, and better fiscal performance, the rate o f growth in
Colombia’s public debt stock has slowed and its share o f GDP has fallen to 45.8 percent
o f GDP as o f 2005. At the same time, the composition o f Colombia’s public debt has
changed with a shift to domestic currency denominated instruments, reducing exposure to
foreign exchange risk: foreign denominated, non-financial sector gross public debt has
fallen from 30.5 percent o f GDP in 2002 to 18.7 percent o f GDP in 2005.
The Bank provided technical advice for improved debt management. Under the
recently completed Financial Market TAL, the Bank assisted the Government in
developing the market for domestic public bonds and other debt instruments (see Box 2).
This was deepened under the series o f Financial Sector Adjustment Loans (see below).
Moreover, the Bank has continued to analyze Colombia’s debt sustainability and make
recommendations on debt management in i t s periodic reports (e.g., the FY02 Policy
Notes, the CAS and the CAS Progress Report) and kept the Government engaged in a
dialogue on how to manage its debt burden. This dialogue has further evolved to
informal advice on how Colombia can attain investment grade for i t s public debt.

Financial Sector. Another area high on the agenda in the 2002 CAS was the
continued restructuring o f the financial sector. After the 1999 crisis, the Bank worked
with the Government on a series o f measures to strengthen the financial system, help
resolve banking failures, especially among publicly owned banks, and strengthen
financial markets. These efforts have largely been successful, especially on cleaning up
portfolios and restoring the sector’s financial viability, as evident in the indicators as
presented in Table 3.
Table 3: Financial Soundness Indicators

I2002 I2003 I2004 I2005 12006
Capital Adequacy (percentage)
Non-performing Loans (percentage o f total loans)
Return o n Equity (percentage)

11.0
8.7
9.6

11.6
6.6
17.1
98

12.1
3.3
23.0
150
I 4.1

I

12.3
2.7
22.1
167
4.0

I

11.0
2.8
18.1
145
I 3.3

Source: IMF
LlVLL
OUUlbG.

I F C has also been playing a key role in helping to shape a more efficient capital
market in Colombia and in developing a sound regulatory framework, in collaboration
with the Government, the private sector and the Bank. Programmatic support was
provided through innovative ways, including initiating the F C ’ s first Colombian Pesodenominated bonds, El Dorado, assisting the establishment o f Colombia’s first secondary
mortgage company, strengthening institutional investors, and consolidating the domestic
capital market with partial credit guarantees for corporate bonds. In addition, I F C

90

supported housing finance, micro and SME finance, and domestic securities market,
providing US$188 million in total for nine transactions, Financing was mostly local
currency to better serve the nature o f those projects.
In housing finance, with the aim to deepen the liquidity o f the mortgage market and
foster Colombia’s capital markets, I F C continued to back the transformation o f the
mortgage sector which was badly hit when the housing price bubble burst during the
1999 crisis. Mortgage financing continues to decline as a share o f total loans. IFC’s
primary support was through partial credit guarantees, which amounted to US$46 million
enhancing the rating and enabling the leverage in the size o f the bond issues. This
included IFC’s support for the issuance o f non-performing mortgage-backed securities,
which was the first in the L A C region and received very favorable response from
investors. IFC also assisted with a former savings and loans institution that was shifting
the focus from financing mortgages to origination and securitization and repositioning
i t s e l f as a universal bank.

As reflected in the CAS Progress report, IFC has also placed a greater focus on micro
and SME finance, as compared to what was originally anticipated under the 2002 CAS,
with the aim to help address underprivileged access to financial services among lowerincome populations. Total financing o f US$57.5 million was provided to microfinance
institutions and other well-established local players promoting SME and micro credit
products through the formal banking system. In addition, in FY06, I F C partially
guaranteed the first bond issue by a leading local brokerage company to help it reduce i t s
reliance on commercial bank funding and fbrther facilitate market liquidity and activity in
the domestic securities markets.
The Bank has been an active partner in the sector, as noted above, building on the
work that had been done at the height o f the banking crisis under the Financial Sector
Adjustment operation (US$506 million, approved November 1999 and closed December
2001). During this CAS period, the Bank provided support under two programmatic
Financial Sector Adjustment operations (FSAL I,US$150 million, approved April 2003
and completed June 2003, and F S A L 11, US$lOO million, approved September 2004 and
completed March 2005). Outcomes for the two programmatic operations have been rated
satisfactory, as confirmed by IEG. Among other things, these operations made progress
on instituting risk-based banking supervision, management o f intervened banks, norms
for asset securitization, regulations on insurance, trust and pension firms, harmonization
o f collective investment schemes, and auctions o f government T-bills. Grunuhorrur, an
intervened bank that had been prepared for privatization under the initial FSAL, was
finally sold in October 2006. Advance work on many o f these measures had been
included under the Financial Market TAL (see Box 2).
Box 2: Outcomes of Financial M a r k e t Development TAL
The Financial Market Development TAL (US$8.2 million, approved June 1997 and closed December
2003) was rated satisfactory in achieving i t s objectives (this rating was subsequently downgraded in
IEG’s Project Audit t o moderately unsatisfactory because i t did not anticipate the 1999 crisis and was
slow to restructure). While designed and largely implemented in the previous CAS period, the
operation’s benefits have camed over into t h i s CAS. The operation was effective in: (1) revising the
way in which the Government calculated i t s pension liabilities, helping to focus attention t o the issues

91

o f the long run viability o f the system and gaining support for the reforms to the pension system
enacted in 2002 and 2005; (2) merging three stock exchanges and helping t o draft a new security law,
adopted in 2005; (3) facilitating the securitization of housing loans; (4) helping to set up the
Government’s system for monitoring financial transactions as part o f its efforts t o reduce money
laundering and financing o f terrorists; and (5) strengthening financial sector regulation and
supervision. All o f these developments, as assessed in two FSAPs and B a n k AAA, are considered
positive. The operation, however, was not successful in developing the local capital market although it
helped introduce regulations for the market for public sector debt.
Source: IEG

As pointed out by IEG, the primary accomplishment o f the Bank-supported work in
the financial sector so far has been the establishment o f an appropriate legal and
institutional framework for the financial markets, even though the effectiveness of these
measures has yet to be tested under stress. The 2005 FSAP showed that the banking
system continues to be dominated by financial conglomerates; the level o f provisioning
o f non-performing loans was still relatively low; corporate restructuring remains biased
against financial institutions; and the sector suffers from the taxes on financial
transactions. The Bank’s latest analysis, well received by the Government, confirms the
continuing weaknesses. As part o f i t s ongoing reform program, the Government asked
the Bank in FY06 to provide technical advice to assess the overall system, identify legal
and regulatory bottlenecks, review creditor rights and insolvency procedures, credit
reporting, the costs o f financial regulations, and the financial dimensions of reforms to
the pension system. Thus, while there has been considerable progress, there i s more to do
to strengthen regulation o f banking, insurance, pensions, and the security market along
with measures to improve the payment system and reduce corporate sector
vulnerabilities. These conclusions have been incorporated into initiatives currently being
taken by the Government, such as drafts o f a new insolvency law and the habeas data
law, and are being built into the package o f reforms supported by the Business
Productivity and Efficiency DPLs (see below).

Infrastructure to Foster Competitiveness and Improve Services for the Poor. During
the CAS period, the Bank Group continued to support decentralized administrations and
expansion o f basic public services, with an attendant impact on the poor (see Box 3).
IFC’s support for infrastructure included two projects undertaken by leading local
players. A prominent part o f the Bank’s efforts have been ongoing support o f the
extension o f the Transmilenio rapid bus service under the Bogota Urban Services project
(FY03; US$lOO million), now being replicated in five secondary centers under the
Integrated Mass Transit Project (FY04; US$250 million). These rapid bus lanes are
considered a model for reducing commuting times, especially over longer distances from
locations where poor people tend to live. Besides supporting investment in the
Transmilenio system, the Urban Services project finances a time-slice o f investments in
transport, air quality, solid waste management, and housing in Bogota’s deprived
neighborhoods. A follow up operation i s anticipated in FY07.
Next to urban transport, the water and sanitation sector has been an important area o f
Bank Group activity. In the case o f IFC, i t supported an innovative public-private
partnership company to develop water and sanitation services to the poorer areas in the
southwestern part o f Barranquilla. As the company explored non-traditional hnding for

92

public infrastructure services in the domestic capital market, IFC provided a US$18
million equivalent partial credit guarantee to enhance company’s local currency bond,
aiming for possible demonstration effect. In the case o f the Bank, besides several
completed operations (see below), the Bank has on-going operations in the city o f
Cartagena (approved FYOO; US$85 million); TA for the transformation o f municipal
water utilities (approved FYOO; US$5 million); and a Water and Sanitation ALP (the first
loan approved FY05; US$70 million) with the goal o f instilling sound management and
operational efficiency in medium-sized and small municipalities. Overall, these Bank
operations have been performing well and meeting their goals although the Cartagena
project has been subject to a complaint to the Bank’s Inspection Panel discussed later.
Box 3: Bank Support for Urban Infrastructure
T w o urban infrastructure operations closed during the CAS period: the Santa F e Water Supply and
Sewerage (two loans totaling U S 1 4 4 m i l l i o n approved November 1995 and closed December 2003)
and U r b a n Infrastructure (US$48.8 million, approved June 1998 and closed June 2004). B o t h
operations, rated satisfactory, focused o n broad institutional, legal, financial, environmental and
operational improvements; the first o n Bogoti’s water and sanitation services and the second, o n the
water sector plus transport, telecommunications and other services (health, education, gas distribution)
in sub-national entities. In the case o f Bogota, 1.8 m i l l i o n new consumers were added, many o f w h o m
were likely poor. Nevertheless, 600,000 potential consumers in informal settlements had yet to be
served. A major achievement was with respect to environmental considerations: the water entity made
considerable gains in adopting innovative and sound environmental and resettlement practices.
Fundamental institutional reforms o f the entity as originally anticipated, however, were n o t achieved.

These efforts have had a positive impact on access to basic infrastructure services.
As the Bank’s strategy in infrastructure has evolved over time-first supporting major
urban centers and now reaching out to medium and smaller sized communities-services
are n o w almost universal among the urban population. According to Bank statistics,
improved water and sanitation reaches 99 and 96 percent, respectively, o f the urban
population. Importantly, the rate o f improving coverage seems to be slowing with an
increase o f only one percentage point in water services, for example, since 2002, with
water utilities keeping pace with population growth.
The remaining uncovered
populations are now likely to be living in extremely poor pockets. Quality o f services,
however, can s t i l l be a problem that needs to be overcome as many locales continue to
report shortages and interruptions in service. Meanwhile, the gap in service levels
between urban and rural populations continues: comparable figures for coverage o f water
and sanitation in the rural areas are 72 and 66 percent, indicating considerable room for
expanding access among rural populations. The L a Guajira Water and Sanitation APL,
currently under preparation, i s an example o f growing attention to rural infrastructure.

The third area o f emphasis in the 2002 CAS was support for improving Colombia’s
capacity to manage natural disasters. This priority emerged as a result o f the 1999
earthquake for which the Bank provided emergency assistance. The Emergency
Recovery loan (US$225 million, approved March 2000 and closed August 2002) was
rated satisfactory in providing shelter, rehabilitating social and public infrastructure, and
preparing new preparedness plans. An important contribution was to demonstrate the
feasibility o f reducing housing construction costs and effective decentralized
implementation. This positive experience led to a broader discussion between the Bank

93

and the Government o n preventive measures, appropriate building codes and contingency
planning, and, as envisaged under the CAS, agreement to proceed with an APL for
Disaster Vulnerability Reduction (first loan approved in FY05, US$260 million; the
second in FY06, US$SO million). W h i l e i t is too soon to measure progress and the new
system has yet to be tested, these operations point to the potential for important gains.

Unlike the Bank, I F C has been active in the oil and gas sector. I t s strategy aims to
support local medium sized companies while assuring that their projects meet high
environmental, social and governance standards, and that revenues are used in a
transparent and effective manner. Consistent with this strategy, I F C has supported, with
a US$15 million equity commitment, a smaller, local company with significant
experience in Colombia’s energy industry, which i s dominated by large foreign and state
companies. As the company demonstrated strong interest in long-term sustainable
development, IFC is also providing technical assistance in: (i)
enhancing the use o f o i l
and gas royalties paid to municipal governments, with the support by the hydrocarbon
association, the state regulator, and the company, and (ii)
helping company’s adoption o f
the best practice environmental and social program, with a hnding mobilized from IFC’s
Corporate Citizenship Facility. This technical assistance i s expected to bring about the
impact beyond the company, at the sector level. I F C has also ventured into the area o f
natural gas, with a US$50 million senior loan to a long-time client and one o f the few
locally-owned, experienced gas transmission companies in Latin America. I F C i s
supporting the company’s expansion strategy in natural gas transmission and distribution
business in Colombia as well as other investments in the region, which is expected to
help achieve enhancement o f basic infrastructure services, promotion o f job-creating
economic activities, and considerable environmental benefits.
Other segments o f infrastructure received less support from the Bank Group during
the CAS period for a number o f reasons but that situation i s starting to change. First, in
transport, financing o f infrastructure, especially roads, has typically been shared by the
Bank with C A F and the IDB, explaining in large part why the Bank has not had a
presence since the 1990s. This situation has been reversed and the Government has
currently requested financial support from the Bank for new road investments. In the
case o f energy, which had been an important part o f the Bank-Colombia engagement in
the past, the sector has been, by and large, privatized. As a result, the Bank has focused
o n strengthening the sector’s institutional capacity under the Power Market Development
and Energy TAL (US$15 million, approved June 1997 and closed December 2002; rated
satisfactory). In term o f the electricity sector, Colombia has advanced in expanding
electricity service, reaching 93.6 percent o f the population accessible by the national grid.
For those off-grid, largely isolated rural populations, 35 percent have electricity, only up
one percentage point since 2002. In the case o f ports, the Bank has provided technical
advice, under Colombia’s first fee-for-service agreement, to review the regulatory
framework for port concessions. This TA helped to define port policy and how to
improve port contracts if the Government goes ahead with renegotiations.
There i s ample scope for more and better investment in infrastructure. These issues
were brought to light in the Bank’s FY04 flag-ship report, entitled “Colombia: Recent

94

Economic Developments in Infrastructure”, not anticipated under the original CAS
program but produced as part of the Bank’s Global Infrastructure Action Plan. This
report provides a comprehensive basis for developing o f approaches to expanding and
upgrading Colombia’s infrastructure base, from both the perspective o f social needs
(basic water and sanitation, secondary/access roads, communications and other services)
and the needs for the productive sectors (roads, ports, airports, telecommunications).

Increased Productivity Through Private Sector Development. This area o f the 2002
CAS was broadly intended to remove impediments to the private sector, addressing
regulatory, environmental and administrative procedures.
M I G A ’ s activities are
summarized in Box 4. In the case o f IFC, beyond the support for SMEs and microfinance, cited above, I F C provided financing for three manufacturing projects with two
leading Colombian pulp and paper product manufacturers operating regionally. These
companies needed long-term financing and faced challenges as they expanded
domestically and abroad. To help with both dimensions, I F C provided US$142 million
in financing and supported strengthening competitiveness and financial fundamentals by
assisting with multiple areas in operational sustainability, such as financial reporting and
restructuring, corporate governance, and environmental, social, health and safety
standards. O n the non-financing front, IFC has placed special emphasis on helping
improve corporate governance across different sectors in Colombia as an integral part
o f strengthening country’s capital market framework. IFC’s assistance to promote
higher-standard governance environment was provided directly at several o f i t s client
companies in Colombia, as well as through training programs sponsored for senior
executives in coordination with the local Chamber o f Industry and Commerce.
Box 4: MIGA’s Support for Private Sector Development
Under this CAS period, MIGA’s support for Colombia has evolved, reflecting the country’s improved
risk perceptions. MIGA only issued one new contract o f guarantee in Colombia since FYO1.
Currently, one project remains guaranteed by MIGA, with overall exposure to Colombia falling from
3.8 percent o f MIGA’s gross portfolio in FYOl to 1.3 percent. In turn, MIGA has begun supporting
Colombian investors in projects in the region. Two operations were approved in FY06: the SantoDoming0 Samama T o l l road in the Dominican Republic; and the Prodenvases Crown manufacturing
facility in Ecuador. MIGA has further engaged local governments in strengthening their investment
promotion capacities. Beginning in 2004, MIGA has been providing technical assistance to the
Chamber o f Commerce o f Bogota in the creation o f an investment promotion agency. This was
MIGA’s f i r s t ever sub-national promotion initiative. The new agency, formally inaugurated in 2006, i s
presently receiving advice on staffing, identification o f target sectors, and outreach. Similar assistance
was launched in 2006 to support Pro-Barranquilla in tracking investors, facilitation, and partnerships in
that city. Colombia i s also participating in MIGA’s Global Enterprise Benchmarking Program, with
the aim o f providing the country with information on which industries it may most likely be able to
compete internationally.
Source: M I G A

Turning to the Bank, the anticipated support for SMEs and micro-finance in the 2002
CAS did not come to fruition nor did the Bank carry out planned ESW on SMEs and
knowledge management. Instead, the IDB took the lead on SMEs, with the Bank
continuing to work on the setting up andor strengthening o f regulatory institutions for
key areas such as telecommunications, road concessions, water supply, and the power
sector under the U S $ 12.5 million Regulatory Reform Technical Assistance loan

95

(approved February 1997 and closed August 2004).
This operation was rated
satisfactory, as confirmed by IEG, in increasing private financing and improve
management o f infrastructure, including toll roads, water supply, power, natural gas
distribution, and telecommunications. I t accomplished this by strengthening the relevant
legal and institutional framework for the different sectors and by promoting private
participation. The project was successful in concessioning mobile telephone services,
attracting U S $ 1.2 billion, and shaping the stock issue by the Bogota Telephone
Company.
N e w priorities for Bank support for private sector development, however, emerged in
the latter part o f the CAS period as competitiveness became a greater priority for the
Government, especially as a free-trade agreement with the U S A became a distinct
possibility. As a result, the Bank and the Government have engaged in a wider
examination o f Colombia’s ability to compete internationally than was originally
anticipated. First, the FY06 C E M deepened understanding o f the issues, including those
in the agriculture sector, one o f the most sensitive areas in opening markets to
international competition. This assessment was further deepened via other AAA products
that analyzed the nature and extent o f the different impediments to Colombia’s
competitiveness, including labor markets (see “Labor Market Adjustment, Reform, and
Productivity”, November 2005), logistics and the quality o f Colombia’s infrastructure,
and the financial system.
These studies have provided the analytical underpinning for reaching agreement in
the CAS Progress Report on proceeding with a new series o f three proposed DPLs,
bridging with the next CAS. This series i s designed to address constraints in the business
environment, foreign trade and competitiveness, the financial sector, quality and
standards, and logistics and infrastructure. The first such loan o f US$ 250 million was
approved October 2005 and closed M a y 2006. The second loan o f U S $ 3 0 0 million was
approved in December 2006 and closed January 2007. So far, there i s little tangible
evidence o f the outcomes o f these operations but country trends are in the right direction.
There have been modest improvements in Colombia’s regulation-governance indicators
as demonstrated in the Bank’s Governance Indicators: in the case o f regulatory quality,
Colombia improved i t s percentile ranking to 54.0 in 2005, as compared to 50.2 in 2002.
To complement these broader efforts to spur Colombia’s competitiveness, IFC is
assisting the Municipality of Bogotil with improving and simplifying the system o f
municipal inspections. The project, which includes a comprehensive diagnostic o f the
inspection procedures and a technical proposal for implementation o f the reform, aims to
deepen the initial improvement that the Municipality had already achieved under a
business procedures simplification program in 2004. Based on the considerable impact
elsewhere in the L A C region, IFC’s support with business procedures simplification in
municipalities could double the businesses registered in Bogota.
Rural Development. Rebirth o f the rural economy was to have been a central feature
o f the 2002 CAS, critical for the peace process and offering opportunity for the 12
million people who live in rural areas, o f whom 79 percent were poor and 37 percent

96

lived in extreme poverty as o f 1999. The CAS anticipated both analytical work and new
lending. First, to inform the debate on what to do in the sector, the Bank devoted
considerable resources to analyzing Colombia’s rural sector, including the question o f
land ownership: land ownership is extremely skewed with a Gini o f 0.86 (1988). The
Bank carried out several pieces o f ESW, starting with the 2002 Policy Notes and
followed by reports on rural finance, coffee production, agricultural competitiveness, and
land policy. As noted above, the FY06 C E M specifically analyzed the effects on
Colombia’s agriculture sector o f a Free Trade Agreement with the USA. Second, despite
the fact that a much scaled-back loan was approved for the sector during this CAS period,
the Bank continued to support innovative ways to address some o f the sector’s key
problems through on-going operations. Three examples stand out: the Peasant
Enterprise Project, the on-going Productive Partnership Project, and the Magdalena
Medio Peace and Development Project (see Box 5). In addition, the Bank has supported
advances in agricultural technology under the completed Agriculture Technology
Development Project (US$46.8 million, approved June 1997 and closed December 2003).
This operation was rated satisfactory, citing achievements in increasing competitive
funding o f research, raising incomes o f 350,000 farmers and strengthening the
decentralized planning process. I t also provided the base for the new Agricultural
Transition project (see below).
lox 5: Pilot Peace and Rural Development Interventions
Peasant Enterprise Zones Development Project (US$4.2 million, approved June 1998 and closed December 2003)
T h i s LIL was designed to develop replicable methodologies for operating in Peasant Enterprise Zones in conflict
areas and areas adjacent to protected rain forests and indigenous territories. Three zones were selected for the pilot,
with assistance provided to local communities to plan and undertake small infrastructure investments, land titling,
farming, and environmental protection, in an open, participatoryfashion. T h e idea was to build local capacity and to
demonstrate the viability of working together. T h e project was successful in realizing its goals and the potential for
scaling up exists. The approach developed under the LIL has been adopted by the Rural Development Institute, but
has yet to receive full scale support for replication.
Second Magdalena Medio Regional Development Project (USSS million, approved September 2001 and closed May
2004) This LIL, rated satisfactory, was also intended to test new forms o f managing and implementing the region’s
development plan with the goal o f increasing citizen influence, making institutions more responsive, and
demonstrating concrete ways to increase economic and social returns. It built on the first LIL, approved in June
1998 and closed in December 2000 (also rated satisfactory), that laid the groundwork in establishing a nongovernmental entity to lead the process. T h e idea for the second LIL was to complete the investment cycle, as
investments planned under the first LIL did not have enough time to materialize, leading to demand for a follow-up
operation to test out those investments, and to reduce the dependence on the intermediary organization, the
Corporation for Development and Peace Magdalena Medio (an NGO sponsored by the Catholic Church and
Ecopetrol). The operation has been successful and mobilized funding from the EU. Since its closure, the concept
has been adopted by the Government and i s being scaled up with Bank support under the Peace and Development
APL in six regions.
Productive Partnerships (US32 million, approved FY02, ongoing) T h i s operation demonstrates the benefits of
pairing small-scale producer organizations with modern agro-businesses. The intention i s to transfer knowledge and
generate mutual benefits that made commercial sense in a demand-driven way with limited recourse to the public
sector. So far, the approach has been working with interim evaluations showing a gain o f 20 percent in incomes and
employment for farmers participating in the program. This result i s well above the 10 percent gain anticipated at the
start. The operation has been included in the Bank’s Agricultural Investment Handbook as an example o f promising
innovation. Importantly, the Government has adopted the concept as a main element o f its strategy to stimulate the
agriculture sector. T h e total number of hectares under the Government’s program has risen by more than 20 percent
since 2002, to 1.1 million hectares.
Source: IEG, Bank Documents

97

The 2002 CAS anticipated that there would be an opportunity to move forward on a
broad agenda o f issues in the rural sector, related to access to land, land markets, forestry,
and smallholder competitiveness. But the scope o f the only new lending operation was
reduced because a lack o f agreement over the vision for the sector, the limited fiscal
space available for such an operation, and differences within Colombia over i t s response
to the costs o f opening domestic markets. Instead, the Bank and the Government agreed
to a narrowly focused program, the recent Agricultural Transition Loan (US$30 million,
approved FY05), addressing phyto-sanitary standards, technology and other issues
relating to Colombia’s integration into global markets and meeting i t s obligations under
the Free-Trade Agreement with the USA.

Environment and Natural Resource Management. There i s considerable convergence
between the Bank and Colombia on the important o f sound environmental management
and sustainable development.
The CAS envisaged a broad based reform o f
environmental management, supported by a series o f Sustainable Development DPLs.
The first operation o f U S $ l 5 0 million was approved June 2005 and closed January 2006;
the second operation o f US$80 million i s pending meeting o f triggers, including the
passage o f a new Water Resources Management Law. A companion Sustainable
Development Investment loan (US$7 million, approved October 2005), not anticipated
under the original CAS, was added to support targeted investments (mainly monitoring
equipment) and to strengthen local capacities to undertake reforms.
These operations address a range o f concerns-urban pollution, water quality,
environmental health, integrated water management-and
target mainstreaming
environmental sustainability and achieving a direct impact on meeting Colombia’s MDGs
(notably the targets relevant to sustainable development and child mortality), implying
attendant improvements in M&E. They also build on previous lending that encouraged
the adoption o f sound environmental management policies and processes in major urban
centers (see B o x 6). The programs were reinforced by the recently completed Country
Environmental Assessment, entitled “Mitigating Environmental Degradation to Foster
Growth and Reduce Inequalities” (February 2006), which provided the analytical basis
and priorities for the Sustainable Development DPLs. Again, it i s too soon to assess
results but the start i s encouraging, especially in the depth o f the reforms and the shared
appreciation o f the importance o f sustainable development within Colombia.
Box 6: Urban EnvironmentalManagement
The US$19.07 m i l l i o n loan (approved January 1996 and closed December 2002) was rated satisfactory
in strengthening the capacity o f the Ministry o f Environment t o provide policy advice and technical
assistance t o major urban centers and smaller communities. The focus was o n designing environmental
management plans addressing solid waste management, land use planning, water resource management,
waste water treatment, public awareness and education. Such plans were created for Colombia’s four
largest cities-Bogoth, Cali, Medellin and Barranquilla. In the case o f Bogotb, two thirds o f the plan
has been put into actual use and an Environmental Fund set up. Development o f a National
Environmental Information System was not achieved, with the IDB eventually providing support for
t h i s component.
Source: IEG

98

A specific goal set in the 2002 CAS was to address the delays in the environmental
licensing system. That goal has been achieved, with the average number o f days to
receive an environmental license falling to 16 days in 2005, down from 130 days in 2001.
The Bank helped revise procedures for issuing these licenses as part o f the preparation o f
the Sustainable Development DPLs. In addition, as anticipated in the CAS, the Bank
advanced the possibility o f reducing carbon emissions: several GEF and PCF operations
have been approved and/or are in the pipeline with the expectation that they will
demonstrate concrete ways to reduce carbon emissions. There i s no specific evidence as
yet. A new opportunity arose to help Colombia prepare for climate change with the GEF
grant for the Integrated National Adaptive Program. More broadly, the Bank and
Colombia have a strong commitment to an active program o f GEF grants to address
global environmental concerns as well as the inclusion o f indigenous and AfroColombian peoples (see below).
Pillar Two: Sharing the Fruits

Overall. Economic growth has been the preeminent factor in explaining the
reductions in poverty and income inequality since 2002. However, credit also has to be
given to the efforts by the Government, with Bank support, to share the benefits o f
growth via increased opportunity, financial security for those facing medical problems,
and greater public resources directed to those with insufficient incomes and/or facing
temporary dislocations. The impetus for reforming the social sectors has been long
standing, with fundamental reforms articulated in the 1991 Constitution. These changes
were accompanied by extensive decentralization intended to improve the quality and
quantity o f social services, particularly health and education. Unfortunately, these
reforms were derailed by the 1999 economic crisis which cut funding and exposed
deficiencies in social programs and the social safety net. That crisis set the stage for
developing new approaches to protect the poor and provide a social safety net.
The Bank’s support has been critical in helping to shape and implement these new
approaches under a series o f Labor and Social Sector Development Policy loans
(PLaRSSALs), accompanied by targeted investment programs in education and social
protection to put these new policies into effect. The results o f this work have been very
positive. The first PLaRSSAL (US$ 150 million, approved September 2003 and closed
June 2004), the second (US$ 200 million, approved November 2004 and closed March
2005) and the third (US$ 200 million, approved July 2006 and closing March 2007) have
continued and deepened the process o f reform initiated under the previous CAS, with the
Social Sector Adjustment Loan (US$155 million, approved August 2002 and closed
December 2002). A T A L o f U S $ 2 million, approved in FY05, was added to provide
technical backup to the local teams designing and executing these reforms. Like i t s
companions in the financial sector and the fiscal adjustment, the initial Social Sector S A L
was designed to carry forward the reform agenda between administrations.

The Social Sector SAL, the ensuing PLaRSSALs Iand I1 and the LaRSDPL I11
demonstrate continuity. According to IEG, the SSAL and two completed PLaRSSALs

99

were successhl in meeting their goals, with the first PLaRSSAL rated highly satisfactory.
They contributed towards improving transparency and citizen oversight via M&E
measures; developing a risk management approach to social protection; expanding health
insurance coverage; improving the efficiency and equity o f resources devoted to the
education sector; and enhancing labor market possibilities. The third loan in the series
added child nutrition to the agenda along with the restructuring o f public hospitals.
Details o f the accomplishments in each o f these areas are provided below.
Education. The 2002 CAS anticipated that the first priority for Colombia in the social
sectors would be to meet its goal o f universal education at the primary level. In working
towards that goal, the CAS set interim targets o f 90 percent for both primary completion
and net primary enrollment as o f 2006. Additionally, supported by subsequent analytical
work, attention was directed to reaching those in the 12-17 year age bracket which,
according to the Bank’s FY03 report, “Closing the Gap in Education and Technology”
(FY03), was critical for Colombia’s competitiveness. Beyond the expansion o f primarysecondary enrollment, the CAS also sought efficiency and quality gains, promotion o f
innovative pilots in decentralizing education management, expansion o f rural education
opportunities, and enhancing demand for higher education by providing student loans.
Most o f these goals have been met and in some cases exceeded.

Country-level results are impressive. Data show that that enrollment in public
primary and secondary education has increased from 7.8 million students in 2002 to 9.2
million in 2006 (95 percent o f target). O f the new students, almost one-third came from
lower income groups. Concerning primary completion rates, the CAS interim goal o f 90
percent as o f 2006 was surpassed, with 94 percent reached in 2004. Preliminary data for
2006 show that the goal for net enrollment was also surpassed, with the net enrollment
close to 95 percent. I t i s important to note that this latter figure i s based o n the 2005
census data. When the CAS was prepared, then available information had net enrollment
for primary students at 87 percent as o f 1998, up from 84 percent in 1992. By 2003, net
enrollment had increased to 88 percent. However, these data were based on interim
population estimates which were too high. As a result, earlier assessments have
overestimated the gap in meeting these M D G s and it will now be necessary to reassess
Colombia’s progress in reaching the 2015 MDGs on the basis o f the last census.

A number o f Bank operations made important contributions to these achievements.
The series o f PLaRSSALs focused specifically on expanding access and improving
quality, with the number o f primary and secondary students surpassing the specific
targets set under the PLaRSSAL, increasing by 743,000 between 2002 and 2004.
Moreover, 90 percent o f students-some 9.5 million-are
now subject to standard
proficiency tests in language, mathematics, and sciences. I t was also expected that 90
percent o f 9th grade teachers would be subject to performance evaluations, but the
Constitutional Court rejected this measure. Almost 8,000 schools have prepared
improvement plans, and 77 out o f 78 quality assurance centers had been set up as o f
2006. It should be highlighted that the cost o f expanding opportunities are largely
financed by the fiscal space generated by increasing efficiency (Le,, teacher-student
ratios) and savings redirected from other sectors. In addition, one o f the driving forces in

100

expanding enrollment was the new incentive to local authorities to enroll students, when
transfers from the central Government were changed to being based on the number o f
students, instead o f the number o f teachers. This reform was adopted under the SFALFIAL development policy series and i s being implemented by the National Planning
Office via the criteria to distribute petroleum royalties to local governments.

In addition to supporting the sector’s policy framework, the Bank financed separate
investment operations to test methods to stimulate decentralized education management

and expand education at the municipal level. The goal was to demonstrate how local
authorities could best make use o f the k n d s transferred to them from the central level.
These operations were implemented under conditions o f conflict and/or the influx o f
displaced persons and their record o f achievements is mixed:
municipal-level
management o f the educational system (brought about by the 1991 Constitution) has been
slow and difficult to implement (see B o x 7). ESW (completed in August 2006) on the
policy options and international experience on contracting out education services i s an
example o f the Bank’s technical advice on improving decentralized services.
Box 7: Experiencesin Municipal Management of Education
The first attempt at directly supporting decentralized education was the Antioquia Education Project
( U S 3 9 . 5 million, approved November 1997 and closed December 2003). IEG rated this project as
modestly satisfactory, in light o f the mixed results as drop-out rates, repetition and student math
achievements did not change. Communities were not able to assume management responsibilities as
expected. However, enrollment went w e l l up: pre-school by 14 percentage points (to 88 percent),
primary by 7 percentage points (to 97 percent), and lower secondary by 16 percentage points (to 89
percent). Upper secondary enrollment decreased slightly, staying at about 63 percent. The results o f
the Pasto Education Project (US$7.1 million, approved November 1997 and closed August 2003) were
better and IEG c o n f i i e d a satisfactory rating. Gross enrollment targets were met, even though net
rates fell; repetition rates went down as did drop-out rates; and student test scores improved for grade 3
math, but fell for language. The Cundinamarca Education Quality Improvement project (approved
FY04, US$15 million) started slowly and was subsequently canceled because the differences with the
newly elected local administration, over the pedagogical model to be used, procurement, and the role
o f the Secretariat o f Education.
Source: IEG, Bank documents

The Rural Education APL has also been hard to implement but has been reaching far
more locales and students than originally anticipated. The first loan o f US$20 million,
approved in FYOO, was designed to encourage greater enrollment and quality in up to 70
poor, rural municipalities starting with net enrollment o f as l o w as 30 percent. The goal
i s to get enrollment eventually up to 60 percent, still well below that achieved in the
urban centers. The second o f the series, originally expected in FY04, i s now
programmed for FY07. So far, while i t has been hard to reach rural communities,
demand for participating in this program has been overwhelming: 582 municipalities
have participated, exceeding the initial target eight-fold.
Between 2002 and 2006,
241,000 new school places were created and 460,000 students in rural areas have
benefited from the program.
Another dimension of the 2002 CAS was to increase demand for higher education.
Colombia experiences l o w enrollment in tertiary education as compared to other Latin
American countries, with very low participation from the bottom income strata. To

101

address these concerns, the ongoing Higher Education Loan (US$200 million, approved
December 2002) helps to finance student loans and grants and expand the number o f post
graduate students. I t is also supporting ways to improve the quality assurance system, set
up M&E to measure progress and develop Labor Market Observatories to track labor
movements and employability. According to supervision reports, this operation has been
surpassing initial expectations. Country data, combined with supervision reports, show
that enrollment in higher education increased from 1 million students in 2002 to 1.3
million in 2006 (about 85 percent o f target) and that student loans rose to 88,000 in 2006,
doubling the number o f students receiving financial support. Surpassing the initial target,
almost 60 percent o f beneficiaries are from income strata 1 and 2, up from 30 percent
before the program started. The number studying at master or doctor level almost
doubled to 13,000 in 2006. Equally, the efforts on quality assurance are progressing,
with 432 programs now certified as high quality, and 3,600 programs (88 percent o f
target) for minimum standards o f quality. A new loan, expanding the program, gas been
requested.
Health i s the second anchor o f the Bank's work in the social sectors, focusing on
coverage o f Colombia's health insurance system, nutritional supplements for vulnerable
populations, and overcoming weakness in public health services. The underpinnings o f
Colombia's health care system were established by the 1993 law that set up a system for
providing direct subsidies to those who could not afford health insurance. However, the
pace o f implementation faltered for several reasons: decentralization became more
difficult as conflicts increased during the 1 9 9 0 ~and
~ the resources to pay for insurance
subsidies were in short supply, especially after the 1999 economic crisis. But, restoration
o f growth and easing o f the fiscal concerns enabled the reactivation o f the reform effort
under the current CAS. To support this effort, the Bank first seconded a senior Bankstaff health expert to Colombia for two years. That expert engaged in day-to-day
problem solving and assisted the Ministry o f Health to refocus the debate, engage a larger
audience, and provide the technical assessments allowing decision makers, including
members o f Congress, to gain confidence in the reform's merits. Financial support for
the reforms was then provided under the series o f PLaRSSALs.
These efforts are paying off. The principal achievement has been the number o f
persons receiving subsidies to acquire health insurance coverage. According to country
data, the number o f subsidized beneficiaries now amounts to 18.6 million persons as o f
2006, up from about 10.7 million in 2002. Currently, 73 percent of the target population
i s covered, as compared to 42 percent at the start o f the CAS period. An important
change has been the shift to full subsidy (instead o f partial): 5.8 million beneficiaries
now receive 100 percent subsidy, up from only 400,000 in 2002. According to an
independent evaluation, this i s an outstanding result, as very few l o w and middle income
countries have achieved almost universal coverage o f their health insurance schemes. In
terms o f health outcomes, as pointed out in the independent evaluation, the first-order
result i s improved access to and utilization o f health services as insurance affiliates are
more likely to use the health care system as compared to those without insurance. This
holds true, for example, for children suffering from diarrhea and respiratory infections.

102

Supply side problems, nevertheless, can have a negative impact on the quality o f
services provided and the impact o f insurance coverage on health status. Thus, the
continuing dual-track o f reforms in the health sector remains important. Accompanying
the expansion o f health insurance are efforts supported by the PLaRSSALs to alter the
way health care i s delivered. In 2001, a major decentralization took place, putting
hospitals and primary care under the responsibility o f local governments. Hospitals were
also expected to operate independently and compete with private providers: subsidies
were increasingly to be shifted to the demand side. These reforms have been taking
effect, hospital by hospital, with the results positive thus far, based on the experience o f
71 institutions under the IDB’s program o f hospital restructuring: service levels have
gone up, staffing got down, total costs reduced and deficits narrowed. Nevertheless,
there i s a long way to go to eliminate operating deficits in public facilities. Under the
PLaRSSALs, some 127 hospitals, as o f 2005, were under management contracts (target
100). More than 90 percent of third level public hospitals have been licensed (target 70
percent) as have 27 out o f 28 private insurers.

The rate o f vaccinations-one o f the MDGs in which Colombia falls short o f the CAS
interim goal-has increased to about 87-90 percent as o f 2005, up from 82 percent in
2002. The interim target was 92-95 percent. World Health Organization statistics show
that the rate o f vaccinations in Colombia fell during the 1996-2000 period, mostly likely
because o f security concerns and the fiscal crisis. Under the PLaRSSALs, better
performance has been hoped for as the resources had been sufficient to make the target;
however, continuing conflicts and forced displacements have made it difficult to reach
the interim goal. To strengthen further the incentives to vaccinate children, the
Government made an immunization card a pre-requisite for participating in nutritional
programs and school enrollment. Complementing the Bank’s PLaRSSALs, the IDB has
been active in providing resources for the investments for both hospital restructuring and
vaccination programs, the latter area also receiving support from CAF.

A disappointing area in terms o f realizing the interim MDGs set out in the CAS is
Colombia’s performance in reducing maternal mortality. The long t e r m goal o f 45 deaths
per 100,000 now seems out o f reach by 2015 unless there is concerted action to improve
the situation. The maternal mortality rate, as o f 2005, stood at 99 deaths per 100,000
women, with no improvement since 1998, according to the Government’s assessment (the
Bank estimates material mortality in Colombia to be 130 per 100,000, based on its own
methodology). It i s now recognized that tracking maternal mortality has proven to be
very difficult. An ongoing assessment by the Bank o f Latin America’s system for
collecting vital statistics shows considerable deficiencies in recording deaths, let alone
accurately recording the cause o f death, in Colombia and elsewhere in the region.
Reducing maternal mortality i s an area in which there was no specific Bank intervention
anticipated under the 2002 CAS.
Social Protection. Another critical area o f reform supported by the Bank has been to
restructure, refocus and expand Colombia’s system o f social protection. As noted earlier,
the 1999 economic crisis brought to light deficiencies in Colombia’s tradition social
safety net system (largely dependent on family and community assistance). At that time,

103

the Government, the Bank and the IDB worked collaboratively to put in place the Red de
Apoyo Social (RAS), a temporary emergency support program financed by the Bank and
IDB. The R A S consisted o f three programs: Familias en Accion, a new conditional
grant program linked to child health check-ups, and regular school attendance, financed
in part by the Human Capital Protection Project (US$lSO million, approved FYO1, closed
November 2005; rated satisfactory); Jovenes en Accion, which provided scholarships and
internships for poor youths (supported by a Bank-financed Youth Development LILY
US$5 million, approved FY99, closed June 2003; rated satisfactory), and Empleo en
Accion, a temporary workfare program, supported with the Bank-financed Community
Works and Employment loan (US$lOO million, approved in M a y 2000, closed November
2005; rated unsatisfactory). The first two programs have been incorporated into
Colombia's institutional structures and scaled up. On the other hand, the third did not
meet its goals (see Box 8).
Box 8: Outcome of the C o m m u n i t y Works and E m p l o y m e n t L o a n
This US$lOO m i l l i o n operation, approved in M a y 2000 with j o i n t financing f r o m the IDB, was one o f
the three pilot social protection programs developed with Bank support in response to the 1999
economic crisis. I t initially aimed at contracting the poor and unemployed t o work in small public
works at the municipal level, patterned after Argentina's successful workfare program, Trubujar. I t
also benefited f r o m a number o f analytical studies that were helping t o frame Colombia's a
comprehensive risk based social safety net. Because o f the crisis, the operation was very quickly
prepared and approved in four months. Implementation, however, spanned a frustrating four years
before two-thirds o f the loan was cancelled and US$6 m i l l i o n redirected to a p i l o t o f a wage subsidy
for private sector f i contracting those previously not employed. That pilot experience did not meet
expectations either. In the end, 228,000 beneficiaries did participate in the workfare program; ex-post
evaluation shows that beneficiaries were largely poor or extremely poor and they did increase their
incomes as compared to control groups. However, the way that program was implemented was
unworkable: it took an average o f 28 months for municipal sub-projects to be prepared, evaluated and
authorized (as compared t o 9 months in Argentina). Rather than using simplified procedures t o speed
up disbursements, there was a tendency to centralize and create unnecessary steps, resulting in delays.
This was opposite to what was done in Argentina, showing that the transfer o f a concept f r o m one
country to another must b e matched by the attributes needed for implementation, effective
This
decentralization and results-orientated management. That was not the case in Colombia.
experience also demonstrates the risks o f a large gap between the program designers, w h o tend t o be
highly qualified staff in central agencies, and the implementators f r o m a broad array o f municipalities
and NGOs.
Source: Bank ICR

Building on these experiences, the Government proceeded to deepen and refine i t s
social safety net system with financial support provided under the series o f PLaSSRLs.
In almost all areas, targets under these programs are being surpassed. The underpinnings
o f the system were further validated in the Bank's ESW, "Colombia's Social Safety N e t
Assessment (FY03) and facilitated by technical studies under a PHRD grant. Additional
technical support i s now being provided under the Social Sector TAL (US$2 million,
approved November 2004). Some o f the changes have been institutional, such as the
merger o f the Ministries o f Labor and Health, to create the new Ministry o f Social
Protection with responsibility for several autonomous agencies (the Social Security
Institute, the Family Welfare Institute and the National Training Program). Successful
pilot programs, such as Familias en Accion, have been scaled up and institutionalized,
and a number o f new programs have been introduced, particularly in the area o f nutrition.

104

Monitoring and targeting o f social programs have been tightened.
Colombia’s restructure social safety net has expanded and improved targeting o f
nutritional programs. Targeting was introduced for early child development and
children breakfast programs whose coverage has been increased five fold to 300,000
families. In total, 1 million children participate in the breakfast program as o f 2006 (up
from 78,000 in 2002) and 2.3 million children benefit from school lunches (up marginally
from 2.2 million in 2002). A new nutritional program has been added for the elderly,
with some 400,000 now served and the number o f elderly receiving cash assistance has
tripled since 2002, reaching 200,000 persons, As part o f the move towards results-based
management, M&E procedures were introduced and ex-post evaluations have been
undertaken o f the child breakfast and community day care programs.

A major part o f the effort on Colombia’s social safety net has been to institutionalize
and expand Fumilius en Accion, the successful program o f conditional grants to poor
families. As a follow-on operation to the Human Capacity Protection loan, the Bank is
presently provided support for the transition o f the Families program, under the new
Social Safety Net loan (US$86.4 million, approved FY06). Besides expanding coverage
from 320,000 to 568,000 families as o f 2006 (target 400,000), the loan i s assisting the
Government in concentrating resources on the extremely poor in marginal areas and in
conflict zones and incorporating 100,000 displaced families (63,000 enrolled as o f 2006).
The 2005 independent evaluation o f the Families program demonstrated i t s effectiveness
in targeting the poor and improving social indicators. Some 91 percent o f beneficiaries
are below the poverty line. Consumption o f basic goods increased by up to 19 percent.
Increased intake o f protein was noticeable in both urban and rural populations. Chronic
malnutrition reduced by 10 percent among children 0 to 2 years. School attendance by
secondary students increased by 14 percentage points to 89 percent in rural areas and by
9 percentage points to 94 percent in urban areas with a commensurate reduction on the
hours worked by children. Still, the evaluation showed that there could be further
improvements in targeting and the design o f the SISBEN system, the methodology used
by Colombia to identify beneficiaries for social and other targeted programs.
Labor Markets. The goal in the 2002 CAS was to help make labor markets more
flexible. Under the first PLaRSSAL, the Government made improvements to labor
regulations in order to make i t easier for hard-to-employ workers (youths, those over 50
years, the disabled, and unemployed heads o f households) gain access to the labor
markets. Law 789, passed in 2002, reduced the cost o f firing and payroll taxes, provided
incentives for businesses to employ more people and added a safety net for the
unemployed. The Bank’s assessment o f those reforms (see above mentioned EWS on
labor markets) shows that these reforms resulted in greater employment o f young
workers, less informality and higher wages for the unskilled. At the same time, the
PLaRSSALs supported the transformation o f existing labor training programs, separating
the regulatory, accreditation and service provision roles o f SENA, the National Training
Institute. Reforms further made the provision o f training more competitive by allowing
licensed private providers and f i r m s to provide their own internal training. The changes
in the system have resulted in a dramatic increase in graduates: according to Government

105

statistics, the number o f graduates from professional training institutes has more than
tripled to almost 3.9 million as o f 2006 (target was to double). Graduates from the
Jovenes en Accion program (mentioned above) have increased eight fold.
Empowerment and Inclusion, Colombia has important populations o f indigenous and
Afro-Colombians that tend to been marginalized. The approach adopted under the CAS
was to heighten awareness among policy makers o f the specific hurtles faced by these
groups. The CAS proposed to address ethnicity systematically in the Bank’s own AAA
program in order to demonstrate how and why such groups were important, and to
incorporate indigenous and Afro-Colombian peoples as target populations under rural
development, bio-diversity, and climate change projects, financed by the GEF. The Bank
committed itself to have all analytical work include breakdown by ethnicity, undertake
AAA on Colombia’s indigenous peoples and Afro-Colombians and help Colombia
include ethnicity in the 2005 Census and household surveys. This action plan has by and
large been accomplished. First, many o f the GEF operations do target these groups.
Second, the Bank did carry out an analysis o f the status o f indigenous and AfroColombians: this report, entitled “The Gap Matters: Poverty and Wellbeing o f AfroColombians and Indigenous People” (July 2005) provided an overview o f the current
status o f these groups and the gaps in services. Third, the newly available 2005 census
data now breaks down information on ethnicity with assistance provided under the
M E C O V I program supported by an IDF grant (US$290,000, approved FY04). The
availability o f these data has encouraged the Colombians to carry out their own analysis
of three disadvantaged groups-indigenous, Afro-Colombians and Roma (the latter, not
covered in the Bank’s work). But not all o f the Bank’s AAA addressed exclusion.
Instead, the Bank has taken an alternative route by using the analyses underpinning social
sector operations to heighten the Government’s interest, first, in targeting the poordisproportionately members o f indigenous and Afro-Colombian groups-and in M&E in
general (see Box 9).
Box 9: Mainstreaming Exclusion
A good example o f mainstreaming exclusion i s the FY06 Social Safety N e t operation. The analysis
backing that operation showed that the SISBEN system, used to target beneficiaries, might not capture
well the socio-economic conditions o f indigenous and Afro-Colombian groups and that the M&E
system in place for the Fumilius program did not track their participation. This led to an indigenous
action plan being prepared. Another example o f an operation giving particular attention to the unique
challenges faced by indigenous and Afio-Colombia groups i s the Bank-financed Peace and
Development APL (first loan US$30 million, approved FY04). A third example, now under
preparation, i s the La Guajira Water and Sanitation project. As o f now, i t i s too early to measure their
impact but these examples demonstrate the scope for internalizing these groups into program design
and for systemic changes to the way that the SISBEN works.
Source: Bank documents

Pillar Three: Building Efficient, Accountable and Transparent Governance

Overall. The goal o f this pillar was to support the Government’s efforts to make
governance more transparent and efficient and to stimulate accountability under i t s Public
Administration Reform Program. Even though i t did not have much margin for
maneuver on the expenditure side, especially after the rejection o f austerity measures in

106

the 2003 referendum and the rulings by the courts on various measures, the Government
embarked on a reform program to change how the central agencies operateconsolidating ministries, cutting authorized positions in the civil service, reducing
bureaucratic steps, upgrading information systems, implementing e-procurement, and
putting in place a results-based management culture. So far, progress has been quite
good, even though the results are uneven and the benefits are more evident on the quality
and efficiency o f spending than on reducing spending per se. Among the quantitative
indicators i s the drop in wages and salaries as a share o f total spending from 11.1 percent
in 2002 to 10 percent in 2006. Colombia’s relative ratings on the Bank’s Governance
Indicators all show improvement: Colombia jumped from the 43rd percentile to 53rd
percentile on government efficiency and from 36th to 53‘d o n the control o f corruption
between 2002 and 2005. It tends to rank higher on government efficiency, regulatory
quality, and control o f corruption than other countries in i t s income category and
countries in the L A C region. Rule o f law, voice and accountability, and violenceespecially the last measure-are where Colombia falls short.

As discussed above, the Bank’s main vehicles to support this effort have been the
FSAL, the FIAL series o f policy based loans and the Second Public Financial
Management Project. Besides supporting the impressive record o f improvements to tax
policy and administration cited earlier, the last operation further helped to design and
install Colombia’s integrated financial management system, SIIF, and performance
monitoring system, SINERGIA. The new series o f Business Environment and
Competitiveness DPLs, also cited previously, picks up some o f these themes, particularly
on those areas that affect the business environment, quality and standards. Beyond these
instruments, the original CAS identified two specific areas, Judicial Reform and Anticorruption, for attention. The CAS Progress Report expanded a third, Monitoring and
Evaluation. Progress in each o f these areas is summarized below.
Judicial Reform. The Government’s National Development Plan places considerable
priority on improving the quality and relevance o f the country’s judicial services. For
many years, the high levels o f violence in society, the lack o f physical presence o f the
state in conflict areas, and perceptions of corruption and impunity have contributed to a
l o w level o f use o f and trust in judicial services by the general public. The 1991
Constitution set in motion a number o f changes to the way that the judiciary i s managed
and structured. Under i t s development strategy, the Government placed particular
emphasis on increasing access to community based, alternative dispute mechanisms,
justice for the poor, via community tribunals and “houses o f justice”. These initiatives
have been support the IDB and USAID.
The Bank oriented i t s support, via the Judicial Conflict Resolution Improvement LIL
(approved FY02 and closed in June 2006, US$3.9 million), to test a comprehensive
approach to judicial reform in civil courts. The intent was to devise new processes,
human resource capacities, and organizational set-ups capable o f reducing processing
times, increasing productivity and increasing demand for legal services, starting with a
sample o f some 80 civil courts in five major centers (with some labor courts added
subsequently). This pilot has moved slowly: the LIL was first to close by June 2004 but

107

has been extended by two years. Implementation was confounded by the intrinsic
complexity o f the sector, the ambivalence o f the executive branch in dealing with the
judicial branch, and the lack o f experience o f lead actors. Nevertheless, the experiment is
starting to show some results: one o f the achievements has been the adoption of
performance evaluation o f judges. Gains have also been experienced in overall
efficiency, thanks in large part to new case tracking mechanisms: the participating courts
were able to increase their resolution rate from 63 percent to 80 percent; lower their
congestion rate from 3.2 to 2.1; and increase their case completion rate from 32 percent
to 48 percent. W h i l e not uniform among the participating courts, average performance i s
considerably better than that o f non-participating courts. Qualitative feedback from users
shows greater social legitimacy. Because o f the priority placed on improving judicial
services, and despite the difficulties so far, the Government i s committed to moving to a
second phase o f the process with a Judicial Sector Development Loan planned for FY07.
~
governments have placed high priority
Anti-Corruption. Since the 1 9 9 0 ~successive
o n reducing corruption in Colombia. In the first Uribe presidential term, the Vice
President was mandated to spearhead the development o f the National Plan Against
Corruption. The Commission’s report and action plan was presented in September 2005,
building on, among other things, the survey o f corruption carried out with the help o f
WBI in April 2001, the Bank’s Governance Indicators, and technical input from WBI to
the commission’s work. During this period, perceptions concerning corruption have
improved according to World Bank Governance Indicators cited above and Transparency
International ratings. In the case o f TI’S rating, Colombia ranked 5gth overall in 2006,
with a rating o f 3.9, up from 3.6 in 2002. This is better performance than many other
countries in Latin America. Nevertheless, these ranking are s t i l l low and corruption
remains a serious concern: according to the WEF’s Competitiveness Report (2004),
corruption was rated the number one obstacle in doing business in Colombia.
Beyond the Bank’s technical support provided to the Vice Presidential commission,
the assistance envisaged under the 2002 CAS has failed to materialize. Earlier criticism
by the Bank was that the Government’s focus, to that point, had been narrowly on the
quality o f legal and administrative controls, handling complaints, and the role o f control
agencies and did not respond to the diagnosis revealed in the 2001 survey. This still
seems to be the case, with the Bank continuing to look for a broader, more
comprehensive approach. The alternative o f working at the sub-national level failed
when central authorities would not agree to provide authorization for the sub-national
government willing to collaborate with the Bank to take o n additional debt. The situation
i s complicated by the lack o f clear institutional home for any anti-corruption initiative.
Nevertheless, the ongoing discussion on the Policy Notes (FY07), plus the conclusions o f
pertinent AAA-Institutional
Governance Review (FY07) and Decentralization
(FY07)-may
revitalize the dialogue.
Monitoring and Evaluation. In contrast to the slow progress in the above areas, the
Government and the Bank have advanced fkrther than anticipated in the 2002 CAS on
instilling a results-based management culture in the public sector. As confirmed in a
recent IEG evaluation o f M&E practices and policies in Latin America, Colombia stands

108

out as a leading case. The mainstay o f this effort was a dedicated component o f the ongoing Public Financial Management I1 project, helping the Government to improve and
extend Colombia’s performance management system, SINERGIA, to all sector ministries
and 170 public entities and to enhance monitoring by civil society. Under the National
Development Plan, the Government set the goal o f increasing the share o f the investment
budget subject to ex-post evaluations, now reaching 24 percent as o f 2006, up from 7
percent in 2002. The Bank has supported this effort by financing individual evaluations
in social sector operations, as a way o f building a body o f M&E experience that can be
replicated and scaled up. The 2005 Progress Report responded to this growing interest by
adding a new M&E component to the Governance pillar. The plan now is to proceed
with the proposed US$ 1Omillion Monitoring and Evaluation Loan, currently in the
lending program. This project is expected to increase the l i n k s between‘ results and
budgeting, complete the institutionalization o f the SINERGIA system, and upgrade the
quality o f information and data used in measuring performance.
Pillar Four: Building the Foundations o f Peace
Overall. The original CAS foresaw the peace process as an essential and integral part
o f the Bank’s program in Colombia with actions embodied in the four pillars. There was
no separate peace pillar per se. However, as the country conditions changed, it became
apparent that the Bank could have a role in both dealing with the after-effects o f the
peace negotiations as well as the dislocations caused the ongoing conflict. Thus, the
2005 Progress Report consolidated the various actions under separate pillars and added
new activities to form a new Peace pillar. As highlighted in the Progress Report and in
the Government’s assessment o f i t s National Development Plan, this i s an area o f

considerable improvement, with numerous statistics demonstrating how security
conditions have changed.
The Bank’s contribution to that process were indirect but important, both at the
general level-helping
to restore macro-economic confidence-and
specific-the
piloting o f new ways to collaborate peacehlly and to plan and execute community
development programs, focusing on those most affected by the conflicts. The fact that
approach developed under the two Magdalena Medio projects have been adopted by the
Government as i t s national strategy and has attracted EU financing under i t s Peace
Laboratories program attests to the impact o f these operations. The new Peace Pillar is
tentative, subject to maintaining improved security conditions. I t focuses on scaling up
the Peace and Development approach and on learning. The following describes the main
elements o f the Peace Pillar as i t now stands:
0

Peace and Development: The first operation under the Peace and Development APL
(US$30 million, approved FY04) expands the approach to collaborative community
development piloted under the Magdalena Medio LILs. I t extends the approach to six
areas encompassing 3 million persons, as compared to 800,000 under the LILs.
Within that population, it targets vulnerable, poor and displaced families and provides
support for restoringhuilding assets, accessing social services, and improving living
conditions (e.g. basic food production, sanitation). So far, progress has been slow but

109

going in the right direction. I t i s expected that the second phase, also for U S 3 0
million, will follow in the coming CAS. Further work is also anticipated on
understanding better the needs o f displaced populations and the impact o f violence on
vulnerable groups.
Integrating Former Combatants: The Government’s strategy has focused on
encouraging paramilitary groups to give up their arms and revert to civilian
livelihoods, with the expectation that the reduced number o f combatants on one side
will increase pressure on the guerrilla movement commensurately reduce i t s
engagement. So far, the strategy has produced positive results, as described
elsewhere, even though the situation continues to be fragile. However, the integration
o f former combatants in Colombia, as in other conflict situations, presents challenges.
The Bank’s response i s to help the Government devise a strategy based on AAA
drawing out the lessons o f other countries and an assessment o f what Colombia has
done so far. These lessons could form the basis for W h e r engagement. The study i s
currently underway.
Rebuilding the Presence of the State: One o f the serious negative effects o f the
ongoing conflict has been the retraction o f the state from areas o f conflict. People are
l e f t to their own devices. At this stage, the idea i s to study how best to build capacity
o f local administrations previously paralyzed by violence and social capital. At this
stage, no specific activity is underway.
Forced Displacement: The 2002 CAS envisioned that the Bank would support a
pilot intervention, using Japanese grant funds, to help the people displaced by
conflicts and carry out ESW on their conditions. Most o f the 2.8 million displaced
are poor (but not exclusively) and more than likely to be indigenous or AfroColombian descent. The Government faced a conundrum: was it better to support
resettlement in new locations or to wait until i t might be auspicious to return home?
Another question was how to protect the assets that the displaced left behind. There
was no generally accepted answer. As a result, the Bank and the Government decided
on three steps: first, to concentrate on integrating social services (including those
supported under Bank-financed operations in the social sectors as discussed above)
for the displaced persons; second, provide direct support under the Peace and
Development APL; and, third, to start a systematic process o f knowledge building. So
far, special quotas have been set for displaced people to be included in the conditional
grant program, Familias en Accion, subsidized health insurance and school
enrollment. Further analytical work is underway to sort out the best way to provide
incentives for these people to return to their homes and/or to protect their assets
during their absence.
Measuring Bank Performance

Overall, the Bank Group’s performance under the 2002 CAS is rated satisfactory.
This conclusion i s based on: (i)
the positive country level indicators to which the Bank
and IFC have contributed directly and indirectly; (ii)
the quality o f the outcomes o f the
Bank’s specific products and services; and (iii)
the continuing progress o f on-going
operations and investments. The strength o f the Bank Group’s contribution rests in the
overall achievements in the macro-economic sphere, contributing to poverty reduction,

110

strengthening the financial sector, promotion o f competitiveness and the private sector,
delivery o f urban public services, improvements to access to social services, plus
increased financing and targeting o f social spending and attention to social protection.
Not least are the Bank’s contributions to sustainable development and, indirectly, to the
peace process. The scaling up o f Bank-financed pilot operations and the national
adoption o f policies and programs that have emerged from the results o f Bank support are
particularly strong indicators o f the impact o f the Bank’s work in Colombia. These
achievements are o f f set by the persistent fiscal imbalances and misalignments, the lack
o f progress in reaching Colombia’s rural and extreme poor, and slow progress in
addressing the chronic problems o f corruption and deficient judicial services.

Delivew o f Services. The 2002-2006 period has been one o f considerable expansion
o f the Bank Group’s support for Colombia. A variety o f instruments were used: DPLs,
investment loans, TALs, grants, and AAA. Programmatic DPLs have constituted the
mainstay o f the program, with quick disbursing funds representing about 60 percent o f
total lending over the period. In the case o f the World Bank Institute, Colombia has not
been a regional focal country; i t s activities have diminished during the CAS period, with
the exception o f early technical support for the deliberations o f the Vice-presidential
Commission on Anti-corruption. On the side o f the Bank, lending increased from
average o f about US$370 million per year during FY97 to FY02 (including a substantial
increase in FYOO to help cope with the 1999 crisis and the earthquake) to an average o f
US$721 million per year from FY03 to FY06, peaking at US$ 912 million in FY05.
Working within the original CAS envelop o f US$3.3 billion, the program has remained in
the high case. Total lending through FY06 amounted to US$2.9 billion, keeping the
Bank’s exposure in Colombia to about 4 percent o f total Bank outstanding loans. The
2005 CAS Progress Report anticipated an additional US$1.2 billion o f lending in FY07.
The quality o f the portfolio i s excellent, as described below, and outcomes, as confirmed
by IEG, are largely satisfactory with substantial contributions made to institution
building.
Business has similarly increased for IFC: between January 2003 and September
2006, IFC invested a total o f U S $ 413 million for i t s own account. The investment
commitments in FY06 reached US$ 291 million, the highest level in any given year for
Colombia, as investment activity picked up due to favorable domestic prospect and
external conditions. IFC’s total committed portfolio at the end-FY06 stood at U S $ 504
million, the fourth largest country exposure in Latin America after Brazil, Mexico and
Argentina. The quality o f the portfolio i s good with no non-performing loans (NPLs) and
loss provisions during the last three fiscal years. MIGA, with only one outstanding
guarantee, similarly does not face any portfolio problems.
Oualitv o f Products and Services. The record o f Bank operations completed during
the CAS period has been good, with outcome ratings higher than Colombia’s historical
experience and the Bank’s overall average, and in line with experience in the rest o f the
Latin American Region (ref: IEG’s ARDE and Development Effectiveness Reports).
There also appears to be synergy and mutual reinforcement between the Bank’s lending
operations and the AAA program. Several IEG project evaluations have commented on

111

the importance o f solid A4A underpinning the success o f the Bank’s lending operations.
An area that warrants comment for the new CAS i s the lack o f consistency in the way the
Bank measures and monitors poverty and other MDGs. In the case o f Colombia, there i s
no consensus on the most appropriate poverty measure and there have been
inconsistencies and mistakes in the Bank’s analyses. The Bank’s latest poverty
assessment (ongoing) reveals differences between the way that the Bank calculates the
absolute poverty (US$1 and US$2 per day). Different Bank documents, moreover, use
different measures and these measures are not always consistent with country measures.
The new CAS i s an opportunity to resolve these differences and to start on the basis o f
population figures using the 2005 census.

O f 24 Bank operations completed, thus far during the CAS period, only four
operations have been rated as not meeting their objectives: the Community Works and
Employment loan (unsatisfactory rating not yet confirmed by IEG), the FIAL I11 loan,
after two triggers for policy agreements to move forward with the series were not met,
and the Financial Market Development loan and the Financial Sector Adjustment loan,
both o f which had been originally rated as satisfactory or moderately satisfactory, but
since been down graded to moderately unsatisfactory by IEG in i t s project performance
audits. Five operations have been rated by IEG as having moderately satisfactory
outcomes: the Antioquia Education loan, the FIAL Iand I1loans, the first programmatic
Financial Sector Adjustment loan, and the Structural Fiscal Adjustment loan. One
operation, the first PLaRSSAL loan, was rated as highly satisfactory. ICRs are pending
for six closed operations: the PLsRSSAL 111, the Justice LILYthe Sustainable
Development IDPL, the Business Productivity IDPL, the Cundinamarca Education
Quality loan, and the Rural Education IAPL. In the case o f DPLs, there i s some lack o f
clarity on whether or not these operations require simplified ICRs at the close o f each
one, or only one comprehensive evaluation at the end o f the series. Either option might
not prove adequate for purposes o f validating the overall direction and scope o f the series
and some form o f interim evaluation or accompanying ESW might be explored in the
next CAS.
Other measures o f performance are equally good. Bank operations are considered as
having made modest to substantial or high impacts on institutional capacity and, where
evaluated, all are considered likely or highly likely to be sustained with the exception o f
the Santa Fe Water Supply loan, as the fimdamental institutional reforms were not
forthcoming and the Community Works and Employment loan. Bank performance, with
the exception o f the Community Works and Employment loan and the FIAL I11loan, has
consistently been considered satisfactory.
As o f FY07, all 24 ongoing operations as o f FY07-15 Bank loans, 8 GEF grants,
and one policy-based guarantee (approved under the previous CAS)-are
performing
well. In the case o f the Bank’s exposure, there do not appear to be any implementation
concerns, as demonstrated in Table 4. The portfolio i s relatively young, with an average
o f 3.3 years since approval. Indicators o f the portfolio are positive, with a nil level o f
problem projects, rapid rates o f disbursement, few inherent risks-only four projects
have any risk flags, mostly delays in implementation-and compliance with fiduciary

112

requirements. Feedback from the Bank’s procurement group indicates that there are no
major procurement concerns under Bank-financed projects. In terms o f quality o f entry,
there do not seem to be any recurring, significant issues. N o r does there seem to have
been any adverse impacts o f Bank Group operations: in the case o f the Inspection Panel
complaint concerning the Cartagena Water Supply and Sanitation loan, as agreed with the
Panel, steps were taken to further verify and strengthen the project’s design and to take
precautions to ensure that the needs o f a previously unidentified affected population were
addressed before the sewerage plant was completed.

Implementation Policies and Procedures. One o f the major changes that has occurred
during the CAS period i s the shift to country systems and to 100 percent Bank financing.
The Bank also dropped the requirement for no more than 60 percent quick disbursing
financing and shifted to an upper limit on Bank exposure in Colombia to a maximum o f 4
percent o f the Bank’s total loan portfolio. Colombia was the first Bank borrower to be
eligible under the 2004 new Expenditure Eligibility Policy. The Bank’s reluctance to use
special accounts, a chronic complaint from the Government, has also been reversed. At
this point, the use o f country systems for procurement i s s t i l l not feasible pending further
reform o f the domestic procurement system to meet Bank criteria. The reaction o f local
authorities to these changes has been positive and, while the evidence is not conclusive,
the upward trend in disbursement since FY04 seems to support the conclusion that these
changes have eased implementation procedures and processes. The greater fiscal space
provided for investments in Colombia’s budgets i s another factor facilitating the pace o f
disbursement.
Promam Costs. Table 5 shows that the cost o f the Bank’s program in Colombia, as
compared to other large countries in the region and countries with similar levels o f
development and program size, is in the middle o f the road. I t ranked 5th out o f eight
comparators in terms o f average costs o f supervision, lending and AAA products.

113

Table 5: Comparative Costs of Bank Program (FY05-06)

Country Dialogue and Aid Coordination. Colombia is a middle income country with
strong institutional capacity in the core sectors o f i t s administration. This not only
facilitates country dialogue, but means that the Bank’s analytical contribution and
knowledge sharing, via AAA and other instruments, tends to find a keen audience among
public officials. I t also means that the Bank’s program tends to be demand driven. The
central coordination and filtering functions are effectively carried out by the National
Planning Department and the Ministry o f Finance, with lending programs and borrowing
capacity divided among the Bank, IDB and CAF. In that context, the competitiveness o f
the Bank both in terms o f financial costs and its processing time and complexity can be a
determining factor in the demand for Bank Group assistance. In addition, Colombia i s
highly committed to citizen participation and has a robust civil society, reducing the need
for the Bank on its own, to ensure that voice o f the people are heard. That said, the Bank
s t i l l needs to hear for itself concerns and perceptions o f those directly affected by Bank
financed operations and the design and implementation o f the CAS.
7. Lessons for Future Country Partnership Strategies
This evaluation demonstrates the benefits o f solid analytical work and effective and
flexible country collaboration. Lessons that might be useful for the preparation and
design o f the coming Country Partnership Strategy are as follows:
Exercising Fiduciary Responsibilities

The Bank, along with the IMF, has a fiduciary responsibility, especially on debt
sustainability, fiscal performance, the financial sector, and monitoring o f public
expenditures, poverty and the MDGs to which the Bank should remain committed. In
the case o f Colombia, the Bank was effective in keeping issues on the front burner
once the worst o f the 1999 crisis was over.
Tempering Zeal with Realism

New administrations tend to have ambitious plans, as was the case o f the first Uribe
Administration’s initial approach to fiscal and institutional reforms. In retrospect, i t

114

may not have been realistic to agree-in the early months o f a new administrationto policy triggers, covering action four years ahead. In fact, many reforms confronted

serious legal and political hurtles and have taken longer than originally anticipated.
On the other hand, the Bank cannot stand in the way, so this lesson i s nuanced to
specific country circumstances.
Setting Targets and Carrying out Intermediate Evaluations of Programmatic Loans

Programmatic operations may pose a challenge in terms o f agreeing ex-ante to
triggers and measuring impacts, To the extent possible, expected outcomes should be
established at the start. Ex-post, individual evaluations o f each loan in the series as
they are completed might be too short term a time frame for impacts to be realized.
Some form o f mid-way, intermediate assessment and/or ESW might be needed to
reconfirm the direction and/or make mid-term corrections.
Buildingon What Works

Looking broadly at where the Bank has been effective in Colombia, working in
sectors with a history o f Bank involvement and with established institutional
responsibilities and capacities seem to work best in Colombia. This argues for
continuing an evolving, programmatic approach and concentrating on and deepening
those areas with continuity from one CAS to another.
Building Consensus and Institutional Homes for New Initiatives
0

The lack o f progress in areas such as anti-corruption and judicial reform calls for
rethinking the Bank’s approach to new initiatives. The analytical ground for an
initiative needs to be solidly and convincingly established and the institutional base
established ex-ante. For the new CAS, the lesson might be prior ESW and consensus
building plus continuing investment to inform policy makers and the public during
implementation o f pilot operations so that the growing evidence o f what works can be
shared with a larger audience.

Refocusing on the Rural Sector: Closing the Gaps
0

A new approach to the rural sector, with attendant attention to Colombia’s extremely
poor and marginalized, may be timely, as the security picture improves. I t was a
priority in the 2002 CAS but little materialized in terms o f specific lending.
Nevertheless, the Bank undertook ample analysis o f the sector: the policy notes for
the CAS and other analytical work have provided evidence that the rural sector was
important, dynamic, and disadvantaged. Importantly, the Bank has supported a
number o f successhl pilot rural development and peace initiatives which could be
scaled up. Looking ahead, i t may be helpful to segment strategies across rural and
urban sub-groups as was done in education. Other sectors amenable to this approach
are housing, water and sanitation-typified
by the L a Guajira Project now under
preparation-and transport.

115

Relying on Local Capacity

Colombia, as a Middle Income Country, i s capable o f assuming the lead in
developing and implementingthe CAS in ways that other countries might not. This is
particularly the case in participation. The Bank can ‘piggy-back‘’ on those efforts
rather than do own parallel exercise. Moreover, the case o f Colombia demonstrates
that MICs with solid institutional capacity can be entrusted to use country based
systems.
Retaining Flexibility

Another hallmark o f working with a Middle Income Country i s flexibility. The Bank
has been flexible i s responding to Colombia’s changing economic and social
conditions especially as the country’s conditions improved beyond what was expected
and when some aspects o f the original CAS were not feasible and/or did not enjoy
full ownership. The CAS Progress Report is an example o f how to accommodate
M I C needs and conditions. This i s an attribute which should be carried over to the
next CAS.
Synchronizing Timing and Monitoring of Development Planning Instruments

The 2002 CAS was prepared at a critical moment in Colombia, compounded by
transitions at senior levels in both the Bank and the Government. The benefit o f
preparing the CAS quickly was its timely assistance to the country. But the cost was
a lack o f internalization and reinforcement among the key development strategy
instruments that the country employs, notably the National Development Plan, and a
lack o f common monitoring definitions, tools and benchmarks.
Admittedly,
development i s an evolving process and new needs can be address over time. The
new CAS i s the opportunity to avoid the gaps in timing and to focus on results.
Internalizing Equity and Meaningfiully Measuring Poverty

The Bank’s efforts at internalizing equity considerations into i t s operations and
analytical work, while taking a different track, seem to have energized Bank staff and
local authorities to take up the concerns o f the extremely poor and marginalized as
part o f a growing M&E culture. This momentum can be elevated to the next stage by
generalizing analysis o f equity, not just in social sector and GEF operations, but in
other proposed policies. In addition, agreement on targets presumes agreement on
methodologies for measuring poverty, among other indicators, which i s now lacking.
The focus o f targeted programs, moreover, can be tightened with continued
refinement o f Colombia’s system o f classifying eligible beneficiaries.

116

I

a

a

a

a

a

*

co
3
3

0

2

N
Q)

ii

c

c
0
0
c.l

ed

3L
L

u
3

E 33
0

h

c,

3

a

d
0
Q)

.
c,I

B

I

s
n

Q)

L

In
0
0
N

Q)

B

P

3

+.,

G
0

L

c,

VJ

VJ

$
W

E

a

R
Q)

0
0
N
L

Q)

€

P

u
Q)

2

e
ed

z

2

u

9

9

9

g 5 : z

0

9

H

8

r

9

z

9

3

a

a

4u:

$1

>f
3

4

0

2

