FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

Report No.

43036-SD

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF THE SUDAN

March 20,2008

Sudan Country Management Unit
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

Date o f Last Country Strategy: June 24,2003

Currency Equivalents
Currency Unit = Sudanese Pound
US $1.OO = 2.04 Sudanese Pounds (as o f March 4,2008)
Weights and Measures
Metric System
Fiscal Year

-

January 1 December 3 1

Abbreviations and Acronvms
AfDB
AU
CAS
CBP
CDD
CEM
CIFA
CPA
CRN
DDR
D-JAM
DPA
ESPA
ESW
FDI
FFAMC
FIAS
FPP
GDP
GoNU
GoS
GoSS
HIPC
ICA
IDA
IDPs
IFC

African Development Bank
African Union
Country Assistance Strategy
Capacity Building Program
Community Driven Development
Country Economic Memorandum
Country IntegratedFiduciary
Assessment
Comprehensive Peace Agreement
Country Re-engagement Note
Disarmament, Demobilizationand
Reintegration
Darfur Joint Assessment Mission
Darfur Peace Agreement
Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement
Economic Sector Work
Foreign Direct Investment
Fiscal and Financial Allocation
and Monitoring Commission
Foreign Investment Advisory
Service
Final Project Proposal
Gross Domestic Product
Government o f National Unity
Government of Sudan
Government o f Southern Sudan
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Investment Climate Assessment
International Development
Association
Internally Displaced Persons
International Finance Corporation

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leader:

JAM
JDO
LICUS
LRA
M&E
MDGs
MDRI
MDTFs
MIGA
NBI
NGOs
OECD
ORSA
PER
PMUs
PRSP
PSD
RIEP
SETIDP
SHHS
SPLM

SPLA
SSRDF
TAF
WBI
WUA

Joint Assessment Mission
Joint Donor Office
Low-Income Countries under
Stress
Lord’s Resistance Army
Monitoring and Evaluation
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Multi-Donor Trust Funds
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
N i l e Basin Initiative
Non-GovernmentalOrganizations
Organizationfor Economic
Cooperation and Development
Oil Revenue Stabilization Account
Public Expenditure Review
Project Management Units
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Private Sector Development
Rapid Impact Emergency Project
Sudan Emergency Transport and
Infrastructure Development Project
Sudan Household Health Survey
Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement
Sudan People’s Liberation Army
South Sudan Reconstruction and
Development Fund
Technical Assistance Facility
World Bank Institute
Water Users’ Association

Obiageli Ezekwesili
Kenichi Ohashi
John Van Dyck

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF THE SUDAN

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................. i

I.

I1.

INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................

COUNTRY CONTEXT .............................................................................................

1
1

A . Political Context ...................................................................................................... 2
B. Economic Context ................................................................................................... 3
4
C . Poverty Context .......................................................................................................

I11. M O V I N G FROM CONFLICT TO DEVELOPMENT ..............................................

7

I V. BANK RELATIONS W I T H SUDAN .....................................................................

14

WORLD BANK SUPPORT PROGRAM................................................................

19

A . Key Challenges........................................................................................................ 7
12
B. Sudan’s Emerging Development Strategy .............................................................

A . Progress in Implementation o f the Country Re-Engagement Note (CRN) ........... 14
B. Progress in Implementation o f MDTFs ................................................................. 16
C . Lessons Learned .................................................................................................... 19

V.

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.

Key Themes for World Bank Support ...................................................................

20

IFC, MIGA, and WBI ............................................................................................
Partnerships and Donor Coordination ...................................................................
Monitoring Performance .......................................................................................
Country Financing Parameters ..............................................................................
Process for IDA Reengagement ............................................................................

32
33
-35
35
36

Instruments ............................................................................................................ 29

V I. CRITICAL RISKS ...................................................................................................

37

LIST OF TABLES

.

Table 1: Status on Selected MDG Indicators .....................................................................
Table 2: Challenges and Bank Support ............................................................................

5
21

LIST OF BOXES
Box 1: UN Implementation o f M D T F Activities .............................................................
Box 2: The N i l e Basin Initiative.......................................................................................
Box 3: Consultations on the Interim Strategy ..................................................................

16
27
33

has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without World Bank authorization .

LIST OF ANNEXES
Annex 1:
Annex 2:
Annex 3:
Annex 4:
Annex 5:
Annex 6:
Annex 7:
Annex 8:

Interim Strategy Results Framework ................................................................

Country Financing Parameters..........................................................................
Country at a Glance ..........................................................................................
Signed M D T F Projects .....................................................................................
MDTF-National Sudan Portfolio ......................................................................
MDTF-Southern Sudan Portfolio .....................................................................
M D T F Sources and Uses of Funds ...................................................................
Summary o f Non-Lending Support ..................................................................

39
48
49
52
56
57
58
59

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) has provided an historic window
of opportunity to create apeaceful andprosperous Sudan. The CPA provided for a
cessation o f hostilities between the Government o f Sudan (GoS) and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/ Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLM/A). It also contains a
framework o f wealth and power sharing to address the root cause o f conflict in Sudanthe country’s legacy o f inequality between center and periphery. The CPA’s vision o f a
Sudan that responds to the needs o f i t s diverse people i s now the key goal for the country,
and i s shared by a broad majority o f actors.

..

While the CPA and the Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement (ESPA) have allowed
peace to take hold in the South, the transitional Three Areas, and the East, peace in
Darfur remains elusive. The core causes o f the conflict in Darfur are closely related to
the region’s isolation, environmental degradation, and lack o f development, particularly
in terms o f livelihoods, economic and social infrastructure, governance, and human
development outcomes. The crisis not only affects Darfur, but also threatens peace,
stability, and development in all o f Sudan and some o f Sudan’s neighboring countries.
11.

iii. Real economic growth estimated at 1 0 percent in 2007 is among the highest in
Africa, but as an oil-rich economy Sudan now faces a number of new challenges in
economic management. While exploitation o f o i l resources has facilitated an increase in
national wealth, i t has also complicated macroeconomic management with significant
pressures toward internal and external imbalances, as well as a heightened concern for
balanced growth in the non-oil sectors which are key for sustainable growth and poverty
reduction efforts. Unrealized oil revenue projections and continued fiscal expansion,
including new spending related to the CPA, have resulted in the highest fiscal deficits
since stabilization (4 percent o f GDP in 2006 and an estimated 3.5 percent o f GDP in
2007) after budget surpluses as recently as 2004. O n the external side, the current
account has deteriorated sharply and the real exchange rate has appreciated rapidly. The
latter has raised significant competitiveness concerns for non-oil exports, on top o f
existing supply-side constraints to production. Sudan’s external debt remains large and
arrears constrain access to longer-term development finance.
iv.
New household survey data shows that poverty in Sudan is widespread and
deep, and the level of inequality is high. Recent growth has not been broad-based, and
in fact, i t appears that inequality has risen, Large urban-rural and regional disparities, as
reflected in public spending patterns, are closely related to conflict, isolation, deprivation,
displacement, and chronic poverty. At the same time, the need to address poverty and
inequality to promote peace and stability has been recognized by policymakers, and
comprehensive provisions for more equal sharing o f resources characterize the CPA as
well as the ESPA and the Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA).
v.
Sudan will need to address the interrelated challenges of improving
governance, increasing access to basic services, and promoting pro-poor growth to
mitigate some of the main causes of conflict and ensure developmentprogress.

i

Improved capability, responsiveness, and accountability o f both the Government o f
National Unity (GoNU) and the Government o f Southern Sudan (GoSS) are essential for
development interventions to be effective and responsive to the needs o f the poor and
marginalized populations. Increasing pro-poor public spending-historically l o w even
by Sub-Saharan African standards-is critical to extending basic services and
maintaining peace, especially in war-affected and marginalized areas. While a more propoor allocation o f expenditures i s vital, this will need to be accompanied by equitable
economic growth to ensure sustained reductions in poverty and inequality.
vi.
The Bank began to reengage in Sudan in the early 2000s after being largely
absent for about a decade. However, IDA financial support i s s t i l l not possible due to
Sudan’s outstanding arrears. Since 2005, the Bank has administered two large MultiDonor Trust Funds (MDTFs) that support the CPA. In addition, the Bank has provided
direct financial assistance through various facilities: the Fund for Low-Income Countries
Under Stress (LICUS), the Post-Conflict Fund (PCF), and a $10 m i l l i o n contribution to
the two MDTFs from the IBRD’s operational surplus. MDTF-supported projects have
experienced major implementation challenges, as have all development and recovery
programs in Sudan, but performance has steadily improved. Significant results are being
seen on the ground, though daunting challenges remain-most notably l o w capacity,
especially at the state level and in the South.
vii.
The main objective of this Interim Strategy is to support GoNU and GoSS to
sustain peace and help reduce conflict by meeting the commitments contained in the
CPA, DPA, and ESPA particularly in the areas of governance, basic services, andpropoor economic growth--especially in war-affected and marginalized areas. Between
now and December 2009-a period roughly corresponding to the first portion o f the Five
Year Strategic Plans o f G o N U and GoSS-the ISN i s expected to help Sudan take
important steps toward the achievement o f the longer-term strategic vision enshrined in
the CPA: promoting peace in Sudan by making it attractive through development, shared
prosperity, and a reformed system o f governance which serves all Sudanese.

viii.
The entry points for Bank support-through management of the MDTFs and
non-lending activities-vary according to the diverse conditionsfacing different
regions of Sudan. At the National level, a focus on stabilizing peace entails a major role
for analytical work and policy dialogue on implementing key provisions o f the CPA (propoor growth, good governance and decentralization, empowerment), and-in the Three
Areas and the East-on pro-peace development projects and building capacity for
community-driven development and local service delivery. In Darfur, the Bank will
work with partners, as security allows, to assess development and recovery needs and to
make ready rehabilitation and development programs to be implemented in the event o f
peace. In the South, the main focus i s o n helping to build a competent, responsive and
stable government based on good governance, rule o f law, and transparency, while
promoting efforts to empower and decentralize service delivery to the states, counties,
and communities. Another key objective i s to help Southern Sudan develop a long-term
strategy to transform i t s e l f into a well-integrated, s e l f reliant, and viable economic unit
that begins to harness i t s vast and rich natural resources for the welfare o f i t s people.

*.

11

Substantial financial support through the MDTFs as well as the Bank’s analytical and
advisory services will be mobilized to meet these objectives.
ix.
IDA ’sfinancial reengagement requires clearance of Sudan’s outstanding
arrears. The clearance o f these arrears can only be undertaken once a firm and
comprehensive agreement among preferred creditors i s in place. Such an agreement
would also include significant reductions in bilateral debts, so as to make the total debt
service obligations sustainable. Following the eventual clearance o f IDA arrears, which
currently stand at $480 million, an exceptional IDA allocation for Sudan as a postconflict country would be sought, and the Bank would prepare another strategy document
which would include, inter alia, a pipeline o f projects.
x.
This interim strategy assumes the continuation of the status quo in the Bank’s
operating environment. In the scenario o f a significant deterioration in the operating
environment in Sudan, the Bank would consult the Board and follow the lead o f the
MDTF donors and the international community in reassessing i t s level o f support. Major
risks that could result in such a deterioration include: a lack o f resolution or worsening o f
the Darfur crisis, continued delays in implementation o f the CPA, governance risks, slow
progress in building capacity, lack o f availability o f future financing for the MDTFs, and
lack o f availability o f Government counterpart funds. On the other hand, in the scenario
o f a significant improvement in the environment for Bank support during the time period
covered by this strategy, the Bank would consult with international partners, GoNU,
GoSS, and the Board on the appropriate steps toward possible arrears clearance and an
increased level o f financial and analytical support to Sudan.

...

111

INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF THE SUDAN

I.

INTRODUCTION

1. The largest country in Africa by land area, Sudan has rich natural resources, but i t s
development has been held back b y the conflicts that have afflicted the country for most o f
the period since i t s independence a half-century ago. The Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), signed on January 9,2005 by the Government o f Sudan (GoS) and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/ Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLM/A),
created a historic window o f opportunity for a peaceful and prosperous Sudan. The CPA
not only provided for a cessation o f hostilities between GoS and the SPLM/A, but also
contains a framework o f wealth and power sharing to address the inequality between center
and periphery that has been a root cause o f conflict in Sudan. The CPA has served as a
beacon o f hope for peace in Sudan, but the continuing conflict in Darfur has also diverted
attention and resources from CPA implementation. N o t only i s it a tragedy in i t s own
right, the Darfur crisis also threatens peace, stability, and development in all o f Sudan and
in some o f Sudan’s neighboring countries.
2.
The World Bank was largely absent from Sudan for about a decade after i t s
disbursements were suspended in April 1993. As part o f the L o w Income Countries under
Stress (LICUS) initiative in the early 2000s and with improving prospects for peace in
Sudan, the Bank prepared a Country Re-engagement Note (CRN) in 2003. The C R N
outlined the Bank’s strategy and programs in support o f the consolidation o f peace and the
post-conflict transition to recovery and development in Sudan. In 2004-05, the Bank and
the United Nations (UN) co-led a Joint Assessment Mission (JAM) o f Sudan’s recovery,
reconstruction, and development needs, culminating in the Oslo Donor Conference in
March 2005. Since 2005, the Bank has administered two large Multi-Donor Trust Funds
(MDTFs) that support the CPA, and has scaled up i t s program o f analytical and policy
assistance. To help prepare for an eventual return to peace in Darfur, the Bank has
collaborated with the African Development Bank and the UN in the conduct o f the Darfur
JAM, which i s currently suspended on account o f security concerns. Normal IDA
financial support i s s t i l l not possible due to Sudan’s outstanding arrears.

3,
With the level o f Bank involvement in Sudan having risen significantly since the
CRN was prepared, this Interim Strategy lays out the Bank’s plans to assist Sudan between
now and December 2009, primarily through the MDTFs and analytical work. I t also
describes the process for eventual IDA financial reengagement once conditions are
appropriate.
11.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

Sudan i s a highly diverse country that faces unique challenges. I t s people identify
4.
with hundreds o f ethnic and linguistic backgrounds, and i t s geography ranges from
1

equatorial mountains in the south, through swamp (the Sudd) and savannah, to desert in the
north. It borders nine countries, and i t s stability and economic health have profound
implications for its neighbors. It i s home to some o f the most educated and wealthy people
in Africa, and some o f the most destitute and disadvantaged. Sudan’s recent history o f
conflict has been the subject o f much international attention; first with the conflict in
Southern Sudan, and now with the Darfur crisis. These conflicts can be seen in terms o f a
historical struggle between the center (Khartoum and adjoining states straddling the N i l e
River) and the periphery (the South, Darfur, the Three Areas’, and the East) driven by
ethnic, social, and economic rifts. The toll o f these conflicts has l e f t many parts o f the
country with a daunting legacy o f low human development, very limited capacity,
inadequate and decaying physical infrastructure, displaced populations, and shattered
social structures that the country needs to address, and with which development partners
can help.
A.

Political Context

5.
The signing o f the CPA marked the end o f decades o f civil war in Southern Sudan.
The signing was rapidly followed by the formation o f the Government o f National Unity
(GoNU) and the establishment o f the Government o f Southern Sudan (GoSS), which has
extensive and unprecedented autonomy. A key element o f the CPA i s the equal sharing o f
revenues generated by o i l in Southern Sudan. The CPA also includes special provisions
for the Three Areas, for improved decentralization within the Northern States, and for
national elections in 2009. Following a six-year interim period, Southern Sudan will vote
in 201 1 on whether to remain within the Republic o f Sudan.
The CPA’s vision o f a peaceful Sudan that responds to the needs o f i t s diverse people
6.
i s now the key goal for the country, and i s shared by a diverse majority o f stakeholders.
Despite the broad support for this vision, CPA implementation has been uneven after
initial progress in setting up GoNU, GoSS, and the two MDTFs administered by the World
Bank. O n the positive side, GoNU has rapidly increased transfers to states to fund
decentralized responsibilities as foreseen in the CPA. Certain elements o f the CPA have
progressed well, notably the rollout o f the new national currency, which i s already
completed. However, in many other areas, progress has lagged behind expectations. The
SPLM suspended i t s participation in GoNU in October 2007 in protest over what it
perceived to be slow progress in implementing the CPA, in particular the demarcation o f
the border between north and south (particularly in the disputed region o f Abyei) and the
withdrawal o f Sudanese Armed Forces troops from Southern Sudan. The SPLM has since
rejoined government after reaching agreements with the National Congress Party (NCP),
i t s partner in GoNU, on many points o f contention-though no consensus was reached on
the future status o f Abyei.

7.
The signing o f the Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA) by the G o N U and some rebel
elements in M a y 2006 held out the promise o f the initiation o f recovery, reconstruction and
development efforts in Darfur to sustain and consolidate peace. But continued violence
and increasing lawlessness in the region has prevented the D P A from having i t s intended
1

The Three Areas comprise Abyei region as well as South Kordofan and Blue N i l e states.

2

effect. International concern has remained high as the casualty and displacement toll in the
region has continued to mount. Fragmentation o f rebel groups has contributed to the
difficulty in reining in violence. GoNU, the UN, and the African Union (AU) agreed last
year on the replacement o f the AU peacekeeping force in Darfur with a hybrid UN-AU
Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) peacekeeping force comprising about 26,000 troops and
police officers; about 9,000 UNAMID peacekeepers are currently deployed. Despite some
progress in forging a common negotiating position among a number o f Darfur rebel
leaders, the most recent peace talks in Sirte, Libya in October, 2007 yielded l i t t l e progress.
The Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement (ESPA) was signed between GoNU and the Eastern
Sudan Front on October 14,2006 based on principles similar to the CPA and DPA.

8.
Relations with neighboring countries are complex, and somewhat unpredictable.
Sudan played a mediating role inatheSomalia conflict and GoSS hosted peace negotiations
in Juba between the Ugandan government and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). Sudan
i s strengthening relations with Ethiopia on trade, energy, and transport. Likewise,
commercial relations have improved with Eritrea after the signing o f the ESPA. The
historical ties between Egypt and Sudan remain strong at all levels-political, commercial,
and cultural. Egypt, the only Arab country with a consular office in Juba, recently became
a donor to the MDTF for Southern Sudan.
B.

Economic Context

Sudan has maintained a sustained record o f macroeconomic stability since 1997.
9.
However, performance under the 2006 IMF Staff Monitored Program was mixed,
reflecting a number o f new challenges in economic management. Following the onset o f
significant o i l exports in 1999, economic growth averaged roughly 7 percent per annum
between 2000 and 2006, and at an estimated 10 percent in 2007, i s among the highest on
the continent. Agriculture commands the largest share o f GDP (roughly one-third), though
down from 42 percent o f GDP in 2000. Foreign investment and rising domestic demand
have spurred growth in the construction and services sectors. While exploitation o f oil
resources has facilitated an increase in national wealth, i t has also led to an increased risk
o f internal and external macroeconomic imbalances, as well as a heightened concern for

balanced growth in the non-oil sectors which are key for poverty reduction efforts.

10. O i l production and price volatilities experienced in late 2006 and early 2007
highlight the inherent fiscal challenges o f an economy with high dependence on oil.
Unrealized oil revenue projections during this period, combined with new spending related
to the CPA (e.g., transfers to GoSS and to Northern states, new commissions and
institutional arrangements from the peace agreements), resulted in the highest fiscal
deficits since stabilization (4 percent o f GDP in 2006) after budget surpluses as recently as
2004. Improvements in o i l production and prices in the second half o f 2007 provided
partial relief to fiscal pressures, with the deficit estimated at 3.5 percent o f GDP for 2007.
The fiscal expansion and rapid credit growth for public sector financing significantly
weakened the financial sector and required several injections o f liquidity by the Central
Bank o f Sudan totaling 1.5 percent o f GDP between September 2006 and January 2007. In
addition, the O i l Revenue Stabilization Account (ORSA) was exhausted in 2006 to help
cover the fiscal deficit, and withdrawals have continued through 2007 depleting roughly
3

three-quarters o f deposits through September 2007. Thus the ORSA i s currently unable to
provide relief from future revenue shortfalls without significant replenishment. To ensure
stability in a volatile revenue environment, prudent expenditure management i s essential.

11. Recent external imbalances include deterioration in the current account as well as
rapid appreciation in the real exchange rate. The latter has contributed to competitiveness
concerns for non-oil exports, in addition to existing supply-side constraints to production.
The infusion o f foreign exchange from o i l exports and large inflows o f foreign direct
investment have driven a roughly 40 percent appreciation o f the real exchange rate since
January 2005. Exports o f key rural products such as livestock, gum arabic, and sesame
have fallen in large part due to reduced competitiveness. This has hurt the rural producers
o f these goods, leading in some regions to the paradoxical phenomenon o f impoverishing
growth. The ongoing Diagnostic Trade Integration Study i s looking at competitiveness
concerns for non-oil exports, including the l i n k s to the exchange rate and supply
bottlenecks.
12. The fiscal pressures in Southern Sudan are even more acute. GoSS’s actual
expenditures have deviated significantly from budget plans, with much higher than
planned expenditures and large differences between sectoral spending plans and outturns.
Payroll costs have swollen, and fiscal discipline has been an issue. The budget i s almost
entirely dependent on o i l revenues, and the GoSS’s cash reserves that could have provided
a cushion are no longer available, having been run down in 2006. In case o f a revenue
shortfall, the required fiscal adjustment would have to include painful cuts in planned
investments and/or in the burgeoning payroll.
13. Sudan’s debt overhang constrains access to concessional finance. Outstanding
external debt stands at about $27 billion in net present value terms, with about $24 billion
in arrearsa2A joint World Bank-IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) was recently
prepared and discussed with the authorities. The results o f the analysis forecast continued
debt distress, even assuming prudent macroeconomic policies and further increases in o i l
revenues. Moreover, Sudan i s highly vulnerable to both oil production and price shocks.
Sudan i s potentially eligible for debt r e l i e f under the HIPC initiative after clearing i t s
outstanding arrears. Debt relief under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) could
also be available in the event that Sudan reaches i t s HIPC Completion Point.
C.

Poverty Context

14. Despite the scarcity o f recent and reliable data on poverty across Sudan, it i s
generally accepted that poverty i s widespread and deep. Data from the 2006 Sudan
Household Health Survey (SHHS), the first nationally representative survey in two
decades, provide new insights about current levels o f human development, though
assessing progress over time remains difficult due to comparability problems. The survey
shows the disparities among regions and the enormity o f the challenge o f reaching the
MDGs. For example, net primary school attendance i s 53 percent overall, with the ratio

’O f Sudan’s total outstanding debt, IDA arrears amount to about $480 million. IMF arrears stood at SDR
1,021 million (US$ 1,629 million) as o f January 3 1,2008.

4

ranging from above 90 percent in River N i l e State to 4 percent in Unity State. In the
South, attendance i s less than 10 percent in half the states. Health indicators reveal a
similar picture with respect to high variation by state and much poorer conditions in the
South. Table 1 shows the SHHS results for several key MDG indicators.
Table I. Status on Selected MDG Indicators
Indicator

MDG 2
MDG 3
MDG 4
MDG 5
MDG 6
MDG 6
MDG 6
MDG 7
MDG 7

Average of
Highest 5
States
84
0.99

Average of
Lowest 5
States
7
0.61

Average
of all
States
53
0.93

82
91

31
24

65
57

19

2

9 .

16
50

1
10

8
28

80
66

35
5

59
31

Net primary school attendance rate
Ratio of girls to boys attending primary
education
Measles immunization coverage
Proportion of births attended by skilled
health personnel
Comprehensive knowledge about HIV
prevention
Contraceptive prevalence
Proportion of population using effective
malaria prevention measures
Use of improved drinking water sources
Use of improved sanitation facilities
Source: Sudan Household Health Survey (2006)

15. The outcomes o n key measures o f human development in Sudan’s disadvantaged
regions (including Darfur, the South, the Three Areas, and the East) rank among the lowest
in the world, though Khartoum and some Northern states along the N i l e show performance
well above the sub-Saharan Africa average. The large urban-rural and regional disparities
are closely related to conflict, isolation, public spending patterns, displacement, and
chronic poverty. Expanding access to basic services, especially in the parts o f the country
where human development indicators are the lowest, i s a key element o f delivering to the
people o f Sudan a peace dividend that can show the benefits o f unity and help prevent
future conflict.
16. While a more pro-poor allocation o f public expenditures will help over time to reduce
poverty and inequality, this will need to be accompanied by broad-based economic growth
in order to ensure sustained poverty reduction and improvements in the lives o f most
Sudanese. Growth has been strong in recent years, but this growth has not been broadbased, and appears to have been accompanied by rising inequality between regions and
between rural and urban dwellers. Recent growth has been concentrated around Khartoum
and neighboring central states and in major urban centers (e.g., Port Sudan, Gedaref, El
Obeid, and Nyala). This has generated employment and boosted tax revenues in these
areas, allowing them to spend much more on service delivery than less rapidly growing
states and rural areas. A more balanced pattern o f growth-with particular emphasis on
traditional rain-fed agriculture and small business sectors-will be vital for enabling
poverty reduction, lowering inequality, and mitigating conflict.

5

17. A root cause o f continuing poverty and inequality i s weak governance and skewed
distribution patterns o f public resources. The IMF estimates that per capita GDP for 2007
i s about $1,160 per year, putting Sudan at the lower threshold o f the middle-income
country classification. Per capita G o N U spending i s about $280-but relatively little o f
this reaches the poor and the remote marginalized regions. Development strategies
adopted since independence have had a centrist bias, and traditional rain-fed agriculture,
practiced by the rural poor, has seen neither significant levels o f investments nor increases
in productivity. Poverty-reducing expenditures have been limited, partly o n account o f the
many years o f North-South conflict, deepening the cycle o f poverty. Recognition o f the
need to address inequality to promote peace and stability has risen since the holding o f
peace talks for the conflicts in the South, Darfur, and the East, and comprehensive
provisions to address inequality run through the respective peace agreements. Addressing
these inequalities i s also a central part o f GoNU’s five year plan (2007-201 1). If
implementation o f these provisions accelerates, there can be a reasonable expectation o f
alleviation o f poverty, reduction in inequality, and reduced conflict.
18. Poverty and Development in Darfur. The core causes o f the conflict in Darfur are
closely related to the region’s isolation and lack o f development, particularly in terms o f
livelihoods, governance, physical infrastructure, and i t s lagging human development status.
Environmental degradation (deforestation, desertification, and water scarcity) and poor
management o f available natural resources has placed enormous pressure on the natural
resource base critical to rural livelihoods and has contributed to the increase in conflict
between pastoralists and sedentary farmers. Even before the current conflict started in
2003, Darfur was lagging behind in terms o f human development. Overall estimated
primary gross enrolment in 2000 was only 50 percent, compared to a Northern state
average o f about 70 percent. Access to public health services in Darfur was also below the
average for the Northern states.

19. Although some significant development projects have been undertaken in D a r f ~ r , ~
the level o f public investment in Darfur over the last several decades has remained
significantly lower than the average for Northern Sudan. The limited provision o f basic

infrastructure-roads, water and energy-has exacerbated Darfur’s remoteness, and
limited i t s growth prospects. Furthermore, a quintupling o f the population in Darfur over
the past 50 years has increased pressure on traditional livelihood systems, with widespread
environmental degradation and deterioration o f rangeland and water resources. Ineffective
local governments and weakened traditional dispute resolution mechanisms have proven
unable to contain conflicts over land rights and natural resources. An unforeseen outcome
o f internal displacement has been the rapid urbanization o f Darfur. As much as 55-60% o f
Darfur’s population n o w lives in urban centers or in sprawling I D P camps in close
proximity to urban centers. This rapid urbanization has put additional stress on
environmental resources while making provision o f basic infrastructure services-water,
sanitation, electricity, and roads-both capital intensive and expensive.

Well-known projects include, for instance, the Jebel Marra Rural Development Project and Nyala-Zalingei
Road (part o f the east-west Salvation Highway ) .

6

111.

A.

MOVING FROM CONFLICT TO DEVELOPMENT

Key Challenges

20. Sudan’s current borders, inherited from the colonial era, bring together a broad
diversity o f peoples, languages, and cultures. At the same time, there i s an increasing
recognition-shared by GoNU, GoSS, and others-that all regions o f the country have
much more to lose than to gain by a division o f the country. A partition o f Sudan could
entail increased conflict and dislocation, loss o f revenue from oil, reduced trade and access
to key markets, and macroeconomic instability. With the CPA-mandated referendum on
the political future o f Southern Sudan looming o n the horizon in 201 1, building support for
unity among the people o f Southern Sudan will be critical. Addressing the root causes o f
conflict in marginalized areas o f the North-including Darfur-also depends to a
significant degree o n demonstrating the value and viability o f the vision promised under
the CPA. Moreover, Sudan i s emerging from a protracted period o f conflict and
international isolation that has contributed to a widespread decline o f institutions,
technological regression, and a general erosion o f human capital. CPA provides Sudan the
opening to re-engage with the international community and regain access to the
knowledge, skills, and technology that it desperately needs to modernize. T o make the
case for a united, peaceful, and modern Sudan, three interrelated challenges will need to be
addressed: (i)improving governance; (ii)increasingaccess to basic services; and (iii)
ensuring sustainable, diversified, and pro-poor growth, with primary attention to waraffected and marginalized areas.

Good Governance
21. Sudan’s rankings on governance indicators-such as those produced by the World
Bank Institute-are below the averages for sub-Saharan Africa (see figure 1). The
provisions o f the CPA, DPA, and ESPA all inherently recognize the necessity o f
improving governance, since each seeks to reconfigure governance arrangements to better
promote peace and development. If Sudan i s to make progress in moving from conflict to
development, accelerated implementation o f commitments to improve capability and
accountability and transparency o f government institutions will be needed.
22. Building a more capable state. While G o N U i s based on the foundations o f the
former Government o f Sudan (GoS), which had been in place since Sudan’s independence,
it i s s t i l l confronted by many institutional weaknesses. The government does not perform
well on the WBI indicator that measures government effectiveness-ranking well below
the sub-Saharan Africa average. Cognizant o f the need to strengthen institutions and
develop the competence o f government officials at all levels, the J A M set out an agenda o f
establishing and strengthening o f the systems and processes o f good governance;
developing national capacity, skills, knowledge and aptitude; reviewing laws and
simplifying legal and administrative procedures; rehabilitating universities and research
centers; and reviewing pay and grading policies and systems. This agenda requires
openness to new ideas and concepts including the adoption and application o f information
and communications technology (ICT) to a wide array o f public services and functions,
especially in education and public administration.

7

Figure 1: WBI Governance Indicators4
Sudan (upper bar) and Sub-Saharan Africa (lower bar), 2006

Voice and R c c o u n t a b i l i t y

I

Political Stability
Governnent Effectiveness
Regulatory Q u a l i t y
Rule o f Lau
Control o f Corruption
0

Country’s

25

50

1

100

P e r c e n t i l e Rank (e-160)

Source: KauCmenn 0.. A . Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi 2007: Governance Matters V I : Governance
I n d i c a t o r s f o r 1996-2006

23. GoSS’s institutional capacity constraints are much greater, and the size o f the
challenge i s multiplied by the ongoing process o f establishing a functioning government
from scratch in a war-devastated region. GoSS was established in October 2005, and i t s
constitution was adopted in December 2005. I t s physical infrastructure i s being
rehabilitated, and i t s institutional structures are s t i l l being developed. Salaries currently
make up 45 % o f GoSS spending-of which security consumes 72% and the c i v i l service,
which incorporates members o f the SPLM, Southern Sudanese who were working with the
erstwhile Coordination Council for Southern Sudan, and fresh appointees, the remainder.
GoSS i s s t i l l in the process o f evolving an organized structure, defining the processes and
systems for governance, and recruiting and training the c i v i l service to deliver results,
while at the same time there i s a severe shortage o f qualified, professional staff, especially
for the delivery o f basic services. Employment in the public service risks becoming an
expensive and inefficient substitute for social security schemes to reintegrate the waraffected, widows, orphans, the disabled and the disadvantaged. The crowding out o f basic
service delivery funding needs by salary costs i s even greater at the state level.

A number o f medium-term actions are needed to improve the quality o f the c i v i l
service in Southern Sudan, and are being supported under the MDTF. These include an
extensive training plan to build civil service ethos, common skill standards within a
gradeljob type and common operating standards and procedures, and development o f a
medium-term framework for the c i v i l service. The latter would define goals and
objectives, operational standards, optimal organizational structures, job descriptions,
minimum qualifications, workforce requirements for different functions, structure o f
24.

The WBI Worldwide Governance Indicators aggregate the views on the quality o f governance o f a large
number o f enterprise, citizen and expert survey respondents in industrial and developing countries. These
data are gathered from a number o f survey institutes, think tanks, non-governmental organizations, and
international organizations. Limitations o f a perception-based index notwithstanding, large differences from
the average are seen to be good indicators o f governance issues and problems.

8

regulations and incentives. Such programs, however, are equally needed at state and local
levels in all parts o f Sudan, especially in the Three Areas, the East, and Darfur.
25. Developing a more accountable and transparent state. Accountability at all levels
o f government i s required to ensure resources are shared equitably and used for their
intended purpose. Sudan, however, scores poorly on WBI’s indicators o f voice and
accountability, rule o f law, and control o f corruption. While there i s little hard data to
corroborate these perceptions-based rankings, the lack o f transparency in public and
private transactions may contribute to such perceptions. GoNU’s five-year strategic plan
acknowledges the need to improve accountability and transparency. It notes the poor
communication o f government decisions, weak performance monitoring systems,
inadequate grass-roots consultation and participation in political and governance processes,
and the need to strengthen the public’s right o f access to information.
26. Commitments under the CPA to improve transparency o f Sudan’s public financesnotably in regard to the o i l sector-are o f particular importance. For overall public
expenditure planning and management, reforms are needed to enable tracking o f
expenditures according to their function and purpose and to consolidate federal and subnational spending. GoNU’s FY08 budget represents a first step in this direction. For the
oil sector, the Government has taken initial steps in the context o f the CPA towards greater
transparency, including posting o i l data on the internet. A National Petroleum
Commission has been established to monitor progress and direct the state’s o i l policy.
Planned actions to increase transparency include a commitment to publish the audits o f
Sudapet, the state-owned oil company, and transfer Sudapet’s net operating income to the
Treasury. Authorities (both G o N U and GoSS) have expressed interest injoining the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). In conjunction with these ‘supplyside’ reforms, more attention i s needed to the ‘demand-side’ o f accountability where civil
society and the media have an important role to play in promoting good governance.
27. In Southern Sudan, GoSS places accountability and transparency very high on its
agenda, but the lack o f institutional safeguards and capacity are a continuing challenge.
There are signs o f action. For example, on June 27,2006, GoSS Presidential Decree
Number 56/2006 established a number o f commissions including the Southern Sudan
Audit Chamber, Southern Sudan Anti Corruption Commission, and Southern Sudan Public
Grievance Chamber. GoSS acted swiftly to address recent allegations o f corruption in the
Ministry o f Finance, suspending implicated staff, removing the incumbent Minister o f
Finance, and launching an internal investigation. A review o f all GoSS contracts has been
carried out under the leadership o f the Anti-Corruption Commission to assess the
appropriateness o f procurement procedures followed under public funds use.
Access to Basic Services

28. Fostering a m o r e pro-poor state. Sudan’s boom in o i l revenues has been
accompanied by a large fiscal expansion, with public sector spending increasing from 7
percent o f GDP in 1997 to 22 percent in 2007. There i s evidence that pro-poor spending i s
gaining priority, though from a very l o w base. Between 2000 and 2004, per capita propoor expenditure averaged roughly $16. After 2004, GoNU’s poverty-reducing spending

9

increased significantly, rising to $70 per capita in 2006.5 Pro-poor expenditure i s slated to
rise more rapidly than overall expenditures again in the 2007 budget. The continued trend
toward an increased share o f the budget devoted towards development expenditure i s
important, especially since pro-poor expenditures in 2006 equated to 5.1 percent of GDP,
well below the average o f 9.2 percent o f GDP for 23 countries that have reached HIPC
decision pointe6In fact, even with the recent increases, pro-poor spending in Sudan
remains among the lowest in Africa as a percentage o f GDP.

29. Making Sudan more o f a pro-poor state will contribute to making it more of a propeace state. With much o f Sudan’s history o f conflict attributable to economic inequalities
among peoples and regions, the openness by G o N U to increasing pro-poor public spending
i s a positive sign. Increased pro-poor spending promises not only to help directly improve
the quality and quantity o f basic services for the poor, but also to help over time to address
root causes o f conflict by diminishing inequality. The next step i s to ensure that budget
plans translate into actual pro-poor spending increases on the ground, since execution o f
budget plans has been uneven.
30. Making fiscal decentralization work. Increasing public resources devoted to propoor spending will not have the desired impact unless the institutional arrangements are in
place to utilize such funds. Since most o f the public sector activities that directly benefit
the poor - health, education, water - are the responsibility o f sub-national governments,
this means that effective fiscal decentralization i s critical for translating increased public
wealth into effective poverty reduction efforts. While the ability to absorb funds and
deliver basic services in most states i s low, there i s strong ownership in Sudan for
enhancing fiscal decentralization and building local-level capacity, and these objectives
figure prominently in the country’s Interim National Constitution, the CPA, and GoNU’s
Five-Year Plan.

3 1. Despite the strong ownership and GoNU’s commitment to increasing sub-national
transfers, case studies o f several Northern states prepared as part o f the ongoing PER
underline the challenges Sudan faces in making fiscal decentralization work. Successful
fiscal decentralization depends on sufficiently autonomous and accountable sub-national
governments with credible budgets and sound fiscal management practices. The state case
studies show that by these criteria, fiscal decentralization remains a work in progress and
requires additional reform and capacity building efforts. States and localities have limited
fiscal and decision-making autonomy, budget predictability i s low, there i s a wide
variation between budgeted amounts and actual outturns, transfers are not predictable and
transparent, and financial management capacity i s low.

Estimates o f pro-poor spending are from the Public Expenditure Review (PER) recently completed by the
Bank, GoNU, and donor partners. The PER working definition o f pro-poor spending includes: locally
financed federal development spending on pro-poor projects, federal social subsidies, three-quarters the
current transfers to Northern states, locally financed development spending in the Northern states, and all
transfers to the Three Areas. Discussions between the Bank and GoNU on this definition are ongoing.
6
Data on pro-poor spending i s monitored by the World Bank and I M F in the context o f the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. (See HIPC Initiative - Status oflmplementation, I M F and World Bank,
2006, Appendix Table 3).

10

32. Established under the CPA, the Fiscal and Financial Allocation and Monitoring
Commission (FFAMC) i s charged with ensuring transparency and fairness in allocation o f
funds to the sub-national level and to GoSS. The commission became operational in late
2006 with support from a grant under the World Bank LICUS trust fund. F F A M C
recommendations o n transfers are incorporated in the FY08 budget, including formulabased sub-national transfers.
33. Addressing short and long-term sectoral priorities concurrently. The urgency o f
showing a peace dividend, and the capacity constraints to delivering quality basic services,
means that increasing access to service delivery will require addressing both immediate
and long-term challenges in parallel. In the short term, to make headway against the
critical need to boost access to services for war-affected, displaced, and marginalized
populations, rapid impact interventions must begin to rehabilitate service delivery
infrastructure and provide drugs, textbooks, and other urgently needed inputs. However,
the needed capacity improvements, as international experience shows, will require
significant time to achieve results. Therefore, over the longer term, a parallel focus must
be on the development o f key systems and capacities on a sector-wide basis, with the goal
o f sustainably expanding the public sector’s ability to provide quality services to the
population.

Sustainable and Diversified Pro-Poor Growth
34. Small-scale industries account for over 90 percent o f manufacturing in Sudan, and
small entrepreneurs provide two-thirds o f household needs for the majority o f households.
I t i s clear that the growth o f such small-scale enterprises i s crucial for increasing incomes,
particularly among rural dwellers and poor people. However, government policy has
traditionally been focused more towards large-scale manufacturing in Khartoum and
nearby states along the N i l e River. Improving the business climate for small and medium
enterprises (SMEs)-by increasing access to finance, improving tax administration,
strengthening opportunities for capacity building, and addressing non-competitive
practices-will be important to stimulating increased growth o f such firms.

35. To enhance the livelihoods o f the poor, reforms in both irrigated and traditional
rain-fed agriculture need to be pursued. The agricultural sector will be a major source o f
sustained growth for the economy, particularly in light o f the major macroeconomic and
sectoral policy changes introduced to improve production incentives in the sector since
1992. There remain substantial inefficiencies in agricultural production and marketing in
each o f the major crop and livestock producing subsectors, in some cases because o f the
intrusion o f government. These inefficiencies should be addressed through improved
support services, technical and institutional change, further deregulation o f some specific
markets, land reform, strategic infrastructure development, and close attention by the
government to control and mitigate environmental degradation. The emphasis o f
strategies for improved efficiency should be toward the traditional rain-fed areas in order
to achieve rapid reduction in rural poverty.
36. In addition to existing supply-side constraints, the competitiveness o f Sudan’s nono i l exports has suffered from the recent strong appreciation o f the currency, which i s

11

currently around 2.04 Sudanese pounds per US dollar, compared to 2.58 Sudanese pounds
equivalent in early 2005, largely due to inflows o f foreign exchange from o i l exports and
FDI. Non-oil exports have declined sharply in local currency terms and as a percentage o f
GDP, though they have remained essentially flat in dollar terms. Evidence from the
ongoing Diagnostic Trade Integration Study suggests profit margins for farmers are
particularly squeezed by the appreciation, in addition to the adverse effects o f supply-side
bottlenecks. Given that the agricultural sector employs 67 percent o f the population,
mainly in the form o f small scale subsistence farmers, the declining competitiveness o f the
sector i s a major concern for prospects for sustainable growth.

37. Inadequate infrastructure i s a serious growth bottleneck. The vast size o f the

country and i t s fragile ecological systems place special demands o n transport facilities,
communications, and other infrastructure services. Although infrastructure has been one
o f the main development problems in Sudan for a long time, services have deteriorated as a
result o f the long c i v i l war and limited access to international finance. Roads, bridges,
railways, river transport, and-to a lesser extent-sea ports are all in need o f substantial
repairs and rehabilitation. Lack o f adequate transport infrastructure particularly hurts more
remote areas by limiting access to markets and services. Other central public infrastructure
such as power plants also needs substantial rehabilitation and new investment given that
less than a fifth o f the population has access to electricity, and power generation in
Southern Sudan i s virtually all by diesel fuel. The most formidable infrastructure
challenge i s the husbandry o f the country’s surface and ground water resources for urban
and rural water supply, irrigation, power, and navigation. With an infusion o f FDI and
dismantling o f the state monopoly, the provision o f telecom and I T services has
accelerated, but the South s t i l l lags far behind the rest o f the country.

B.

Sudan’s Emerging Development Strategy

38.

Persistent c i v i l wars have prevented successive governments from creating an
inclusive national long-term vision, although the CPA, the JAM, and the Poverty
Eradication Strategy concept note contain elements o f such a vision. GoNU has developed
a Five Year Strategic Plan consistent with these frameworks. GoSS i s contributing to this
Five Year Plan in the context o f the preparations for the next Sudan Consortium, and also
envisions preparing i t s own five year plan linked to that o f GoNU.

39. Working jointly with the Government o f Sudan and the SPLM, the Bank and UN coled a Joint Assessment Mission (JAM) o f Sudan’s recovery, reconstruction and
development needs in 2004 and 2005. The JAM’S work was organized around eight

cluster groupsY7each o f which conducted relevant research and designed prioritized
interventions. Underlying the Framework was an explicit acknowledgement o f the need to
consolidate the peace and resolve governance and resource distribution issues that could
generate conflict in the future. The first transitional phase, ‘Consolidating the Peace’
7

Institutional development and capacity building; governance and the r u l e o f law; economic policy and
management; productive sectors; basic social services; infrastructure; livelihoods and social protection; and
information. The Framework, at both the regional and national level, encompasses a variety o f cross-cutting
issues, including gender integration, institutional development, environmental protection, decentralization,
HIVIAIDS and conflict prevention.

12

(2005-2007) focused mainly on issues such as security, reconciliation, peace building, food
security, return o f displaced persons, provision o f basic services, governance, including the
implementation o f institutions and processes under the CPA, and more equitable resource
distribution among the different regions. This phase was to prepare the ground for the
second phase, ‘Accelerating Progress toward the MDGs’ (2008-20 1l),
where development
interventions would be scaled up.
40. The JAM’S findings were synthesized by a joint Government, donor, UN and Bank
team into a Framework for Sustained Peace, Development and Poverty Eradication, which
was presented at a Donor’s Conference in Oslo in April 2005. The Framework focused on
key themes that were agreed to be integral to consolidating the peace and facilitating
broad-based human and economic development. Providing basic security and human
rights protections, and ensuring the safe return and reintegration o f the world’s largest
displaced population, were seen as fundamental preconditions to rebuilding social capital
and putting the country on a solid footing for development. In parallel, implementation o f
the CPA required sweeping reforms to governance, the creation o f new institutions, and
significant capacity building at all levels o f government to allow for effective
decentralization and equitable resource allocation. With the first phase o f implementation
o f the J A M drawing to a close, i t was agreed in the March 2007 Sudan Consortium that a
detailed review o f performance, and an elaboration o f plans and needs for the period from
2008 to 201 1 should be prepared soon. While the Bank and UN were heavily involved in
the first phase o f the J A M exercise, GoNU and GoSS are expected to take the primary role
in driving this process, and integrating it with their own development planning.

41. The Five Year Strategic Plan, 2007-2011. G o N U has developed a Five Year
Strategic Plan, to which GoSS i s contributing, in the context o f the preparations for the
next Sudan Consortium-GoSS also envisions preparing i t s own five year plan linked to
that o f GoNU. The G o N U planning process entailed a bottom-up approach beginning in
the North with preparation o f 5-year plans and programs by the states and 30 federal
ministries, and the Transitional Darfur Regional Authority (TDRA). The plan provides a
framework for focusing and coordinating peace and development efforts over the next five
years, building o n the JAM. Offering a vision o f “a unified, secure and peaceful Sudan
based on the principle o f pluralism, a democratic multi-party system, equitable distribution
o f wealth and the Rule o f Law,” the plan represents a positive step towards a national
poverty reduction strategy. The plan i s centered on eight key result areas: promoting
sustainable economic development, sustaining peace and stability, reducing poverty and
meeting the MDGs, strengthening good governance and r u l e o f law, building capacity o f
public institutions and civil society, strengthening public information and media, fostering
scientific research, and promoting citizenship and national identity. Among the various
quantitative and qualitative goals, the plan aspires to achieve the following MDGs:
0

0

0

Reducing poverty rate to 30%
Basic education accessible to 80% ( no gender discrimination); secondary
education also to 80% and enabling 70% access to higher education
Reducing child mortality by 50%
Reducing maternal mortality b y 50%
Reducing malaria and tuberculosis by 80%

13

0

Increasing access to information (IT) sources to 50% o f population
Providing potable water to 80% o f population
Raising rate o f participation in coming elections to 80%

42. Moving towards a National PRSP. During the JAM, national and southern
authorities agreed on a Poverty Eradication Strategy (PES) concept note, laying the
framework for how a poverty reduction strategy could be prepared for the country as a
whole. The next step i s the development o f a fully national, participatory post-JAM
poverty reduction strategy that would build on the building blocks o f the CPA, the J A M
Framework, the PES concept note, the 2004 I-PRSP, and both Governments’ Five-Year
Strategic Plans.

IV.
A.

BANK RELATIONS W I T H SUDAN

Progress in Implementation o f the Country Re-EngagementNote (CRN)

43. The CRN, discussed by the Board on June 24,2003, outlined a four-pronged
knowledge generation and sharing to foster national dialogue; (ii)
approach focusing on: (i)
capacity building to support policy reform; (iii)
demonstration projects to help improve
delivery o f basic social services; and (iv) resolution o f the debt overhang. The C R N also
foresaw the need to establish and staff country offices, and raised the possibility of the
Bank administering a reconstruction trust fund. This materialized after the CPA when the
Bank was asked to manage the two Multi-Donor Trust Funds (MDTFs) for Sudan.
Progress in implementing the C R N has been generally good, as shown below,
44.
though factors such as l o w capacity and the Darfur crisis have prevented a higher level of
progress from being achieved, and there has been difficulty in quickly locating and
deploying the needed staff and skills to handle the growing work program.
Knowledge Generation and Sharing. From a relatively l o w level prior to the CRN,
the Bank has scaled up i t s analytical program to support the transition to a more
development-oriented national agenda (see Annex 8). K e y completed analytical and
advisory activities have included a Public Expenditure Review, a Country Economic

Memorandum, Health and Education reports, the Sudan JAM, a joint IMF-Bank
Financial Sector Assessment, a joint IMF-Bank debt sustainability assessment, a
Diagnostic Trade and Integration Study (DTIS), a volume on the development
challenges in Darfur, and studies on Livestock Marketing and Gum Arabic (with joint
MDTF support).
At the authorities’ request, the Bank has also preparedjust-in-time policy notes on:
environmental and social safeguards for the Merowe Dam; protecting the poor from
the rise in domestic price o f oil; possible options for cash transfers to returnees in
Darfur once peace i s realized; and a diagnostic o f the growth prospects and
institutions in South Kordofan state. In addition, the Bank provided technical
resource persons for the wealth sharing deliberations at the NortWSouth and Darfur
peace talks. In response to the financial and budgetary crisis faced by GoSS in the

14

first half o f 2006, the Bank mobilized a fiscal mission in association with key donor
partners (JDO, DFID, USAID and the UN) to assist GoSS in formulating prudent
fiscal management policies and programs. IFC i s providing technical assistance to
help GoSS draft key legislation for private sector development. Under the Technical
Assistance Facility (TAF), supported by the National MDTF, a variety o f studies have
been initiated to fill the knowledge gap (see para. 53).
0

0

0

0

Capacity Building. The Bank has been supporting efforts to strengthen capacity
through the JAM, analytical work done jointly with government, and through the
Low-Income Countries under Stress (LICUS) trust-fund and the MDTFs. Building
capacity for basic service delivery, reconstruction o f infrastructure, public
expenditure management, and financial management is a central focus o f the projects
supported by the MDTFs. The $4.5 million LICUS trust fund grant for Sudan,
approved in December 2004, also focuses on capacity building and institutional
development o f fiduciary and aid-management systems, particularly in the South.
Another LICUS grant ($0.23 million) for the African Union supports the DarfurDarfur Dialogue and Consultations, as well as other peace-building activities, and
provides for possible technical assistance for the Darfur peace negotiations. A PostConflict Fund (PCF) grant ($ 0.42 million) supports research and knowledge
dissemination on institutions and key aspects o f the socio-economy o f Darfur. The
grant i s also intended to build the capacity o f local partners in Darfur, particularly
NGOs and CBOs, to prepare development programs. The Bank’s Financial Market
Integrity Unit has provided technical assistance to help the authorities combat money
laundering.
Demonstration Projects. The PCF-supported Community Empowerment Project in
the Nuba Mountains in South Kordofan State has made good progress in piloting
funding mechanisms for small-scale community driven investments in a war-affected
and marginalized area, and it i s planned to replicate this mechanism in other areas.
Results from Bank-managed Dutch trust fund support for reforms in the
administration o f the massive Gezira irrigation scheme have been impressive: a new
Gezira Act was adopted in July 2005, following which the Gezira Board has been
overhauled and a new chairman appointed, mandatory crop rotations have been
abandoned, and ‘payment upon delivery’ for cotton has been adopted. Even though
capacities are s t i l l weak, 1,572 Water Users’ Associations (WUAs) have been
established which seek to empower local communities.
Debt. Little progress has been achieved to date in resolving Sudan’s debt situation,
as donors are awaiting resolution o f the Darfur crisis and continued progress in
implementing the CPA. Sudan remains eligible for HIPC debt relief.
Scaling up the Bank’s Presence. As foreseen in the CRN, the Bank opened a
country office in Khartoum in 2005, where a Country Manager i s based. A World
Bank sub-office was established in Juba in 2006 to support GoSS and facilitate the
implementation o f MDTF-South. Staffing levels in both locations have risen rapidly
to accommodate the added work o f administeringthe MDTFs, and additional hiring
will be considered in line with the evolution o f the work program.

15

B.

Progress in Implementation o f MDTFs

45.
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement specified that two Multi-Donor Trust Funds
(MDTFs) - one for the National Government and one for GoSS -be established to
facilitate the coordination o f external donor financing o f Sudan’s reconstruction and
development needs as laid out in the JAM. The MDTF for the National Government
(MDTF-N) was proposed to focus on
Box 1: UN Implementation of MDTF
consolidating peace-by supporting key
Activities
CPA commitments on the currency, the
census, and the national transport networkMDTF-National
and supporting recovery and development in $38.7 m (28 %) of MDTF-N funds are
war-affected and marginalized areas in the
implemented by UN agencies, including:
Northern states. The MDTF for the South
UNIDO-$1.1 m
UNFPA-$12.0 m
(MDTF-S) aimed to support the nascent
UNDP - $13.0 m
UNOPS
$7.1
m
GoSS in building institutions working
UNICEF - $5.3 m
WHO - $0.16 m
across all sectors, balancing both short- and
long-term needs. Donors and the authorities
MDTF-Southern Sudan
requested the World Bank to administer the
$78.3 m (42 %) of MDTF-S funds* are
implemented by UN agencies, including:
MDTFs, particularly because o f the high
degree o f fiduciary compliance (financial
UNFPA - $10.0 m
WFP - $30.1 m
management and procurement) that the
UNOPS-$20.1 m
ILO-$0.5m
Bank’s procedures would bring. O f the $2
IAPSO - $0.7 m
UNICEF- $2.7 rn
billion pledged for development at the April
UNDP - $14.1 m
2005 Donors’ Conference in Oslo, one
* An additional $35.9m in GoSS counterpart funds is
quarter ($508 million total) was pledged for
also implemented by UN agencies
the two MDTFs. Post-Oslo pledges have
raised the total to $585 millibn, o f which $492 million has been paid-in by 14 MDTF

partners.

46. MDTF-supportedprojects experienced initial implementation challenges in
reconciling the need for rapid delivery o f results with the l o w capacity on the ground,
particularly in the South, and the need to ensure adequate fiduciary controls and
government ownership. Implementation by UN agencies was foreseen as one o f the key
channels to deliver MDTF results. However, the Bank experienced difficulties in reaching
consensus with UN agencies on legal agreements, particularly relating to fraud and
corruption, until a unique Sudan-wide agreement on legal templates was reached on
November 10,2006. As o f October 3 1, 2007, more than one-third o f MDTF grant
commitments was being managed or implemented by UN agencies.

47. In the past year, the Bank has sharply increased its field presence, arranged a series o f
training activities targeted at key counterparts, and given the Sudan country team priority
access to World Bank senior decision-makers and top operational policy experts. This

*

Partners having paid in funds to the MDTFs are: Netherlands, Norway, the United Kingdom, the European
Commission, Canada, Sweden, Germany, Finland, Denmark, Italy, Egypt, Iceland, Greece, and the World
Bank. The Bank contribution(from IBRD surplus) comprises $5 million to each o f the MDTFs.

16

effort included a Southern Sudan Implementation Support Mission in M a y 2007, with
legal, procurement, financial management, and disbursement specialists with experience
working in fragile states. The Support Mission helped Bank staff in Juba to address a
number o f key bottlenecks affecting the pace o f implementation o f MDTF projects.
48. The performance o f the MDTFs-from preparing new projects to delivering results
from existing ones-is steadily improving. In terms o f the preparation o f projects, MDTF
projects have been prepared with an average lead time that compares favorably with the
World Bank average for emergency operations o f six months, and the Bank average for all
projects o f 15 months. For the two MDTFs, 22 grant agreements for projects have been
signed, o f which 20 projects are effective, for a total commitment o f $336 million through
November 30,2007. GoSS and GoNU have committed $554 million in parallel to MDTF
programs. Governance and management structures for the MDTFs are working well, and
the large proportion o f G o N U and GoSS’s own resources that are cofinancing the MDTF
framework i s an important sign o f government ownership. For the GoSS cofinancing, the
creation o f pooled funds allows government resources to follow Bank fiduciary practices
(especially procurement and financial management).
49. Unlike other donor-funded programs in Sudan, the MDTFs are fully embedded in the
budgets o f the GoNU and GoSS and they help leverage sizeable Government resources (as
much as 2/3 o f total project cost) for pro-peace, pro-poor programs. These attributes,
however, are also responsible for some o f the implementation delays as projects are
prepared and implemented by Government agencies and project funding i s subject to
Government budget allocation, release procedures, and internal decision-making. Thus,
MDTF-supported projects suffer from the same implementation constraints and difficulties
as the Government’s own public investment programs. Conversely, however, engagement
through the MDTF helps to improve the Government capacity for implementation itself.
50. While the pace o f disbursements has accelerated, with disbursements o f about $164
million as o f November 30, 2007, the real acceleration in the pace o f MDTF
implementation needs to be measured by the results achieved on the ground. One example
o f successful delivery o f MDTF results i s the Rapid Impact Emergency Project (RIEP).
The project has provided pharmaceuticals and medical supplies to over 500 local health
facilities, and medical kits to over 1000 health facilities. RIEP has also financed the
delivery o f 40,000 school kits to 2,600 primary schools. Governor’s offices in 10 Southern
states have been renovated and equipped, including the installation o f IT/communications
equipment, generators, vehicles, office equipment, and furniture. The RIEP model is now
being replicated for the Three Areas Program targeting the transitional states o f South
Kordofan and Blue N i l e .

5 1. An interim Project Accounting Agent i s in place in Southern Sudan, and an
international procurement agent has been contracted to establish a Procurement Division in
GoSS, review and revise GoSS procurement policies, and to carry out the day to day
procurement activities o f GoSS for a period o f two years. Among other notable results in
MDTF-S projects, a new secondary school syllabus has been developed, the third phase of
fast-track teacher training for 1,200 teachers has started, good progress has been made in
the rehabilitation o f water systems, the hospital, and government ministries in Juba, and
17

850 kilometers o f roads are being repaired and maintained. Contracting i s underway for
delivery o f health services by NGOs and private entities. A summary description o f the
MDTF-S project portfolio i s provided in Annex 4.

52.
At the National level, the new national currency mandated by the CPA has been
successfully introduced with support from both MDTFs, and the old currency has been
completely phased out in all o f Sudan, including the South and Darfur. The two MDTFs
have also fully disbursed the funds supporting the preparatory work for the CPA-mandated
National Census, which i s a key precursor to the upcoming national elections. In conflictaffected northern states, the Community Development Fund (CDF), supported by a $15
million MDTF-N grant, has made exemplary progress in supporting community-led
development in the conflict-affected Three Areas on the basis o f sub-projects submitted by
local communities and developed through a consultative, participatory planning process.
The CDF has supported over 200 fast track sub-projects in education, health, and watero f which over half are already completed. In addition, 392 solar-powered lighting systems
have been installed in schools, health facilities, and other public places in 10 remote rural
settlements. It i s now intended to scale up the CDF to cover a majority o f conflict-affected
areas in North Sudan and a similar program i s envisaged for Southern Sudan with support
from MDTF-S.
53. MDTF-N i s also helping to rebuild critical transport infrastructure in war-affected
areas. Demining o f the Babanousa-Wau railway has been completed with counterpart
funds from GoNU under a MDTF-supported transport rehabilitation project, opening the
way for MDTF-funded rehabilitation o f the railway. Contracting for the railway
rehabilitation i s underway, as i s the contracting for rehabilitation o f three major roads
linking formerly GoS and SPLM-controlled localities in the Three Areas and the East. The
Technical Assistance Facility has funded training in procurement, financial management,
and environmental safeguards for officials implementing CPA-related programs. To fill
critical knowledge gaps, TAF i s financing a National Transport Master Plan and an
Environmental Safeguards Assessment Framework. Other TAF studies support the
preparation o f investment programs in Health, Education, and Agriculture. The TAF i s
housed in the Ministry o f Finance and National Economy (MOFNE), and i s managed
entirely by Sudanese professionals with no expatriate support. Three joint MDTF/World
Bank-funded policy studies have also been completed (on gum arabic, livestock marketing,
and development needs in South Kordofan state) as part o f the advisory and analytical
assistance provided by the MDTF technical secretariat. Summary description o f other
projects supported by MDTF-N i s given in Annex 4.

54. Despite recent progress, daunting challenges remain. Capacity i s a main constraint
throughout the country, but especially given the near infancy o f government structures in
the South. L o w capacity leads to forced trade-offs between ownership, building capacity,
good governance and sustainability on the one hand , and speed o f delivery and visibility
on the other but these trade-offs must be carefully balanced to ensure value for money.
Capacity shortages are especially severe at the state levels, both in the North (with a few
exceptions) and in the South-precisely where basic services are critically needed.

18

C.

Lessons Learned

55. Managing the trade-off between delivering short-term results and long-term
needs. Following the signing o f the CPA, there were high expectations for a quick peace
dividend to reverse the social and economic toll from decades o f conflict and neglect in
Sudan. At the same time, donors and Government requested the World Bank to administer
the MDTFs due to the Bank’s greater reliance on Government’s o w n systems to implement
projects, which has the advantage o f promoting capacity building through learning by
doing-but also required a great deal o f work initially to help authorities, especially in the
South, take on new responsibilities. When initial results from MDTF projects-many o f
which focus on longer-term institutional building and reconstruction-did not immediately
meet these expectations, the Bank faced criticism for its procedures and project design.
There i s n o w a better recognition o f the need for projects to strike a better balance between
the short-term objectives o f delivering visible results o n the ground and the longer-term
concerns with ownership, capacity building, and sustainability.
56. Working with implementing partners. Though n o w largely resolved, contractual
disagreements with UN agencies set back the start o f many MDTF-supported activities.
Since the MDTFs were designed to rely in the beginning on the ability o f UN agencies to
implement recovery activities in post-conflict countries such as Sudan, i t i s vital to ensure
that inter-agency agreements can be concluded rapidly with involvement at the highest
levels o f management earlier in the process.
57. Adapting project design to deliver rapid results in a low capacity environment.
One o f the conclusions o f the M a y 2007 Support Mission was that different project design
models could have helped deliver results more rapidly. For example, more projects that
mobilize communities, build physical infrastructure, and create jobs-such as community
driven development (CDD) and public works proj e c t s - c o u l d have helped to deliver
results more rapidly. While GoSS initially favored other approaches over CDD-type
programs, the Bank i s engaging GoSS in rethinking the value o f this approach in producing
rapid outcomes.

58.

Managing expectations and need for effective communications. Despite
significant achievements and results on the ground, there is a strong perception among
MDTF stakeholders that post-conflict recovery and development in Sudan i s falling short
o f expected results. At the heart o f these perceptions are unrealistic expectations. This
experience has highlighted the need to create more realistic expectations through a
strengthened communications strategy with appropriate staffing and resources.

V.

WORLD B A N K SUPPORT PROGRAM

59. Long-term strategic vision. While this interim strategy covers a short period, it
aims to contribute to the achievement o f the longer-term strategic vision enshrined in the
CPA: promoting peace in Sudan by making it attractive through development, shared
prosperity, and a reformed system o f governance which serves all Sudanese. Voluntary
support for unity o f Sudan can emerge from sustained peace, a critical long-term goal
19

given that no economic, social, or political progress will be possible in the face o f
continued domestic conflicts in Sudan.
60. Strategic objective. The Bank’s main objective i s to support GoNU and GoSS to
meet the commitments contained in the CPA (as reflected by the JAM), DPA, and ESPA
and particularly to help the authorities to begin to address the three interrelated challenges
described in Section III-improving governance; increasing access to basic services; and
ensuring sustainable and diversified pro-poor growth-especially in war-affected and
marginalized areas. The Bank will seek to accomplish this objective in close partnership
with Sudan’s other international partners, and taking into account i t s comparative
advantage relative to them.
61. Spatial differentiation. The entry points for Bank support vary according to the
diverse conditions facing different areas o f Sudan. At the National level (excluding
Darfur), the focus i s on stabilizing peace by helping to reduce disparities between the
center and marginalized and war-affected areas. This entails a significant investment in
analytical work and policy dialogue to backstop the implementation o f the key provisions
o f the CPA (pro-poor growth, decentralization, good governance, and empowerment),
and-in the Three Areas, the East and other marginalized areas-to support demonstration
projects and capacity building programs for local service delivery. In D a r f u r , the Bank
will work with partners, as security allows, to assess development and recovery needs and
to make ready rehabilitation and development programs to be implemented in the event o f
peace. In the South, the main focus i s on helping to build a competent, responsive, and
stable government in Southern Sudan based on good governance, rule o f law, and
transparency while promoting efforts to empower and decentralize service delivery to the
states, counties, and communities. Another key objective i s to help Southern Sudan
develop a long-term strategy to transform i t s e l f into a well-integrated, s e l f reliant, and
viable economic unit that begins to harness i t s vast and rich natural resources for the
welfare o f i t s people.
62. Duration. The 2 1-month timeframe o f the support program roughly corresponds to
the first period o f the Five Year Strategic Plans o f GoNU and GoSS, both aimed at
sustained peace, economic growth and poverty reduction. This duration reflects the many
uncertainties facing Sudan in the near-term. These uncertainties include the Darfur
conflict and the 2009 elections, among others. Positive resolutions o f these risks-and
progress toward clearance o f arrears-could allow for a full Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS).

A.

K e y Themes for W o r l d Bank Support

While there i s a need to be selective in choosing areas for Bank/MDTF support, the
massive recovery and development requirements faced by Sudan at this juncture make
selectivity difficult, and argue for a broader rather than narrower focus. To address the
challenges identified in Section 111, the Bank program will concentrate on a set o f key
themes. The relationship between the identified challenges and such themes i s shown in
Table 2. Most o f the specific interventions planned or already underway under each theme
span the Interim Period (2005-20 11) mandated in the CPA, and thus have an
63.

20

implementation l i f e that extends beyond the time period covered by the I S N . Given the
special circumstances surrounding Darfur, the Bank’s strategy for supporting recovery and
development in this region in the event o f a resolution o f the conflict i s described
separately at the end o f this section.
Table 2. Challenges (as identified in Section 111) and Bank Support
Challenges
Improving governance

Key Themes for Bank Support
Capacity
Building public sector capacity,(including the
Population Census and new National Currency)
Supporting decentralization
Accountability
Empowering civil society
Strengthening fiduciary systems

Increasing access to basic
services

Expanding access to health, education, and
water and sanitation
Combating HIVIAIDS
Supporting community-led recovery in
marginalized / war-affected areas

Ensuring sustainable,
diversified, and pro-poor
growth

Supporting infrastructure development,
especially transport
Fostering private sector growth particularly in
non-oil sectors
Supporting rural development, livelihoods, and
the environment

Imrwoving Governance

64. Building public sector capacity. Capacity building i s a major focus o f Bank
analytical support and MDTF projects-including dedicated capacity-building projects,
and other projects in which capacity building efforts are mainstreamed. In view o f the
massive needs, however, capacity building programs need to be further scaled up and
accelerated. In the South, the ‘learning by doing’ model (through interaction with
individuals and firms contracted for the purpose) together with targeted training appears to
be working, but needs to be supplemented with more attention to institution building at all
government levels and sector wide technical training programs. A study o f governance
and capacity building in the South i s expected to eventually lead to a government-owned
plan for capacity building. WBI i s a key partner working with G o N U to help develop and
implement capacity building programs at national, regional, and state levels. In addition to
MDTF-supported programs, the Bank i s expected to provide targeted technical assistance
to GoSS and GoNU on information technology and o i l sector management.

65. MDTF assistance i s also being used to support implementation o f key elements o f the
CPA to promote and consolidate peace. The G o N U and GoSS have sought MDTF support
for the Fifth Sudan Population Census (the first one since 1993) and for the New National
Currency Production and Exchange Program. The Central Bank o f Sudan, with support
21

from the IMF and the MDTFs, has successfully completed the introduction o f the new
currency as a symbol o f peace and unity to enhance national economic integration and
development. The Census, supported by GoNU, the MDTFs, UNFPA, EC, and other
donors, i s scheduled for early 2008, and i s expected to produce reliable and accurate
demographic, economic, and social data for development planning, while underpinning the
forthcoming elections in 2009.
66. Another element o f building capacity to promote peace and development will be to
help Southern Sudan develop a long-term development strategy that will apply regardless
o f the outcome o f the 201 1 referendum. This would likely include a plan to transform
Southern Sudan into an integrated and viable economic unit, with primary emphasis on
investments in infrastructure (primarily transport, power, and telecommunications to help
to reduce physical isolation and to improve access to economic opportunity) and human
development, supported by a policy and incentives framework to encourage and attract
private investment in areas o f non-oil growth (commercial agriculture and agro-industrye.g., sugar, palm oil, timber (teak), livestock, fish, fruits and vegetables; cement and
building materials; tourism; light manufacturing; and handicrafts), and the institutional
capacity to manage all this. N o t only will such a plan support development in the South, it
should also support heightened stability in the region through increased integration and
development o f a more common identity among Southerners.
67. Decentralization. The focus o f the Bank’s support i s to assist G o N U in making
decentralization work, as this i s central to the CPA, the ESPA, the D P A and the Interim
National Constitution. The Bank i s providing technical assistance to the Fiscal and
Financial Allocation and Monitoring Commission (FFAMC), which makes
recommendations on the formula used to make transfers to decentralized levels o f
government and monitors the transfers, through the LICUS project. Further support to
GoNU and states i s envisaged for establishing a robust and efficient intergovernmental
fiscal framework and developing national and state level capacity in Public Financial
Management (PFM), which i s critical for effective decentralization. In the South, support
to the Southern Sudan FFAMC, strengthening state capacity for PFM, and identifying
options for increasing own source revenues o f states are planned. An ESW study on
decentralization i s underway to present options to GOS S for structuring intergovernmental relations.
68.

Empowering civil society. Civil society has an important role to play in a more
open and peaceful society, including in holding the government accountable to i t s CPA
pledge to decentralize and improve the quality and accessibility o f services. In the South,
NGOs have been active in seeking MDTF contracts for service delivery and rural
development. The Bank i s supporting the development o f pilot accountability mechanisms
in the North (connected with the MDTF-supported Community Development Fund) and
the South. The Sudan Development Marketplace 2007, held in Khartoum in August 2007,
was used to introduce the concept and techniques o f accountability mechanisms to a crosssection o f CSOs, and to encourage development innovation at the grassroots level using
small grants to stimulate innovative approaches to address local livelihoods and service
delivery issues. A N G O Strategy Note was also prepared in consultation with relevant
M D T F stakeholders to help enhance NGO/CBO participation in MDTF-supported

22

operations. Additional Bank resources have been mobilized from the Bank’s Small Grants
Program to support CSOs in the area o f empowerment and participation.

69. Strengthening fiduciary systems. The l o w capacity o f both governments, but
particularly the nascent Southern government, in procurement and financial management
entails significant fiduciary risks. These risks not only have the potential to affect Bankadministered funds, but also threaten to reduce the development effectiveness o f
government’s own expenditures. The Bank i s undertaking a Country Integrated Fiduciary
Assessment (CIFA) in collaboration with other donors, and at the request o f the authorities.
The CIFA i s using Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) indicators as a

framework to assess the country’s fiduciary status and provide baseline ratings. Similar
fiduciary assessments are being carried out for GoNU and GoSS, and will lead to action
plans that could be implemented with Bank/MDTF and other donor support to improve
procurement and FM performance.

70. As GoSS fiduciary systems have needed to be developed from scratch, the Bank has
helped the Southern authorities build capacity in core public financial management

functions (budgeting, accounting, procurement and audit) through technical assistance,
training, drafting new legislation, and investment support. Until this capacity i s
sufficiently developed, the M D T F i s supporting the contracting out o f procurement,
accounting and auditing functions to the private sector.

Increasing: Access to Basic Services

71. Expanding access to health, education, and water. In the South, humanitarian
programs implemented by international NGOs account for a large proportion o f resources
applied to basic service delivery, especially for short-term assistance to displaced and
conflict-affected populations. These services, however, are fragmented, reach only limited
subsets o f the population, and depend on external actors’ continued presence for
sustainability. The Bank’s strategy aims to address both the short- and long-term
challenges for delivery o f basic services. In the short-term, the Rapid Impact Emergency
Project (RIEP) has quickly provided key inputs (Le., textbooks, pharmaceuticals) needed
for health and education. The Sudan Emergency Transport and Infrastructure
Development Project (SETIDP) i s supporting rehabilitation o f water supply in Juba. To
expand health service delivery promptly, the GoSS/MDTF Health Umbrella Program i s
contracting with the private sector and NGOs to support the delivery o f services to the
population o f the South. Among the objectives o f the Education Rehabilitation Project i s
rapid teacher training and recruitment and scaling up o f alternative education for
demobilized soldiers, returning refugees, and other adults. In addition, there i s likely to be
a large role for parent-teacher associations in the financing and provision o f basic
education particularly in poorer states and rural areas. Over the longer term, the MDTF i s
helping GoSS to develop key systems and institutional capacities at the sector-wide level,
with the goal o f expanding the public sector’s ability to provide sustainable quality health
and education services to the population. Implementation o f the Southern Sudan Rural
Water Supply and Sanitation Project i s expected to accelerate as key contracts for drilling
new boreholes are signed.

23

72. At the National level, in addition to the CDF which supports community-driven
delivery o f basic services (education, health, water and public lighting), the MDTF i s
supporting increased access to basic health services for conflict-affected and underserved
populations in four target states: Southern Kordofan, Blue Nile, Kassala, and Red Seacovering a population o f approximately 5. l million. At the same time, the Bank i s
supporting policy reform in a context o f increased dialogue between the Government and
international partners, in particular with the intention o f leveraging growing Government
fiscal resources towards pro-poor spending. In this context, the support aims to improve
knowledge and capacity to lay the groundwork for sustainable financing, reform and
development o f the decentralized health care system.
73. Despite the foregoing initiatives, pro-poor spending for basic services needs to
increase in the context o f dramatically growing central government revenues through more
efficient allocation o f fiscal transfers to the states and more effective decentralized service
delivery. The current situation can be characterized as one where progress i s being made
at central and local levels but the missing middle i s the state. State governments have a
crucial role in service delivery given their constitutional responsibility and increasing
ability to finance services. There i s strong latent demand from state-level policymakers
and stakeholders for dialogue and building capacity for service delivery. Planned
engagement i s likely to be multi-sectoral and focused o n several target states in a limited
number o f priority areas.
74. Combating HIV/AIDS. Although data are few, it i s believed that the incidence and
prevalence o f HIV in Sudan i s lower than in neighboring countries. Still, the end o f the
two-decade-long civil war-which restricted labor migration, trade and travel thereby
containing HIV transmission-carries the risk o f a large expansion o f the epidemic in
Sudan, especially the South, which could affect poverty reduction and economic growth.
Given the very real potential for increased HIV/AIDS incidence, preventing the further
transmission o f HIV infection i s one o f the greatest challenges o f post-war Southern
Sudan. A MDTF Southern Sudan HIV/AIDS project will aim to support GoSS in
mounting an effective national response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic through a multisectoral
approach which includes c i v i l society.
75. Addressing gender imbalances in recovery and development programs. Gender
specific interventions are embedded in all MDTF projects aimed at improving basic service
delivery-health, education, water and sanitation-while infrastructure projects all have a
gender focus in specific components. The Capacity Building, Institutional and Human
Resource Development Project supports the renovation o f regional vocational training
centers in Southern Sudan where a key focus i s on training o f women. The Bank will also
undertake an analysis o f the gender provisions under the CPA and help government
implement these through projects and technical assistance. The C D F encourages the
participation o f women and children in project design and implementation through social
mobilization programs.
76. Supporting recovery in marginalized/war-affected areas. Demonstrating progress
in reconstruction and development in war-affected and marginalized regions i s crucial to
the success o f the CPA and Sudanese unity. Still, in many such areas (which include most
24

o f Sudan outside o f Khartoum and a few more advanced Northern states), progress has
been uneven in terms o f delivering on the promises o f a peace dividend. All Bank
activities in the South aim to promote recovery and the shift from conflict to development.
The Community Development Fund (MDTF-N), currently active in the war affected Three
Areas, has proven to be a successful model for delivering services in marginalized areas
that will be scaled up to include more such areas over the I S N period. The Bank and
authorities are exploring whether the next phase o f the project could support capacity
development o f local governments for resource management and service delivery. Start
Up/Emergency Projects in South Kordofan and Blue N i l e State aim to address a number o f
emergency needs in basic services and capacity building in the short t e r m and a follow-on,
longer-term (Reconstruction and Development Phase) project will feature a more
comprehensive and integrated approach addressing the need for lean, efficient, effective
and transparent government institutions.

Ensuring Sustainable and Diversified Pro-Poor Growth

77. Sustainable and pro-poor growth begins with a stable macroeconomic and fiscal
environment. Sudan has posted a good record in both o f these areas in recent years, but
continuing this strong performance i s an increasing challenge due to the recent large fiscal
expansion, lower than expected o i l revenues, and the implications o f the economy’s
increased reliance o n oil-notably the reduced competitiveness o f non-oil exports. While
Sudan i s newly experiencing the complications o f o i l wealth, international experience can
help suggest measures that can overcome the problems Sudan currently faces. To help in
this regard, the Bank i s starting work with GoNU and GoSS on a Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM) focusing on pro-poor growth and governance in an o i l economy.
Diversification o f sources o f growth to lessen dependency o n o i l will be important over the
longer term, and will require an increased role for the private sector, the rural sector, and
addressing infrastructure gaps.
78. Fostering private sector growth. While much o f Sudan’s recent economic growth
has been due to increasing o i l production, sustained growth over the longer term requires
that other sources o f growth can take the lead - particularly the private sector. In the
South, growth o f the infant private sector i s contingent on an improving and more stable
investment climate, and increased capacity o f the private sector itself. A Private Sector
Development project i s helping GoSS to develop the enabling environment for private
sector growth in Southern Sudan, and sustainably increase formal employment.

79. At the National level, where the regulatory environment i s more settled, the formal
private sector i s stronger; however, the fmits o f recent rapid economic growth have not
been shared widely. A Microfinance project, expected to begin implementation early in
the ISN period, seeks to enable the financing o f tens o f thousands o f small entrepreneurs,
and establish a conducive policy and regulatory environment for the microfinance sector,
which i s currently highly undeveloped in Sudan relative to neighboring countries and
demand. The C E M would examine the possible engines o f pro-poor growth in Sudan,

especially in the marginalized regions and the South, and what types o f policies would
foster this potential. Under the NETREP, government i s being assisted to deepen private
sector participation in the transport sector. The Bank i s also finalizing an Investment

25

Climate Assessment (ICA) which focuses on private sector development (PSD) and the
constraints faced by micro and small businesses.
80. Supporting rural development. With agriculture, forestry and natural resources
representingthe mainstay for the livelihoods o f the large majority o f Sudanese, the
development o f this sector i s central to ensuring food security, equitable wealth
distribution, and restoration o f peace. Key challenges in the sector include overcoming a
legacy o f public bias toward large-scale public irrigation rather than the rain-fed
agriculture practiced by the poor, improving access to more reliable domestic water
through rainwater harvesting, improving resilience in the face o f shocks, addressing
environmental degradation, improving marketing efficiency, and strengthening capacity for
agricultural support services and technology adoption.

8 1. At the National level, an MDTF Livestock Production and Marketing Pilot project
w i l l seek to identify promising interventions that can enhance livelihoods and improve
productivity, particularly in isolated and conflict affected areas. The Bank i s engaging
with authorities o n key pro-poor growth policy areas such as improving the
competitiveness o f rain-fed agriculture and livestock; improving the management
efficiency and profitability o f irrigated schemes (such as in the large Gezira scheme),
thereby creating new jobs without massive public subsidies; supporting small-scale and
low-cost water harvesting technologies to improve access to water; and exploring how to
liberalize gum arabic markets so that the poor can get a larger share o f export income from
this sector. In the South, a Livestock and Fisheries project has recently become effective,
and an Agriculture and Forestry Support Services project at the National level will aim to
improve productivity o f agricultural and forestry producers through facilitating adoption of
improved technologies, and strengthening GoSS institutional capacity in the area. These
projects aim to combat environmental degradation while promoting environmental
sustainability to help reduce the sources o f conflict. In addition, Bank E S W i s envisaged
in collaboration with UN and DfID to assess key environmental challenges (degradation
and depletion o f natural resources, loss o f natural habitats, desertification, loss o f
biodiversity, water and urban pollution, and destruction o f cultural heritage sites) and to
investigate the potential application o f carbon finance.
82. Supporting infrastructure development. At the national level, transport
infrastructure i s poor and damaged, particularly in marginalized and war-affected areas.
The Sudan National Emergency Transport Project (NETREP) i s rehabilitating critical rail
and river transport infrastructure in war-affected areas, and helping to improve the
operational capability o f National Highway Authority, Sudan Railway Corporation and
other transport agencies. Under the Technical Assistance Facility, a comprehensive
Transport Master Plan i s to be undertaken. The recommendations o f this study will help to
establish the policy reform and investment agenda for the country. Other infrastructure
programs (rural roads, energy, water supply and irrigation) are envisaged under the stateled Three Areas Program and could be expanded to include urban slum upgrading and
renewal projects. The N i l e Basin Initiative (NBI), which involves all N i l e riparian
countries, also has important implications for Sudan as explained in Box 2.

26

83. Southern Sudan has one o f the least developed road networks in the world, and the
few roads that do exist have been degraded by decades o f conflict. Through the threephase Sudan Emergency Transport and Infrastructure Development Project (SETIDP),
MDTF-S supports the repair, maintenance and construction o f roads in the South, as well
as rebuilding critical physical infrastructure in Juba. As progress is being made with the
implementation o f on-going contracts, focus under the project i s shifting to the preparation
o f the next phase o f the project and improving capacity building and project
implementation. However, the overall needs in the transport sector remains huge, and the
financing needs for key priority interventions over the next few years exceeds all budget
allocations.
Supporting Recovery and Development in Darfur in the Event o f Peace

84. The ongoing humanitarian efforts o f the UN and international NGOs in Darfur are
saving thousands o f lives. These efforts constitute the main way o f supporting the
displaced people currently living in camps in and around Darfur. In the event o f a
resolution o f the Darfur conflict, the international effort would have to turn to the
rehabilitation o f the region, and to investing in i t s development. Progress on both fronts
would be required to ensure that peace could be sustained in the region.
Box 2: The Nile Basin Initiative
The Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) aims to foster cooperation among the riparian countries sharing
the Nile, and find win-win opportunities to optimize the productive use of water through
integrated investments in infrastructure (including irrigation and power), reversal of land
degradation, improved environmental management, and creation of policies to facilitate
regional integration. The World Bank, on request of the Council of Ministers of Water Affairs of
the Nile Basin, has been involved in the Nile Basin Initiative process as a facilitator as well as
financier since 1998; furthermore, it has served as a convener for the donor community and is
the administrator of the multi-donor Nile Basin Trust Fund (NBTF). For Sudan, the success of
the NBI so far in building cooperation among Nile countries has opened the possibility for it to
draw on the waters of the Nile in new ways reaping benefits beyond those provided directly by
the river alone.
For example, GoNU is planning to finance the connection of Sudan's power grid to that of
Ethiopia, opening the way for Ethiopia to export surplus power generated from its bountiful
hydroelectric resources while Sudan provides complimentary thermal power. IDA is planning
to provide financial support for the connection on the Ethiopia side. An NBTF-financed
Eastern Nile flood preparedness project under implementation, involving Egypt, Ethiopia, and
Sudan, will aid Sudanese communities in preparation, prevention and mitigation of flood
impacts. The Eastern Nile watershed project, under preparation, will address sustainable land
management issues during the first phase and is seeking support through the GEF as well as
bilateral donors. Sudan also hosts a regional unit for a Nile transboundary environmental
project (funded by GEF and NBTF resources), which addresses environmental awareness,
transboundary water quality, and wetlands protection issues; supports community microgrants; and, fosters dialogue on the environmental function within a future permanent Nile
Basin institution. Systematic analytical and sector work is planned to explore options for
major, joint multipurpose development in the Eastern Nile and to guide the Bank's mediumterm role, comparative advantage, and strategic partnerships for investment support in the
basin.

27

85. To prepare for an eventual return to peace, the Bank, UN, and African Development
Bank had begun work o n a Darfur Joint Assessment Mission (D-JAM). The D - J A M was
initiated promptly following the signing o f the Darfur Peace Agreement in M a y 2006, but
the deteriorating security situation in Darfur forced the suspension o f the mission last fall
before i t s work was complete. At the direction o f the Core Coordinating Group (CCG) o f
donors which provides oversight for the D - J A M work, the mission i s expected to be
resumed as soon as security on the ground i s sufficient for broad-based consultations with
the stakeholders in Darfur on the emerging findings. In the interim, LICUS and
Development Grant Facility (DGF) funds have been provided to support intra-Darfur
dialogue, institution and confidence building activities, and research and knowledge
dissemination. These grants have shown little progress due to G o N U travel permit
restrictions on the N G O implementing the DGF, and the fact that the Darfur-Darfur
Dialogue and Consultations (DDDC) and the Transitional Darfur Regional Authority
(TDRA) have only recently become operational.
86. Lessons from recent experience in Sudan illustrate that delivery mechanisms must be
found to fully mobilize the UN system and the multilaterals in ways that fit their
comparative advantages, to maximize impact and speed. The UN will likely move rapidly
with a broad based r e l i e f and recovery agenda to be delivered by the large NGO presence
in Darfur. The primary focus will be on restoring livelihoods and provision o f minimal
basic services. The financing mechanisms for this effort are being defined.
Simultaneously, development and reconstruction work can begin using several modalities.
The current D P A outlines possible delivery mechanisms through the new institutions
mandated by that peace agreement. These mechanisms could include:
0

Extending ongoing MDTF- National programs to D a r f u r . This could
include at least four ongoing MDTF-National programs that can be scaled up
rapidly: (i)
Community Driven Development (which could include priority
basic services such as health clinics, primary schools, markets, community
Infrastructure (primary focus on
centers, and solar power applications); (ii)
primary paved roads, railway rehabilitation, and repaidupgrading o f airstrips);
(iii)
Capacity Building and Training; and (iv) Microenterprise/Small Business
Development. Darfur specific sector-wide programs could be phased in after
18-24 months o f careful planning and project preparation work covering
agriculture, livestock, health, education, water resources, and urban
infrastructure and services (including water and sanitation), based on the
findings o f the D-JAM. With the large increase in staffing by the Bank in
Sudan in the last two years, the Bank’s presence could be scaled up rapidly to
accommodate the needs o f a program in Darfur. IDA funds could supplement
these efforts after IDA arrears are cleared.
T h e Government o f National Unity’s own efforts. Darfur should benefit
from many o f the commitments that the national government has made in the
context o f the CPA, the DPA, and the ESPA including increased
decentralization and larger fiscal transfers to states, and increased federal
support for infrastructure development.

28

Scaling up of the current ongoing bilateral development programs in
Darfur. Many bilaterals may wish to expand their existing assistance in Darfur
to meet the region’s post-conflict recovery and reconstruction needs. I t will
also be important to work with new development partners and donors (e.g.,
China, India, Egypt, Malaysia, and the Arab/Islamic Funds and Development
Banks) with a view to harmonizing their ongoing and planned interventions in
Darfur with the results o f the D J A M so as to reduce transaction costs as much
as possible.

B.

Instruments

87. Within the I S N period, the MDTFs are expected to remain the main financial
instruments for the World Bank’s engagement with Sudan. Nevertheless, there i s likely to
be a growing role for World Bank non-lending services in support o f policy dialogue and
institutional strengthening. IDA lending will remain inactive until clearance o f Sudan’s
outstanding arrears.
Multi-Donor Trust Funds

88. The sectoral mix o f MDTF projects in the first phase (2005-07) was guided largely
by the priorities established by the JAM, with projects approved by the respective
Oversight Committee for each MDTF, whose membership includes representatives o f the
Government, donors, UN, and the Bank. The 22 signed MDTF projects (see Annexes 4’5,
and 6) under implementation show a generally good thematic and sectoral balance when
compared to the priority expenditure areas set forth in the JAM. MDTF projects cover
most main J A M sectors, including health, education, water, transport, public sector
capacity building, r u l e o f law, decentralization, and good governance, and support under
MDTF-N and MDTF-S is differentiated based on the particular needs and priorities o f
GoNU and GoSS. At the margin, there i s more emphasis on infrastructure (in monetary
terms) than estimated under JAM.
89. The second phase o f the MDTFs, from 2008 to 201 1, i s linked to the second phase o f
the interim period leading up to the referendum. I t will be informed by the objectives o f
the GoNU and GoSS Five Year Strategic Plans. Donor commitments for this second phase
are expected to be discussed in the next Sudan Consortium, currently scheduled for April
2008.
90. Strengthening M D T F Performance. Based on the lessons o f experience in
administering the MDTFs to date, and the challenges that s t i l l remain, efforts to improve
MDTF implementation performance will focus both on the role o f the Bank and o f the
Government, as well as the linkages to other donor programs. These efforts, many o f

which are already ongoing, include:

Improving the capacity f o r program and project implementation. The l o w levels
o f capacity encountered by many projects argue for a stronger than normal
implementation support on the part o f the Bank. Increased World Bank staffing
levels and better tailoring o f supervision activities to the country context are expected

29

to assist significantly in improving implementation performance. The Bank has
rapidly scaled up i t s staffing complement in both Khartoum and Juba, but it will
likely be necessary to continue to place additional staff in coming years. The Bank
will step up efforts to assist in building GoSS capacity, particularly in public

financial management, for critical posts and critical core spending agencies. Planned
programs include training 2,500 GoSS senior and mid career officers in basics o f
policy making, administration, law and social responsiveness, and I C T for effective
communications (Institutions and HR Development Project). The Bank will also
continue to provide regular training in project management, PFM, and public
procurement, while at the technical level the existing ‘learning by doing’ model will
be intensified. While capacity i s in many cases higher within GoNU, increased
efforts at the statehocality levels are expected to result in better implementation
outcomes. The planned support o f the World Bank Institute (WBI) will be important
in this regard.
T a k i n g advantage o f recent, more flexible W o r l d Bank operational policies. The
World Bank Board approved a revamped set o f procedures (OP 8.0) to enable
accelerated implementation o f emergency operations on February 27,2007. Under
these new procedures, a high-level Rapid Response Committee, chaired by a
Managing Director in the Bank, allows timely access to senior World Bank
management to address roadblocks to rapid project implementation. Given the
positive impact o f the implementation support mission o f procurement, legal,
financial, and disbursement specialists to Juba in May 2007, more such high-level
problem solving missions are envisioned under these procedures. In more routine
cases, increasing decision-making authority i s being devolved to staff in Sudan. The
new Country Financing Parameters detailed in section F below are also expected to
simplify Bank support in many cases. Robust public procurement procedures
designed to preclude any perception o f corruption demand a certain unavoidable
amount o f time. However, there remains room within which to shorten the amounts
o f procurement processing time currently typical o f MDTF-Nand MDTF-S projects.
Part o f this improvement can be realized by more flexible Bank policies, and faster
clearances from the Bank. The Bank i s also continuing to bring more o f i t s own
human resources to bear in assisting the client to build public procurement skills.
Recent developments such as the newly installed Procurement Agent in Southern
Sudan, and new GoSS procurement rules should expedite matters. The focus should
now shift to include state and local levels.

Balancing short a n d long-term results. Projects must ensure the proper mix
between achieving tangible short-term outputs, and the longer-term objectives o f
ownership and capacity building to ensure sustainability. Obtaining the right balance
will require careful calibration, close consultations, and active management. In
administering the second-phase o f the MDTFs, the Bank will explore with donors
ways to consolidate donor interventions in sectors with large recurrent and operating
cost requirements (e.g. social sectors with a direct bearing on MDGs) into sectorwide programs (similar to SWAps) with unified plans, operating rules and budgets.
If this approach can be implemented, it will allow a longer time horizon for
sustainable outcomes and results while unified capital and recurrent budgeting will

30

lead to rationalization o f public expenditures and allow the possibility o f systematic
MDTF financing o f critical recurrent and operating costs. Still, the importance o f
rapid results will also need to be kept in mind given the massive immediate needs.
Improving communications. A MDTF communications strategy i s in place and the
MDTF technical secretariats have attempted in recent months to adopt a more
proactive communications strategy not only to improve the understanding o f the
purpose o f the MDTFs, but also to help keep expectations realistic about what the
MDTFs can deliver. Realism will be the core value o f a cohesive communications
effort through a two-way process which emphasizes listening as well as informing
and learning. Communications officers are n o w in place in Juba and Khartoum, and
efforts to further strengthen communications staffing and programs are underway.
The need for an active outreach and dissemination effort i s recognized clearly from
the experience o f MDTFs so far. The Bank will continue to support sponsor
workshops, “Project Managers’ Clubs,” and actively disseminate emerging best
practices in order to foster adoption o f successful modes o f operation and sharing o f
innovation. In this regard, a successful workshop was held in November 2006 in
Addis Ababa, bringing together senior GoNU/GoSS officials and project managers as
well as representatives from the donor and N G O community.
0

Strengthening the synergies between MDTF projects and sector dialogue and
ESW. Using ESW to build knowledge on which future projects can be based will
improve project quality and improve preparation speed. Similarly, improved policy
dialogue based on lessons learned from MDTF projects can create more conducive

environments for current and future projects to achieve their objectives.
Accordingly, the Bank will seek to enhance i t s capacity for policy advice and
dialogue, especially o n public sector reform, decentralization, macroeconomic
management, and sectoral strategies.
Non-lending Services

9 1. Following a long period o f international isolation, the reengagement by donors,
including the Bank, in a wide range o f development activities has created opportunities for
dialogue with the country partners and brought opportunities for a number o f stakeholder
groups in Sudan to absorb new ideas related to development. The importance o f this
engagement should not be underestimated. The lessening o f ‘knowledge isolation’ and the
growing networks to exchange ideas, such as the Sudan Consortium, are themselves
important elements to mitigate the most fundamental o f the risks, that o f stifling the social
energies needed to realize the CPA vision.

92. ESW products planned to be completed and delivered in the I S N period include a
new Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) on pro-poor growth in an o i l economy, an
Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) focusing o n the needs o f small firms, the Darfur
JAM, phase two o f the Public Expenditure Review (PER), a Southern Sudan capacity
Building Study to identify priority needs and formulate recommendations to address them,
an Environment and Natural Resources study, and a Country Integrated Fiduciary

31

Assessment (CIFA). The C I F A i s particularly important in the context o f harmonizing
donor practices regarding public procurement and financial management.

93. To enrich this menu o f policy and analytical support, the Bank will seek to deepen

dialogue-and open up space for civil society participation in such dialogue-in areas
such as: developing a Darfur reconstruction and development strategy; making
decentralization work; transforming Southern Sudan into an integrated and viable
economic unit; and local area development. The Bank's Financial Market Integrity Unit
will continue i t s technical support to build capacity to combat money laundering through a
proposed multi-phase program.

C.

IFC, MIGA, and WBI

94. IFC i s providing assistance to Sudan consistent with the pro-poor and pro-peace
focuses o f the ISN. IFC's Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) completed a rapid
diagnostic assessment in Southern Sudan in spring 2006, which i s n o w being followed up
by assistance to harmonize the conflicting legal regimes governing key aspects o f private
investment, including property rights, facilitate access to land with appropriate freehold
and leasehold provisions, and establish a public-private dialogue mechanism. At the
request o f GoNU, FIAS completed an assessment o f administrative barriers to investment
in September 2006. Endorsing the findings o f this assessment, G o N U has requested
additional assistance in implementation, which I F C expects to provide.

95. MIGA involvement in Sudan through i t s guarantee program will depend o n a
resolution o f the Sudan's non-accrual status with IDA. Assuming a resolution to the
arrears issue, MIGA intends to identify and respond favorably to requests for political risk
insurance, especially for projects that are in conformity with the country's CPA and are
more national in character (e.g., telecommunications, railroads, river transport). In the
South, MIGA's guarantees could play a strong catalytic role in promoting South-South
investment, including support for foreign direct investments coming from the sub-region,
e.g., from Uganda, Kenya, and South Africa. With respect to technical assistance, MIGA
i s working closely with F I A S to support the Government in i t s efforts to create a one-stop
shop for foreign investors.
96. WBI has been involved in supporting G o N U in the development o f i t s "Economic
Governance Capacity Building Program (EGCBP) for Post-conflict Sudan." The program
i s tailored to meet the transitional needs o f a post-conflict environment while strengthening
capacity for policy formulation to complement longer term institutional reforms. The

overall goal i s to develop human resources for good economic governance and strengthen
execution o f the Ministry o f Finance and National Economy's functions in Development,
Revenue and Treasury Management for sustained peace, economic growth and poverty
eradication. Within this context, the specific objectives are to develop and enhance the
capacity o f appropriate authorities at all levels o f government including the national and
southern Ministries o f Finance, the 25 Ministries o f Finance at the State level, Darfur
Reconstruction and Development Fund (DRDF) o f the Transitional Darfur Regional
Authority (TDRA) and Eastern Sudan Reconstruction and Development Fund (ESRDF).
Additionally, the program will seek to strengthen the capacities o f local universities and

32

training institutions in curriculum development and content delivery in key thematic areas
o f economic policy analysis and management.
Box 3: Consultations on the Interim Strategy
A range of consultations were held to build broad support for the interim strategy program.
These consultations included meetings in May 2007 with members of civil society, the UN,
and donors. Consultations with GoNU and GoSS were held in August and September 2007,
respectively, followed by a final discussion of the ISN with GoNU and GoSS in December
2007.
Among the key conclusions of the consultations and briefings was the general feeling that a
one-year to 18-month time period for the ISN was short, and only viable if set within a longer
term strategic framework including the key milestones in CPA implementation, such as the
2007 Census, 2009 elections, and the 201 1 referendum on political future of the South.
Leading up to the referendum, many stakeholders recommended that the Bank’s should focus
on fiscal decentralization, wealth-sharing, and other aspects of the implementation of the
CPA, which are crucial to making the case for Sudan to remain peacefully unified.
Stakeholders suggested that a priority should be for the Bank to expand its analytical work,
particularly on sources of economic growth and how to achieve a sustainable oil economy
within Sudan.
Stakeholders underlined that the new ISN should reflect the lessons learned from past work,
both in relation to the MDTFs and the Bank’s broader involvement. Stakeholders expressed
the need for an assessment of progress made under the first phase of the JAM, and also
emphasized that the Bank should be mindful of transferring more ownership to the Sudanese
as the MDTFs mature and evolve. Another message that emerged from the consultations
was that stakeholders value the Bank’s role as a co-coordinator and facilitator. The Bank’s
ability to fulfill this role should continue to be developed, and within this role, the Bank should
expand its interaction with civil society.
At the National level, the authorities argued that debt relief should be a main component of the
Bank’s ISN, in order to restart IDA lending. The Bank agreed to describe in the strategy the
necessary steps toward reaching this goal.
In the South, a number of key challenges in the near future were highlighted, most notably the
risk of fiscal difficulties and the issue of government payroll. The general consensus was that
the main focus in the South should be on capacity building within GoSS. However it was felt
that for capacity building to be truly effective it would have to be formulated within a long term
framework. There were also calls for the Bank to continue building up its work on fostering
private sector growth.

D.

Partnerships and Donor Coordination

97. Large volumes o f humanitarian and development aid from numerous NGOs,
bilaterals, and multilateral agencies have clearly stretched the ability o f GoNU and GoSS
to coordinate and manage this assistance. Transactions costs are increasing for authorities
as they face a proliferation o f projects. For example, GoSS i s already working with donors
on over 100 ongoing projects. Increased harmonization is vital to ensure manageable
transaction costs for authorities, to take advantage o f synergies and economies o f scale,
and to avoid redundancies in various partners’ support.
33

98. External partners are moving toward common arrangements for providing
development assistance. The MDTFs, for which 15 donor partners have paid in funds, are
one vehicle for harmonized donor support in Sudan-the two MDTFs represent about a
quarter o f international support for development in Sudan. Sudan is also one o f the pilot
countries in a recent OECD initiative to harmonize international engagement in fragile
states. Italy and Norway are leading an initiative to develop a Memorandum o f
Understanding with G o N U and GoSS on development assistance modalities, with the goal
o f avoiding the current duplication o f delivery mechanisms in the N o r t h and South o f the
country. In addition, GoSS i s n o w in the process o f developing i t s aid management
strategy with assistance from U N D P for effective coordination and better use o f donor
funding. The Ministry o f International Cooperation o f G o N U has undertaken a review o f
aid effectiveness in Sudan and the adherence o f i t s development partners to the principles
o f the Paris Declaration.
99. Joint missions have been conducted during MDTF project preparation and
supervision, and partners are undertaking some joint analytical work, o f which the national
and Darfur J A M S are prime examples. Denmark, the Netherlands, United Kingdom,
Norway, Sweden, and Canada have formed a Joint Donor Office (JDO) to provide
assistance to GoSS through a single policy framework under unified administrative
arrangements and shared costs. The JDO’s areas o f activity cover policy dialogue, donor
coordination, technical support to the MDTF-S Secretariat, monitoring, reporting and
program management.
100. Sudan Consortium. T o report o n progress by authorities on policy commitments
and to renew donor financial pledges, authorities and international partners have agreed on
regular Sudan Consortium meetings. The first meeting o f the Consortium took place in
Paris on March 9 and 10, 2006, with particular attention being paid to the need for
improved public expenditure and revenue management at all levels o f government as well
as good governance. The second Sudan Consortium, held in Khartoum and Juba from
March 19 to 2 1,2007, concluded with a call for accelerated action to implement fully the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), with donors highlighting concerns over the
Darfur crisis. The authorities’ progress reports showed that the pace o f implementing the
provisions o f the CPA has been slow in some important areas, and that pro-poor policies
and spending-while improving-have been below expectations. It was agreed that prior
to the next consortium, a review o f performance in the first J A M period, and plans for the
remainder of the Interim Period should be prepared. Constraints on aid delivery would
also be reviewed. Preparations for the next Consortium-to be organized jointly by the
Bank and the UN-are currently underway, with the timing and location to be agreed soon
by the authorities and international partners.

101. New development partners and donors. The global trend o f increasing volumes o f

development assistance from non-traditional bilateral donors (i.e. non-OECD Development
Assistance Committee members) i s evident in Sudan, both within and outside the MDTF
framework. Egypt, a new donor, has become the latest contributor to the Sudan MDTFs.
Outside the MDTFs, notable bilateral partners now include China, India, Malaysia, and
several Middle Eastern countries. In the future, the Bank expects to take an increasing role

34

in strengthening lines o f communication and sharing information on development activities
with the new development partners

E.

MonitoringPerformance

102. Socio-economic data and statistics are limited in scope and reliability. The
prolonged conflict has worsened the quality o f data available and weakened the capacity o f
the national statistical system to generate useful statistics. This limits to a large degree the
ability to track progress o n key development outcomes over time.
103. A national results monitoring framework i s included in the Framework for Sustained
Peace, Development and Poverty Eradication that was prepared following the JAM. This
framework was designed around the eight clusters o f the JAM, and within each cluster key
indicators were identified relating to progress on reconstruction, development and poverty
eradication through 2007. These indicators are periodically updated and reported at the
Sudan Consortia. GoNU’s Five Year Strategic Plan has identified eight results areas
which would provide the framework for monitoring progress and evaluating results.
104. Due to the need for rapid start-up, project documentation for MDTF projects has
often contained limited M&E frameworks. A key task during the I S N period will be to
strengthen the M&E frameworks o f existing MDTF projects to solidify results monitoring
systems. M&E frameworks in project documentation for new MDTF projects will be
expected to meet the same standard as normal Bank investment projects.
105. A results framework that aims to help measure the Bank’s performance against this
strategy in working with GoSS and other partners i s presented in Annex 1. Given the short
time period covered by the ISN, the lack o f timely and reliable data, and the lack o f a
nationally-owned PRSP, the results framework i s necessarily less ambitious than a typical
results-based CAS framework. While the ISN framework aims to track performance at the
outcome level where possible, in many cases tracking the outputs o f Bank/MDTF support
i s the only feasible option. With continuing support in MDTF projects and Bank and
donor TA to strengthen statistical capacity and develop an inclusive national poverty
reduction strategy, a more standard results framework could be expected to be prepared for
the Bank’s next country strategy for Sudan.
F.

Country Financing Parameters

106. On June 15,2007, the Bank established new country financing parameters for Sudan
that provide the overall framework for cost sharing arrangements, and the financing o f
recurrent and local costs, and taxes and duties, for all projects (see Annex 2). In line with
the policy framework approved by Executive Directors on April 13,2004 governing the
eligibility o f expenditures in World Bank financing, the financing parameters for Sudan
make development objectives the primary determinant o f Bank (or Bank-administered)
financing, while making sure that risks, such as those to fiscal sustainability and the use o f
Bank or Bank-administered funds, are appropriately addressed. As such, the parametersdepending on specific project circumstances-potentially allow the Bank to finance up to
100 percent o f the cost o f a project; set no limit on the level o f recurrent costs the Bank
35

may finance (subject to sustainability criteria); allow financing o f local costs in any
proportions required by individual projects; and permit the Bank to finance taxes and
duties as long as they do not constitute a significant share o f project costs. The parameters
are consistent with the recent policy revisions o f OP 8.00 to allow greater flexibility in
responding rapidly to emergency situations.

G.

Process for I D A Reengagement

107. Normalizing IDA relations with Sudan can be divided into three phases, with
important inter-relations among them: arrears clearance; reactivation o f Bank financial
instruments (IDA lending and grants); and access to HIPC debt relief.

108. Arrears clearance. The Sudanese authorities have taken steps towards normalizing
relations with the Bank and have been making small, intermittent debt service payments
since mid-1999. This, however, has not been sufficient to prevent a continued
accumulation o f IDA arrears, which have risen to $480 million. The clearance o f these
arrears could only be undertaken within a framework o f a firm and comprehensive
agreement among preferred creditors, including significant reductions in bilateral debts, so
as to make the total debt service obligations sustainable. Once such an agreement i s in
place, arrears clearance would likely necessitate an IDA Development Policy Operation
(DPO); hence, deepening the World Bank-GoNU dialogue on key policy reforms will help
to facilitate the eventual clearance process. The World Bank i s working with the IMF and
other multilateral creditors to maintain timely debt information in anticipation o f preparing
a comprehensive arrears clearance plan.
109. In August 2007, the Bank and Fundjointly prepared a Debt Sustainability Analysis
(DSA) for Sudan. Under the baseline scenariog, the analysis suggests most debt ratios will
remain above their indicative thresholds over the medium- to long-term, even assuming
prudent macroeconomic policies and further increases in o i l revenues. The N P V o f debtto-GDP ratio i s expected to decline from 47 percent in 2007 to 34 percent in 2017, which
i s s t i l l 4 percentage points higher than the indicative threshold. The N P V o f debt-toexports i s expected to fall from 284 percent in 2007 to 203 percent in 2009, but to increase
thereafter to 429 percent in 20 17, which i s substantially higher than the indicative
threshold o f 200 percent; this largely reflects projections for o i l export revenues that show
a steady decline after 2009. The N P V o f debt-to-revenue i s projected to decline from an
average o f about 240 percent a year in 2007 and 2008 to remain below i t s threshold o f 200
percent through much o f the forecast period through 20 12, but i s expected to breach the
threshold b y 7 percentage points in 2017. The two debt service indicators (debt service-toexports ratio and debt service-to-revenue ratio) are expected to remain below their
indicative thresholds throughout the forecast period 2007-2027.

9

The macroeconomic framework for the baseline assumes servicing o f only new obligations falling due, and
no servicing of the more than US$24 billion in arrears.

36

VI.

CRITICAL R I S K S

110. The Bank faces a highly uncertain environment for provision o f development
assistance in Sudan. This Interim Strategy assumes the continuation o f status quo. In the
scenario o f a significant deterioration in the operating environment in Sudan, the Bank
would consult i t s Executive Board and follow the lead o f the MDTF donors and the
international community in determining the scope and content o f i t s level o f support. O n
the other hand, in the scenario o f a significant improvement in the environment for Bank
support during the time period covered by this strategy, the Bank would also consult with
donors, the authorities, and the Board on the appropriate steps to take toward possible
arrears clearance and an increased level o f financial and analytical support to Sudan.

111. Some o f the key risks that may prevent the full realization o f the objectives o f this

Interim Strategy include:

Lack of resolution o r worsening of the Darfur crisis. While the Darfur Peace
Agreement (DPA) held out the promise o f a resolution to the crisis, peace and
stability in the region have not yet been realized. Continuation o f the conflict will
threaten peace, stability, and development in all o f Sudan and some o f Sudan’s
neighboring countries.
Continued delays in implementationof the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA). Progress in the implementation o f the CPA has been slow in some key areas,
which has in turn contributed to increased tensions between the parties to the
agreement. Continued delays may have negative consequences broadly for the
prospects for peace, growth, and poverty reduction, as well as more narrowly for the
implementation o f the Bank’s proposed strategy.
Governance. Improved governance i s crucial for delivering on the promise o f the
CPA. The quality o f governance will also be a key determinant o f the success o f
support from the Bank and other partners. L o w financial management and
procurement capacity, and weak control systems, carry major r i s k s - e v e n as
government, the Bank, and other partners work to strengthen them in parallel with
the implementation o f development activities. The 2009 elections, mandated by the
CPA, hold the promise o f major progress on the CPA agenda o f peace, development,
and democracy, but also bring risks o f conflict and reversal o f progress if the process
i s contested or perceived to be flawed.

Slow progress in building capacity. Especially in the South, rapid progress in
capacity building is essential to effective and sustainable implementation o f
development programs. Without increased capacity, the speed and effectiveness o f
Bank and MDTF support, too, will be limited.
MDTF future financing. Current MDTF pledges and commitments cover the
period from 2005 to 2007. Given the immense development needs, the MDTFs will
soon reach the limits o f their commitment authority. New commitments for the post-

37

2007 period are needed. Delays in raising new resources would negatively affect the
financing o f pipeline projects and subsequent phases o f existing projects.
Availability of Government counterpart funds. The fiscal pressures currently
affecting both G o N U and GoSS put the availability o f counterpart funds for MDTF
projects at risk. Reduced availability o f counterpart funds may have the effect o f
delaying project implementation, and removing a key mechanism for ensuring
Government ownership o f projects.

MDTF Implementation Challenges. The Bank has worked closely with GoNU,
GoSS, UN agencies, donors, and NGOs to overcome initial hurdles to rapid
implementation o f projects funded by the MDTFs. However, implementation
challenges remain, and will put a premium on the all parties’ ability to deliver rapidly
on their commitments. A critical challenge will remain govt. decision making, and
the resulting bottlenecks to implementation.
112. Mitigation o f certain o f these risks i s largely beyond the reach o f the Bank,
particularly the Darfur crisis where a resolution depends on local and national
stakeholders, with assistance from UN, AU and bilaterals. For other risks, the Bank can
partially mitigate the possibility o f negative outcomes though: supporting the
implementation o f the provisions o f the CPA, helping to build institutional capacity,
supporting improved financial management and procurement systems, demonstrating
tangible results from MDTF implementation to donor partners, strengthening working
partnerships with UN, AU, and AfDB, information sharing and existing collaboration to
new donors and development, assisting authorities in managing risks o f revenue volatility,
and applying Bank procedures in a flexible manner to ensure the expeditious
implementation o f recovery and development programs.

38

a

0
Tt

il

e
Y

e

3

d
m

:I

m
h
0

m

.

b

b

.

8

0
*

8

*

*

*

m

SI*

..

$1.

*

.

D

.

.

.

e

e

*

ciil

*

*

.

Annex 3: Country at a Glance

Sudan a t a glance

9/25/07

Key Development Indicators

Sudan

(2006)

SubSaharan
Africa

LOW
income

Age distribution, 2006
Male

Population. mid-year (miiiions)
Surface area (thousand sq km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

36 2
25
41

2,403
29,215
16
30

45-49

30 5
840
2,160

648
842
2,032

1,562
650
2.698

30 34

11 8
91

5.6
3.2

80
61

Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

59
64
41

41
72
47
96
29

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female ( % of ages 15 and older)
Grass primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

66
56

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNi per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)
GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

Female

751

770
24,265
2.3
36

6044

15 19
04

io

20

io

0

20

percent

(most recent esf/mate, 200&2006)

71
52

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

Net Ald Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and ofricial aid
Top 3 donors (in 2005):
United States
United Kingdom
Netherlands
A d (Oh of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

69

Under-6 mortality rat&(per 1,000)
59
75

69
50
96
86

50
f 06

56
37

75
38

72

96

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

1990

1990

2000

2006

615

813

220

1,629

60
50
46

143
37
62

5
6
15

771
196
155

82
32

3.7
33

1.9
7

6.9
52

25 5
22 0

69 0
30

80
94

8.0
6.9

01

04
135

257 1
100

217.2
90

24.9
24.000

31.1
12,365

36.2
37,442

2.5
93.3

19 4
7,617

1996

I?Sudan

1980

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

1

2000

2005

Q Sub-Saharan Africa

IGrowth of GDP and GDP percaplta (Oh)

I

95

-GDP

00

-GDP

oercaolia

1980-90
1990-2000
2000-06
(average annual growth %)

2.2
4.9

2.5
7.4

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Sermces

32 9
14 1
75

(36 of GDP)
32.8
41.7
16.3
21.5
8.8
8.6
36.6

32.3
26.5
62
39.2

23

Household final consumption expenditure
General g o t t final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

81 9
16 0
14 7

86.1
7.4
7.4

76.5
7.6
18.3

69.7
16.3
24.6

17 7
13 8
-1 9

73 4
72 7
66 5

45
26 6
13 8

Exports of goods and sewces
Imports of goods and serwces
Gross sawngs

10 6
23 1
40

4.6
56
0.9

15.3
17.7
12.9

16.1
28.7
11.6

76
32

84 8
83 7

11 7
15 0

Note Figures In italics are for years other than those specified 2006 data are preliminary
a Aid data are for 2005

17
14 2
18
80

17

59
43

indicates data are not available

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

Note: data presented m this standard table may differ from data cited In elsewhere in the ISN due to differences in the
definition of indicators used.

49

1

1
I

Sudan
Balance of P a y m e n t s and T r a d e

2000

2006

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cifl
Net trade in goods and sewces

1,664
1,634
-297

5,813
7,105
-3,981

-1,840
-14.9

-5,490
-14.7

Current account balance
as a O
h of GDP
Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)
Resews, including gold

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2006
Voice and accountability
Political stability

641

1,016

84

1,384
0 2006

a2000

Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

10.3
5.0
8.7

19.4
6.3
19.5

Overall surplus/deficit

-0.7

-3.9

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate
E x t e r n a l D e b t a n d Resource Flows

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)
Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

16,411
239

17,447
369

132.7
12.6

46.6
6.4

392

0

-

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
hlphsr Y ~ I Y I Slmpiy be#errabngs

T e c h n o l o g y and I n f r a s t r u c t u r e

2000

Paved roads (Oh of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

36 3

0

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (%of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

-

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (96 of internal resources)

2005

3.6

0.0

56

57

0 26

3.6

35

419

497

iBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

1
0
2
1

0
0
0

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt sewce

1,167
0
4

1,196
0
45

4
0
0

0
0
0

0

1

GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP 5 per kg of oil equivalent)
Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

ShoTt-lerm 6 225

828

124 4
0.17

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

0

IQA 1 2 3 4

IUS$ m/llionsj

PIIYP~. 2 689

US0 millions

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)

,

Environment

Composition of total external debt, 2005

Private Sector Development

$

Rule of law

Central G o v e r n m e n t F i n a n c e
(% of GDPj

1

2000

2006

-

39
58.6
9

-

-

iFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which iFC own account
Disbursements for iFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account

Ranked as a major constraint to business
(Oh of managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
ma.

0

MiGA
Gross exposure

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2006 data are preliminary
.. indicates data are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.

9/25/07

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

Note: data presented in this standard table may differ from data cited in elsewhere in the ISN due to differences in the
definition of indicators used.

50

Millennium Development Goals

Sudan

W~thselected targets to achieve between 7990 and 2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rates for S I a day poverty and malnutrltlon
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990

Goal 2: ensure that chlldren are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primarycompietion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacyrate (% of people ages 15-24)

41
21

1995

2000

33.9

11.0

30

39
26

2005

53’
50
34

Goal 3: ellmlnate gender dlsparlty In educatlon and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed In the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held bywomen in national parliament (%)

932

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thlrds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

120
74

106
69

97
65

104

65

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortallty by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

56.g3

Goal 6 : halt and begln to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major dlseases
Prevalenceof HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Contraceptiveprevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)
Goal 7: halve the proportlon of people without sustainable access to bask needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

67

Goal 8 : develop a global partnership for development
Fixed line and mobile ohone subscribers (Der 1.000 oeoole)
Internet users (per I.OOO people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Youth unemployment(% of total labor force ages 15-24)

.

&Primary
--Ratio

2002

,

(Measles lmmunlzatlon (%of I-yearolds)

iducatlon indicators (%)

2000

I

of girls to boys in primary L
secondary education (..)

75

5g3
31.23

0.2
2.7

0.1
3.1

0.2
3.6

0.3
3.5

0

0

1

77

CT lndlcators (per 1,000 people)
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

2005

net enmiiment ratio (. )

1.6
7.63

1990

0 Sudan ( )

1995

2000

2005

0 Sub-Saharan Afnca

Note: Figures In italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).
Note: 1/ Net primary school attendance rate from 2005 Sudan Household Health Survey
2/ Ratio of girls to boys in primary education only, SHHS Survey
3/ Indicators taken from Sudan Household Health Survey

51

2000

2002

2005

o Fixed + mobile subscribers (. )
Internet users

11/9/07

Annex 4: Signed MDTF Projects
MDTF National
Technical Assistance Facility ($5 million MDTF): A technical assistance facility to support
studies, training and advisory assistance for the post-conflict development program o f Sudan’s
GoNU. The project aims at supporting the G o N U and state governments to strengthen their
professional and technical capacities for formulation o f pro-poor and pro-peace policies, programs
and projects. Effective.

-

Community Development Fund Phase 1($42.8 million MDTF), including a scale up of
$27.8m: The project supports community-led development in Northern Sudan (the first phase covers
localities in the Three Areas- South Kordofan and Blue N i l e - and N o r t h Kordofan and Kassala)
through partnerships among local stakeholder, including local communities, NGOs and communitybased organizations, on the basis o f sub-projects submitted by local communities and developed
through a consultative, participatory planning process. The project’s objective i s to meet urgent
community-driven recovery and development needs in the war-affected and underdeveloped areas o f
Northern Sudan including the Three Areas by providing basic social and economic services and
infrastructure. Effective.
Fifth Population Census Project ($19.1 million MDTF): Phase I1for $12 million was approved in
August 2007 and fully disbursed. The main objective o f this project i s to support and facilitate the
conduct o f the Fifth Population Census in accordance with international scientific standards in order
to produce credible and accurate results. These results will be used for realizing the political,
economic, social and environmental objectives enshrined in the I N C and CPA. A related objective i s
to produce reliable and accurate demographic, economic and social data that can be used as a
benchmark for development planning. This project will enable the primary target groups- the
government, the international development community and the civil society to have accurate and
reliable data to formulate and monitor their plans. Effective.
Capacity Building o f the Judiciary ($13 million MDTF): This Project’s main goal i s to strengthen
the capacity o f the Judiciary to: enhance i t s independence; build the knowledge base o f judges; and,
empower the judiciary t o effectively and fairly apply the law and deliver justice. Effective.
Sudan National Emergency Transport Project ($43.5 million MDTF): The main aim o f the
project i s to rehabilitate critical rail and river transport infrastructure in war-affected areas, including
the Three Areas, on an emergency basis. In addition, the project will help to improve operational
capability o f National Highway Authority, Sudan Railway Corporation and other transport agencies
and remove supply constraints and transport capacity limitations in key traffic demand corridors.
Effective
Decentralized Health System Development Project - Phase I($6 million MDTF): The Project
Development Objective i s to improve access to basic health services by conflict-affected and
underserved populations in four target states while establishing the basis for reform, sustainable
financing, and development o f the decentralized health system. Along with some activities at the
level o f the Federal Ministry o f Health, the project targets the conflict-affected and poor states o f
Southern Kordofan, Blue Nile, Kassala, and Red Sea, covering a population o f approximately 5.1
million. The target states include the Three Areas. Effective.

52

Sudan New Unified National Currency Project ($25 million MDTF): The main development
objective o f the project i s to support the Central Bank o f Sudan to effectively, efficiently and
transparently introduce a new national unifying currency into the country. The new currency will
improve the formulation and implementation o f national monetary policy; restore normal local
currency, economic and commercial activity by reducing transaction costs, and serve as a symbol for
peace and unity by enhancing national economic integration and development -thus helping to
maintain the integrity o f the CPA. Activities are complete and the currency i s in circulation, but
some payments remain to be made. Effective
Sudan Microfinance Project ($10 million MDTF): The development objective i s to increase the
availability o f affordable financial services to 200,000 households by supporting the establishment of
commercially sustainable microfinance service providers. Effectiveness conditions being fulfilled.
South Kordofan Emergency Project ($7.9 million MDTF): The project has two key objectives: to
contribute on the one hand to the supply o f basic services and facilities to the respective conflictaffected populations; and to contribute to capacity building o f the state government to enable it to
more effectively execute i t s mandate, especially at the local (decentralized) level. The project i s
supported by three grant agreements with the GoNU, UNICEF and UNIDO. Effective.
Improving Livestock Production and Marketing Project- Pilot ($4 million MDTF): The Project
will support the development o f livestock production and marketing in two poor and conflict ridden
areas o f central and eastern Sudan. Improving livelihoods dependant on livestock i s a means to
ensure peace dividends, mitigate natural resource-based conflict and improve food security.
Effective.
Blue Nile Emergency Project ($7.3 million MDTF): The project initiates recovery o f basic
infrastructure and social services for poor people in the conflict-affected area o f the Blue N i l e State
and to lay the foundations for a program addressing capacity building needs in key state ministries in
order to ensure future improvements in service delivery especially at the local level. The project i s
also supported by 3 grant agreements with the GoNU, UNICEF and UNIDO. Grant with G o N U i s
already signed for $1 .lm but not yet effective. Grants for UNICEF and UNIDO are Effective.

MDTF- South Sudan
Rapid Impact Emergency Project ($34.3 million MDTF, including supplemental financing of
$8.8 million for Public Works and $5.5 million for the support to GoSS Commissions): The
project addresses immediate needs, and has provided pharmaceuticals, vaccines, medical supplies to
700 health facilities throughout the ten states o f Southern Sudan. The grant delivered 20,000
educations kits, and 1 million textbooks and 40,000 school kits for 2,600 primary schools. Support to
the states was provided through vehicles, motorcycles, generators and office furniture. Prefabricated
office structures, with generators for electricity, have been provided for key GoSS operations.
Supplemental grants for $8.7 million to support public works in the state capitals and $5.5million to
support the GoSS Commissions and independent agencies were also approved. Effective.
Sudan Emergency Transport and Infrastructure Project ($50 million MDTF, o f which $30
million WFP contract): This project covers the renovation o f key GoSS government buildings and
the hospital in Juba and the Juba water supply system. The project includes emergency
improvements for about 260 km o f tracks and seasonal roads to provide good access, maintenance o f
580 km o f already improved roads, upgrading o f 160 km o f roads to all weather standards, and
design o f 45 1 km o f roads for improvements to paved standards. A feeder roads program for
implementation in phase 2 i s to be also prepared. Effective.

53

Health Umbrella Project ($20 million MDTF): This project provides 750,000 mosquito nets, plus
drugs and health equipment for treating the ailments that represent the heaviest burden on the
population. The project will support contracting o f NGOs and f i r m s to deliver basic health services
to a large share o f the population. The project provides technical assistance to the newly established
Health Ministry to develop core capacities in managing public health programs. Effective.
Multi Donor Education Rehabilitation Project ($25.5 million): An additional grant amount o f
$17.8m was added in November 2007 to meet the growing needs o f this project in Southern Sudan.
This project i s designed to improve access to primary education and create learning opportunities for
other groups critical to Sudan’s return to normalcy. These include internally displaced people and
demobilized soldiers. The project provides for capacity building o f the Ministry (MoEST),
procurement o f textbooks, and enrollment o f non-formal learners in alternate learning programs.
There are also steps to accelerate teacher training, and to support the rehabilitation and construction
o f new schools. Effective.
Core Fiduciary Project ($5.6 million MDTF): The project i s helping to establish minimal
fiduciary systems to provide reasonable assurance to the GoSS and the MDTF regarding the use o f
funds. I t supports the recruitment o f a Project Accounting Agent for providing accounting services
and the recruitment o f an External Audit Agent for providing auditing services. An additional $2.6m
was added to the original grant amount o f $3m as the cost o f the Accounting and External Audit
Agents was higher than anticipated. Effective.
Fifth Population Census Project ($15.3 million MDTF): Phase I1 for $10 million was approved in
August 2007 and fully disbursed. The main objective o f this project i s t o support and facilitate the
conduct o f the Fifth Population Census in accordance with international scientific standards in order
to produce credible and accurate results. These results will be used for realizing the political,
economic, social and environmental objectives enshrined in the I N C and CPA. A related objective i s
to produce reliable and accurate demographic, economic and social data that can be used as a
benchmark for development planning. This project will enable the primary target groups- the
government, the international development community and the community providing humanitarian
assistance to have accurate and reliable data to formulate and monitor their plans. The delivery o f
many government services rely on this population census, designed to produce reliable demographic,
economic and social data. Effective.
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project ($15 million MDTF): The project i s designed to
increase access to safe water and sanitation facilities in all states throughout Southern Sudan and to
build capacity for sustainable management, regulation and expansion o f the rural water and
sanitation sector. At the end o f the project it i s expected that an additional 1.8 million people in rural
areas w i l l have access to clean water and sensitized on key hygiene messages and support for
hygienic behavior change; 225 schools and health units equipped with appropriate sanitation
facilities; 80 sustainable public latrines shall be constructed in small market centers, bus stops and
other public places. Effective.
Capacity Building, Institutional and Human Resource Development in Southern Sudan ($8.2
million MDTF): The project objectives are to provide the foundation for effective, efficient and
transparent functioning o f the Government o f Southern Sudan and to increase access t o labor market,
welfare and vocational training services. These objectives will be achieved through (i)the
development andor strengthening o f institutions and systems; (ii)refurbishing offices and facilities
or investing in new infrastructure where required; and (iii)training. Effective.

54

Livestock and Fisheries Development Project ($7.7 million MDTF): The objective o f this
project i s to improve the performance o f the livestock and fisheries sectors in five selected States o f
Southern Sudan through capacity building, improving animal health, reducing post-harvest losses
and improving market infrastructure. Effective.
Police and Prisons Support Project ($5.3 million MDTF): The project i s designed to provide to
the Government o f Southern Sudan the necessary capital investment in police and prison

infrastructure and equipment and to contribute to the institutional development o f the police and
prisons, and to the training o f police and prisons staff. The project will be implemented by UNDP.
The role o f the World Bank will be that o f a fiscal agent. Effective.

Sudan New Unified National Currency Project ($15 million MDTF): The main development
objective o f the project i s to support the Central Bank o f Sudan and the Bank o f Southern Sudan to
effectively, efficiently and transparently introduce a new national unifying currency into the country.
The new currency will improve the formulation and implementation o f national monetary policy;
restore normal local currency, economic and commercial activity by reducing transaction costs, and
serve as a symbol for peace and unity by enhancing national economic integration and development
- thus helping to maintain the integrity o f the CPA. . Activities are complete and the currency i s in
circulation, but some payments remain to be made. Effective.
Southern Sudan Private Sector Development ($6.8 million MDTF): The development objective
o f the PSD project i s t o develop the enabling environment for private sector growth in Southern
Sudan, and to sustainably increase formal employment in Southern Sudan. The project focuses on
building capacity among Southern Sudanese policy makers and the private sector to develop the
policy and institutional framework for trade and investment through open consultation, provides
policy, technical and financial support for the establishment o f the microfinance sector in Southern
Sudan, supports the emergence o f industries, private sector institutions and finally establishes a
wholesale market in order to create efficient flow o f products into rapidly-growing Juba, as well as
backward linkages into the rural economy, while demonstrating a public-private partnership model
for market infrastructure. Effective.
Southern Sudan Support to Agriculture and Forestry ($10 million MDTF): The Project supports
the recovery o f the agriculture and forestry sub-sectors by facilitating group-based rapid introduction
o f improved technologies (seeds, planting materials, tools, etc.), and help build functional capacity in
the Ministry o f Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and in States, which are not supported by other
concurrent donor financing. The Project would strengthen linkages between the Central Government,
State governments, and Local Governments, and involve both NGO’s and private sector service
providers to facilitate implementation. Grant Agreement signed but not yet Effective
Southern Sudan HIV/ A I D S Project ($16 million): The purpose o f this multisectoral project i s to
strengthen a coordinated national response to HIV/AIDS by building capacity at the GoSS, State
and County levels o f Southern Sudan, and scale up delivery o f comprehensive H I V / A I D S services.
The Project will support integration o f HIV/AIDS into critical GoSS sectors. K e y project
components include capacity building o f the SSAC at all levels; strengthening the line ministries’
and institutions’ response; strengthening civil society response; and strengthening the health sector
response to HIV/AIDS. Grant signed but not yet effective.

55

Annex 5: MDTF-National Sudan Portfolio
(US$ millions, as of February 25, 2008)

CDF-I (Community
Development Fund)

15.0

11.2

10.0

Subtotal of effective projects

171.9

72.35

349.6

PSD (Rural microfinance small enterprises)
Blue Nile:
State
Total

0111612006

04/26/2006

12/31/2008

10.0

10.0

05/22/2007

Not effective

06/30/2011

1.I

8.0

12/03/2007

Not effective

09/30/2009

183.0

72.35

367.6

56

1

Annex 6: MDTF-Southern Sudan Portfolio
(US$ millions, as of February 25, 2008)

RlEP Supplemental for
Public Works

Umbrella Program for
Health System
Education Rehabilitation
Project
Education Rehabilitation
Project - Supplemental
Rural Water Supply and
Sanitation Project
Cap. Bldg., Institutional &
Human Res Development

I Total

8.8

8.8

3.2

12l22l2QQ6

Q3I26l2QQ7

31 lQ3l2QQ8

20.0

9.01

60.0

Q3I23l2QQ6

Q7/28/2QQ6

Q6I3Ql2QQ9

7.7

3.0

15.4

Q3I3Ql2QQ6

Q7I27l2QQ6

Q9l3Ql2QQ9

5.0

1 1 lQ212QQ7

1 11Q2l2QQ7

Q9l3Ql2QQ9

17.8

I

15.0

1.5

15

IQ127l2QQ6

Q2I2Ql2QQ7

12/31I201 Q

8.2

2.3

4.4

12/22/2QQ6

0211 412007

12/3112009

234.7

I

112.9

I

57

246.6

I

I

I

I

Annex 7: MDTF Sources and Uses of Funds
(As of February 25, 2008)
National Sudan MDTF: Sources
and Uses of Funds (in $000)
Source of Funds
A. Net Donor Contribution:
1, Donor contribution received
2. Investment Income
3. IDA overhead (0.4%)
Uses of Funds
B. Commitments:
1. Grant Agreement Signed
2, Program Administration*
3. Monitoring Agent contract

220,899.5
208,084.5
13,593.1
(778.4)
192,573.2
183,039.0
7,000.0
2,534.2

C. Net Commitment Authority Available (A-B)

Source of Funds
A. Net Donor Contribution:
1. Donor contribution received
2. Investment Income
3. IDA overhead (0.4%)
Uses of Funds
B. Commitments:
1. Grant Agreements Signed
2. Program Administration*
3. Monitoring Agent contract

1

28,326.3

398,834.6
376,621.6
23,617.6
(1,404.6)
247,875.8
234,635.5
10,000.0
3,240.3

C. Net Commitment Authority Available (A-8)

150,958.8

"Program Administration cost is the cumulative approved budget for the cost of running the Technical
Secretariat plus the project processing costs.

58

Annex 8: Summary of Non-Lending Support
(As of March IO, 2008)
Delively to
Client (Fr)

Cost ('US$OOO) *

Recent deliveries
Joint Assessment (JAM)
Basic Education in the North
Anti-Money Laundering Assessment
FSAP
Decentralized Service Delivery
Darfur Peace Agreement TA
Education TA
**Policy Note on Gum Arabic
PSL4
**Policy Note on Livestock
PSD TA
Sudan Telecom TA
Background Papers on Darfur
Public Expenditure Review
**South Kordofan Growth & Institutions

05
05
05
05
05
06
06
07
07
07
07
07
07
07
08

1,966
139
71
243
12
55
101

Underway
Investment Climate Assessment
Darfur JAM
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
Country Integrated Fiduciary Assmt
Licus Assistance and Cap. Blg
Private Sector Development
Health Financing
Gezira TA
Public Expenditure Review Phase I1
Natural ResourcesBnvironment Study
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM)
Southern Sudan State Effectiveness Study

08
08
08
08
08
08
08
09
09
09
09
09

75

Product

Audiencea

Objectiveb

--

42

_-

24 1
69

--

5 00
47

--

190
170

--

78
55
46
40
10
52
95

PlannedE'roposed
Southern Sudan Capacity Building Study

a.
b.

Government (G), Donor (D),Bank (B), Public dissemination (P).
(A) Knowledge generation, (B) public debate, (C) problem-solving, (D) donor coordination, (E) country strategy.

*
**

Cost to date for activities s t i l l underway.
Funded by MDTF-N

59

