d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

 Report No. 48476-AR 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

FOR 

THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC 

FOR THE PERIOD 2010-2012 

May 6, 2009 

Argentina, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay 
Country Management Unit 
Latin America and the Caribbean Region 

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance 
of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank 
authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The last Country Assistance Strategy for Argentina was discussed by the Executive 
Directors on May 4, 2006 (Report No. 34015-AR). 

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENT UNITS 

(As of March 31, 2009) 
Currency Unit = Argentine Peso 
US$1 = 3.70 Argentine Pesos 

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

Metric System 

FISCAL YEAR: 

January 1 – December 31 

IBRD 
RegionalVice President 
Country Director 
Task Team Leader 

IFC 
Pamela Cox 
Regional Vice President 
Pedro Alba 
Regional Director 
Andrew Follmer Country Manager 
Task Manager 

Jyrki I. Koskelo 
Atul Mehta 
Enrique Cañas 
John Barham 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
Argentina Fiduciary Action Plan 
Argentina ’s Private Pension Funds 
Argentina ’s Supreme Audit Institution 
National Social Security Administration 
Adaptable Program Loan 
Public Investment Projects Bank (Banco de Proyectos de Inversi ón Pública ) 
Proactive Central Bank 
Balance of Payments 
Andean Development Corporation (Corporaci ón Andina de Fomento) 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report 
Clean Development Mechanism 
Country Environmental Assessment 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
Country Procurement Assessment Report 
Consumer Price Index 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Recovery and Maintenance Contracts (Contratos de Recuperaci ón y Mantenimiento ) 
Emerging Markets Bond Index 
Economic and Sector Work 
Argentine Carbon Facility 
Essential Public Health Functions (Funciones Esenciales de la Salud Pública) 
Fee-For-Service 
Focus Resources on Effective School Health 
Fixed Spread Loan 
Government and Anticorruption 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environmental Facility 
Government of Argentina 
Governance Partnership Facility 
Global Road Safety Facility 
Heads of Household Plan 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
Implementation Completion Report 
Inter-American Development Bank 
Institutional Development Fund 
International Finance Corporation 
International Financial Institutions 
Integrated Fiduciary Performance Assessment 
Argentina National Statistics and Censuses Institute (Instituto Nacional de Estad ística 
y Censo) 
Agricultural Technology Institute 
International Road Assessment Program 
International Swaps Dealers Association 
Latin America and the Caribbean Region 
Learning and Innovation Loan 
Millennium Development Goals 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Middle-Income Countries 
Ministry of Health 
Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social Security (Ministerio de Trabajo, Empleo y 

AAA 
AFAP 
AFJPs 
AGN 
ANSES 
APL 
BAPIN 
BCRA 
BOP 
CAF 
CAS 
CASCR 
CDM 
CEA 
CEM 
CFAA 
CPAR 
CPI 
CPS 
CREMA 
EMBI 
ESW 
FAC 
FESP 
FFS 
FRESH 
FSL 
GAC 
GDP 
GEF 
GoA 
GPF 
GRSF 
HH 
IBRD 
ICR 
IDB 
IDF 
IFC 
IFIs 
IFPA 
INDEC 

INTA 
IRAP 
ISDA 
LAC 
LIL 
MDGs 
M&E 
MIC 
MOH 
MTESS 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

Seguridad Social) 
Non-governmental Organizations 
Northwest Region  
Non Performing Loans 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
Argentina ’s Public Health Plan for Retired Senior Citizens 
Renewable Energy for Rural Markets Project (Proyecto de Energ ías Renovables en 
Mercados Rurales) 
Project Implementation Unit 
Heads of Household Plan (Plan Jefes/as de Hogar Desocupados/as) 
Price Monitoring Mechanism 
Uranium Mining Environmental Restoration Project (Proyecto de Restituci ón 
Ambiental de la Miner ía del Uranio) 
Small Farmer Development Project (Proyecto de Desarrollo de Pequeños 
Productores Agropecuarios) 
Rural Education Improvement Project (Proyecto de Mejoramiento de la Educaci ón 
Rural) 
Provincial Agricultural Development Project (Programa de Servicios Agr ícolas 
Provinciales) 
Argentina ’s Investment Agency 
Buenos Aires Urban Transport (Proyecto de Transporte Urbano de Buenos Aires) 
Argentina Urban Transport for Metropolitan Areas Project 
Reduce Emissions from Deforestation and Land Degradation 
Research and Development 
Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes 
Secretary of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Food 
Structural Adjustment Lending 
Standard and Poor ’s 
Strategic Environmental Assessment 
Argentina ’s E-procurement System 
Animal and Plant Health Service 
Procurement Plans Execution System (Sistema de Ejecuci ón de Planes de 
Adquisiciones) 
National System of Administrative Professionals (Sistema Nacional deProfesionales 
Administrativos) 
Social and Fiscal National Identification System 
Argentina ’s Web-based Financial Management System 
Local Unified Integrated Financial System  
Small and Medium Enterprises 
Sector-Wide Approach 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
Water and Sanitation Services 

NGOs 
NOA 
NPL 
OECD 
PAMI 
PERMER 

PIU 
PJyJHD 
PMM 
PRAMU 

PROINDER 

PROMER 

PROSAP 

ProsperAR 
PTUBA 
PTUMA 
REDD 
R&D 
ROSC 
SAGPyA 
SAL 
S&P 
SEA 
SECOP 
SENASA 
SEPA 

SINAPA 

SINTyS 
SISDIF 
SLU 
SMEs 
SWAp 
UNFCCC 
WSS 

 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the collaboration and contributions of the 
Government of Argentina in the preparation of this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS). 
In particular, the World Bank Group thanks the following government officials for their 
contributions to the CPS:  Mart ín Abeles, Secretary of Economic Policy, Ministry of 
Economy and Public Finance; Pablo Barone, National Director for Projects with 
International Credit Institutions, Ministry of Economy and Public Finance; and Aníbal 
López, Director for Projects with the World Bank, Ministry of Economy and Public 
Finance; and Maria Florencia Jalda, Secretary for Budgetary Evaluation, Office of the 
Chief of Cabinet of Ministers; and Pablo Salvioli, Subsecretary for Evaluation of 
Externally-Financed Projects, Office of the Chief of Cabinet of Ministers; and Jorge 
Roel, National Director of Externally-Financed Programs and Projects, Office of the 
Chief of Cabinet of Ministers.  Further, the World Bank Group extends a special thanks 
to numerous non-government and government stakeholders who participated in CPS 
consultations in November and December, 2008.  We also thank the members of civil for 
their contributions to the preparation of this program through the client consultations as 
well.  

Other contributors to the preparation of this CPS include Messes./Mmes:  Mariela 
Alvarez, John Barham, Carla Bonahora, Yanina Budkin, Paloma Años Casero, Diego 
Cerdeiro, Jasmin Chakeri, Franz Drees-Gross, Frank Earwaker, Geraldine Garc ía, 
Hermann von Gersdorff, Esperanza Lasagabaster, Carla Pantanali, Javier Pereira, Susana 
Pérez, Kathrin Plangemann, Rafael Rofman, Dena Ringold, Felipe Saez, Verónica 
Salatino, Eduardo Udarpilleta, and Eduardo Wallentin, who, together with the Country 
Director and CPS TTL, comprised the Core Team.  In addition, Marcelo Acerbi, Anjali 
Acharya, Alexandre Arrobbio, Rafael Cortez, Michael Crawford, Todd Crawford, Robert 
Davis, Tanja Faller, Fernando Hernández, Richard Hinz, Magali Junowicz, Fernando 
Lavadenz, Nick P. Manning, Barbara Mierau-Klein, William Maloney, Ferenc Molnar, 
Tawhid Nawaz, Beatriz Nussbaumer, Reynaldo Pastor, Luis Pérez, Andrés Pizarro, 
Verónica Raffo, Fernando Rojas, Klas Sander, Manuel Schiffler, Claudia Sepúlveda, 
Tomás Serebrisky, María Marcela Silva, Alvaro Soler, Lucía Spinelli, Laura Tuck, Julio 
Vega, Dorte Verner, Gotthard Walser, Xiaoping Wang, Tevfik Yaprak, and David 
Yuravlivker provided valuable inputs.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR 
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................ I 
I. 
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................1 
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT ....................................................................................................2 
A. 
Economic Context ................................................................................................... 2 
B. 
Private Sector Trends .............................................................................................. 6 
C. 
Poverty, Inequality and the MDGs .......................................................................... 7 
D. 
Political and Social Developments .......................................................................... 8 
E. 
Governance.............................................................................................................. 9 
III. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ...............................................................................10 
IV. GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT VISION ..........................................................14 
V. ARGENTINA – WORLD BANK PARTNERSHIP .....................................................18 
A. 
The Current Program ............................................................................................. 18 
B. 
Summary Findings from Completion Report ........................................................ 21 
C. 
Development Partners ........................................................................................... 22 
D. 
CPS Consultations ................................................................................................. 22 
E. 
Rationale for WBG support to Argentina ............................................................. 23 
F. 
Argentina – World Bank Country Partnership Strategy (FY10-12) ..................... 24 
Strategic Approach of the Proposed CPS ............................................................. 24 
Results Orientation and Monitoring ..................................................................... 24 
The WBG’s Indicative 2010-2012 Program .......................................................... 25 
World Bank Lending.............................................................................................. 30 
IFC Activities......................................................................................................... 30 
The Bank’s Analytical Agenda .............................................................................. 31 
Treasury Services .................................................................................................. 33 
Portfolio and Fiduciary Considerations ............................................................... 33 
VI. RISKS ...............................................................................................................................33 
A. 
External ................................................................................................................. 33 
B. 
Internal .................................................................................................................. 34 
C. 
Risks to the World Bank Group ............................................................................ 36 

 
 
 
 
TABLES 

Table 1: CPS Program Objectives and Select Activities ............................................................ 26 
Table 2: Planned lending deliverables (FY09-FY10) ................................................................. 31 
Table 3: Key Elements of the Partnership’s Analytical Agenda – Argentina CPS 2009-
2012.............................................................................................................................. 32 

BOXES 

Box 1: Recent Progress in Public Sector Management .............................................................. 10 
Box 2: Argentina and the IBRD Strategy for Middle-Income Countries ................................... 20 
Box 3: The Heads of Households Program:  A Successful Partnership ..................................... 21 

FIGURES 

Figure 1: Components of export growth in Argentina 1995-2004 (in %) .................................... 5 

ANNEXES 

Annex 1:   Economic Performance 2003-2008 (Government of Argentina) 
Annex 2:   Argentina CPS Results Framework 
Annex 3:   CAS Completion Report 
Annex 4:   Argentina’s Public Debt 
Annex 5:   Banking Sector Update 
Annex 6:   IBRD and Carbon Finance Program Summary 
Annex 7:   IFC Program Summary 
Annex 8:   Proposed GEF Program 
Annex 9:   CPS Consultations 
Annex A2: Argentina At A Glance 
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 
Annex B3: IBRD Program Summary 
IFC Investment Portfolio Operations Program 
Annex B4: Summary of Nonlending Services  
Annex B5: Key Social Indicators 
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators 
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators 
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 
IFC Committed & Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio 

MAP 
IBRD 33362  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Argentina’s macroeconomic performance 
in 
recent years was 
largely strong.  
Consecutive years of rapid and pro-poor economic growth enabled poverty and 
unemployment to be cut to levels experienced prior to the country’s 2001-2002 economic 
crisis.  However, the economy started to decelerate in late 2008 due to domestic and 
international factors.  The administration of President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner 
seeks to maintain economic growth and stability, and the development of the global 
economic crisis in 2008 has reinforced the Government’s view favoring increasing 
regulation and further heightened the Government’s prioritization of social safety nets 
and job creation. 

The implementation of the 2006 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was largely 
successful with Bank financed operations making significant contributions to the 
Government’s development objectives.  It structured Bank assistance in accordance with 
the same three pillars established under the previous CAS, namely: (1) sustained growth 
with equity, (2) social inclusion, and (3) improved governance.  The International Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) lending program consisted entirely of 
investment loans, thereby completing the transition from adjustment lending to 
investment lending that started with the 2004 CAS.  A key lesson of the 2006 CAS is that 
by focusing selectively on areas of consensus within the Government’s development 
agenda, the Bank was able to provide important support as the Government has made 
remarkable strides in reducing poverty.  After a strained relationship during and in the 
wake of the crisis, the positive relationship that now prevails may be attributed to the 
successful partnership that has evolved.  

The proposed Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) (2010-12) seeks to advance the 
Government’s development vision by providing pragmatic, performance-based support, 
consistent with an uncertain policy environment but adequate to the opportunities and 
reflecting the Bank’s positive experience in Argentina.  Given the uncertain economic 
outlook, a large share of the Bank ’s proposed financial support will assist Government 
strengthening of the social safety net system and other social programs.  Given the 
continuity in Government policy and the expressed demand, the CPS continues to focus 
on the three pillars successfully supported under the previous CAS.  However, there will 
be a shift in the support provided toward rebalancing the portfolio, giving greater 
emphasis to the social inclusion pillar as the Bank’s preventive response to the 
deteriorating economic and social environment.  

The CPS has a strong results orientation.  In addition to specific support to build 
institutional capacity for results-based management, the Government and Bank will 
jointly monitor project-by-project results and their aggregate contribution toward the 
anticipated country results.  In addition, the Bank’s Analytical and Advisory Activities 
(AAA) portfolio will be even more selective and focused on achievement of the CPS 
results.  This results focus is strengthened by the Bank Group’s program coordination 
with Argentina’s other development partners, notably the Inter-American Development 
Bank (IDB) and the Andean Development Corporations (CAF).  There is especially 

 i

strong coordination with IDB on fiduciary matters, particularly with the harmonization of 
procurement rules and procedures.   

Government of Argentina Strategic Objectives 
Pillar I 
Pillar II: 
Pillar III: 
Sustainable Growth with Equity 
Social Inclusion 
Improved Governance 
Outcomes toward which the CPS will contribute 

Upgrade Argentina’s infrastructure 
to address potential bottlenecks to 
competitiveness, and underpin 
medium-term growth and poverty 
alleviation 

Improve competitiveness, quality, 
and exports of agriculture and 
livestock production 

Address a growing problem of 
resource degradation 

Consolidate the reduction 
in poverty and expand 
efforts to reverse the 
longer-term poverty trend 
by increasing household 
incomes and integrating 
marginalized groups into 
the productive marketplace 

Consolidate improvements 
in health indicators and 
improve quality of 
education while reducing 
drop out rates 

Strengthen the 
effectiveness, efficiency, 
transparency and 
accountability of public 
sector management 

Expand performance 
management and improve 
the quality of public 
expenditure, enhance 
service delivery outcomes 
and trust in institutions 

Strengthen public sector 
capacity to spur investment 
and growth 

The CPS proposes an IBRD lending envelope of US$ 3.3 billion for FY10-FY12, front-
loaded through two operations to support Argentina ’s safety nets during the critical next 
two years.  A rich menu of possible AAA activities will be the basis of annual 
discussions with the Government to jointly select and commit to analytical activities that 
respond to the country’s evolving needs.   

The International Finance Corporation (IFC) strategy in Argentina is designed to support 
the growth of export-oriented sectors and a select group of financial institutions, in order 
to create jobs and meet the needs of low-income populations.  The overarching strategy is 
to proceed cautiously, with sponsors in strong industries that have an established record 
of sound, profit-oriented, and therefore sustainable management.  This means that IFC 
will concentrate its activities on existing clients in both corporate and financial sectors.   

While Argentina is better positioned than it was at the onset of the 2001 crisis, significant 
risks remain.  Among them, Argentina will have to weather the effects of the global 
economic crisis which, when combined with internal factors such as limited access to 
external financing and uncertainty over the course of economic policies, contributes to 
slowing growth and creates fiscal and balance of payment vulnerabilities.  Successful 
mitigation of medium-term risks will require efforts to strengthen the investment climate, 
support private sector development, and ensure a predictable legal and institutional 
environment.  The impending mid-term elections introduce an additional element of 
political risk, and this CPS proposes a very proactive agenda for addressing the 
continuing portfolio risks. 

 ii

 
 
 
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 

1. 
The last World Bank Group Country Assistance Strategy for Argentina was 
presented to the Board on May 4, 2006, at a time when Argentina was on the way to a 
third consecutive year of rapid growth after a deep economic and social crisis in 2001-02.  
The IBRD program of US$3.3 billion comprised only investment loans, completing the 
transition from adjustment lending to investment lending begun with the 2004 CAS.  
Given the continuity with respect to the long-term strategic goals of the Government, the 
2006 CAS proposed that the Bank’s assistance strategy should be structured in 
accordance with the same three pillars established under the previous CAS, namely: (1) 
sustained growth with equity, (2) social inclusion, and (3) improved governance. 

2. 
The implementation of the CAS was largely successful with Bank financed 
operations making significant contributions to the Government’s development objectives.  
Innovative projects were implemented in the health and infrastructure sectors, and the 
Bank fully committed the CAS lending targets.  The portfolio was almost fully renovated 
during this time period, and significant actions were taken to strengthen fiduciary 
safeguards.  Despite this good performance, whereas the 2006 CAS projected that Bank 
exposure may decline from US$6.9 billion at end-2005 to US$5.9 billion by end-2008, 
exposure had already declined to US$5.1 billion by end-December 2008 largely due to 
disbursement lags in the wholly investment lending portfolio. 

3. 
Macroeconomic performance during most of the CAS period was largely strong.  
Consecutive years of rapid and pro-poor economic growth enabled poverty and 
unemployment to be cut to pre-crisis levels.  The economy benefited from a significant 
reduction in public debt following the 2005 sovereign debt restructuring.  However, in 
2008, the economy started to decelerate due to domestic and international factors.  While 
the economy grew at a healthy rate of 7.0 percent in 2008, real GDP growth is projected 
to decline sharply due to weakening private domestic and external demand.   

4. 
This CPS covers the fiscal years 2010-12 and is aligned with the country’s 
development goals.  It will be implemented during a time of economic uncertainty and 
volatility and proposes to maintain an indicative IBRD lending program of up to US$3.3 
billion (frontloaded) to help Argentina weather the global economic crisis and address 
structural development issues, together with an active IFC program.  It also proposes 
strengthening the Bank’s AAA program and further intensifying the focus on 
implementation with a newly-approved Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant. 

5. 
The CPS will seek to advance the Government ’s development vision by providing 
pragmatic, performance-based support, consistent with the uncertain policy environment 
but adequate to the opportunities and reflecting the Bank’s positive experience in 
Argentina.  Given the uncertain economic prospects, a large share of the Bank ’s proposed 
financial support will assist Government strengthening of the safety net system and other 
social programs.  In addition the CPS will provide for more flexibility in loan design and 
implementation, consistent with Bank policy.  Finally the Bank will consider stronger 
financial transfers and technical and analytical support to the subnational level.  

 1

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

A. 

ECONOMIC CONTEXT 

6. 
Argentina’s economic and social crisis of 2001-02 was one of the most severe 
losses of income and downturns in living standards on record, and the last several years 
have been largely dominated by the country ’s recovery. Argentina ’s focus in 2007 shifted 
from recovery to sustainability, but now the Government faces the daunting challenge of 
preserving the strides made against poverty and unemployment against the backdrop of 
the worst global economic crisis since the Great Depression. While Argentina is, in many 
ways, much better positioned going into this crisis than in 2001, the country’s ability to 
implement counter-cyclical policies is limited by weak access to financing sources, 
particularly external, and uncertainty of the global macroeconomic outlook and the 
direction of economic policies.  Annex 1 presents the Government ’s assessment of 
economic performance. 

7. 
Recovery from 2001 Crisis.  In recent years, Argentina ’s growth has been strong 
and underpinned by twin surpluses (fiscal and external).  In 2007, the economy grew by 
8.7 percent, the fifth straight year of 8-9 percent growth since the financial crisis of 2001-
2002.  The recovery was supported by a strong domestic demand, including a dynamic 
expansion in investment spending since 2003, improved fiscal performance and favorable 
terms of trade (high commodity prices), particularly since 2006.  The economy also 
benefited from a significant reduction in public debt following the 2005 sovereign debt 
restructuring.  Twin surpluses (fiscal and external) allowed the country to accumulate 
foreign reserves and reduce the debt burden.  The Government’s economic framework, 
aimed at supporting the growth momentum, rested on three main pillars: maintenance of 
a competitive exchange rate; fiscal prudence; and active income policies.  This strategy 
was very successful.  Poverty more than halved from 58 percent in 2003 to 23.4 percent 
in 2007, and unemployment fell from 21.5 percent in 2003 to 8.3 percent in 2007 – 
though poverty remains above the levels of 1970s. 

8. 
Recent growth performance. Since 2008, growth was adversely affected by 
domestic and external factors.  The four-month farm conflict that erupted in March 2008 
took a toll on the economy, although growth kept its momentum until the second half of 
2008 when the global economic crisis began to affect Argentina more strongly.  The farm 
conflict increased economic uncertainty which in turn led to a surge of capital outflows 
and pressures on the currency, increases in domestic interest rates and a decline in peso-
denominated deposits.  The Central Bank acted promptly and stabilized the exchange 
market and banking system.  A second wave of financial sector stress resulted from the 
deepening of the global financial crisis and the October announcement of the 
nationalization of the private pension funds, but stability returned after intervention by 
the Central Bank.  More generally, market confidence has also been eroded by concerns 
over inflationary pressures that surfaced in 2007,1 the increasingly unfavorable external 

1  In early 2008 in response to these pressures, the Government reduced the real rate of growth of primary 
expenditures so as to neutralize the fiscal impulse.   

 2

                                                 
environment, higher financing needs, and uncertainty over the global macroeconomic 
outlook and the course of domestic economic policies. 

9. 

Response to Global Economic Crisis.  Argentina has weathered the global 
economic crisis relatively well to date, but the sharp decline in commodity prices 
combined with the world economic slowdown and the strengthening of the peso relative 
to Argentina’s main trading partners is affecting the economic outlook through its impact 
on the fiscal and external accounts.  In this context, balance of payment pressure (in 
particular, potential pressures on the exchange rate and capital flight) is likely to be a 
source of vulnerability in the medium-term.  At the same time, Argentina still enjoys 
ample foreign reserves (US$46.4 billion at end-2008) that could help mitigate the impact 
of economic shocks.  On the fiscal side, the key risk is that revenues are subject to further 
declines in commodity prices and lower than expected domestic growth, assuming 
primary expenditures remain contained, given the current need to maintain a counter-
cyclical fiscal stance. 

10. 
The Government is taking several counter-cyclical policy measures to mitigate the 
negative impact of the decline in private aggregate demand and to strengthen the social 
safety net system. These responses are framed under the authorities’ objectives to 
preserve the primary fiscal surplus and exchange rate stability and confidence.  

11. 
The medium-term macroeconomic framework (2008-2010)2 incorporates the 
preliminary impact of the global crisis on the Argentinean economy and the policy 
measures undertaken by the Government in the second half of 2008 (the nationalization 
of the pension system and the fiscal stimulus package in response to the crisis, in 
particular, the increase in capital expenditures, and the recent local debt swap of 
Guaranteed Loans).  The CPS baseline macro projections are summarized below:  

• Growth and inflation.  Growth is expected to decline sharply in 2009 and 2010, from 
7.0 percent to a range of 0-1 percent.  Recent activity indicators have all shown sharp 
declines during the last quarter of 2008.  Official figures place inflation at 7.2 percent 
in 2008, whereas the GDP deflator is of 19.4 percent3.  Inflation is also likely to 
decline in 2009, but projections are subject to considerable uncertainty.  

• Fiscal accounts. The primary fiscal surplus of the Central Government was originally 
estimated to decline from 3.1 percent of GDP by the end of 2008 to about 1.8 percent 
in 2009 and 2.0 percent in 2010, before the effect of the private pension takeover. 
Taking into account these additional resources, along with increased capital spending 
and other counter-cyclical fiscal measures implemented by the Government, the 
primary fiscal surplus is projected at 2.4 percent in 2009 and 2.6 percent in 2010.  

• Financing gap.  Gross public sector4 financing needs are expected to remain broadly 
constant over the medium-term.  They are estimated at US$16.3 billion in 2008 and 
are projected at US$15.8 billion and US$13.2 billion in 2009 and 2010, respectively, 

2 Macroeconomic projections assume an average soybean price of about US$ 330 a ton in 2009. 
3 CPI figures are contested by market analysts, thus the GDP deflator is also provided.  
4 Including federal and provincial governments. 

 3

                                                 
taking into account the recent debt swap of Guaranteed Loans.  The net financing gap 
of the Federal Government is projected at about US$3.0 billion in 2009 and US$0.1 
billion in 2010, after taking into account the additional resources from the 
nationalized social security contributions.  In addition, gross disbursements from 
international financial institutions (IFIs) -including the World Bank- are expected to 
amount to US$ 1.0-1.8 billion in 2009, with a remaining financing gap easily met 
from domestic sources. Argentina continues to lack access to international financial 
markets, although the Government remains committed to advance in the pending 
resolution of claims by the Paris Club and holdouts from a 2005 debt restructuring. 

• External accounts. The current account surplus is expected to deteriorate, but will 
remain marginally positive in 2009 (0.1 percent of GDP) and 2010 (0.7 percent of 
GDP).  In 2008, this surplus is estimated to have reached around 3 percent of GDP 
(2.9 percent in 2007).  Due to recent volatility, gross international reserves declined to 
US$46.4 billion by end-2008 (about 9.7 months of 2008 imports).  

• Monetary accounts. Money growth is expected to slow, reflecting weaker domestic 
demand.  Real growth of net credit to the private sector is expected to decline from 
11.4 percent in 2008 to -7.5 percent in 2009 and +1.0 percent in 2010.  The peso 
depreciated from 3.14 pesos/US$ at end-December 2007 to 3.46 at the end of 2008.  
By end-March 2009 the exchange rate had reached 3.70 and is likely to continue 
depreciating further.  

• Financial system.  The Argentine banking system is generally well placed to face the 
international crisis.  Bank liquidity is strong at 23 percent of deposits, compared to 17 
percent a year ago.  However, the flight to quality by investors has resulted in an 
increase in Argentina ’s already-high financing costs with sharp decreases in domestic 
bond and stock prices and a substantial rise in the country risk premium.  The capital 
markets remain underdeveloped, and the banking system is too small to meet the 
needs of the economy.  As of September 2008, private sector loans represented only 
12 percent of GDP.  The Central Bank recently announced several measures to bolster 
liquidity. 

12. Medium Term Growth Challenges.  Despite five years of solid economic 
performance, preserving high growth in today’s adverse international environment and 
sustaining it in the future remains challenging.  Prior to 2003-07 economic growth was 
highly volatile.  Breaking out of past volatility requires sustained investment and 
improved productivity performance.  Yet, investment rates have been volatile, and 
productivity growth has not been as strong as in comparators.  Previous studies show that 
most of the output growth, including that achieved in the last five years, has been driven 
by factor accumulation, particularly by labor accumulation- as reflected by the substantial 
increase in employment since the crisis of 2002 (Coremberg, 2008).  While this is an 
expected outcome given the unemployment rates in 2002 (well above 20 percent), this 
highlights the need for action to further improve the level and quality of investments in 
the future.  This will require further progress in strengthening the investment climate and 
supporting private sector development, ensuring a predictable legal and institutional 
environment; including in backbone infrastructure services (energy, transport, telecom 

 4

and finance). These actions would encourage improvements in resource allocation, and 
support the entry of new more productive firms.  Another challenge related to medium-
term economic growth is the role of exports.  Export growth over the past years has been 
to a large extent due to the ability of Argentine firms to export existing products, while 
exports of new products have contributed less to overall export growth (although there 
are noteworthy exceptions, including in the auto parts, pharmaceutical and medical 
instruments industries).  This calls for policy measures to improve the ability of existing 
firms to innovate and compete successfully in global markets.  Over the longer term, 
there are the outstanding agendas in the energy sector and the efficiency of public 
expenditures. 

Figure 1: Components of export growth in Argentina 1995-2004 (in %) 

121

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60

47

6

0

-55

-19

Inc rease in
expor ts of ex is ting
produc ts to
ex is ting markets

Fall in expor ts of
ex is ting produc ts
to ex is ting markets

Ex tinc tion of
expor ts of ex is ting
produc ts to
ex is ting markets

New expor ts of
ex is ting produc ts
to new markets

New expor ts of
new produc ts to
ex is ting markets

New expor ts of
new produc ts to
new markets

13. 
Downside Risks to the CPS Base Case.  Given the uncertainty surrounding the 
global crisis, a more pessimistic scenario could entail further drops in commodity prices, 
and negative GDP growth for 2009 and 2010 (-3 and -2 percent, respectively), as a result 
of a sharper contraction in both domestic and external demand.  In this scenario, the 
exchange rate would likely depreciate substantially. The fall in output would also impact 
the fiscal accounts, and the primary fiscal surplus of the Federal Government could be as 
low as 1.3 percent of GDP.  As a result, net financing needs could reach US$7.7 billion, 
doubling the projected financing needs of the base case.   

14. 
In sum, over the next eighteen months, Argentina will have to weather the 
global economic crisis.  The main transmission channel is trade, since Argentina's fiscal 
and external positions remain vulnerable to swings in commodity and manufactured 
export volumes and prices.  Given the uncertainty over the global macroeconomic 
outlook and the direction of economic policies, the Government has a limited margin to 
use countercyclical policies.  On the monetary front, with rapid exchange rate 
depreciation in neighboring countries the real exchange rate lost competitiveness as the 
Central Bank implemented a policy of more controlled depreciation to contain financial 
volatility and inflationary pressures.  Fiscal accounts are deteriorating although the 
Government should manage to keep fiscal primary surpluses if growth of primary 

 5

 
 
expenditures is contained.  In addition, the global crisis has increased risk aversion, and 
that implies that Argentina will continue to have limited external financing options.  
While the Government will likely be able to meet its financing needs during 2009, 
Argentina’s economic outlook in 2010 would be challenging if world economic 
conditions do not improve.  In sum, a large stock of reserves and small primary fiscal 
surpluses would help mitigate the negative impact of potential economic shocks.   

B. 

PRIVATE SECTOR TRENDS 

15. 
Response to 2001-2002 Crisis.  The years immediately following the crisis were 
marked by major restructurings and debt renegotiations that allowed the private sector to 
deleverage and recover.  Companies rebuilt their balance sheets and emphasized 
liquidity.  Where possible, large corporates diversified their investments and sales into 
foreign markets, and consolidated their domestic market shares. 

16. 
Recovery from the 2001-2002 crisis led to increases in capacity utilization in 
industry and private investment levels.  Investment reached 21 percent of GDP by 2006, 
compared to a low of 11 percent of GDP in the midst of the crisis.  Post-crisis investment 
surpassed levels recorded in the 1990s.  Investment was mainly financed through higher 
retained earnings due to improved firm profitability, and other financing sources played a 
more modest role.  Private sector credit has been increasing since 2004, but at 12 percent 
of GDP remains low.  It is nearly half the level prior to the crisis and nearly a fifth of 
average levels prevalent in upper middle income countries. 

17. 
Current Context.  Argentina ’s best performing firms have tended to be in 
agriculture and agro-industry, especially those with a global market orientation. 
Argentina is the third-largest world supplier of soybeans and the second largest exporter 
of corn and sorghum.  About 70 percent of the country’s soy production is processed 
domestically, making Argentina the world ’s largest exporter of soybean oil and one of the 
leading exporters of pellets and flour.  Broadly speaking, the rest of the manufacturing 
sector has alternated tactically between export and domestic markets.  Excluding 
agroindustry, the bulk of manufacturing exports, especially vehicles, goes to Brazil.  
While there are pockets of excellence, manufacturing industry is generally less 
competitive in other export markets and lacks economies of scale. 

18. 
Issuances by large corporations in the domestic capital market have been limited.  
Net external corporate debt financing has been negative in recent years since Argentine 
corporations could not regain access at reasonable cost to global financial markets after 
the crisis.  The private sector ’s low debt levels probably caused some underinvestment, 
but should enable companies to manage global economic uncertainties with greater ease.  
Large companies generally are reported to have ample liquidity to cover debt falling due 
in 2009.  Foreign direct investment has recovered somewhat averaging nearly 2.5 percent 
of GDP from 2004 through 2007 due to acquisitions and some Greenfield investments. 

19. 
Regulation and Governance. Argentina ’s overall ranking on the Ease of Doing 
Business has slipped to 113 in 2009 from 77 in 2006, compared to an average of 75 in 
2009 for upper middle-income countries.  Argentina’s performance on regulatory fronts 

 6

(starting a business, employing workers, protecting investors, paying taxes and trading 
across borders) falls below average standards for upper middle-income countries5. 
Indicators of regulatory quality and government effectiveness point to weaknesses in 
Argentina6.  Some progress has been made in recent years in a few of these areas, but 
broadly speaking, the pace of reform has been slower than in peer countries. 

C. 

POVERTY, INEQUALITY AND THE MDGS 

20. 
Poverty and Equity.  As detailed previously, poverty more than halved from 58 
percent in 2003 to 23.4 percent in 2007, and the official number for the first semester of 
2008 is 17.8 percent7.  Over 11 million Argentines have been lifted out of poverty since 
the crisis, moving Argentina toward achievement of its Millennium Development Goals.  
However, poverty and inequality are still high by Argentina’s historical standards.  
Poverty in the 1970s and until the 1987 crisis was around 10 percent8.  After that crisis, 
poverty fell again but only to 18.5 percent in 1992 and climbed steadily to about 27 
percent in the late 1990s.  During the crisis of 2001-03 poverty levels increased sharply, 
and only in 2006 did poverty return to the levels of the late 1990s, much higher than the 
historical experience.  Developments on poverty levels went together with a substantial 
increase in inequality with a Gini coefficient that increased from 0.344 in 1974 to 0.487 
in 20069.  Other inequality indicators confirm this trend, during the same period the 
income share of the poorest quintile declined from 7.1 to 3.7 percent.  Therefore, the 
introduction of a safety net like Jefes y Jefas was not only in response to the 2001-03 
crisis but was also an attempt to mitigate a longer term trend. 

21. 
Formal and Informal Labor.  Argentina has made great progress in increasing 
the formality of employment.  However, about 40 percent of the employed still have 
informal jobs.  Even in the City of Buenos Aires, about 80 percent of the first jobs for the 
young (under 29) are estimated to be informal.  The economic slowdown is believed to be 
having a stronger impact on informal employment to date.  However, if the situation 
worsens, as expected, the impact will also be felt by those in formal jobs.  Qualified 
formal sector workers will have access to unemployment insurance, whereas informal 
workers have no access to any safety net as no new beneficiaries have been added since 
2003.  In addition to a negative impact on poverty, this could also lead to social tensions. 

22. Gender Equality. Argentina has taken important steps to promote gender equity 
in health, social security, and gender-based violence, with more progress needed in the 
labor market and domestic violence.  Achievements include passing of the Reproductive 
Health Law and the Sexual Education Law as well as a 2005 Presidential Decree which 
expands pension coverage for women over age 60.  Moreover, the Supreme Court has 
created an Office of Domestic Violence to provide assistance to victims of domestic 

5 Doing Business 2009 – Argentina http://www. doingbusiness.org/ExploreEconomies/?economyid=9 
6 La Escuela de Gobierno de la Universidad Torcuato Di Tella, Índice de Confianza en el Gobierno – ICG , 
January 2009 
7 The poverty numbers in recent years are contested by many private analysts who believe that official 
statistics under-report inflation since early 2007.   
8 Based on extrapolation from Greater Buenos Aires to all urban population. 
9 See “A Distribution in Motion ”, CEDLAS Documento de Trabajo Nro. 78. 

 7

                                                 
violence.  However, women continue to lag behind in access to employment (only 53 
percent of women age 25-49 years work compared to 97 percent for men in the same age 
range). Female wages are on average 30 percent lower than men’s in the same 
occupation.  

D. 

POLITICAL AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 

23. 
President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner succeeded former President Néstor 
Kirchner in December 2007 with high levels of support.  She won the first-round election 
with over 45 percent of the vote, outpacing the nearest rival by 20 percentage points.  
President Fernández campaigned on the successes of the previous administration, namely 
strong economic growth, improvement in social conditions, and public debt restructuring.  
This implied an assertive stand with regard to international creditors and holders of 
public service concessions, and she has maintained the previous administration ’s general 
policy direction. 

24. 
Despite her strong electoral performance, the President has faced significant 
challenges.  Inflationary pressures and a stand-off with farmers over export taxes 
dominated the agenda during the first half of 2008, with the latter eroding the support of 
middle class and small farmers.  The Government lost the approval of a key agricultural 
bill in July 2008, but regained momentum with approval of key initiatives such as the 
nationalization of pension funds and the extension of the Economic Emergency Law, as 
well as a tax moratorium and measures to encourage the repatriation of offshore capital. 

25. 
To overcome the impacts of the international economic crisis, President 
Fernández launched major initiatives to regain public support and keep the economy 
running.  In December 2008 she announced a public works package totaling US$ 32 
billion in a bid to sustain growth and employment next year.  She also announced tax 
benefits for middle class workers and initiatives to promote local consumption by 
subsidizing the buying of new cars, household appliances, and domestic travel. 

26. 
The Government has also announced increases in gas prices for high consumption 
households and in electricity tariffs as a way to reduce government subsidies to utilities 
companies.  While the increases are targeted to higher income households, they have 
generated opposition by consumers.  Consumer confidence is falling sharply, according 
to a Poliarquia poll, which showed that 40 percent currently consider that the situation in 
Argentina is bad and will worsen in 2009, up from 18 percent in December 200710.  Also 
since end-2007, President Fernández’s approval rating fell from 51 to 28 percent, and 
approval of economic policy from 55 to 29 percent.  With the deterioration in the social 
and economic context, there are increased risks of social tensions. 

27. Mid-term legislative elections were scheduled for October, but the Government 
has advanced them to June.  The opposition has started some moves among the Radical, 
Socialist and Civic Coalition parties to form a pre-election alliance, and some highly 
visible defections from within the Peronist party have also taken place.  

10 Country Profile, Oxford Analytica online.  December 2008. 

 8

                                                 
E. 

GOVERNANCE 

28. 
Argentina has come a long way on the governance front from the serious 
institutional and governance crisis that erupted in 2001-02.  At that time, large scale 
social unrest had significantly eroded the legitimacy of all branches of Government, and 
there was very limited scope for constructing political and social consensus precisely 
when the need for leadership and social consensus was critical.  Argentina was able to 
handle this acute social and political emergency while adhering to a fully functioning 
democratic constitutional framework and within a context of social peace and respect for 
human rights.  It is widely recognized that the Bank-supported Heads of Household 
Program was instrumental in reducing the social tension that would have been expected 
in such a severe crisis environment.  Despite the lessons learned from this extraordinary 
experience and the substantial progress achieved, some of the ingrained issues affecting 
governance performance continue to prevail, and the country continues to garner 
governance ratings disjointed from its income level and human development.   

29. 
The Government has chosen to focus on a strategy of incremental public sector 
strengthening, with an emphasis on the design and gradual application of new public 
sector tools. It continues the efforts of the previous administration to approach state 
modernization on the basis of a sequenced approach targeted at the strengthening of 
institutions, systems and capacities, to improve the quality of service delivery and 
respond to citizens’ demands.  The strategy is focused on the short- and medium-term, 
and includes active support to key institutions.  Initial work is underway to design a new 
public sector strategy.  An Advisory Council composed of academics has recently been 
created to advise Government on public sector modernization and help increase 
institutional quality and credibility. 

30. 
Recent years have shown some progress in public sector modernization at the 
Federal and Subnational level, both in terms of supply and demand, as shown in Box 1.  
On the supply side, the Government has expanded the legal framework, strengthened and 
expanded public management systems (financial management, public investment, public 
employment, procurement and control); and has built institutional capacity for the design 
and increasing use of these systems.  On the demand side, work has begun towards 
greater institutional quality through the expansion of channels for citizen participation, 
initial steps towards the implementation of the Access to Public Information Decree and 
the use of new technologies to enhance access to public services and improve service-
delivery.  

 9

Box 1: Recent Progress in Public Sector Management 

• Financial management: The financial management systems (SLU and SIDIF) cover 87% of 
the federal administration. 
• Public Investment: The BAPIN II system has been implemented in 23 of the 24 provinces and 
in 110 federal agencies. 
• Public Employment: The electronic registry for public employees includes the totality of 
SINAPA employees (i.e., 26,000 employees), which amounts to more than 20 percent of all 
permanent federal public employees. 
• Procurement: Argentina’s e-procurement system (SECOP ) is operational for purchases up to 
Arg.$10,000 (US$3,200) in four agencies (eight procurement units). 
• Quality Management: 80% percent of user surveys and focus groups show improved service 
delivery in line with established targets for participating institutions. 
• E-government: 750 procedures are included in the electronic directory of government 
procedures, out of which 50 can be processed electronically. 

III. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES 

31. 
The most immediate challenge under the new CPS is to help the Government 
mitigate the effects of the global economic crisis.  However, a continued strong 
framework for economic growth is important to mitigating those effects in the medium-
term, and that will require strategic attention to medium-term constraints such as 
insufficient infrastructure, energy constraints, a stronger agricultural sector, and a social 
safety net that sustainably transitions households out of poverty and into employment.  
The rapid growth up to 2007 has also raised questions about environmental sustainability.   

32. 
Infrastructure Gap. Argentina ’s social infrastructure endowments (particularly 
access to improved water supply and sanitation) lag those of comparable middle-income 
countries while its productive infrastructure stocks (electricity generation capacity, paved 
roads and teledensity per worker) are generally somewhat higher.  Because of economic 
volatility and recurrent crises, Argentina’s rate of infrastructure investment has been 
highly variable over the past 3 decades.  While Argentina invested about 3 percent of 
GDP (most of it from public sources) in infrastructure in the 1980’s, overall investment 
levels declined to 1.7 percent of GDP in the 1990 ’s.  While this decline reflects a broader 
Latin American trend, the decline in Argentina was particularly severe, with public 
financing for infrastructure investment amounting to less than 0.5 percent of GDP 
between 1995 and 2003.  This was only partially off-set by private infrastructure 
investments, which averaged 1.2 percent of GDP in the 1990 ’s.  Since the 2003 crisis, 
public infrastructure investment has grown robustly, reaching levels of 1.3 percent of 
GDP in 200711.  A World Bank study12 suggests that improving infrastructure stocks to 
the level of the regional leader could result in an increase in the rate of GDP growth by 
1.3 percentage points per year; while raising infrastructure coverage and quality to the 
East Asian median could add over 3 percentage points to annual growth.  The same study 

11 Includes direct investments and capital transfers by the national Government, but excludes provincial 
investments or those from fiduciary funds or off-budget capital expenditures (such as those by public 
enterprises). 
12 Calder ón and Servén, “The effects of Infrastructur e Development on Growth and Income Distribution ”, 
The World Bank, 2004.   

 10

 
                                                 
finds that the effect on poverty would be substantial as well: improving Argentina’s 
infrastructure coverage and quality to the level of Costa Rica would reduce its Gini 
coefficient by 0.04. 

33. 
Electricity.  The Government faces several key challenges in the energy sector, 
notably 
the significant probable need for generation capacity due 
to a 
tight 
supply/demand balance once growth resumes and under-investments in generation.  
Bottlenecks in transmission and low investment levels in distribution have been 
exacerbated by the steep increase in electricity consumption between 2003 and 2008.  
While residential coverage is relatively high, four percent of the population (mainly in 
rural areas) continues to lack access to electricity service.  The sector in Argentina also 
faces regulatory challenges, in part the result of the pesification and tariff resetting 
interventions following the 2001 crisis.  These actions and the Government’s overall 
move to a transitory emergency approach resulted in retrenchment by private investors, 
reductions in the effective tariff which required increasing government subsidies, and 
uncertainties about the Government’s sector strategy.  Moreover, public investment both 
in transmission infrastructure and new gas-fired generation capacity has gained relevance 
as the Government becomes more active in the sector. Overall, some of these policies and 
measures are helping to re-establish the basis for a stronger sector, but uncertainties 
remain regarding the Government ’s medium and long-term vision for the sector and, in 
the short term, the success of its new tariff policy, which is being resisted by consumers. 

34. 
Developing Extractive Industries.  The challenge of establishing an adequate 
legal and regulatory framework is exemplified by the contrasting situations in the energy 
and mining sectors.  Although Argentina has the fourth largest natural gas reserves in the 
region, the country has experienced gas shortages since 2004.  Strong economic growth 
and low prices caused an increase in energy demand, outstripping supply, and Argentina 
is expected to become increasingly dependent on external gas supplies in the immediate 
future.  The development of the mining sector, where Argentina has benefitted both from 
sector reforms undertaken in the late 1990 ’s and -- until recently – a boom in commodity 
prices, has been markedly different.  Since the crisis, the stability of the legal and fiscal 
framework has attracted the characteristic long term investment needed in mining, and 
the contribution to GDP of the mining industry has increased from 2.5 percent in 2001 to 
6.0 percent in 2006.  While the sector is generally still expected to grow, it might do so at 
a slower pace (3.8 percent annual growth between 2008 and 2012 is expected).  
Improving social and environmental management capacity in the sector and enforcing 
established regulatory and fiscal regimes would help maximize both investments and 
sector contribution to socio-economic development, mainly in rural areas.   

35. 
Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development.  The agroindustrial sector 
continues to be a critical part of the national economy.  It contributes around 60 percent 
of total goods exports, 18 percent of GDP, and 22 percent of the value added of the goods 
sectors.  Crops make up the largest contribution followed by livestock (63 percent and 31 
percent, respectively).  Agriculture is also a major source of employment, directly 
generating about 12 percent of national employment and over 20 percent when including 
transport and commerce services related to food and agriculture.  About 11 percent (4.4 
million) of Argentina’s 40 million inhabitants live in rural areas, and over a million rural 

 11

inhabitants currently face one or more unmet basic needs.  Building a more competitive, 
diversified and inclusive agricultural sector will depend on strengthened national and 
provincial institutions, particularly in the areas of agricultural technology, innovation, 
and finance.  Finally, increasing training and capacity building in policy and decision-
making will enhance cooperation and harmonization between federal and regional levels, 
facilitating progressive integration of small-scale producers in efficient product chains, 
the expansion of their production and their access to increasingly demanding markets. 

36. 
In 2008, these structural challenges were compounded by a severe drought, 
increasing pressure from the rural sector for a new approach.  A drought emergency was 
declared by the Government in January 2009 and affects 15 provinces under emergency 
(agricultural losses more than 50 percent) or agricultural disaster (more than 80 percent).  
Official numbers for 2008/09 estimate a reduction of the cultivated area of 11 percent 
from last year.  Regarding total production, drought affected crucial phases of the 
cultivation.  For wheat, a historical fall of 50 percent of the total production is expected. 

37. 
Environment.  Argentina faces serious environmental challenges, some of which 
compound the financial issues of farmers.  The expansion of soy production over the past 
several years has fueled deforestation, poor water resource management has increased 
land degradation, and pesticide management practices have 
increasingly raised 
environmental health concerns.  Land degradation has affected 60 million hectares.  The 
deforestation rate of 0.75 percent in 2006 is twice the Latin American average, and 
overfishing places stocks of hake, in particular, under significant stress.  Water 
contamination, particularly in the Matanza-Riachuelo and Reconquista urban river basins 
in the Greater Buenos Aires area -- home to 3.5 million people -- is a grave concern, as 
well as solid waste management (while 90 percent of municipal solid waste is collected, 
only 45 percent is properly disposed).  Finally, the health care costs associated with air 
pollution in major urban areas is estimated at 1.6 percent of GDP annually. 

38. 
Social Safety Nets.  The main challenge is to increase the level of labor force 
formality while improving and consolidating existing protection arrangements, both for 
formal workers and their families and for the most vulnerable sectors.  These programs 
must now move beyond crisis response to a comprehensive system of social protection.  
Another area where much work is needed is to expand coverage of the social insurance 
system to include workers who lack or have insufficient contribution histories and thus 
are not eligible for insurance-based pensions, unemployment and family benefits.  The 
Government recently took a step in this direction with the expansion of pension coverage 
to elderly who have not made the minimum payroll contributions to be eligible for 
benefits under the pre-existing system.  Challenges inherent to this transition include: 
covering all vulnerable groups including those in the informal sector, ensuring that 
benefits are adequate to meet the program ’s objectives, avoiding gaps and overlaps 
between programs, institutions, and levels of government, and ensuring that the overall 
social protection system is fiscally and politically sustainable. 

39. 
Addressing the Inequities in the Health Sector.  Several sources estimate that 
the population without coverage by union schemes, private health insurance, and PAMI 
(Public Health Plan for Retired Senior Citizens) equals between 35 and 39 percent of the 

 12

population; i.e., between 13.5 and 15 million individuals.  Thus the focus should continue 
to be on provincial health systems, which would provide care to these populations.  There 
is also inequity across provinces.  For example, the infant mortality rate in the Province 
of Buenos Aires is three times higher than in the City of Buenos Aires. 

40. 
Education Sector, the Key Challenges for Human Capital Formation are 
Equity and Quality. Universal coverage has basically been achieved, but there is great 
dispersion 
in 
test results between different socio-economic 
levels, gender and 
geographical regions.  In terms of educational outcomes, Argentina compares favorably 
with other Latin American countries, but lags behind OECD countries.  Recently 
sanctioned laws take cognizance of these difficulties and set forth clear goals to be 
achieved, but Argentina could do more to assure high-quality educational opportunities 
for all, and to address the key issues that include: (i) half of school students do not 
complete secondary education; (ii) gaps in educational attainment deepen social and 
regional differences; (iii) the quality of the education of those who graduate from 
secondary education is not always good enough to have the students ready for higher 
education or for inclusion into the work force, and (iv) the university system does not 
prepare graduates with the profile required by Argentina ’s current development needs. 

41. Opportunities for Argentina ’s Indigenous Population . Recent Argentine 
legislation has advanced indigenous rights, but a gap remains between legal recognition 
and the practical application of laws both in daily life and in public policy. Land 
entitlements to indigenous communities, a right constitutionally granted, illustrates this 
problem.  Indigenous peoples are more vulnerable and lag behind other groups in access 
to public services and incomes.  Despite Government effort to increase access to public 
services and having indigenous peoples take charge of their development—e.g. through 
the recently-closed Indigenous Peoples LIL supported by the World Bank —indigenous 
populations have difficulties obtaining equal access to education and health, for example.  
The literacy rate of the indigenous population age 10 and over is 7 percentage points 
lower than the average rate of the total Argentine population, and many indigenous 
people drop out as early as primary school.  Few continue on to receive secondary 
education.  While lack of money explains 60 percent of drop-outs, discrimination is also 
an important factor.  Indigenous communities face high levels of malnourishment, 
infectious diseases, and high rates of adult and infant mortality.  Moreover, the majority 
of communities lack access to safe water, electricity and communication services.  Two 
out of three persons in the indigenous population lack health insurance. 

42. Governance. Public sector management remains a major challenge to achieving 
greater growth and equity in Argentina. Key challenges include (i) strengthen the 
efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of the public expenditure management; (ii) 
improve service-delivery outcomes and restore trust in Government; and (iii) make the 
public sector more accountable and responsive to citizens and the private sector.  

43. 
Strengthen Efficiency, Effectiveness and Transparency of Public 
Expenditure Management.  A key challenge is to expand the use of public management 
tools to effectively guide policy-making.  Important progress has been made through the 
design of an initial performance-informed budgeting model and nine pilots carried out for 

 13

the 2007 and 2008 budgets, which through further expansion could lay the foundations 
for an effective performance- management/- budgeting approach across government.  The 
new web-based financial management system, e-SIDIF, is key to achieving these goals.  
Procurement requires a deepening of reforms, such as through the expansion of the e-
procurement system SECOP across government.  At the subnational levels, key 
challenges include improved public expenditure management and greater compliance 
with the Fiscal Responsibility Law. 

44. 
Improve Public Service Delivery Outcomes and Restore Citizen Trust in 
Government.  Citizens’ trust in Government and public institutions in general was 
seriously affected by the 2001-2002 crisis, and while the Government has made efforts to 
regain public trust, much still remains to be done.  Citizens ’ demands for greater 
institutional credibility have risen, and require greater assurance that the analysis and 
decision-making in public institutions will be done on the basis of technical criteria and 
independent of political intervention.  The institutional strengthening of key institutions 
such as ANSES has contributed to recover citizen ’s trust in one of the areas that has been 
historically lagging behind, by reducing the time in the provision of benefits, expanding 
the network of service delivery units and implementing enhanced service-delivery quality 
standards. Within the framework of the incremental strategy, the challenge is to replicate 
this “island of reform” to other areas of the public sector and help increase trust in 
Government and restore the credibility of public institutions.  It will be critical to restore 
trust in the National Statistical Agency whose reporting is increasingly questioned by the 
private sector, press and civil society. 

45. Make the public sector more responsive to citizens and the private sector.  
While much of public sector reform has been oriented towards improving Government 
internal efficiency, in recent years there has been a shift towards actively responding to 
citizen ’s and private sector demands and needs. Some initiatives, such as reaching out to 
citizens with simplified e-government tools and processes, beneficiary participation in 
ANSES and the Citizens’ Charter program, while isolated, have paved the way to deepen 
responsiveness and social accountability channels.  In particular, efforts towards the 
adoption of law of access to information and effective implementation are promising 
mechanisms on the demand side that can help improve transparency and accountability in 
Argentina, effectively strengthening initiatives such as performance-based budgeting.  

IV. GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT VISION 

46. 
The new administration of President Cristina Fernández that took office in 
December, 2007, largely maintained continuity in the economic and development policy 
frameworks.  The objective for this new administration continues to be the maintenance 
of economic growth and stability, while a special focus has been put into the building of 
institutions and strengthening foreign relations.  The onset of the global economic crisis 
in 2008 has buttressed the Government’s pro-regulatory posture and further heightened 
the Government’s prioritization of social safety nets and job creation.  The Government’s 

 14

 
strategy for dealing with the global crisis includes requesting front-loading of the lending 
envelope under the CPS while maintaining flexibility with phased operations. 

47. 
Infrastructure. The Government has given high priority to infrastructure 
development over the past 5 years, both as a tool to reduce social inequality and as a 
means to overcome potential bottlenecks to competitiveness. As operating deficits for 
many infrastructure services have widened, the government raised several key tariffs and 
fares over the course of 200813.  In electricity and gas, in particular, tariff increases have 
been steeply progressive, reflecting the Government’s emerging view that rate increases 
should both reduce (and where possible eliminate) operating deficits and reduce income 
inequality.  Finally, with the onset of the worldwide economic crisis and slowdown, the 
Government has come to see an aggressive infrastructure investment program as a key 
component of a counter-cyclical economic stimulus package. 

48. 
Transport. Argentina has significantly improved the quality of its highway 
infrastructure over the past decade, with about 90 percent of both its national and 
provincial networks now in good condition.  Going forward, the Government proposes to 
further roll-out the largely successful CREMA model of highway maintenance (under 
which private contractors rehabilitate sections of highway and then maintain them under 
multi-year contracts) to more of the national and especially the subnational network.  To 
reduce logistics costs (which represent about 23 percent of sales costs for commodities on 
average), the Government also plans to improve rail and road access to the Rosario port 
system, which accounts for 57 percent of Argentina’s exports (mostly grains and 
oilseeds) by volume.  Finally, in urban public transport, the Government has focused on 
eliminating localized infrastructure bottlenecks and increasing ridership.  Physical 
measures are increasingly expected to be accompanied by institutional improvements 
(e.g. creation of a metropolitan transport authority for the Greater Buenos Aires area). 

49. Water and Sanitation.  At 80 percent piped water supply and 48 percent piped 
sewerage coverage (2007), Argentina compares unfavorably with other upper-middle 
income countries and continues to lag behind some of its neighbors (Chile and Uruguay).  
The same is true of waste water treated (10 percent), a figure that lags well behind both 
Chile and Uruguay.  Against this backdrop, the Government has established the goal of 
reaching 83 percent piped water supply and 62 percent piped sewerage coverage by 2011. 

50. 
Electricity.  In the last few years, the situation in the sector has begun to evolve, 
with increases in investments, transmission tariffs and the approval of significant 
increases in distribution tariffs in certain provinces and more recently for the Buenos 
Aires metropolitan area.  The Government has also taken steps to promote private 
participation in the upstream segments of the sector, introducing the “Energy Plus 
Regime” in September 2006 and the “Gas Plus Regime” in March 2008.  In transmission, 
the Government has sought financing from several multilateral development banks to 
overcome bottlenecks, increase the operational security of the system and improve 
service quality.  On the demand side, the Government moved quickly in December 2007 

13 These include urban transport fares and electricity tariffs in the Buenos Aires Metropolitan area, gas 
tariffs nationwide, and nationwide wholesale electricity prices for large consumers. 

 15

                                                 
to launch a new energy efficiency program and has secured a US$15.2 million grant from 
GEF to support an aggressive program to replace incandescent light bulbs and to set up 
an energy efficiency fund.  Finally, in rural areas, the Government scaled up its efforts 
under the US$30 million PERMER project with a US$50 million additional finance loan.  

51. 
Agriculture – the Pampean economies.  There is a large gap between the 
Pampas (which enjoy uniquely favorable natural conditions,) and the non-Pampean 
“regional” economies.  The Government views agricultural commodity exports as an 
important source of fiscal revenue and maintains a system of export taxes on soy, wheat, 
corn and sunflower seeds.  The Government also argues that these taxes and other 
restrictions advance longer-term goals in the agricultural sector, such as productivity and 
crop diversification.  Moreover, since 70 percent of soybeans are produced by large 
farmers that represent only 22 percent of the overall farmer population, the Government 
argues that export taxes support social equity goals.  Given the slowdown in Argentina ’s 
economy, unemployment is another matter of concern for the Government.  Comparing 
different production systems, soy generates 1 job per 100 Ha, while cotton contributes 15 
jobs per 100 Ha.  The Government’s interest in maintaining lower export tax rates for 
processed goods such as soybean oil or meal is oriented toward generating not only more 
value added but also more employment.  Other analysts counter, however, that the key 
challenge facing the agricultural sector is to develop a predictable long-term policy 
framework that provides incentives for increased production.  Export taxes have been 
raised three times by decree since 2002, making medium and long-term investment 
planning more difficult.  With the steep decline of commodity prices in 2008, in 
particular combined with the effect of the draught, these analysts are also concerned that 
the returns on farming of export commodities has declined substantially.   

52. 
Agriculture – the Non- Pampean Economies. 
 In the non-Pampean economies, 
the Government’s strategy is fundamentally different. 
 It emphasizes enhanced 
competitiveness by: (i) strengthening the management and efficiency of irrigation 
systems; (ii) improving roads, electricity, and other rural infrastructure; (iii) transferring 
technology; (iv) establishing product sanitary and quality systems to meet international 
standards; and (v) promoting agribusiness through collective actions in value chains.  The 
creation of a new Sub-Secretariat of Family Agriculture in the Secretariat of Agriculture, 
Livestock, Fisheries and Food signals the Government ’s intention to focus more 
systematically on small holders, non-farm producers, rural workers and migrant workers. 

53. 
Environment.  The Government has embarked on an ambitious program in 
support of the brown environmental agenda (water pollution and solid waste management 
in particular as well as the remediation of improperly closed uranium mining and milling 
sites).  It has also been active on the green environmental agenda, as evidenced by the 
2007 Deforestation Law (Ley No. 26.331 de Presupuestos M ínimos de Protecci ón 
Ambiental de los Bosques Nativos) and initiatives to safeguard biodiversity, such as the 
implementation of ecological corridors in rural landscapes, the connection of high-value 
national and provincial protected areas, and promotion of sustainable resource use in the 
buffer zones of the Chaco and Arid Patagonia eco-regions.  The Government has also 
pursued an active climate change agenda. The Argentine Carbon Facility (FAC), in 
particular, has been strengthened to facilitate the development of new investment projects 

 16

with CDM potential14, as part of a broader mitigation policy.  The Government is 
planning to use GEF resources to strengthen capacity in designing sectoral policies as 
well as measures to mitigate and adapt to climate change as part of the Third National 
Communication under the UNFCCC. 

54. 
Social Protection Policy.  The Government is maintaining the strategy it has 
followed since 2003 around the three anchors of employment, universal policies, and the 
effective inclusion of vulnerable sectors with an integral, territorial, and restitution of 
rights perspective.  The Government sees formal employment as the basis of inclusion 
and has developed several policies to improve its quality and expand formality in the 
labor market, including the improvement of payroll taxes enforcement programs, use of 
collective bargaining to define salaries, increases in the minimum wage, and expansion of 
coverage, increases in benefits and improvements in management of the Family 
Allowances program.  However, it is also updating approaches and programs to adjust to 
new conditions and to address remaining pockets of poverty.  The Government has 
reaffirmed its vision that poverty is much more than the lack of income and is a problem 
of economic, social, cultural, and political inclusion of citizens.  The Government wants 
to continue the reform of the program Heads of Households (Jefes y Jefas de Hogar 
Desempleados-PJyJHD) orienting participants with employability problems towards the 
program Familias para la Inclusión Social .  Those participants with better employment 
opportunities will be directed towards the training and employment services program 
Seguro de Empleo y Capacitación.  In addition there are high expectations for the 
Lifelong Learning Program to start achieving high rates of coverage and with this 
improve earnings of those employed and the employability of those searching for 
employment. 

55. Health.  The Government’s vision is to reduce the fragmentation of the public 
health system while further developing interventions for vulnerable and poor sectors 
through non-contributive health insurance and the ongoing programs Plan Nacer and 
Remediar.  The authorities are considering expanding the Nacer results-based approach 
to other population groups.  The fourth area of the Government’s Acuerdo Bicentenario 
begins with health and centers on creating a more integrated national system—with better 
coordination of public and private providers—through training and human capital 
development in rural and isolated areas.  Specific attention will be paid to generating a 
new generation of nurses and improving the hospital infrastructure, particularly outside of 
urban centers.  The plan also recognizes the links to broader social issues such as 
nutrition and other education support for families, and addresses the effects on 
communities with high and persistent unemployment. 

14 FAC provides services including: (i) technical guidance and assistance to projects with regard to the 
conditions of resource utilization, submission of requests, and other aspects of project execution, (ii) 
capacity building for different projects, (iii) coordination and implementation of studies at the national level 
to identify potential projects and support their development, (iv) assistance for decision-makers in the 
public and private sectors with regard to strategies and mitigation policies, and (v) identification of 
portfolios of CDM projects eligible for financing. 

 17

                                                 
 
56. 
Education.  The Government will continue working towards achieving the targets 
that it set for itself in recent legislation.  Among the most important ones are universal 
school enrollment of 5 year olds and increasing public spending on education to 6 percent 
of GDP by 2010, to be financed by national and provincial governments.  Current level of 
education spending is around 5 percent of GDP.  

V. ARGENTINA – WORLD BANK PARTNERSHIP 

A. THE CURRENT PROGRAM 

57. 
The 2006 CAS proposed that the Bank ’s assistance strategy be structured in 
accordance with the same three pillars established under the previous CAS, namely: (1) 
sustained growth with equity, (2) social inclusion, and (3) improved governance.  The 
IBRD lending program consisted entirely of investment loans, thereby completing the 
transition from adjustment lending to investment lending that started with the 2004 CAS. 

58. 
Status of the Bank’s Program in Argentina .  The 2006 CAS has shown some 
strong achievements that have renewed and strengthened the relationship with Argentina:  

• Bank lending in the health sector, with the introduction of an insurance-based 
approach for maternal child care, has become a model for the efficient delivery of 
basic health services at the provincial level that is expected will be extended  beyond 
maternal child care and also as a model to be replicated internationally.   

• Dialogue and solid analytical work have been undertaken to move the Heads of 
Household Program from emergency income support programs to a more 
comprehensive, long-term and sustainable strategy for social protection.   

• Successful direct lending in three provinces (duly guaranteed by the national 
Government) has shown promising opportunities for an effective dialogue and 
developmental assistance at the subnational level. 

59. Mainstreaming Governance in the CAS.  The 2006 CAS mainstreamed its 
governance focus and provided space for innovation within the partnership.  The Bank 
has had a selective approach in engaging Argentina in the area of governance via two 
separate and distinct entry points.  First, it has supported the authorities ’ strategy of 
incremental public sector strengthening, with an emphasis on the design and gradual 
application of new public sector tools.  The strategy is focused on the short-and medium 
term, and includes active intervention in key institutions.  Second, it has engaged the 
authorities 
in 
the 
implementation of 
the Argentina Fiduciary Action Plan, a 
comprehensive effort to improve fiduciary performance in the Bank’s investment 
portfolio in Argentina.   

60. 
The Argentina Fiduciary Action Plan (AFAP).  It is a collection of discrete but 
conceptually linked initiatives in fiduciary management that improves transparency and 

 18

 
 
accountability in Bank-supported investment projects.  The Plan reflects an approach that 
is significantly different from past “ring fencing” of individual operations.  It focuses on 
measures that cut across projects and strengthen country systems for financial 
management and procurement.  Key achievements under the AFAP include: 

• A web-based information system (known as SEPA) that provides the public with easy 
access to detailed information on all Bank-financed contracts in the country.  

• A methodology (known as IFPA) to simplify, summarize, and communicate 
technically complex fiduciary assessments (at the project and portfolio level) through 
an easily understood system of red, yellow, and green “traffic lights.”  

• An intensification of dialogue between the Bank and Argentina’s Supreme Audit 
Institution (AGN).  Audit support activities have improved on-time audit completion 
and, more broadly, strengthened Government audit capacity.  

• A Price Monitoring Mechanism (PMM) on civil works contracts to help distinguish 
higher prices attributable to legitimate supply responses from artificial price inflation.  

• An across the board effort to reduce the use and size of Project Implementation Units 
(PIUs) and thereby strengthen the state’s own institutions and systems.  

61. 
The SEPA is one of the most successful components of the AFAP.  Designed in 
response to project-level challenges to disclose relevant information on project 
procurement plans and their implementation via the web, its initial scope included all 
contracts financed by the Bank in Argentina.  With a recent decision by IDB to adopt 
SEPA as its procurement dissemination tool, SEPA will de facto cover a substantial share 
of Argentina ’s public investment program and achieve impressive progress in the 
transparency of public procurement in Argentina.  Beyond Argentina, SEPA has been 
implemented in Mexico, Honduras, Uruguay and Paraguay.  Three additional countries 
are in the advanced stages of implementation, and another four have recently begun 
implementation of SEPA. Likewise, concurrent audits designed to ensure fiduciary 
standards of a Bank-financed results-oriented maternal-child health insurance scheme has 
gradually become the auditing standard for the health insurance scheme at the national 
level and it is envisaged it may be adopted in future Government programs in the sector.  

62. 
Portfolio Management.  There has been a strong focus on portfolio management 
which has enabled an intensive dialogue with the Government at the highest levels to 
address issues affecting the portfolio as a whole and ensure that the commitments made 
in investments are effectively executed.  In addition to regular joint portfolio reviews, the 
Government has recently: (a) reorganized the handling of loan approvals within the 
Ministry of Economy with the expectation that it will significantly streamline the process 
of approval of loan agreements and subsidiary agreements with subnational and other 
implementing agencies15; and (b) agreed to improve management information systems 

15 See Ministerial Resolution No. 108/2009 dated March 16, 2009 issued by the Ministry of Economy and 
Public Finance. 

 19

                                                 
utilized by project entities to jointly monitor civil work contracts to identify undue 
delays.  This is a welcome initiative as over 60 percent of Bank commitments finance 
high-value civil works contracts.  The CAS completion report highlighted that progress in 
this area should be continued and deepened, thus new activities will be supported with an 
IDF grant and are expected to accelerate the pace of implementation. 

63. 
There have also been shortfalls from initial expectations regarding the pace of 
implementation of the portfolio.  A productive dialogue with the authorities has ensued, 
and an action plan is in place to address the shortfalls.  The overall country relationship 
has been greatly strengthened in the past three years, consolidating improvements that 
had steadily accrued since 2001-02.  The IFC has realized similar accomplishments by 
focusing its lending on companies that demonstrate social responsibility and a track 
record of honoring contractual obligations.  The IBRD not only reestablished its presence 
in a number of sectors but opened new channels, particularly in the form of result-based 
disbursements and direct lending to provinces, guaranteed by the Federal Government, 
that have enhanced the Bank’s developmental contribution to the country. 

Box 2: Argentina and the IBRD Strategy for Middle-Income Countries (MIC) 

Argentina has presented a peculiar challenge in the implementation of IBRD’s MIC Strategy.  In 
the midst of the 2002-03 crisis, the possibilities of developing a strong partnership appeared 
limited as the Bank was identified by the new authorities as partly responsible for the social and 
economic debacle.  Since then there has been strong progress in building trust and in designing an 
investment partnership that has shown responsiveness and flexibility as the country transitioned 
from acute crisis to a rapidly recovering economy.  The current CAS period focused the 
partnership in developing investment initiatives that could contribute to generating a solid basis 
for continued pro-poor growth.  In the growth dimension, the assistance efforts implied a move 
from traditional transport projects --which continue to play an important role--to a focus on 
logistic investments aimed at improving transport efficiency, improved non-Pampean agriculture 
production and addressing major environment challenges.  In the social dimension, it implied the 
phasing out of the emergency assistance schemes for a focus on increasing the employability of 
the poor through investments in life-long learning schemes and the improvement of health and 
educational services.  The proposed program includes new and challenging efforts to respond to 
the country’s needs with customized and flexible approaches consistent with Bank policy.   

As the country faces new challenges derived from some fragile policy approaches and the 
international crisis, the Bank stands ready to further expand its partnership by expanding the array 
of services, particularly in the areas of financial and knowledge services which have been 
underutilized.  In the financial services sector the Bank will continue to make available a full 
menu of financing and credit-enhancement and risk-management tools that could help the 
Government optimize the management of its debt and asset portfolios, particularly at a time of 
significant financial constraints.  In the knowledge service sector, the Bank will continue to make 
available its research and expert services at the sectoral and country levels through analytic work, 
training, institutional capacity building, technical assistance, and other advisory activities.  The 
recent experience with Fee-for-Service analytical work at the provincial level seems a promising 
channel for increasing our knowledge contribution to the country. 

 20

 
Box 3: The Heads of Households Program:  A Successful Partnership 

The Heads of Household Program was Argentina’s main response to the social and economic 
crisis in 2002.  Government rapidly developed and implemented this assistance program which 
provides a monthly payment equivalent to US$50 to individuals that (i) are the head of a 
household; (ii) are unemployed; (iii) live in a household with minors, disabled or pregnant 
women, and (iv) work 4 hours a day or take training or education classes.  The Bank supported 
the Program through the Heads of Household Project (Loan 7157-AR), approved by the Board on 
January 28, 2003, and Heads of Household Transition Loan approved on March 23, 2006. 

The Bank supported the part of the program in which beneficiaries did indeed comply with the 
workfare requirement.  The Program was very successful in (i) calming the social situation 
(which had nearly erupted into violent conflict), and (ii) targeting the poor, mitigating effectively 
the impact of the crisis.  Government, with Bank support, has improved program governance 
(better internal controls, database crosschecks and supervision).  For example the Bank now 
finances only transfers made with debit cards, a more transparent mechanism than cash payments.   

Since 2002, the Bank accompanied Government implementation of the Program with analytical 
studies of its poverty and inequality impact.  Incidence data shows that the Program had good 
targeting performance.  The share of Program participants among the 40 percent better-off 
households in Argentina was 6 percent in 2005 while the share of Program benefits going to the 
bottom two quintiles was 80 percent.  Given the good targeting performance, the HH Program 
was instrumental in tilting the overall economic growth period in a pro-poor way.  While the 
number of indigenous beneficiaries is not known, the program is active in dozens of 
municipalities with high proportions of indigenous populations. 

Governance improvements to Jefes included building additional cross-checks into the registry 
databases and adding additional controls within the MTESS. This included regular monthly cross-
checks of the registry database with other databases by an independent agency (National System 
of Tax and Social Identification –SINTyS ). The MTESS also introduced cross-checks of the 
registry against beneficiaries (and family members) among the participants in private health 
insurance plans.  In addition, the spouses of beneficiaries were cross-checked against private 
employment registries. 

Social accountability was also enhanced through greater use of public information and 
participation mechanisms. The MTESS coordinated with the National Consultative Council staff 
to hold a series of workshops on the program in order to consult and provide information, 
promoting the participation of local organizations (non-governmental organizations, unions, 
business groups, private companies, professional training centers, among others). 

With the normalization of the overall economic and social situation, the Government reoriented 
the HH Program.  The strategy was to distinguish among those beneficiaries that have higher re-
employment chances from those that require a different type of longer-term safety net, linked to 
building human capital for children. 

B. SUMMARY FINDINGS FROM COMPLETION REPORT 

64. 
Five consecutive years of rapid and pro-poor economic growth beginning in 2003 
have enabled poverty and unemployment to be cut back to pre-crisis levels.  Many of the 
country development goals articulated in the CAS were achieved.  Whereas the aim was 

 21

 
 
 
 
to reduce unemployment from 14 percent in 2005 to no more than 11 percent in 2009, 
unemployment was already below 8 percent in 2008.  Similarly a targeted reduction in 
urban poverty from 38 percent in 2005 to no more than 30 percent in 2009 was already 
surpassed by 2007.  The Government has clearly been successful in further relieving a 
massive social crisis during the CAS period; however, that achievement was made at the 
cost of increasing inflationary pressures as detailed above.  

65. 
The anticipated CAS outcomes were largely achieved (see Annex 3).  Outcomes 
with respect to the lending program were also substantially achieved.  During the CAS 
period there was a significant renovation of the country ’s investment portfolio which had 
been virtually exhausted during the post crisis period.  The Bank is on track to deliver 20 
project loans for a total of US$3,425 million before end FY200916 under the current CAS.  
There has also been a strong focus on fiduciary matters in all aspects related to the 
preparation and implementation of the portfolio.  The Bank also delivered a strong 
program of AAA albeit less than envisaged in the CAS. 

C. DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS  

66. 
The Bank Group ’s program is coordinated with Argentina ’s other development 
partners, notably the IDB and CAF.  In the case of IDB, the authorities have promoted a 
division of labor among the two institutions in line with the requirements of the various 
sectors.  In human development, the Bank has taken a lead role in health while IDB has 
taken a corresponding position in the education sector.  In the case of social protection, 
the Bank initially took a leading role with the Heads of Household Program; however, 
IDB has recently become increasingly involved with its financing of the Familias 
Program.  In the infrastructure sectors, the Bank has a leading role in roads, flood 
protection and water and sanitation; while IDB is predominant in regional infrastructure 
development in the north of Argentina and urban development. 

67. 
There is strong coordination with IDB on fiduciary matters, particularly with the 
harmonization of procurement rules and the decision of IDB to adopt SEPA as a tool to 
make information on IDB-financed procurement available to the public.  IDB is currently 
in the process of preparing its country assistance strategy for the coming four years.  Its 
lending program (about US$1.5 billion per year) has been larger than the Bank’s and has 
similar priorities and lending modalities.  IDB also has greater exposure (about US$8.5 
billion) and a larger portfolio (about US$7.1 billion) in Argentina than the Bank. 

68. 
The degree of coordination with CAF is less as they are mainly active in different 
sectors from the Bank.  CAF has a smaller presence (exposure about US$0.5 billion); 
however, there is dialogue and consultations with CAF representatives in the field.  

D. CPS CONSULTATIONS 

69. 
During December 2008, the CPS team conducted seven thematic consultations in 
Argentina on the issues of: transportation and logistics, water and sanitation, agriculture, 

16 One remaining project for US$840 million will be considered by Executive Directors before the end of 
FY09 (AR Matanza-Riachuelo River Basin Clean-Up). 

 22

                                                 
environment, social policy, federal-provincial relations, and public sector management.  
Even with the diversity of topics covered and a methodology that allowed in depth 
discussion of each topic, there were common concerns expressed:  (i) the need to support 
capacity building for public officials at the local and national level; (ii) the need to 
identify strategic plans by sectors and the support the Bank could bring to do so; (iii) the 
opportunity to work at the provincial and municipal levels as well as national, including 
the need for the Bank to invest in capacity building at these levels; and (iv) participants 
expressed an overall appreciation of the work done with the Bank yet they mentioned that 
Bank’s rules could be more flexible to improve the execution of projects.  These general 
findings are reflected in the activities planned under this CPS, and the individual 
consultations also provided useful input that has been taken on board by the respective 
sectors.  For example, the public sector management consultation yielded a call for 
reinforcement of results-based management initiatives which will be taken up in a multi-
sectoral manner as the CPS proposes to build on such initiatives in the health sector and 
under the Performance-Based Budgeting project.  The sessions on human development 
and national-provincial relations provided useful input reflected in the CPS aims of 
greater institutional strengthening of and support to the provinces.  Annex 9 provides 
additional details on these consultations and their outcomes. 

E. RATIONALE FOR WBG SUPPORT TO ARGENTINA 

70. 
The strengthening of the relationship between the Bank and Argentina in recent 
years has provided the basis for a broadened upstream dialogue.  Building on the 
pioneering dialogue in the health and safety net sectors, increasingly strategic dialogue 
has been developed in sectors such as transport, environment and agriculture.  In the 
current context of potential serious effects from the international economic crisis and 
amidst signals that the authorities may need to review and eventually revise some of their 
policy and strategic preferences, it will be particularly important that the Bank maintain 
its presence and remain a reliable and important source of advice and assistance to the 
country.  Requests for Bank support in mitigating the impact of the crisis with a Social 
Safety Nets operation constitute an excellent opportunity to help the administration in 
consolidating a solid social protection system.  Likewise, there are potentially other 
opportunities for the Bank to assist the country in mitigating the impact of the crisis while 
addressing some of the structural issues derived from the current policy stance. 

71. 
A key lesson of the last CAS is that by focusing selectively on areas of consensus 
within the Government’s development agenda, the Bank was able to provide important 
support as the Government has made remarkable strides in reducing poverty.  The 
positive relationship that now prevails may be attributed to the successful partnership that 
has been evolving  towards making the Bank a borrower of choice when dealing with 
complex investments particularly in the infrastructure and social sectors and, lately, in the 
emerging field of  environmental programs.  In fact, the Government’s demand outstrips 
the available IBRD resources, especially as the pipeline is rebalanced in response to the 
global economic crisis to fortify Argentina ’s social safety nets. 

 23

F. ARGENTINA –

 WORLD BANK COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (FY10-12) 

Strategic Approach of the Proposed CPS  

72. 
In this complex and challenging context, but capitalizing on the improvement in 
relations since the crisis, it is essential to continue responding to emerging economic and 
social issues, while managing risks.  Given the continuity in Government policy and the 
expressed demand, the 2010-2012 CPS will continue to focus on the three pillars 
successfully supported under the previous CAS:  (i) sustainable growth with equity, (ii) 
social inclusion, and (iii) improved governance.  However, there will be significant 
evolution in the support provided as this flexible but focused framework will allow 
rebalancing the portfolio toward even greater emphasis on the social inclusion pillar as 
the Bank’s key response to the deteriorating ec onomic and social environment.  The CPS 
proposes an approach characterized by the following, which are largely derived from the 
lessons of the previous CAS – as detailed in Annex 6: 

• Joint work with the Government that: (1) is strategic and where there is strong 
demand, and (2) in areas where the Bank has good dialogue with the authorities and 
feels comfortable with the basic policy and institutional framework.   
• Focus on cross-cutting issues such as governance and institutional strengthening. 
• Focus on the national level of government and, in line with the federal nature of 
government in Argentina, seek to deepen its engagement with the subnational levels 
of government.  
• The Bank proposes to capitalize on the value-added of its expertise and experience 
through more complex and likely larger programs or projects.    
• The Bank will strengthen its AAA program.  
• The CPS seeks to improve the implementation of the Bank portfolio.  
• The CPS proposes further efforts to improve fiduciary safeguards.  

73. 
The CPS will be performance-based.  One inherent characteristic of the 
investment lending-only portfolio is its self-selectivity.  Along with macroeconomic 
stability, portfolio management and fiduciary performance are among the factors that will 
determine actual lending levels.  At the sector level, the quality of the policy framework 
and implementation performance will continue to determine the pace and extent of new 
lending.  At the project level, Bank-financed activities will continue to be designed 
around clear development outcomes and incorporate incentives toward those outcomes 

Results Orientation and Monitoring  

74. 
The Argentina CPS is based on the Results Framework (Annex 2).  This 
framework identifies and tracks specific outcomes the World Bank program is designed 
to influence over the next three years.  The mid-term CPS Progress Report will provide 
an opportunity to assess progress and performance, and revisit the Results Matrix in order 
that it may reflect any evolution in the Bank and Government ’s relationship and shared 

 24

priorities. In addition, the Government and Bank ’s semi-annual portfolio reviews provide 
not only an opportunity for project by project results assessments, but also their aggregate 
contribution toward the anticipated country results.  The strengthening of the portfolio 
management described during the previous CAS period, and the IDF supported efforts 
that will be implemented under this CPS will further strengthen the linkage between this 
semi-annual exercise and country results monitoring.  The effectiveness of the Bank’s 
AAA portfolio in supporting the achievement of the CPS results will be strengthened by 
the joint annual AAA review exercise described previously.   

The WBG’s Indicative 2010-2012 Program  

Objectives and Outcomes 
75. 
As mentioned previously, the proposed program would provide selective, 
performance-based support under the three pillars to influence specific outcomes in 
support of Argentina’s strategic development goals.  Annex 6 describes proposed 
activities in greater detail, and Annex 2 elaborates the outcomes and milestones the 
activities are expected to support.  Given the need for flexibility in this dynamic global 
context in order to be responsive to the Government’s needs, this list is indicative. 

• Objective:  Upgrade Argentina’s infrastructure to address potential bottlenecks 
to competitiveness, and underpin medium-term growth and poverty alleviation 

76. 
The Bank will undertake an innovative approach in supporting the Government ’s 
objective, with activities designed to contribute to improving the transport network, 
increasing public transport ridership, increasing rural access to electricity supply, and 
improved access to water and sanitation.  The first outcome will be supported by a major 
operation tackling logistic multi-modal problems affecting transport efficiency.  The two-
stage APL for the Rosario Metropolitan Area Infrastructure project should help to reduce 
high logistical costs associated with grain and oilseed exports through the Rosario port 
system, which accounts for 58 percent of Argentina’s exports by volume.  The Bank will 
also expand its support for urban transport beyond the Greater Buenos Aires area under 
the Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport project (PTUMA) and continue supporting 
successful highway maintenance schemes under a National Highway Assets Maintenance 
III Project.  At the same time, the Bank would build on its long-standing involvement in 
rural electrification (PERMER) and more recent support for energy efficiency (through 
GEF) with a new Rural Electrification and Energy Efficiency Project.  Beneficiaries of 
these programs include some of the most vulnerable, including indigenous, populations.  
Finally, the Bank will contribute toward improved access to water and sanitation with a 
major environmental initiative.  The proposed US$840 million loan (APL-1) in support 
of the Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustainable Development Project would finance most of 
the 
transmission, 
treatment and disposal 
infrastructure needed 
to provide 
the 
infrastructure backbone for cleaning up an urban river basin that is home to some 3.5 
million people and more 
than 4,000 
industrial facilities stretching across 14 
municipalities and the City of Buenos Aires.   

 25

Table 1: CPS Program Objectives and Select Activities 

Government of Argentina Strategic Objectives 
Pillar I 
Pillar II: 
Pillar III: 
Sustainable Growth with Equity 
Social Inclusion 
Improved Governance 
Outcomes toward which the CPS will contribute 

Upgrade Argentina’s 
infrastructure to address 
potential bottlenecks to 
competitiveness, and underpin 
medium-term growth and poverty 
alleviation 

Improve competitiveness, 
quality, and exports of 
agriculture and livestock 
production 

Address a growing problem of 
resource degradation 

Consolidate the reduction in 
poverty and expand efforts to 
reverse the longer-term 
poverty trend by increasing 
household incomes and 
integrating marginalized 
groups into the productive 
marketplace 

Consolidate improvements in 
health indicators and improve 
quality of education while 
reducing drop out rates 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Improving the transport 
network 
Increasing public transport 
ridership 
Increasing rural access to 
electricity supply 
Improved access to water 
and sanitation  
Increase the diversification 
of production in the 
agricultural sector 

• 

Selected Programs for Support 
Improving employability 
of the most vulnerable 
• Expansion of provincial 
health insurance 
• Hospital restructuring and 
expansion 
• Strengthening health 
sector governance 
• Universal access to 
primary education 
• Lower teen dropout rates 

Strengthen the effectiveness, 
efficiency, transparency and 
accountability of public 
sector management 

Expand performance 
management and improve the 
quality of public expenditure, 
enhance service delivery 
outcomes and trust in 
institutions 

Strengthen public sector 
capacity to spur investment 
and growth 

• Strengthening 
transparency of decision-
making, increase access 
to information 
• Expanding effective 
performance-
management and 
performance-informed 
budgeting 
Improving compliance 
with the Fiscal 
Responsibility Law 

• 

Cross-Cutting Themes 
Strengthen capacity of the Government to prepare, approve and implement investment projects in 
line with the requirements of a medium-term investment partnership. 
Ensure awareness and knowledge with Government about IBRD financial products that could 
provide flexibility to Argentina in managing its debt, including the ability to change the financial 
characteristics of existing and future loans as to better manage the financial risks relating to 
currency, interest rate, roll over and commodity price volatility 

77. Most projects in the infrastructure portfolio generate significantly improved 
conditions for the poor.  While most of the Bank ’s infrastructure investments under the 
2006-2008 CAS supported maintenance and expansion of the national and subnational 
highway networks, the new portfolio will present a more diversified picture with 
investment initiatives conveying increased complexity and value added from the Bank 
and a growing focus in producing improved efficiency and poverty alleviation.   

 26

 
 
 
 
 
 
• Objective:  Improve competitiveness, quality, and exports of agriculture and 
livestock production 

78. 
The proposed CPS program will contribute to increasing the diversification of 
production in the agricultural sector.  Bank work in support of this objective will continue 
to focus on enhancing the competitiveness of the non-Pampean (“regional”) economies 
and increasing the assets and opportunities of small farmers and the rural poor.  At the 
national level, the Bank will seek to engage the Government in a discussion of 
agricultural policy options that reflect the changing international and domestic context 
based on just-in-time analytical work.  The Government has recently sought additional 
lending from both the IDB and the World Bank (which approved a US$300 million loan 
in October, 2008) for the PROSAP program.  It has also received an additional financing 
loan for the PROINDER small farmers project (July, 2007) to reach deeper into poor 
rural areas. In addition, the Government has expressed interest in a new Rural Poverty 
operation that would address extremely poor and vulnerable indigenous and non-
indigenous populations, including the landless and migrant workers.  This project will be 
the primary IBRD vehicle for combining natural resource management activities with 
support to indigenous peoples.  Finally, IBRD ’s ongoing flood protection operations 
contain strong elements of disaster preparedness planning in addition to physical works. 

• Objective:  Address a growing problem of resource degradation 

79. 
The Bank program will provide support to (i) increase the areas of forest and 
forest plantations under sustainable management, (ii) strengthen urban and solid waste 
management, improve environmental management and governance, and (iii) increase 
access to international carbon markets.  Support for Argentina’s “green” (natural 
resources) agenda will build on ongoing operations in Sustainable Natural Resource 
Management (IBRD) and Biodiversity Conservation in Productive Forestry Landscapes 
(GEF).  The latter works with small farmers, including indigenous peoples, to introduce 
biodiversity-friendly practices in productive forests. 
 These operations will be 
complemented by a new GEF-funded Rural Corridors and Biodiversity Conservation 
project which would stitch together conservation corridors necessary for the survival of 
several endangered species and the sustainable management/ use of native forest and arid 
steppe while strengthening the federal system of protected areas.  

80. 
The proposed CPS will support the second and third outcomes by expanding the 
Bank’s work on “brown” environmental issues through the previously discussed 
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustainable Development Project and a proposed Sustainable 
Industrial Development Project that will support the conversion of small and medium-
size industries in highly polluting sectors to cleaner production processes.  These 
operations will complement ongoing operations in urban solid waste management and in 
the remediation of improperly closed uranium mining and milling sites.  In addition, 
several new operations will mainstream “brown” issues, such as air pollution control, as 
parts of loans in other sectors.  The upcoming PTUMA Project, for example, will 
promote increased public transport ridership while the Rosario Logistics Project will 
alleviate traffic congestion and promote a modal shift from road to rail for agricultural 
commodities.  Finally, Bank support for Argentina’s Third National Communication 

 27

under the UNFCCC is expected to deepen the absorption of climate change 
considerations in sectoral planning, particularly in infrastructure and agriculture.  A 
country environmental assessment (CEA) (planned for FY10) is expected to help 
Argentina and the Bank to set priorities for additional investments. 

• Objective:  Consolidate the reduction in poverty and expand efforts to reverse 
the longer-term poverty trend by increasing household incomes and integrating 
marginalized groups into the productive marketplace 

81. 
A key element of the Bank’s ongoing and future policy dialogue toward this 
objective is to improve the employability of the most vulnerable.  The focus of social 
service delivery has shifted from emergency relief and expanding access to basic services 
to better inter-governmental coordination and improved quality of services.  The Bank is 
therefore supporting the Government in facilitating the transition of beneficiaries out of 
Jefes and developing a longer term strategy for social protection.  According to the 
discussions with the national Government, the Bank is proposing to design and 
implement new operations to extend and complement the existing social protection 
programs.  The first operation would focus on improving the equity, transparency, and 
efficiency of social programs and on the Seguro Program to: (i) create conditions to 
extend the services of Seguro to the population generally, beyond the former 
beneficiaries of Plan Jefes (at this time the only ones eligible); (ii) improve the execution 
and adaptation of employment services, taking into consideration the particular 
conditions in each locality where the program is executed; and (iii) adapt the benefits 
offered to the participants to ensure appropriate support and incentives.  The proposed 
second phase would focus on supporting policies to expand coverage of both programs, 
in the direction defined by the first phase loan.  Thus, the Project would finance further 
improvements in design and operation of these programs, while supporting the inclusion 
of vulnerable families and workers currently excluded, with the final goal of increasing 
the efficiency and effectiveness of Argentina’s social protection policy. 

82. 
Another aspect that has been explored with the Argentine Government at various 
levels is the possibility of supporting social inclusion policies at the subnational level, as 
detailed in the next paragraph.  To provide updated information on the trends and impacts 
of social protection programs, the Bank will support the Government to enhance its 
monitoring capacity by providing technical assistance in the design and implementation 
of a national “Social Protection Survey”. 

• Objective:  Consolidate improvements in health indicators and improve quality 
of education while reducing drop out rates 

83. 
The Bank aims to expand support toward this objective through (i) expansion of 
provincial health insurance coverage, (ii) hospital restructuring and improving services, 
and (iii) strengthening the Ministry of Health and health sector governance.  The program 
aims to strengthen the governance capacities of the National Ministry of Health to 
improve the operation of the health system, as discussed in paragraph 85 below.  
Expected outcomes would be improved access, effectiveness, and transparency of health 
services delivery.  The proposed health projects would move forward with innovations 

 28

such as: (i) expanding the age groups that would benefit from existing provincial 
insurance arrangements (e.g. to all school-age children); (ii) defining a broader 
guaranteed service scope (e.g. to include chronic, non-transmissible diseases); and (iii) 
introducing health quality attributes to services (e.g. reducing waiting lists).  The project 
would seek to achieve (i) gradual improvement in equity of access by providing all 
Argentines with a similar health plan regardless of where they live; and (ii) a structured 
and comprehensive approach to address the disease burden associated with chronic 
conditions and regional pathologies that disproportionately affect the poorest population. 

84. 
Universal coverage of 5-year old children and retention of teenagers, particularly 
those in the poorer segments of the population, are two of the key elements of the 
Government’s strategy for strengthening the education system.  The Bank’s program 
targets exclusion from educational attainment, which is highest among children and 
teenagers of the poorest families.  The latest education legislation is increasing the 
financing of the education sector to 6 percent of GDP by 2010.  The Bank’s involvement 
in subnational education systems over many years gives it a comparative advantage on 
issues of improving quality of education and management of the education system.  The 
Bank's emphasis on provincial education can best be seen through an ongoing US$150 
million rural education project that will provide support until October 2011. 

• Objective: Strengthen 
the 
effectiveness, 
accountability of public sector management 

efficiency, 

transparency and 

85. 
The proposed CPS will build on the on-going engagement on public sector 
management strengthening by deepening engagement on existing loans and responding to 
new requests with support for additional operational and analytical work.  The ongoing 
State and Subnational Modernization projects are complemented by the Institutional 
Strengthening of the National Social Security Administration Project and the Social and 
Fiscal National Identification System (SINTyS) second-phase APL.  In addition, a 
US$350,000 Governance Partnership Facility (GPF) grant for strengthening governance 
in the health sector formulate and implement sustainable approaches to improving 
governance in the health sector in Argentina.  Achievement of the goals of the GPF grant 
will be supported by a project to create a multi-stakeholder National Observatory for 
Health Policy that would (i) deepen analysis of accountability and incentive mechanisms 
in the health sector, assess lessons from experience and identify opportunities for scaling 
up; and (ii) pilot and evaluate innovative approaches. 

• Objective:  Expand performance management and improve the quality of public 
expenditure and enhance service delivery outcomes and trust in institutions 

86. 
The program will concentrate on strengthening public expenditure management 
tools, including an increased focus on performance-management and -budgeting, 
proposed to be supported by the Foundations for Performance-Informed Budgeting 
Project.  While this is an important part of the Government’s long-term agenda, it is also 
facilitates greater fiscal discipline in the short-term, including specific measures for 
public financial management reform to address the financial crisis.  Sectoral dialogue is 
also focused on strengthened poverty-targeting in public expenditures, particularly 

 29

through the ongoing health and education portfolios and the proposed Basic Protection 
Project. 
 The program also emphasizes support to cross-cutting public sector 
management areas across 
the federal administration, such as human resource 
management, e-government, procurement, quality management, and M&E through the 
State Modernization II loan.   

87. 
Specific organizational reform issues will be addressed through the Institutional 
Strengthening loan to ANSES, the National Social Security Administration and specific 
e-government tools will be promoted through the second phase of the National Social 
and Fiscal Identification System Project.  At the subnational level, the program will focus 
on a variety of public sector management areas at the provincial levels, such as 
performance management and budgeting, human 
resource management, 
tax 
administration, e-government and strategic planning.  This will be supported by the on-
going Subnational Governments Modernization Project.  In addition, Fee-for-Service 
products are proposed for a number of subnational governments, starting with the on-
going FFS in the province of Corrientes. 

World Bank Lending 

88. 
 The Bank proposes an indicative lending envelope of US$3.3 billion for FY10-
FY12, front-loaded with two operations to support Argentina’s safety nets during the 
critical next two years.  IBRD ’s exposure to Argentina declined from US$ 9.4 billion at 
end-CY2001 to US$ 5.1 billion at end-2008, about the same level as in 1995.  This 
reduction is partly the result of reasonable commitment levels through mainly investment 
operations that led to lower disbursements.  At the same time, the special SALs of the late 
1990s increased debt service during this period.  With the proposed program, Bank 
exposure in Argentina is expected to increase to US$5.6 billion by the end of the CPS 
period as a result of front loaded assistance designed to help the country and its more 
vulnerable population weather the impact of the global economic crisis.   

89. 
Due to uncertainty over the evolving international economic situation and the 
need to maintain flexibility, lending amounts for some projects are not yet fixed and, 
thus, are expressed in Table 2 as ranges.  Furthermore, the Government ’s desire for 
flexibility in their response to the global crisis is reflected in a strategy to avoid 
committing excessively large amounts to projects without a track record of successful 
implementation and disbursement.  Successfully implemented programs may be scaled 
up through additional financing, repeater projects or multi-phase APLs.  Lending plans 
for FY11-12 will be specified in further detail in a progress report reflecting any changes 
in demand, country conditions and the Bank ’s lending capacity at the time. 

IFC Activities 

90. 
IFC’s strategy in Argentina is designed to support the growth of export-oriented 
sectors and a select group of financial institutions, in order to create jobs and meet the 
needs of low-income populations, particularly those in frontier regions. 

 30

91. 
Argentina represents IFC’s second-largest exposure in the region and IFC’s 
seventh-largest country exposure by committed portfolio.  It constitutes 12 percent of 
IFC's committed portfolio in the Latin American and Caribbean region.  IFC’s strategy in 
Argentina is designed to manage existing risks prudently and seek out new investment 
and advisory opportunities to selectively support the CPS pillars.  The Corporation’s 
investment bias is mainly toward export-oriented industries and a select group of 
financial institutions, with a strong emphasis on attending “bottom of the pyramid ” 
population needs, particularly in frontier regions.  The overarching strategy is to proceed 
cautiously, with sponsors in strong industries that have an established record of sound, 
profit-oriented, and therefore sustainable management.  This means that IFC will 
concentrate its activities on existing clients in both corporate and financial sectors.  IFC 
aims to continue renewing and even expanding trade finance lines to Argentine banks, 
which have become strong IFC partners for onlending programs to farmers and MSMEs.  
Additional information on IFC ’s program is provided in Annex 7. 

Table 2: Planned lending deliverables (FY09-FY10) 
Project 
 FY and amount (in US$ Million) 
FY09 
FY10 
840 
450 

Matanza-Riachuelo Development APL 
Basic Protection Project (Phase I) 
Foundations for Performance-Informed Budgeting 

BA Provincial Infrastructure (AF) 

Urban Transport in Metropolitan Areas 
Provincial Roads (AF) 
Cordoba Provincial Roads (AF) 
Sustainable Industrial Development  
Rural Poverty 
San Juan Social Inclusion & Local Development 
Provincial Government Modernization (AF) 
Essential Public Health Functions - FESP (AF) 
Health Sector Governance Strengthening* 
Road Safety 
Basic Protection Project (Phase II) 

10-20 

50 

150 
200 
30-60 
40-60 
30-50 
20-50 
15 
90 
4.5 
20 
550 

*Though listed separately here, will likely be included in FESP AF for a total loan of US$94.5m 

The Bank’s Analytical Agenda 

92. 
A complete description of the Bank ’s analytical agenda appears in Annex 6.  
Table 1 summarizes key elements of the proposed agenda.   As with the previous CAS, 
there are few AAA activities planned under the Governance pillar as these are 
mainstreamed in the operations themselves. 

 31

  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Table 3: Key Elements of the Partnership ’s Analytical Agenda – Argentina CPS 2009-2012   

Pillar 1:  Sustainable Growth with Equity 

Country Economic Memorandum (CEM): Productivity and Growth. The study will : 
• Review short and long-run determinants of economic growth; study role of macro policies in 
responding to external shocks and their effectiveness in mitigating output volatility 
• Study link between the quality and composition of trade, and its long-term growth potential 
• Look at the link between business environment and firm level productivity 
Reducing Logistics Costs in the Buenos Aires Container Port System and the Northwest 
(Logistics II).  This study will: 
• Focus on high logistics costs in the northwest region and policy alternatives to avoid 
unnecessary transportation costs from the Port of Buenos Aires  
• Prepare guidelines on how to set up a National Logistics Council that could become a 
forum to anticipate and propose solutions to logistics bottlenecks in Argentina 
Rural Transport Assessment. 
• Analyze transportation access to health, education and other public services as well as 
obstacles to the movement of goods in rural areas; 
• Assess the rural and/or secondary road networks in Argentina, including coverage, quality, 
management and maintenance, available financing and corresponding expenditures 
Country Environmental Assessment (CEA) and Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEA). 
• CEA will focus on environmental implications of key policies, and capacity to address 
priorities; 
• SEA’s will provide analytical options and pa rticipatory approaches for mainstreaming 
environmental and social considerations in policies, plans and programs in different sectors 
Private Sector Development, Innovation and Competitiveness Study:  
• Focus on federal and provincial level based on demand from Governors. 
Pillar 2:  Social Inclusion 

Safety Nets.   
• Supporting efforts to improve effectiveness of the safety net for the poor and vulnerable 
• Expanding coverage of poverty reduction programs, improving data, and more  
• Strengthening provincial safety net programs and coordination with national programs 
Impact of Labor Market Developments on Inequality. 
• Analyze the effects of labor and social protection programs on income inequality,  
• Generate new quantitative data for analysis of income inequality at the provincial level 
• Analyze income distribution and policy impacts, and inform lending in social protection 
Strengthening Management and Governance of Public Hospital Networks. 
• Support efforts to strengthen hospital networks management  
In the framework of a National Plan proposed by the MoH to construct primary health 
care and hospitals, document what works and what could work better to improve 
innovation and entrepreneurial behavior in the public hospital system 
Higher Education. 
Identify options for higher education to graduate professionals with the knowledge and in 
the numbers required by Argentina’s development 
Pillar 3:  Governance 

• 

• 

Public Sector Management. 
• Performance-management and performance-informed budgeting at the subnational levels 
Provincial Finances. 
• Review provincial performance under Federal Fiscal Responsibility Regime and identify 
options to support provincial fiscal sustainability within the existing inter-governmental 
fiscal system. 

 32

Treasury Services 

93. 
Finally, in addition to lending and AAA, the Bank will ensure the Government ’s 
awareness and knowledge of IBRD financial products that could provide flexibility to 
Argentina in managing its debt, including the ability to change the financial 
characteristics of existing and future loans to better manage the financial risks relating to 
currency, interest rate, roll over and commodity price volatility.  These products can also 
be applied beyond IBRD’s loan portfolio, to gain access to IBRD banking products to be 
applied to Argentina’s other sovereign liabilities (e.g. bonds outstanding, third party 
loans, etc.), thus taking advantage of the preferential pricing that IBRD’s AAA rating 
commands.  Staff of the World Bank’s Treasury are available to review with Government 
the flexibility, depth and breadth of IBRD’s full menu of banking products and services, 
including technical assistance in designing and implementing a broad strategy for public 
debt management aimed at reducing both market risks and overall costs of funding.  

Portfolio and Fiduciary Considerations 

94. 
An important lesson of the previous CAS was that the shift from adjustment 
lending, which dominated Bank lending at the beginning of the decade, to an all-
investment lending program has strained the project implementation capacity of the 
Government, particularly in areas of loan approval processing and the contracting of high 
value civil works.  Therefore Bank will continue efforts to strengthen the capacity of the 
Government to prepare, approve and implement investment projects in line with the 
requirements of a medium-term investment partnership.  Key elements of this strategy 
include (i) support the implementation of new project approval procedures at the national 
level; (ii) improved design, preparation and approval procedures for subnational projects; 
(iii) improved procurement capacity; and (iv) improved fiduciary risk and portfolio 
monitoring.  The emphasis on infrastructure and complex projects also brings an 
increased element of safeguards risks, thus the partnership strategy includes an increased 
focus on safeguards capacity and supervision. 

A. EXTERNAL  

VI. RISKS 

95. 
Adverse External Environment.  Over the next 18 months, Argentina will have 
to weather the global economic crisis and a declining primary fiscal surplus.  External 
factors will negatively impact the terms of trade, fiscal and external positions, and 
competitive devaluations of trading partners.  The country has few financing options, and 
the capital account poses particular risks as a new round of capital outflows would cause 
foreign reserves to drop.  On the internal balances, Federal Government revenues are 
expected to fall by 0.9 percentage points of GDP while primary expenditures would fall 
by only 0.1 percentage points of GDP.  In addition, the provincial primary fiscal surplus 
is expected to further deteriorate.  However, the Government will be able to maintain a 
primary fiscal surplus of about 2.4 percent of GDP in 2009, assuming that commodity 

 33

 
prices stabilize by end-2009 and that the Government manages to contain nominal 
expenditure growth in the face of mid-term elections in 2009.  

96. 
Limited Availability of Counterpart Funds.  Relatedly, a deepening of the 
economic slowdown and deterioration of the fiscal position could result in a decreased 
availability of counterpart funds for the implementation of the Bank’s portfolio.  Should 
this occur, the Bank would respond as it has in previous crises with a restructuring of the 
portfolio.  While such a restructuring would be responsive to the specific needs of the 
country, current contingency discussions anticipate that such a response would further 
rebalance the portfolio toward social safety nets and health services, focusing available 
funds on operations that disburse quickly and provide employment. 

97. High Indebtedness.  Argentina ’s public debt remains high at US$175 billion as 
of end-September 2008, equivalent to 58 percent of GDP.  Medium- and long-term debt 
currently represent nearly 90 percent of total federal obligations, while short-term debt, 
mainly due to the Central Bank and other Government agencies (including ANSES and 
AFIP), accounts for 6 percent of total debt.  Interest and capital arrears represent another 
4 percent of debt.  Once intra-public sector obligations are netted out, public debt as a 
share of GDP is lower (55 percent).  About 52 percent of Argentina ’s debt is 
denominated in foreign currency, while the bulk of the remaining peso-denominated debt 
is indexed to inflation.  The share of foreign currency-denominated and inflation-indexed 
debt has been relatively stable since 2005, and exposure to foreign exchange and inflation 
risk thus remains important.  The Government has stated its intention of clearing arrears 
with Paris Club members and has indicated that it will be making a fresh offer to hold-out 
bond holders.  In addition, the Government is taking further steps to improve liability 
management, including the recently completed debt swap of Guaranteed Loans. 

B. INTERNAL 

98. 
Slowing Economic Growth.  GDP growth is decelerating, as detailed previously.  
Consumer demand and private investment are expected to decline, and external factors 
further complicate the economic outlook.  However, the economy is more resilient than it 
was back in 2001 due to largely solid fundamentals (twin surpluses and sizeable foreign 
reserves) and a small and more solid banking system.  The Government has launched a 
package of countercyclical fiscal measures to mitigate the negative impact of the 
economic slowdown.  In particular, the authorities plan to use their strengthened fiscal 
position from the nationalization of the private pension funds to protect the incomes and 
employment of vulnerable groups through public work programs and through other 
measures aimed at encouraging domestic consumption. 

99. 
Inflationary Pressures.  Inflation remained high in 2008, but it could have begun 
to recede by year-end.  Looking forward, inflation is likely to recede gradually over the 
next two years as recessionary pressures continue to build and declining commodity 
prices contribute to this deflationary trend.   

100. Financing Gap.  The Government will face sizeable financing gaps during the 
period 2009-2011, but they seem manageable if economic policies are prudent.  

 34

Refinancing risks have decreased, in spite of limited access to international financial 
markets and high credit risk.  In addition to IFIs and BCRA resources, the Treasury is 
now allowed to borrow from Banco Naci ón up to 30 percent of its public deposits, which 
would enable it to close the financing gap for 2009.   

101. Potential Threats to Social Cohesion.  If the economic crisis increases the stock 
of poor not covered by social safety nets, pressures to increase coverage and benefits, and 
create ad-hoc new social programs could lead to significant fiscal pressures through 
increased and perhaps less-efficient social spending.  The authorities are working with 
the Bank and IDB to strengthen safety nets in view of the potential deterioration in social 
conditions.  In addition to the threats to social cohesion related to structural problems of 
poverty and inequality covered earlier, the spring 2008 Farm Crisis has exacerbated 
growing divisiveness within the country.  This is likely to manifest itself more strongly in 
increased political risk for the Government than in social instability. 

102. Political and Social Instability.  Mid-term legislative elections were scheduled 
for October, but the Government has advanced them to June.  Polls suggest that the 
Government coalition will face significant competition and will likely have smaller 
majorities.  The resurgence of the farm conflict and defections from the Government's 
majority even before the elections in both chambers have increased uncertainty.  On the 
positive side, however, a smaller majority in Congress could result in more efforts by 
political parties to build consensus to address key national challenges, including working 
out a response to the crisis.  There may also be increased social unrest as the downturn in 
economic activity results in higher unemployment and poverty.  In addition to increasing 
the difficulty of reigning in public spending, this introduces a degree of uncertainty in the 
direction of policy.  Our program however is in areas where there is wide consensus 
focusing on medium to longer term development.   

103. Legal Risks.  Domestic and foreign investors have raised concerns regarding the 
extension of the economic emergency laws and the legality of the evolving policy aimed 
at providing the state with a larger role in the provision of social services and regulation 
of the market.  Additional such measures could risk a weakening of legal certainty and 
rule of law.  Recent nationalization measures risk diminishing confidence in GoA ’s 
credibility regarding contract rights and trigger another round of arbitration cases.  These, 
as well as MIGA’s disengagement, could eventually impact the credibility of Argentina 
vis-a-vis the international financial community and negatively impact the ability to obtain 
financing during the global crisis.  In addition, there are possible legal risks associated 
with the scope and practical application of the Government’s recently-enacted tax 
moratorium, designed to encourage the repatriation of offshore capital.  Concerns have 
been expressed about the law ’s unintended potential to open a gap in Argentina ’s 
defenses against illegal money laundering practices and terrorist financing. 

104. Constrained Ability to Attract Private Capital.  Argentina ’s below-average 
(for middle-income countries) performance on regulatory fronts and high corruption 
perceptions weaken the basis for private investment, particularly in infrastructure.  
Dialogue between the private sector and the Government to explore possible public-
private partnerships would be helpful in mitigating this risk.  

 35

C. RISKS TO THE WORLD BANK GROUP 

105. Strategic and Relationship Risk.  Our program needs to adjust to changing 
needs as the economic downturn deepens.  It is important to re-calibrate our program 
towards shorter term priorities, especially social safety net programs to help protect 
vulnerable groups.  This is also likely to increase disbursements over the next 18 months 
with the objective of moderating or reversing the Bank's negative net transfers to 
Argentina during the global economic crisis.  In addition, we will strive to support 
important visible infrastructure programs to address key infrastructure and environmental 
deficiencies and cement more firmly the Government's demand for our support. 

106. 
Implementation Risk.  This reflects the 100 percent investment composition of 
our lending program, as well as the complex and heterodox economic policy 
environment.  The most important include: (1) weakening in the economic or key sectoral 
policy and institutional frameworks that would undermine the sustainability and 
development impact of the Bank ’s program; and (2) the standard implementation risks of 
a 
large 
investment portfolio 
in partnership with weak 
institutions 
including 
implementation performance, and fiduciary concerns; and (3) safeguards risks inherent to 
the strong focus on infrastructure and complex projects which, while adding value in the 
context of weak institutions, necessitate vigilance and proactivity in supervision.  While 
such risks are common for many countries, the high corruption perceptions, the size of 
the country, and the complex inter-governmental relationships perhaps make Argentina 
particularly challenging. 

107. Conflict over Uruguay Pulp Mill.  The Argentine authorities continue to oppose 
the paper plant being financed in Uruguay by IFC.  However, the authorities are pursuing 
their differences with Uruguay over the plant in other international fora.  In this regard, 
the authorities have also indicated that potentially affected communities should refrain 
from closing transit bridges to Uruguay.  

 36

Annex 1 
Page 1 of 7 

 
 
 
Annex 1 
Page 2 of 7 

Economic Performance 2003-2008 

From 2003 through 2008 the Argentine Government focused its macroeconomic strategy 
on three pillars: maintaining a competitive real exchange rate, fiscal prudence, and active income 
policies.  The fruit of that strategy was GDP growth averaging 8.8 percent in those years, with 
repeated balance-of-payments current account surpluses, declining public sector debt, and 
significant reductions in poverty and extreme poverty. 

That 2003-2008 sustained growth chapter anchored 
in solid macroeconomic 
fundamentals (budget and current account surpluses) is virtually unprecedented in Argentina.  In 
previous times, recurring balance-of-payments problems typically created fiscal sustainability 
problems and made the financial system more vulnerable and unstable.  With an uncompetitive 
tradables sector (in many instances associated to an appreciated real exchange rate, as occurred 
during the 1990s), a constant in previous growth processes was a widening of the current account 
deficit and ultimately balance-of-payments and financial system crises that took a harsh social 
and distributional toll.  

Such turbulence had serious repercussions on the public finances as well.  The public 
account deficits that had been habitual in Argentina prior to 2003-2008 had prompted systematic 
fiscal adjustments which slowed economic growth, with adverse consequences mainly for the 
lowest-income population and for infrastructure spending, a key driver of sustainable long-run 
growth.  In contrast to the primary budget balances of prior decades—deficits averaging 3.1 
percent of GDP in the 1970s, 5.4 percent in the 1970s, and 3.8 percent in the 1980s, then an 
average primary surplus of 0.15 percent of GDP in the 1990s, the 2003-2008 period saw an 
average primary surplus of 3.3 percent of gross output.  Over that latter span the country posted 
its first public sector financial surplus in more than fifty years. 

The economic growth path of these past years cannot be ascribed solely to the above-
mentioned twin surpluses or to a relatively benign international environment:  it also owes much 
to structural changes in investment and economic productivity, diversification of the structure of 
production, workings of the labor market, the financial system, and the public sector. 

Investment and Productivity 

Medium- and long-term growth sustainability depends, among other factors, on 
significant investments to scale up production, transportation, warehousing, and distribution 
capacity and increase productivity of the local supply base. 

Gross fixed domestic investment as a proportion of GDP climbed from 11.3 percent in 
2002 to 19.8 percent in 2005 and to 23.0 percent in 2008—1.9 
percentage points past the 1990s 
high (21.1 percent in 1998).  Moreover, the GDP share of investment in producer durables (the 
investment component that most heavily impacts the economy’s reproduction capacity and 
productivity) jumped from 4.7 percent in 2003 to 10.1 percent in 2008, approaching in the latter 
year Argentina’s all-time highs (over 10 percent in 1961 and in 1977). 

The twofold aim of this suite of investments was to expand capacity, to be able to supply 
the simultaneous increases in domestic and external demand, and to raise productivity.  Increases 
in productivity (measured as the ratio of GDP in constant local currency to employment) took the 
average for this variable to 4.1 percent between 2003 and 2008.  As well as marking a record 
high, this performance, as a ponderable feature, was associated to modernization of production 
plant and equipment, reorganization of plant layouts, and investment in R&D, and not to a 
substitution of capital for labor (a pattern common to previous experiences). 

 
 
 
 
Annex 1 
Page 3 of 7 

National Government public investment increased steadily in 2003-2008, from 1.2 
percent to 3.6 percent of GDP.  The bulk of this spending went to infrastructure, gaps in that area 
being usually one of the most serious bottlenecks to sustained growth of developing economies.  
By way of this approach the public sector helped achieve a high long-term growth rate without 
affecting the budget surplus. 

Structure of Production 

Argentina’s production base became increasi ngly more diversified between 2003 and 
2008, lessening vulnerabilities for sustained GDP growth.  Unlike previous expansion eras, 
economic growth during those years was balanced across the tradables sector (industry, 
agriculture, mining), services (notably tourism), and construction. 

Within the tradable goods sector—a crucial part of the economy for sustained real 
current-account surplus growth—manufacturing became one of the leaders of this expansive 
phase.  The 9.5 percent average annual growth posted by this sector marked a sixty-year high, 
surpassing even the increases of the 1960s, the era of fastest industrial growth in our nation’s 
history. 

This manufacturing growth was not concentrated in a handful of industry sectors but was 
distributed fairly evenly across the industrial aggregate.  For instance, in the past six years, the 
rate of output growth in sectors where small and medium-sized enterprises predominate (textiles, 
garment making, footwear, metal product industries) generally topped the growth rates of sectors 
dominated by larger companies, whether export-oriented (automotive, food, base metals) or 
selling to the home market (construction materials). 

The Argentine export basket likewise became more diverse, as evidenced by the strong 
cumulative growth rates in leading domestic metal industry sectors like the automotive industry 
(+167 percent between 2003 and 2008) and machinery and mechanical devices (+91 percent), as 
well as in railroad equipment (+54 percent) and metal manufactures (+63 percent).  Growth 
increases for medical, optical, and precision instruments (+50 percent) and electric equipment and 
appliances (+73 percent) also outpaced the aggregate. 

The automotive sector weighs heavily in the export basket (accounting for 19 percent of 
the overall increase in exports in constant prices in recent years); other prominent export 
segments were sundry chemical product industries (11 percent), aircraft and aircraft parts (5 
percent), and machinery and mechanical devices (5 percent)—medium-high technology-intensive 
sectors that made considerable inroads into the global marketplace during the period reviewed 
here. 

These moves to diversify Argentine production had as a fundamental backing an 
exchange rate policy that sought to counter real exchange rate appreciation pressures stemming 
from healthy current account surpluses (especially since early 2007, when agricultural commodity 
prices skyrocketed), keeping “Dutch disease” at ba y.  In addition to diversifying its export basket 
in 2003-2008, Argentina recorded one of Latin America’s highest year-on-year increases in 
export volume. 

Social Inclusion 

The above-described growth chapter was associated 
to steady reductions 
in 
unemployment, poverty, and extreme poverty rates and real-wage increases, which improved both 
personal income distribution (Gini) and factor income distribution.  On the labor market side, 
employment-output elasticity averaged a record 0.6 in 2003-2008, a result of steady GDP 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 1 
Page 4 of 7 

increases, diversification of production (with labor-intensive industry sectors contributing 
heavily), and intensive investment. 

A combination of rising 
labor demand and a stable participation rate drove 
unemployment rates down from 19.7 percent in the fourth quarter of 2003 to 7.6 percent in the 
same period in 2008.  The declining unemployment rate, in turn, systematically pushed up wages 
(nominal and real), which recovered completely from their shrinkage during the previous phase of 
job market decline.  Between 2002 and 2008 the wage bill-to-GDP ratio increased from 34.6 
percent to 43.6 percent, making for a more equitable income distribution. 

Complementing the labor market’s internal dynamic was the National Government’s 
active income policy.  By way of example, systematic adjustments of the minimum wage (a 
cumulative increase of 520 percent between January 2003 and December 2008) were intended to 
make sure that wage increases reached primarily lower income workers, so as to maximize the 
poverty and indigence reduction that comes with labor market recovery. 

As for the situation of retirees and pensioners, between 2003 and 2008 the National 
Government increased average pension benefits by a cumulative 44 percent, in real terms.  The 
recently enacted Pension Portability Law (October 2008) provides for two automatic pension 
adjustments annually, tied to observed increases in wages in the economy and tax and social 
security revenue intakes. 

The Social Insurance Inclusion Plan furthered the pro-elderly income policy by giving 
pension entitlement to people who had been left out of the current pension system because of 
unregistered employment or unemployment problems.  Bringing over 1.3 million new people into 
the social security system has raised coverage rates for women over 60 and men over 65 to more 
than 70 percent in 2008 (85 percent for those over 65), up from 49 percent in 2003 and, together 
with the aforementioned increase in pension benefits, contributed to virtually eradicate severe 
poverty among older adults. 

Against that backdrop, the recent transfer of private pension fund contributors to the 
public pension system was primarily intended to ensure continual increases in benefits to all 
Argentine pensioners, the private system’s inadeq uate investments having jeopardized the income 
of its contributors in the short and medium term. 

Financial System Stability 

The recent economic growth chapter unfolded concurrently with the rehabilitation of the 
financial system, which had suffered the consequences of the late-1990s crisis.  During that 
period the system’s soundness indicators had been alarming: bank liquid holdings as a percentage 
of total deposits was a 19.6 percent low; some 40 percent of all private commercial bank loans 
were classed as substandard, public sector lending exposure was around 50 percent, bank 
liabilities were excessively dollarized (49 percent), and there were severe mismatches between 
loans’ currency of denomination and the currenc y received by borrowers, both for corporate and 
household loans. 

Prudential regulations adopted since 2003 have made bank balance sheets sounder and 
more robust.  That move, together with the economic growth dynamic, has produced structural 
improvements in the condition of local financial institutions.  In January 2009, financial system 
liquidity was just under 30 percent of total deposits, with a public sector lending exposure of just 
12.5 percent (an all-time low); the arrears rate for private commercial bank loans was 3.3 percent 
of total private credit, and banks have been posting record profits since 2006.  These strengths 
signal a difference relative not just to previous growth eras in Argentina but also to the 

 
 
 
 
Annex 1 
Page 5 of 7 

environment that other countries’ financial sy stems, in developed and developing economies 
alike, are currently navigating. 

The Argentine authorities also brought in a package of regulations to reduce exchange 
risk, to mitigate one of the greatest drivers of instability in the domestic financial system.  For 
example, dollar deposits in the local banking system can be used only for foreign trade finance.  
Thus, at present, foreign-currency deposits make up no more than 20 percent of total system 
deposits.  

Fiscal Sustainability 

Thanks to the existence of a systematic primary budget surplus in a growing economy, 
the national public sector gross debt stock plummeted from 138.7 percent of GDP in 2003 to 48.5 
percent in 2008.  That improvement, along with the 2005 public debt restructuring and the recent 
bonds-for-loans swap, trimmed the debt and in the process created a sustainable debt maturity 
profile. 

Consequently, Argentina’s public accounts now are sound for the short, medium, and 
long term.  Interest payments on the public debt come to barely 6.6 percent of national 
government revenues, down from the December 2002 level of 13.5 percent, and borrowing 
requirements will decline nominally starting in 2010 and systematically through 2014. 

Since new debt offerings were mainly local currency bonds, the public sector debt’s 
foreign currency exposure dropped from virtually 100 percent in 2001 to just 52.5 percent in 
2008, further reducing the economy’s external vul nerability.  The share of variable-rate debt 
declined as well, from 34.8 percent in 2002 to 27 percent today. 

This improvement in fiscal sustainability indicators was not achieved at the expense of 
social line items.  Social expenditure of the consolidated public sector (aggregate national, 
provincial, and municipal government outlays) rose from 19.2 percent of GDP in 2003 to 23.7 
percent in 2008.  Education took up 36 percent of the increase (60 percent of it for basic 
education), health spending 19 percent, and social security 33 percent (the above-mentioned 
Social Insurance Inclusion Plan figuring prominently in the latter). 

A final noteworthy item is the increase in the Water Supply and Sewerage and the 
Housing budget lines.  Though these two items have less relative weight in the structure of social 
spending, both increased in GDP share terms by 180 percent and 97 percent respectively, and 
accounted for 11 percent of the overall growth in social expenditure. 

Avenues of Transmission of the Global Crisis 

The worldwide crisis is being transmitted via two channels: finance and trade.  Because 
of the nature of Argentina’s growth between 2003 and 2008, financed fundamentally with 
domestic savings (the flip side of the current account surplus), its economy was better equipped 
than ever in its history to fend off financial contagion.  In Argentina the crisis would be felt 
almost exclusively via the trade avenue, though thanks to some of the structural changes 
mentioned above its impact was attenuated. 
Financial Channel 

The global crisis has spread chiefly through the financial channel; in most developing 
economies this triggered a flight to safe assets.  In numerous instances—especially in economies 
running current account deficits—the reversal 
of the capital account balance prompted severe 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 1 
Page 6 of 7 

exchange adjustments and led to drops in countries’ stock and bond values and in local bank 
system deposits. 

This time, unlike past episodes of global turbulence, Argentina was not affected via the 
financial avenue; there was no significant exchange adjustment or any significant contraction of 
bank system deposits.  The nation’s continuing budget and current account surpluses minimized 
the impact of the external financing crunch, and its healthy international reserve stocks, bolstered 
financial system mentioned earlier, and dedollarization of local contracts kept the local money 
and currency markets stable. 

Thanks to the exchange rate policy pursued in recent years there was less volatility in the 
nominal exchange rate.  Since September 2008 Latin American currencies have undergone strong 
nominal depreciations against the U.S. dollar, ranging from 7.7 percent to 13.2 percent.  But 
Argentina was able to manage the value of its currency with the dual aim of remaining 
competitive and keeping the financial system stable, as reflected in the low 5.3 percent volatility 
observed in the depreciation of the local currency when the crisis deepened following the collapse 
of Lehman Brothers. 

A continuing current account surplus in 2009 will keep the Argentine economy’s external 
and financial sectors stable.  On the public finance side, the Government’s strategy to preserve 
fiscal sustainability by means of liability management and local borrowing operations to ensure 
that the State can honor its commitments, will cement the nation’s strong position in an adverse 
global climate. 

Trade Channel 

Trade is the second avenue of transmission of the global crisis.  The worldwide economic 
downturn is showing up in slipping export growth in the different countries. Argentina has felt the 
adverse impact of this transmission channel in recent months, but its 2003-2008 growth dynamic 
has made it more resilient. 

Recent years have seen a diversification in Argentine export destinations, with 
diminishing exposure to the industrialized economies17 (in which growth will slow as a result of 
the present turmoil) and more sales to recent rapid growth economies (where growth will be 
comparatively high, albeit slower than in the recent past). 

About 60 percent of Argentine exports are products with low elasticity to declines in 
global income, such as food products.  Consequently, the falloff in external demand will be 
confined mostly to a cluster of local sectors, such as the automotive or steel industries, whose 
export sales are highly sensitive to global activity levels and in which the government has 
instituted specific policies to boost domestic demand. 

The makeup of Argentina’s export basket also leaves it less exposed to commodity price 
drops.  Generally, countries that export food, energy, and mining commodities are hurt by drops 
in world prices, but price corrections of Argentina’s agricultural export commodities were less 
severe than for other products (such as some metal minerals), since previous price movements for 
these items were not the result of largely speculative factors but of the rising demand for corn and 
soya for alternative energy production, and sustained demand in emerging nations. 

17 In 2008, the United States and the Eurozone took up 7 percent and 19 percent, respectively, of Argentine exports; 
MERCOSUR and the ASEAN-China-India bloc accounted for 23 percent y 15 percent, respectively. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Annex 1 
Page 7 of 7 

Outlook for 2009-2010 

Comparatively speaking, Argentina is solidly positioned to weather the global crisis, both 
by virtue of its own experience and relative to other developed and developing economies.  This 
strong position is grounded not just in the country ’s continuing “twin” surpluses but also in the 
structural changes that took place in 2003-2008: an increase in economic productivity, 
diversification of production, reductions in unemployment and poverty, improvements in the 
income distribution, financial system rehabilitation, and bolstering of the public finances. 

Given this backdrop, domestic economic policy should be able to manage the global 
crisis via the usual fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate instruments, with the aim of easing the 
impact of the global turmoil on Argentina’s macroeconomic aggregates without the need for a 
restructuring of private-sector balance sheets.  The immediate challenge is to keep the global 
troubles from affecting investment in infrastructure and social protection, as occurred in previous 
episodes of crisis in our region.  Public investment and social spending will be critical, given their 
positive impact on the economy’s systemic compe titiveness and what such expenditure can do to 
protect social welfare gains. 

 
 
 
 
  
A

n
n

e

x

2

P

a

g

e

1

o

f

5

A

r

g

e

n

t

i

n

a

C

P

S

R

e

s

u

l

t

s

F

r

a

m

e

w

o

r

k

P

I

L
L

R
A

1

-

S

U

S

T

A

I

A
N

E
L
B

G

R

O

W

T

H

W

I

T

H

E

Q

U

I

T

Y

C

o
a
o

d
n
S
d
n
n
u

t

r

y

t

r

a

t

e
c

o
g
a

i

r
c

G

l

s

a

I

i

t

s

s
s
I

u

e

s

a

d
n

O

b

s

t

a

c

l

e

s

O

u

t

c

x
o

m

c
e
e

s

t
t

h

e

B

a

u
k
n
n

P

r
e
c
r
e

g
o

a

m

E

p

s

t

o

I

f

l

n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

I

n

s

t

r

u

m

e

n

t

s

1

.

I

n

f

r

a

s

t

r

u

c

t

u

e
r

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n

t

U

n
d
p
n
d
n
n
n
p
h
p
n
d
p
n
n
u

a
a
g

s
s
e
e
e
s
c
e
r
e
r
r
s
r
e
s
r

n
u
d

A

e
e
r
r

g

n

i
t
t

d
d
n

a
a

s

i

f

t

t
t
i
t
i
i
i
t

u

o

s
s
e
r

c
c

o
o

t

a

o

m

v

,

a

d
n

m

i

u

m

t
-
t

r
e

m

g
a

e
r

v
o

w

t
i

a
o

v
o

r
e

y

l
l

a

i
t

.

R

a

t

e

o

f

i

n

r
f

s
a

r
t

u

c

t

u

r

e

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

h

s
a

b

e
e

n

h

i

h
g

l

y

v

a

i
r

a

b

l

e

,

d

c
e

i
l

n

i

g
n

r
f

o

m

3

%

o

f

D
G

P

i

n

t

h

e

0
8
9
1

s

t

o

1

.

7

%

i

n

t

h

e

0
9
9
1

s

t

o

l

s
s
e

t

h

a

n

0

.

5

%

i

n

5
9
9
1

-

3
0
0
2

.

 B

o

l
t
t

e

n

c
e

k

s

i

n

r
t

a

n

s

m

i

s
s

i

n
o

o

f

e

l

c
e

i
r
t

c

t
i

y

a

d
n

l

o

w

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

l

e

v

e

l

s

i

n

d

i

s

i
r
t

u
b

i
t

n
o

p

a

r
i

e

d

w

t
i

h

a

s

t

e
e

p

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

i

n

e

l

c
e

i
r
t

c

t
i

y

c

n
o

s

u

m

p

i
t

n
o

a

d
n

r

e

r
t

e

n

c

h

m

e

n

t

y
b

p

i
r

v

a

t

e

i

v
n

s
e

t

o

r

s

 4

%

o

f

u
p
o
p

l

a

i
t

n
o

(

m

a

i

n

l

y

r

u

r

a

)
l

l

c
a

k

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

e

l

c
e

i
r
t

c

t
i

y

.

 N

e
e

d

f

o

r

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

d

s

o

c

i

a

l

a

d
n

e

v
n

r
i

n
o

m

e

n

t

a

l

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

a
c

p

c
a

t
i

y

i

n

e

x

r
t

c
a

i
t

v

e

i

u
d
n

s

i
r
t

s
e

c
e
s

t

o

r

a

d
n

f

o

r

e

n

f

o

r

c

i

g
n

s
e

t

a

b

i
l

s

h

e

d

r

e

u
g

l

a

t

o

r

y

a

d
n

i
f

a
c
s

l

r

e

g

i

m

s
e

.

 W

a

t

e

r

c

n
o

t

a

m

i

n

a

i
t

n
o

,

s
e

p

c
e

i

a

l
l

y

i

n

t

h

e

M

a

t

a

n

a
z

-

R

i

c
a

u
h

e

l

o

a

d
n

R

c
e

u
q
n
o

i

s

t

a

u

r

b

a

n

i
r

v

e

r

b

s
a

i

n

s

,

i

s

a

g

r

a

v

e

c

n
o

e
c

r

n

,

s
a

i

s

s

o

i
l

d

w

s
a

t

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

.
t

T

r

a

n

s

o
p

t
r

N

e

t

w

o

r

k

I

m

p

r

v
o

e

d

s
a

i

d
n

i

a
c

t

e

y
b
d

a

l
8
1
t
l

s
a
e

t

0
9

%

o

f

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

a

p
d
n

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

p

a

v

e

n
o
n
d

-

c

n
o

s
s
e
c

i

n
o

e

d

r

o

a

d

s

i

d
o
o
g
n

c

d
n
o

i
t
i

n
o

(

m

a

i

n

t

a

i

n

e

d

w

t
i

h

e
c
c
a

p

t

a

b

l

e

a

v

e

r

a

g

e

r

n
h
g
u
o

s
s
e

I
(

R

I

<

4

)

t

o

a

o
v

i

d

c
c
a

u

m

u

l

a

i
t

n
o

o

f

f

u

t

u

r

e

i
l

a

b

i
t
i
l
i

s
e

a

d
n

r

e

u
d

e
c

p
o

e

r

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

c

o

s

t

s

)

,

a

d
n

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

a
c

p

c
a

t
i

y

i

n

k

e

y

e
s

g

m

e

n

t

s

o

f

t

h

e

n

e

t

w

o

r

k

.

 I

m

p

r

v
o

e

m

e

n

t

s

i

b
u
p
n

i
l

c

r
t

a

n

s

o
p

t
r

i

n

r
f

s
a

r
t

u

c

t

u

r

e

i
(

n

t

e

g

r

a

i
t

n
o

,

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

,

e

t

c

.

)

a

d
n

s

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

i

g
n

o

f

i

n

s

t
i
t

u

i
t

n
o

a

l

p

l

a

n
n

i

g
n

a
c

p

c
a

i
t
i

s
e

i

n

t

h

e

B

u

e

o
n

s

A

r
i

s
e

M

e

r
t

o
p
o

t
i
l

a

n

R

e

g

i

n
o

a

d
n

e
s

l

c
e

t

e

d

m

e

d

i

u

m

s

i

e
z

c

i
t
i

s
e

.

 I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

r

u

r

a

l

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

e

l

c
e

i
r
t

c

t
i

y

s

p
p
u

l

y

   I

m

p

r

v
o

e

d

A

s
s
e
c
c

t

o

W

a

t

e

r

a

d
n

S

a
•

n

t
i

a

i
t

n
o

,

s
a

i

d
n

i

a
c

t

e

d

y
b

:

I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

w

a

t

e

r

t

h

r

h
g
u
o

u
o
h

e
s

c

n
n
o

c
e

i
t

n
o

s

t

3
8
o

%

i

1
1
0
2
n

.

•

I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

e
s

w

e

r

a

g

e

t

o

2
6

%

i

1
1
0
2
n

.

•

6
1

,

0
0
7

k

m

o

f

t

h

e

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

n

e

t

w

o

r

k

m

a

n

a

g

e

d

t

h
g
u
o
h

R
C

E

M

A

.

•

2

,

4
0
1

k

m

o

f

t

h

e

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

n

e

t

w

o

r

k

m

a

n

a

g

e

d

t

h

r

h
g
u
o

R
C

E

M

A

.

•

6
3
1

k

m

o

f

u
d

a

l

a
c

i
r
r

a

g

e

w

a

y

s

c

n
o

s

r
t

u

c

t

e

d

.

     A

n

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

o

f

5

%

i

b
u
p
n

i
l

c

r
t

a

n

s

o
p

t
r

i
r

d

e

r

s

h

i

p

i

n

A

M

A
B

(

B

u

e

o
n

s

A

r
i

s
e

)

,

a

o
d
n

f

5

%

i

n

e
s

l

c
e

t

e

d

m

e

d

i

u

m

s

i

e
z

c

i
t
i

s
e

.

  •

u
o
h
0
0
0
5
2

,

e
s

o
h

l

d

s

e

l

c
e

i
f
i
r
t

e

d

w

t
i

h

s

u

s

t

a

i

n

a

b

l

e

e

l

c
e

i
r
t

c

t
i

y

e
s

r

v

i

s
e
c

y
b

2
1
0
2

•

0
0
0
2

r

u

r

a

l

c
s

o
o
h

l

s

e

l

c
e

i
f
i
r
t

e

d

w

t
i

h

r

e

i
l

a

b

l

e

,

r

e

n

e

w

a

b

l

e

e

l

c
e

i
r
t

c

t
i

y

s

p
p
u

l

y

y
b

2
1
0
2

 

E

p
x

a

d
n

w

a

t

e

r

a

d
n

e
s

w

a

g

e

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

f

o

r

8
2
1

,

0
0
0

o
o
p

r

r

s
e

i

d

e

n

t

s

i

n

a

r

s
a
e

o

f

A
B

P

r

v
o

i

n

e
c

w

t
i

h

h

i

h
g

a
s

n

t
i

a

r

y

o

r

e

v
n

r
i

n
o

m

e

n

t

a

l

u
v

l

n

e

r

a

b

t
i
l
i

y

.



I

n

i
t
i

a

t

e

c

n
o

s

r
t

u

c

i
t

n
o

o

f

r
t

k
n
u

c

o

l
l

c
e

i
t

n
o

,

r
t

a

n

s

m

i

s
s

i

n
o

,

r
t

a
e

t

m

e

n

t

a

d
d
n

i

s

o
p

a
s

l

i

n

r
f

s
a

r
t

u

c

t

u

r

e

f

o

r

G

r

a
e

t

e

r

B

u

e

o
n

s

A

r
i

s
e

a

r

a
e

.



R

e

u
d

e
c

l
f

d
o
o

i
r

s

k

i

n

A
B

c

t
i

y

a

d
n

C

o

i
r
r

e

n

t

s
e

.

N

a
a

i
t

o

n

a

l

H

i

g

h

w

y
a

A

e
s
s

t

M

a

n

g
a

e

m

e

n

t

A

P

L

I

d
n

I
I

(

r
a

v
o
v
p
o
p

i
r

e
c

d
a

F

Y
R

4
a
0
o

I
I
a

d
n

F

Y

7
0

,

r

s
e

p

c
e

i
t

v

e

l

y

)

P

n

i

l

d

(

d
E
L

N

)

C

r

o

b

a

R

a
o

d

I

n

f

r

a

s

t

r

u

c

t

u

e
r

+

A

F

(

a
I

v
o
o
a
p
p

r

e
r
s
s

d

u
F

Y

7
0

r
r
a

d
o
a
n

E
L

N

,

t
r

r
c
e
e
s
e
e
r
r

p

i
t

1
v
v
o

e

,
l
i

y

)

n
u
F
n
S

f

r
e

t

u

I
e
r
s
e
r
c

t
i

P
n

j

c
r
e
s

t

f

o

h

P
P

n

e
I
c
I

o
a

f

B
A

n

A

f

t

u

c

t

u

(

A

L

d
n

t
)

(

e
a

p
p

r

v
a
o
o

e

d

F
n

Y

5
0
a

,

u
F

Y

7
0

a
e
r

d
n

E
L

N

)
t

a

a

F

R

d

I

f

r

s

t

r

c

t

u

P

r

o

j

c
e

(

a
r
r

p
p
g
a

r

v
o

e

d
a
o

F

Y

o
7
0

)

A
T

s
e

n
p
n
n

i
t

M

e
r

j
t

c
e
r

p

o

t
i
l
(

a

n

A
A
U
T

e
r

a

s

U

r

b

a

n

r

t

P

o

t

P

M

)

(

E
u
P
L

N

)

A
A
B
U
T
B

e

n

o

s

i
)

s
e
r

A
U

r

n
d
b
d

a

T

r

a
a

n
p
F
n

s

a
o

r

t

n
P
n

r

g
o

j

c
e

t

(

a

d
n

i
t
i

o

n

l

i

c

i

(

a

p
p

r

v
o

e

d

F

Y

7
9

a

d
n

F

Y

7
0

)

  P

R
E

M

R
E

+

A

d
d

i
t
i

o

n

a

l

n
F

i

a

n

c

i

n

g

(

a

v
o
a
p
o
p

l
r

c
e
e

d

F

Y

d
o
n
a
9
9

a
c

F
n

Y

9
0
a

)

R

u
P

c
e
r

E

l
(

t

r

i
f
i

i
t

d
n

E

n

r
e

y
g

E

i
f
f

c

i

e

n

c

y

r

j

t

P

R
E

M

R
E

I
I

)

(

E
L

N

)

 U

r

b
d
n

2
a

F
n

l

o
o

P
d

e
r

v

e

n

i
t

o

n

a

d
n

D

r

a

i

n

g
a

e

(

A

P

L

1

a

)

(

a

p
p
a

r
i

v
o

e

d

F
n
u

Y

5
a
0

a

d
n

F

Y

6
0

)

B

s

c

M

i

c

i

p

l

S

r
e

v

i

s
e
c

(

a

p
p

r

v
o
o

e
s

d

F

Y

6
0

)

B

n
d
u
n

e

A
L

i
-

s
e
r

P

r

v
o

i

n

e
c

I

n

f

r

a

s

t

r

u

c

t

u

e
r

(

A

P

L

-

1

a

A

P

2

)

(

a

d
a
v
o
o
a
p
a
v
p

r
t

e
z

F

Y
R

5
0
a

c
e
e
a

d
o
n

F

A
Y
B

7
0
a

)

M

p
n

-

i

c

u
h
P

l
j

s

i

u
S
n
P

s

t
)

a

i

n

a

b

l

e

D

e

e

l

m

e

n

t

r

o

t

(

L

-

1

(

E
L

N

)

8
1

I

p
n

a

r

i
t

c

i

p

a

n

t

P

r

v
o

i

n

e
c

s

:

B

u

e

o
n

s

A

i

r

e

s

,

C

r

b
o
d

a

,

S

a

n

t

a

F

e

,

E

n

t

r

e

R

o

s

,

C

u
b
u
h

,
t

C

o

r
r

i

e

n

t

e

s

,

N

e

u
q
u

é

n

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ó
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ó
 
 
 
 
í
 
 
 
 
 
A

n
n

e

x

2

P

a

g

e

2

o

f

5

P

I

L
L

R
A

1

-

S

U

S

T

A

I

N

E

D

G

R

O

W

T

H

W

I

T

H

E

Q

U

I

T

Y

C

o
a
o

d
n
S
d
n
n
u

t

r

y

t

r

a

t

e
c

o
g
a

i

r
c

G

l

s

a

I

i

t

s

s
s
I

u

e

s

a

d
n

O

b

s

t

a

c

l

e

s

O

u

t

c

x
o

m

c
e
e

s

t
t

h

e

B

a

u
k
n
n

P

r
e
c
r
e

g
o

a

m

E

p

s

t

o

I

f

l

n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

I

n

s

t

r

u

m

e

n

t

s

2

.

T

o

w

a

r

d

s

M

o

e
r

u
S

s

t

a

i

n

a

b

l

e

R

u

r

a

l

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n

t

a

d
n

E

n

v

i

r

o

n

m

e

n

t

a

l

M

a

n

g
a

e

m

e

n

t

I

m

p
u
q

r

v
y
o

e

c

o

m

p
d
p
n

e

t
i
t
i
t

v

e
s
s
e
r

n

s
s
e

,

a
o
g
a

t
i
l
i

i
t
t
,
l

a

d
n
n
u

e

x

v
o

o
o

f

r
r

c

u
u
d

e
r

a

i
l

t

c

k

p

c

o

 A

b
d
d
p
d

s
s
e
e
r

g
o
a
o

s
e
r
r

o

w

i

n
u

g

r
e

o
g

l

m

f

o

e
c
r

r

a

d

a

i
t

n

.

B

u

l
i

d

i

g
n

a

n

e

v

e

n

m

o

r

e

c

o

m

p

e

i
t
i
t

v

e

,

d

i

v

e

r

s

i
f
i

e

d

a

d
n

i

n

c

l

u

s

i

v

e

a

g

i
r

c

u

t
l

u

r

a

l

c
e
s

t

o

r

w

l
l
i

r

e

u
q

r
i

e

s

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

e

n
d

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

a

d
n

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

i

n

s

t
i
t

u

i
t

n
o

s

.

 M

d
o

e

r

n

i

a
z

i
t

n
o

o

f

r

a
e
s
e

r

c

h

,

e

x

t

e

n

s

i

n
o

a

d
n

r

e

u
g

l

a

t

o

r

y

r
f

a

m

e

w

o

r

k

f

o

r

f

u
q
d
o
o

a

t
i
l

y

a

d
n

a
s

f

e

t

y

i

s

r

e

u
q

r
i

e

d

t

o

e

n

s

u

r

e

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

a

d
n

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

d

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

e

o
p
x

t
r

m

a

r

k

e

t

s

a

d
n

p

r

o

t

c
e

i
t

n
o

o

f

o
d

m

s
e

i
t

c

c

n
o

s

u

m

e

r

s

.

 E

p
x

a

n

s

i

n
o

o

f

s

y
o

p

r

u
d
o

c

i
t

n
o

h

s
a

f

u

e

l

e

d
d

e

f

o

r

s
e

t

a

i
t

n
o

.

 P

o
o

r

w

a

t

e

r

r

s
e

u
o

r

e
c

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

h

s
a

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

l

a

d
n

d

e

g

r

a

d

a

i
t

n
o

,

a

p
d
n

s
e

i
t

c

i

d

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

p

r

c
a

i
t

s
e
c

h

a

v

e

r

a

i

e
s

d

e

v
n

r
i

n
o

m

e

n

t

a

l

h

a
e

t
l

h

c

n
o

e
c

r

n

s

.

 .

I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

t

h

e

d

i

v

e

r

s

i
f
i

a
c

i
t

o
n
o

f

p

r

u
d
o

c

i
t

n
o

i

n

t

h

e

a

g

i
r

c

u

t
l

u

r

a

l

c
e
s

t

o

r

y
b

p

r

o

m

o

i
t

g
n

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

p

r

u
d
o

c

i
t

v

t
i

y

a

d
n

c

o

m

p

e

i
t
i
t

v

e

n

s
s
e

o

f

t

h

e

r

e

g

i

n
o

a

l

c
e

o
n
o

m

i

s
e

.

   I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

p
0
3
y
b

e

r

e
c

n

t

a

r

s
a
e

o

f

f

o

r

s
e

t

a

d
n

f

o

r

s
e

t

p

l

a

n

t

a

i
t

n
o

s

d
n
u

e

r

s

u

s

t

a

i

n

a

b

l

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

       I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

i

n

u

r

b

a

n

w

s
a

t

e

 D

e

v

e

l

p
o

a

d
n

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

s

o

i
l

d

w

s
a

t

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

s

r
t

a

t

e

g

i

s
e

.

    I

m

p

r

v
o

e

d

e

v
n

r
i

n
o

m

e

n

t

a

l

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

v
o
g
d
n
a
•
•

e

r

n

a

n

e
c

,

s
a

i

d
n

i

a
c

t

e

y
b
d

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

r
t

a

n

s

p

a

r

e

n

c

y

a

d
n

a

m

o

r

e

p

a

i
t
r

c

i

p

a

t

o

r

y

a

p
p

r

o

c
a

h

i

n

t

h

e

m

i

n

i

g
n

c
e
s

t

o

r

i

n

A

r

g

e

n

i
t

n

a

 I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

i

n

t

e

r

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

a
c

r

n
o
b

m

a

r

k

e

t

s



P

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

A

g

i
r

c

u

t
l

u

r

a

l

D

e

v

t

S

r
t

a

t

e

g

i

s
e

d

s
e

i

n
g

e

d

a

d
n
u
d
n

e

r

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

a

i
t

n
o

i

n

a

t

l

s
a
e

t

2
1

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

.



0
5

%

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

m

e

n

t

i

n

e

i
f
f

c

i

e

n

c

o
y

f

i
r
r
i

g

a

i
t

n
o

s

y

s

t

e

m

s

a

2
d
n

%

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

m

e

n

t

i

n

r

o

a

d

r
t

a

n

s

o
p

t
r

a

i
t

n
o

i

n

P

O
R

S

A

P

a

r

s
a
e

.

 •

P

r

o
p
o

a
s

l

f

o

r

t

h

e

s

u

s

t

a

i

n

a

b

l

e

u

e
s

a

d
n

p

r

o

t

c
e

i
t

o
n
o

f

n

a

i
t

v

e

f

o

r

s
e

t

s

a

d
n

b

i

d
o

i

v

e

r

s

t
i

y

p

r

e

p

a

r

e

d

•
•

i

n

s

t
i
t

u

i
t

n
o

a

l

i
f

e

l

d

a
c

p

c
a

t
i

y

.

P

r

o

t

c
e

t

e

d

a

r

a
e

s

y

s

t

e

m

c

o

r

e

a

r

s
a
e

a

d
n

c

o

i
r
r

o
d

r

s

s
e

t

a

b

i
l

s

h

e

d

i

n

c

i
t
i
r

a
c

l

c
e

o

r

e

g

i

n
o

s

;

s

n
y

e

r

y
g

b

e

t

w

e
e

n

f

o

r

s
e

r
t

y

a

d
n

c

n
o

e
s

r

v

a

i
t

n
o

i

n

i
t
i

a

i
t

v

s
e

c

r

a
e

t

e

d

 •

p
5
1

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

a

d
n

m

n
u

i

c

i

p

a

l

s

o

i
l

d

w

s
a

t

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

p

l

a

n

s

c

o

m

p

l

e

t

e

d

y
b

2
1
0
2

•

4

a
s

n

t
i

a

r

y

l

a

d
n

l
l
i
f

s

u
b

t
l
i

a

d
n

p
o

e

r

a

i
t

g
n

y
b

2
1
0
2

•

A

t

l

s
a
e

t

5

m

a

j

o

r

s

o

i
l

d

w

s
a

t

e

u
d

m

p

s

t
i

s
e

c

l

o

e
s

d

y
b

2
1
0
2

 •

1

m

i

n

i

g
n

s

t
i

e

(

M

a

l

güe
a

r

)

a
s

f

e

l

y

c

n
o

t

a

i

n

e

d

a

d
n

a

p
p

r

p
o

i
r

a

t

e

c

l

o

s

u

r

e

p

l

a

n

s

p

r

e

p

a

r

e

d

f

o

r

a

o
n

t

h

e

r

8

s

t
i

s
e

 •

N

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

R

E

D
D

s

r
t

a

t

e

y
g

a

d
n

m

n
o

t
i

o

i
r

g
n

s

y

s

t

e

m

f

o

r

e

m

i

s
s

i

n
o

s

a

d
n

e

m

i

s
s

i

n
o

s

r

e

u
d

c

i
t

n
o

s

p

r

e

p

a

r

e

d

.

•

1

D
C

M

p

r

o

j

c
e

,
t

s
e

i
t

m

a

t

e

d

a

u
n
n

a

l

r

e

u
d

c

i
t

n
o

s

o

f

6
7
1

,

2
2
6

O
C

2

t

n
o

s

)

•

R

e

u
d

c

i
t

n
o

o

f

5
2
1

,

2
0
5

O
C

2

t

n
o

s

y
b

t

w

o

s

t

a

d
n

a

l

n
o

e

D
C

M

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

P

R

O

S

A

P

I

a

d
n

I
I

(

a

p
p

r

v
o

e

d

F

Y
R
E
D
N

7
0
a

a

d
n

F
F

Y

9
0

)

P

R

O

I

d
n

A

(

a

p
p

r

v
o

e

d

F

Y

8
9

a

d
n

F

Y

8
0

)

 I

D
R
B

u
S

e
s

t

a

t
i

b
P
n
n

a

j
l

c
e
e

N

a

t

u

r

a

l

R

s
e

o

u

s
e
c
r

M

a

n

g
a

e

m

r

o

t

.

(

a

p
p

r

d
o
y
v
o

e

F
d

Y

8
0

)
t
i

G

E

F

B

i

i

v
a

c
s
s
r
e

y
a

C

o

n

r
e
s

a
v

i
t

o

n

i

P
n

r

o

u
d

c

i
t

v

e

F

o

s
e
r

t

r

L

d
n

p

s
e

(

a

p
p

r

v
o

r
e

o
a
d
a
v

F

C
Y

7
o
0

)

G

E
C

F
n

R

u

l
i
t

r
r

i

d

o

s
r

a

d
n

B

i

o

d

i

v

s
r
e

t
i

y

o

r
e
s

n

(

F

Y

0
1

)

   S

o

i
l

d

W

a

s

t

e

M

a

n

g
a

e

m

e

n

t

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

a

p
p

r

v
o

e

d

F

Y

6
0

)

i
   M

n
n

i

g

E

n

v

i

r

o

n

m

e

n

t

a

l

R

s
e

t

o

r

a

i
t

o

P
n

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

e
a

9
0
a
a
a
v
a
a
d
a
v
o
o
p
p

r

e
r

F

Y

)

P

t

r

b

s

G

s

T
L

r

a

n
d
n

s

p

o

r

t

S

a
a
y

s

t

e

m

P
u
u
p
p

r
e
e
r
r

o

j

c
c
e
e
c
e
r
r

t
j
j

(

F

Y

0
1

)

,
,

S

t
l
l

a

l
t
l
i
f

G

a
a

e
s

C
C

t
t

P
P

o
o

t
t

(

F

Y

8
0

)

O

ría
r

M

e

h

n

F

Y
C
C

o
o
5
0
a
a
o

)

s
e
r
r
r

b
b

n
F
P
n
n

i

a

F
n
p
h
P
n
n
n
b

s
e
r
c
e

A
T

(

a

p
p
a

t
i
l
i
r
i

y
v
o

e

d

F

Y

7
0

)

a
a

r
r

t

t
i

c
s
r
e

F

t

C

o

a

r

F
p
h

a

c

t
i
l
i

y

(

F

Y

9
0

)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

n
n

e

x

2

P

a

g

e

3

o

f

5

P

I

L
L

R
A

2

-

S

O

C

I

A

L

I

C
N

L

U

S

I

O

N

C

o
a
o

d
n
S
d
n
n
u

t

r

y

t

r

a

t

e
c

o
g
a

i

r
c

G

l

s

a

I

i

t

s

s
s
I

u

e

s

a

d
n

O

b

s

t

a

c

l

e

s

O

u

t

c

x
o

m

c
e
e

s

t
t

h

e

B

a

u
k
n
n

P

r
e
c
r
e

g
o

a

m

E

p

s

t

o

I

f

l

n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

I

n

s

t

r

u

m

e

n

t

s

1

.

p
p
u
S

o

r

t

i

n

g

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

T

o

w

a

r

d

s

P

r
e

m

a

n

e

n

t

S

a

f

e

t

y

N

e

t

s

a

d
n

F

o

s

t

r
e

i

n

g

E

m

p

l

y
o

m

e

n

t

C

o

n
p
n

s

o
v
o
o

i
l

d

a
y
g
a
v
o
v
a
a
o
a

t

e

t

h
d
n

e
r
e
e
e
e
e
r
e
s
r
s
c
r
r
e
r

n
n
n
d
u
n
b
d
d
h
d
p
n
h

c

i
t

o

n

f
f
i
t
i
i

r
e
s

t

y
o
v
a

x

a

e
s
r
r
r
c
c
e
r
e
e

r

t

t

e
r
r
e

t

e

l

o
y

g

r
e

m

p

t

t

n
n

s
s
e

i

n

n
u
d
b
h
d
n

a
o
g
a
o

l

o
g
o
a

m

i

t

r

i
i
t

o
g

m

i

n

f
i
l
l
i
t
i

e
z

g

d
p
p
n
u

s

t

t

h
p

c
c

a

i

o

u
d

e

m

a

k

e

t

l

a

e
c

.

C

h

a

l
l

e

g
n

e

o

f

c

v
o

e

i
r

g
n

a

l
l

u
v

l

n

e

r

a

b

l

e

g

r

p
u
o

s

i

n

c

l

d
u

i

g
n

t

o
h

e
s

i

n

t

h

e

f

o

r

m

a

l

c
e
s

t

o

r

,

e

n

s

u

i
r

g
n

t

h

a

t

b

e

n

e

t
i
f

s

a

r

e

a

d

e

u
q

a

t

e

t

o

m

e
e

t

t

h

e

p

r

g
o

r

m’s
a

b
o

j

c
e

i
t

v

s
e

,

a

o
v

i

d

i

g
n

g

a

p

s

a

d
n

v
o

e

l
r

a

p

s

b

e

t

w

e
e

n

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

s

,

i

n

s

t
i
t

u

i
t

n
o

s

,

a

d
n

l

e

v

e

l

s

o

f

v
o
g

e

r

n

m

e

n

,
t

a

d
n

e

n

s

u

i
r

g
n

t

h

a

t

t

h

e

v
o

e

r

a

l
l

s

o

c

i

a

l

p

r

o

t

c
e

i
t

n
o

s

y

s

t

e

m

i

s

i
f

a
c
s

l
l

y

a

o
p
d
n

i
t
i
l

a
c

l
l

y

s

u

s

t

a

i

n

a

b

l

e

.

M

v
o

e

r
f

o

m

e

m

e

r

g

e

n

c

p
y

r

g
o

r

a

m

s

t

o

i

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

l

g
n
o

t

e

r

m

P
S

,

i

n

c

l

d
u

i

g
n

b
u
p

i
l

c

i

n

c

o

m

e

r
t

a

n

s

f

e

r

s

t

h

a

t

e

p
x

a

d
n

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

o

f

c

h

l
i

d

r

e

n

•

C

o

m

p

l

e

t

e

r
t

a

n

s

i
t
i

n
o

u
o

t

o

f

e
J

f

s
e

y

e
J

f

a

s

•

S

e

u
g

r

o

d

e

C

a

p

c
a

t
i

c
a

i

n

y

E

m

p

l

e

o

p
o

e

n

e

d

t

o

a

l
l

A

r

g

e

n

i
t

n

i

a

n

s

t

h

a

t

r

e

u
q

r
i

e

,
t
i

a

u
n
d
n

m

b

e

r

o

f

p

a

i
t
r

c

i

p

a

n

t

s

h

s
a

r

c
a
e

h

e

0
0
0
0
0
3
d

,

.

•

N

u

m

b

e

r

o

f

e

m

p

l

y
o

m

e

n

t

a

g

e

n

c

i

s
e

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

y
b

0
0
1

.

•

A

t

l

s
a
e

t

0
0
0
0
0
1

,

p

a

i
t
r

c

i

p

a

n

t

s

i

n

f
i
l

e

-

l

g
n
o

l

a
e

r

n

i

p
g
n

r

g
o

r

a

m

s

o

f

w

h

i

c

h

5
2

%

a

r

e

e

m

p

l

y
o

e

d

w

t
i

h

i

n

a

y

a
e

r

.

H

e

a

d

s

o

f

H

o

u

e
s

h

o

l

d

T

r

a

n

s

i
t
i

o

P
n

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

a

p
p

r

v
o
o

e

g
d

F

Y
L

6
0
a

i
)

L

f
i

e

L

n

e

r

n
n

g

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

a

v
o
a
p
p
o

r
i

r
e

g
o
d

F

Y

7
0
a

)

S

c

l

P

r

m

s

t

o

w

a

r

d

s

t

h

e

B

i

e
c

n

t

e

n
n

i

a

l

A
A
A
B

(

F
P

Y

9
0
o

i
)
t

a

s

i

c

r

t

c
e

o

P
n

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

p
E
L

N

)
l

E

m

y
o

m

e

n

t

I

n

e

u
q

a

t
i
l

y

A
A
A

(

F

Y

0
1

)

 )

2

.

I

m

p

r

v
o

i

n

g

S

e

l

c
e

t

e

d

H

e

a

l

t

h

a

d
n

E

u
d

c

a

t

i

o

n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

C

o

p
n
h
p
u
n
d
d

s
e
r
c

o
v
o
o
a
o
a

i
t
l
l

h
d
n
u
q
n
d
h
u

a

t
i

e

t
l
.
i
i
l
i
i

m

p

e
s
r
r

a
v
o
o
o
y
a

m

e

n
d
n

t

s

i
i

c

t

m

e

a

f

r
e

i
t

w

e
s
e

e
r

u
d

c

i

n

g

o

t

r

a

t

P

u
p
o

l

a

i
t

n
o

w

t
i

u
o
h

t

h

a
e

t
l

h

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

i

s

5
3

-

9
3

%

 I

n

e

u
q

t
i

y

i

n

i

n

f

a

n

t

m

o

t
r

a

t
i
l

y

r

a

t

s
e

c
a

r

o

s
s

r

e

g

i

n
o

s

,

s

t

a

n
g

a

i
t

n
o

i

n

d

c
e

i
l

n

e

o

f

m

a

t

e

r

n

a

l

m

o

t
r

a

t
i
l

y

.

 A

r

g

e

n

i
t

n

a’s

h

i

h
g

l

e

v

e

l

s

o

f

c
s

o
o
h

l

a

t
t

e

d
n

a

n

e
c

r

a

t

s
e

m

s
a

k

h

i

h
g

r

a

t

s
e

o

f

d

r

p
o

-

u
o

t

s

a

d
n

r

e

p

e

i
t
i
t

n
o

i

n

a

d
d

i
t
i

n
o

t

o

u
q

a

t
i
l

y

i

s
s

u

s
e

.

 L

a

r

g

e

d

f
f
i

e

r

e

n

s
e
c

i

n

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

a

l

a

t
t

a

i

n

m

e

n

t

y
b

r

e

g

i

n
o

,

g

e

d
n

e

r

o

r

s

o

c

i

o

c
e

o
n
o

m

i

c

s

t

a

t

u

s

.

 H

i

h
g

r

a

t

e

o

f

h

i

h
g

e

r

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

p

a

i
t
r

c

i

p

a

i
t

n
o

(

6
6
1

.

%

o

f

a

g

e

g

r

p
u
o

)

h

i

d

e

p

r

b
o

l

e

m

o

f

r

e

l

e

v

a

n

e
c

o

f

c

u

i
r
r

c

u

l

u

m

.

B

u

l
i

n
o
p
u
d

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

p
d

e

f
r

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

t

h

r

p
h
g
u
o

e

f
r

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

i

n

e
c

n

i
t

v

s
e

a

d
n

r

s
e

u

t
l

s

b

e
s
a

d

i
f

n

a

n

c

i

g
n

t

o

w

a

r

d

s

:

 E

p
x

a

n

s

i

n
o

o

f

h

a
e

t
l

h

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

t

h

r

h
g
u
o

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

h

a
e

t
l

h

i

n

s

u

r

a

n

e
c

 H

o

s

p

t
i

a

l

r

s
e

r
t

u

c

t

u

i
r

g
n

a

d
n

e

p
x

a

n

s

i

n
o

 S

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

l

a
e

d

e

r

s

h

i

p

o

f

M

o

H

a

d
n

h

a
e

t
l

h

c
e
s

t

o

r

v
o
g

e

r

n

a

n

e
c

.

L

o

w

e

r

t

e
e

n

a

g

e

d

r

u
o
p
o

t

r

a

t

s
e

.

 H

i

h
g

e

r

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

a

d
n

l

a

o
b

r

m

a

r

k

e

t

i
l

k
n

a

g

s
e

•

P

r

g
o

r

s
s
e

t

o

w

a

r

d

s

M

G
D

i

n

f

a

n

t

m

o

t
r

a

t
i
l

y

r

a

t

e

o

f

5
8

.

/

5
1
0
2
y
b
0
0
0
1

•

N

u

m

b

e

r

o

f

n
u

i

n

s

u

r

e

d

p

e

r

s

n
o

s

d

r

p
o

s

r
f

o

m

5
1

m

n

.

t

o

9

m

n

w

h

l
i

e

r

e

g

i

n
o

a

l

d

f
f
i

e

r

e

n

s
e
c

a

r

e

r

e

u
d

e
c

d

.

•

H

o

s

p

t
i

a

l

s
s
e
c
c
a

a

d
n

e

i
f
f

c

i

e

n

c

y

t

a

r

g

e

t

s

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

•

N

e

w

u
p

r

c

h

s
a

i

p
g
n

r

o

e
c

u
d

r

s
e

s
e

t

a

b

i
l

s

h

e

d

•
•

D

c
e

r

e
s
a
e

d

M

o

t
r

a

t
i
l

y

r

a

t

e

0
0
1

%

c
s

o
o
h

l

e

n

r

o

l
l

m

e

n

t

f

o

r

c

h

l
i

d

r

e

n

a

g

e

5

•

I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

c
e
s

d
n
o

a

r

y

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

c

o

m

p

l

e

i
t

n
o

r

a

t

s
e

f

o

r

t

h

e

0
2

-

4
2

a

g

e

g

r

p
u
o

P

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

M

a

t

r
e

n

a

-
l

C

h

l
i

d

H

e

a

t
l

h

A

P

L

1

&

2

(

e
s
s
a

p
p

r

d
a
v
o

e

b
u
F
P

Y

4
0

a

a
d
n

n
u
F
h
F

Y

7
0

)

E

n

i
t

l

i
l

c

H

e

t
l

c

i
t

o

n

s

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

e
a

p
a
p

t
r
l

v
o

c
e
e

d

F

Y

7
0
o

)

H

S
h

t

r

p
p
u
S

o

r

t

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

E
L

N

)
t
l

H

e

a

S
h

c
e

t

o

r

G

v
o

r
e

n

a

n

e
c

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

p
E
L

N

t
)
i

H

o

s

a

l

R

s
e

t

r

u

c

t

u

r

i

n

g

A
A
A

(

F

Y

0
1

)

R

u

r

a

l

E

u
d

c

a

i
t

o

n

I

m

p

r

v
o

e

m

e

n

t

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

a

p
g
p

r

v
o

e
r
e

d

u
F
d

Y

o
6
0
a

)
i
t

H

i

h

E

c

n

A
A
A

(

E
L

N

)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ó
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

n
n

e

x

2

P

a

g

e

4

o

f

5

P

I

L
L

R
A

3

-

I

M

P

R

O

V

E

D

O
G

V

E

C
N
A
N
R

E

C

o
a
o

d
n
S
d
n
n
u

t

r

y

t

r

a

t

e
c

o
g
a

i

r
c

G

l

s

a

I

i

t

s

s
s
I

u

e

s

a

d
n

O

b

s

t

a

c

l

e

s

O

u

t

c

x
o

m

c
e
e

s

t
t

h

e

B

a

u
k
n
n

P

r
e
c
r
e

g
o

a

m

E

p

s

t

o

I

f

l

n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

I

n

s

t

r

u

m

e

n

t

s

1

.

S

t

e
r

n

g

t

h

e

n
n

i

g

P

b
u

i
l

c

I

n

s

t

i

t

u

t

i

o

n

s

E

a
x

u
d
d
u
u
n
q
n
p
p
h

a
g
a
a

p
d
n

r
e
e

f
t
f

a
o

r

m

a

n
n
u
u
b
d
u
h
n
p
n

r
e
c

m

e

m

n

i
i
l

m

p

v
o

e

t

e
r
c
e
e

t
i
t
l
i

o
y

e
c
c
c

r
e
e
s

x

s
e
r
e
e
r
e
s

,

a
o

v

t
i

i
l
i

v

y

i
t
t

o
o

m

s
e
s

a

d
n
 S

t

n

i

n

t
i
t

n

;

t

e
r

n
p
d
n

y
o
g

t
t
i

h

e

b
u
u
p
p
n

i
i
l

c

c
s
e
e
s

t
t

o

e
r

c

a
a

g
a

r
c

t
t

o

s

r

n

v

m

n

t

w

h

.

K

e

y

c

h

a

l
l

e

g
n

s
e

i

n

c

l

d
u

e

:

•

S

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

i

g
n

t

h

e

e

i
f
f

c

i

e

n

c

y

,

e

f
f

c
e

i
t

v

e

n

s
s
e

a

d
n

r
t

a

n

s

p

a

r

e

n

c

o
y

f

b
u
p

i
l

c

e

p
x

e

d
n

t
i

u

r

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

;
t

•

I

m

p

r

v
o

i

g
n

e
s

r

v

i

e
c

d

e

i
l

v

e

r

y

u
o

t

c

o

m

s
e

a

d
n

r

s
e

t

o

r

e

r
t

u

s

t

i

n

G

v
o

e

r

n

m

e

n

;
t

a

d
n

•

M

a

k

i

g
n

t

h

e

b
u
p

i
l

c

c
e
s

t

o

r

m

o

r

e

c
c
a

n
u
o

t

a

b

l

e

a

d
n

r

s
e

n
o
p

s

i

v

e

t

o

c

i
t
i

e
z

n

s

a

d
n

t

h

e

p

i
r

v

a

t

e

c
e
s

t

o

r

.

S

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

t

h

e

r
t

a

n

s

p

a

r

e

n

c

y

o

f

d

c
e

i

s

i

n
o

-

m

a

k

i

g
n

,

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

i

n

f

o

r

m

a

i
t

n
o

 E

p
x

a

d
n

e

f
f

c
e

i
t

v

e

p

e

f
r

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

-

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

a

p
d
n

e

f
r

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

-

i

n

f

o

r

m

e

g
d
u
b
d

e

i
t

g
n

 E

n

s

u

r

e

c

o

m

p

i
l

a

n

e
c

w

t
i

h

t

h

e

F

i

a
c
s

l

R

s
e

n
o
p

s

i

b

t
i
l
i

y

L

a

w

•

I

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

i
f

n

a

n

c

i

a

l

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

(

L
S

w
U

/

e

b

-

S

I

D

I

F

)

s

y

s

t

e

m

f

u

l
l

y

p
o

e

r

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

•

F

o

r

t

h

e

g
d
u
b
0
1
0
2

e

,
t

e
s

v

e

n

c
e
s

t

o

r

s

(

"

p

i
l

e

o
g

"
s

)

p

l

a

n

,

p

r

e

p

a

r

e

a

d
n

n

e

o
g

i
t

a

t

e

t

h

e

r
i

g
d
u
b

e

t

s

n
o

t

h

e

b

s
a

i

s

o

f

g
d
u
b

e

t

p

e

f
r

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

i

d
n

i

a
c

t

o

r

s

e
s

l

c
e

t

e

d

i

n

t

h

e

p

e

f
r

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

-

i

n

f

o

r

m

e

g
d
u
b
d

e

i
t

p
g
n

l
i

o

t

e

x

e

r

c

i

s
e
s

p

r

e

v

i

u
o

s

l

p
y

r

e

p

a

r

e

d

.

F

o

r

t

h

e

g
d
u
b

e

t

s

o

f

1
1
0
2

a

2
1
0
2
d
n

,

a

l
l

c
e
s

t

o

r

s

p

r

e

p

a

r

e

,

n

e

o
g

i
t

a

t

e

,

m

n
o

t
i

o

r

a

d
n

r

e

o
p

t
r

g
d
u
b

e

t

e

x

c
e

u

i
t

n
o

w

t
i

h

r

e

f

e

r

e

n

e
c

t

b
u
p
o

i
l

c

l

d
y

i

c
s

l

o

e
s

d

g
d
u
b

e

t

p

e

f
r

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

i

d
n

i

a
c

t

o

r

s

.

•

E

p
x

a

n

s

i

o
n
o

f

t

h

e

b
u
p

i
l

c

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

y

s

t

e

m

(

A
B

P

I

N

)
I
I

t

o

a

l
l

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

i
l

k
n

e

d

t

o

e

x

a

n

t

e

a

d
n

e

o
p
x

s

t

e

v

a

l

u

a

i
t

n
o

s

•

S

I

N

F

O

c

v
o

e

r

s

p
0
9

e

r

e
c

n

t

o

f

c

i

v

i
l
i

a

n

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

e

x

c
e

u

i
t

v

e

b

r

a

n

c

h

e

m

p

l

y
o

s
e
e

a

p
d
n

e

r

s

n
n
o

e

l

d

a

t

a

p

e

r

s

n
n
o

e

l

d

a

t

a

t

h

a

t

a

p
p

a
e

r

i

n

o
b

t

h

t

h

e

S

I

N

F

O

a

d
n

L

U

P

I

s

i

g
n

l

e

l
i
f

e

s

y

s

t

e

m

s

a

r

e

i

d

e

n

i
t

a
c

.
l

•

U

e
s

r

s

u

r

v

e

y

s

s

o
h

w

i

g
n

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

d

e
s

r

v

i

e
c

d

e

i
l

v

e

r

y

i

n

t

h

e

a

g

e

n

c

i

s
e

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

i
t

g
n

t

h

e

C

i
t
i

e
z

n

s

C

h

a

t
r

e

r

•

E

l

c
e

r
t

n
o

i

c

d

r
i

c
e

t

o

r

o
y

f

G

v
o

e

r

n

m

e

n

t

p

r

o

e
c

u
d

r

s
e

i

n

c

l

d
u

s
e

0
2

%

o

f

p

r

o

e
c

u
d

r

s
e

w

h

i

c

h

a
c

b
n

e

p

r

o

e
s
s
e
c

d

e

l

c
e

r
t

n
o

i

a
c

l
l

y

•

N
A

S
E
S

:

A

v

e

r

a

g

e

i
t

m

e

i

n

t

h

e

p

r

v
o

i

s

i

o
n
o

f

n

e

w

b

e

n

e

t
i
f

s

:

d
0
6

a

y

s

•

F

e

d

e

r

a

l

n

e

t

w

o

r

k

o

f

c

n
o

r
t

o

l

a

g

e

n

c

i

s
e

f

u

l
l

p
o
y

e

r

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

•

F

i

v

e

m

i

n

i

s

i
r
t

s
e

a

r

e

p

a

i
t
r

c

i

p

a

i
t

g
n

i

n

t

h

e

P

I

B

c
s

h

e

m

e

,

i

n

c

l

d
u

i

g
n

P

b
u

i
l

c

W

o

r

k

s

,

H

a
e

t
l

h

,

E

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

,

L

a

o
b

r

a

d
n

S

o

c

i

a

l

D

e

v

e

l

p
o

m

e

n

t

S

t

a

t

e

M

o

d

r
e

n

i

z

a

i
t

o

n

I
I

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

c
s
a
I

p
p

l
t
r
i
i
t

v
o

e

d
o

F
u
n

Y

7
0

)

n
S

S
u

i
t

a

t
i
l

S

t

e
r

n
d

g

i
t

n
n
n
h

s
e

i
t

o
o
g
a

f

t

P
h
n

r
e

N

a
o

t
i
t

o

n

a

l

o

a

c
e

r

y

A

m

i

r

i
t

j

c
e

(

a

p
p

r

d
o
v
a
o

e

F
n

Y

v
6
o
0

)

n
d
b
u
S

i
i
t

a
a

i
l
t

G

r
e
r

n

m

e
c
e

n

t

s

b
u
P

i
l

c

S

c
e

t

o

r

M

o

r
e

n

z

o

P
n

o

j

t

(

I
a

p
p

r

v
y
o

e

d

F
P

Y
L

6
2
0

)

S

T
N

S

A

(

a

p
p
o

r

a
v
o

e

o
g
d

P
F
n

Y

9
o
0
o

)

d
n
u
d
u
F

i
t
i
t

r
s

f

c
r
e

P

r
e

f

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

-

I

n

f

o

r

m

e

d

B

g

e

n

j

t

(

E
L

N

)

    P

r

v
o

i

n

e
c

o

f

C

o

r
r

i

e

n

t

s
e

S

t

r

a

t

e

g

i

c

P

l

a

n

(

S
F
F

)

n
b
u
 S

a

i
t

o

n
n

a

l
t

b
u
P

i
l

c

n
F

i

a

n

c

i

a

l

M

a

n

g
a

e

m

e

n

t

A

s
s
e
s
s

m

e

b
u
 P

i
l

c

S

c
e

t

o

r

E

S

W

,

c

v
o

r
e

i

n

g

:

•
•
•
•
•

P

e

f
r

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

P

b
u

i
l

c

i
f

n

a

n

c

i

a

l

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

E

x

t

e

r

n

a

l

c

n
o

r
t

o

l

S

n
b
u

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

s

r
t

a

t

e

g

i

c

p

l

a

n
n

i

g
n

S

n
b
u

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

r

s
e

r
t

u

c

t

u

i
r

o
g
n

f

e

p
x

e

d
n

t
i

u

r

e

a

d
n

e
s

r

v

i

e
c

r
-

s
e

n
o
p

s

i

b

i
t
i
l
i

s
e

 P

r
e

f

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

-

b

a

e
s

d
u
b
d

g

e

i
t

n

g

A
T
L
N

 I

D
A

F
d
n
 S

i
-

S
n

t
i

e
r
r
s

n

v
g
a

t
i
t

h

I
e
e

n
n
n

i

a
g
o
g
v

f
i
t

O

i
f
i
f
t

e
s
c

f

o

r

m

t

s
e

o

n

t

r
e
r

n

g
o

t

h
n

e
e

n
n
n

t
i

a
g

e

x

t
t

s
r
e
e

d
u
n
b
n
u

a

l

a
a

t
i

a
a

d
n

t

h

e
e

c

o

n

t

r

o

l

e

v

i

m

t

h

i
t

o

n

l

l

e

v

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
–
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

n
n

e

x

2

P

a

g

e

5

o

f

5

P

O

R

T

F

O

L

I

O

P

E

R

F

O

R

M

C
N
A

E

C

o
a
o

d
n
S
d
n
n
u

t

r

y

t

r

a

t

e
c

o
g
a

i

r
c

G

l

s

a

I

i

t

s

s
s
I

u

e

s

a

d
n

O

b

s

t

a

c

l

e

s

O

u

t

c

x
o

m

c
e
e

s

t
t

h

e

B

a

u
k
n
n

P

r
e
c
r
e

g
o

a

m

E

p

s

t

o

I

f

l

n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

I

n

s

t

r

u

m

e

n

t

s

1

.

B

u

l
i

n
d

i

g

p
u

t

h

e

G

v
o

r
e

n

m

e

n

t’s

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

M

a

n

g
a

e

m

e

n

t

C

a

p

a

c

i

t

y

h
S
p

t

e
e
r
e
r

n

v
g
o
a

t

h

e
r
e
e
e
s
e
r
c
r
e
e

n
p
n
p
n
n
n
n
n

t

n
h

e
s
e
e
e
e
e
r
s

c

a
o
a
a

p

c

t
i

y

o

f

t

G

m

t

t

p
p

,

a

v
o
v

h
d
d
n
n
h

i

m

l
j

m

t

i
t
i
l

t
i
t

m

e

t
t

p

r
r
r
e
e
r

o

t

i

w

e

u
q

i
i

m

e
s
e
s
r
e

o

t
f

a

m

e

i

u

m

-

t

m

n
n

v

t
i

m

n

p

a

t

h

p

.

D

e

l

a

y

s

i

n

a

p
p

r

v
o

a

l

o

f

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

a

t

t

h

e

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

l

e

v

e

l

 S

l

o

w

d

i

s

u
b

r

e
s

m

e

n

t

s

 D

e

l

a

y

s

i

n

l

a

r

g

e

p

r

o

c

u

r

e

m

e

n

t

c

n
o

r
t

c
a

t

s

.

 O

v

e

r

a

l
l

o
p

f
t
r

o

i
l

o

p

e

f
r

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

I

m

p

r

v
o

e

d

a

p
p

r

v
o

a

l

p

r

o

e
c

u
d

r

s
e

o

f

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

a

t

t

h

e

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

l

e

v

e

l

I

m

p

r

v
o

e

d
d

s
e

i

n
g

,

p

r

e

p

a

r

a

i
t

n
o

a

d
n

a

p
p

r

v
o

a

l

p

r

o

e
c

u
d

r

s
e

o

f

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

a

t

t

h

e

s

n
b
u

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

l

e

v

e

l

I

m

p

r

v
o

e

d

p

r

o

c

u

r

e

m

e

n

t

a
c

p

c
a

t
i

y

o

f

a

g

e

n

c

i

s
e

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

i
t

g
n

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

 I

m

p

r

v
o

e

o
p
d

f
t
r

o

i
l

o

m

n
o

t
i

o

i
r

g
n

 I

m

p

r

v
o

e

d

i
f

u
d

c

i

a

r

y

i
r

s

k

m

n
o

t
i

o

i
r

g
n

s

y

s

t

e

m

•

T

i

m

e

o

f

a

p
p

r

v
o

a

l

o

f

l

o

a

n

s

y
b

t

h

e

G

v
o

e

r

n

m

e

n

t

i

s

r

e

u
d

e
c

d

t

o

a

m

a

x

i

m

u

m

p

e

i
r

o
d
o

f

4

m

n
o

t

h

s

,

a

i
l

n
g

i

g
n

t
i

w

t
i

h

t

h

e

a

p
p

r

v
o

a

l

o

f

t

h

e

l

o

a

n

y
b

t

h

e

B

a

k
n

.

•

T

i

m

e

f

o

r

a

p
p

r

v
o

a

l

o

f

l

o

a

n

s

a

t

t

h

e

s

n
b
u

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

l

e

v

e

l

i

s

r

e

u
d

e
c

d

t

o

a

m

a

x

i

m

u

m

o

f

6

m

n
o

t

h

s

,

a

i
l

n
g

i

g
n

t
i

w

t
i

h

a

p
p

r

v
o

a

l

y
b

t

h

e

B

a

k
n

a

d
n

a

t

t

h

e

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

l

e

v

e

.
l

•

0
8

%

P
P

R

s

r

e

l
f

c
e

i
t

g
n

a

n

S

r

a

i
t

g
n

;

0
8

%

o

f

P
P

R

s

r

e

l
f

c
e

i
t

g
n

u
q

a

i
f
i
l

e

d

p

r

o

c

u

r

e

m

e

n

t

s

t

a

f
f

h

a

v

e

b

e
e

n

a

o
p
p

i

n

t

e

d

;

0
6

%

o

f

p

l

a

n
n

e

d

p

r

o

c

u

r

e

m

e

n

t

p

r

o

s
e
s
s
e
c

d
n
u

e

r

p

r

o

c

u

r

e

m

e

n

t

p

l

a

n

s

a

r

e

c

n
o

r
t

c
a

t

e

d

s
a

p

l

a

n
n

e

d

.

•

0
5

%

o

f

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

p

r

v
o

i

d

e

r

e

i
l

a

b

l

e

i

n

f

o

r

m

a

i
t

n
o

n
o

c

n
o

r
t

c
a

t

s

a

d
n

i
f

n

a

n

c

i

a

l

r
t

a

n

c
a
s

i
t

n
o

s

,

a

d
n

t

h

i

s

i

n

f

o

r

m

a

i
t

n
o

i

s

a

v

a

l
i

a

b

l

e

i

n

a

c

n
o

s

o

i
l

d

a

t

e

d

s

y

s

t

e

m

t

o

b

e

u

e
s

d

y
b

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

i
t

g
n

a

g

e

n

c

i

s
e

,

a

d
n

t

h

e

G

v
o

e

r

n

m

e

n

t

a

d
n

t

h

e

I

F

I

s

f

o

r

m

n
o

t
i

o

i
r

g
n

u
p

r

o
p

s
e
s

.

•

A

d

j

u

s

t

m

e

n

t

o

f

e

x

i

s

i
t

g
n

i
r

s

k

s
s
e
s
s
a

m

e

n

t

t

o
o

l

s

t

o

e

n

s

u

r

e

s

r
t

a

t

e

g

i

c

f

o

c

u

s

n
o

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

i
f

u
d

c

i

a

r

y

i
r

s

k

s

a

d
n

r

s
e

u

t
l

s

.

•

F

r

a

m

e

w

o

r

k

A

g

r

e
e

m

e

n

t

f

o

r

P

h

s
a

i

g
n

u
o

t

P

I

U

s

•
•

F

i

u
d

c

i

a

r

y

A

c

i
t

n
o

P

l

a

n

S

e

m

-
i

A

u
n
n

a

l

P

o

f
t
r

o

i
l

o

R

e

v

i

e

w

s

I

D

n
F

:

I

m
m
m

p

e
r

v
o

i
t

n

g

I

n
n
d
n
u
u

v

s
e

t

m

e

n
p
p

t

P
n

o

r

i
l
i
t
f
t
t
i
t

o
o
o

M

a
y

g
a

e
s

n
d
n

B

l
i

i

a
g

U
C

I

s

u

n

s

,

S

s

t

e

a

H

m

a

t
i

a

.
l

(

a

p
p

r

v
o

e

d

8
0
0
2

)

n
u
d
 S

t
i
f

c
e
r

g
a

t

h

e

n

i

n

g
a

a
a

d
n
b

s
e
s

t

r

o

n
n

g

e
c

o
o
o

s
r

d

i

n

a

i
t

o

n

o

f

i

r

y

t

e

m

d

i

B

u

n

A

i

s
e
r

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
–
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Annex 3 
Page 1 of 32 

March 16, 2009 

ARGENTINA: CAS Completion Report 
Date of CAS: May 4, 2006:   Report No. 34015-AR 
Period covered by the CAS Completion Report:  2006-2008 

Summary 
This document evaluates the achievement of CAS objectives in Argentina together with the respective 
contributions of the Government and the Bank. 

The 2006 CAS was prepared jointly by the IBRD and the IFC at a time when Argentina was well on the 
way to a third consecutive year of rapid growth after having emerged from a deep economic and social 
crisis in 2001-02. Poverty and unemployment, while still high, had fallen substantially from the peaks of 
the crisis years.  Progress was evident throughout the economy. 

The objective of the CAS was to build an investment partnership in support of Government efforts to 
transition from crisis recovery to sustained private-sector led growth that would result in a reduction of 
poverty and greater equity. The IFC aimed to provide long-term financing and structured finance products 
for companies and projects in strategic sectors with an emphasis on export-oriented and export facilitating 
endeavors especially as they relate to South-South trade. The proposed IBRD operational program was 
aimed at a substantial renovation and further expansion of the Bank ’s investment engagement in the 
country under the same three pillars that had been established under the 2004 CAS.  This new CAS was 
intended to complete the transition from adjustment lending to investment lending that began with the 
previous CAS and establish the Bank as a reliable medium term investment partner.  A broad program of 
AAA was also envisaged in support of an active dialogue with the Government, civil society and the 
private sector. 

Both the IBRD and the IFC successfully delivered a program of lending and investment operations 
consistent with the CAS.  This period was characterized by dramatic improvement in the economy, greatly 
strengthened relations between the Bank and Government, and innovation in project design.  As envisaged, 
the IFC effectively focused on sustainable projects with companies that had demonstrated social 
responsibility and that had a track record of honoring contractual obligations.  The IBRD reestablished a 
presence in a number of sectors and supported projects that were innovative and which contributed 
meaningfully to advancing the development agenda of the Government.  There was also a strong emphasis 
placed on fiduciary management as it was expected that the expansion in investment lending would 
heighten tensions in this field.  The normal lag in disbursements in investment lending and delays in the 
approval of loans led to a decline in the overall exposure of the Bank in Argentina during the CAS period. 

With respect to the program of AAA, the Bank delivered less than had been proposed in the CAS.  Some 
studies were circulated in draft without being finalized.  In part, that reflected the Government ’s lesser 
interest in a formally structured policy dialogue at the federal level.  Nevertheless, significant analytic work 
was completed and delivered including a study of logistics costs, a study of rural poverty and policy notes 
for the incoming administration of 2007. In addition, the lending and investment program of the Bank 
Group in Argentina affords another avenue for dialogue at the operational level and at the policy level in 
many sectors and at several levels of government. 

The overall country relationship between the Bank and Argentina has been greatly strengthened in the past 
three years, thereby consolidating the previous improvements that have steadily accrued since the crisis of 
2001-02.  In large part the positive relationship that now prevails may be attributed to the successful 
partnership that has been evolving  towards making the Bank a borrower of choice when dealing with 
complex investments particularly in the infrastructure and social sectors and, lately, in the emerging field of  
environmental programs.  The Bank Group and Argentina are now well placed to continue moving forward 
with a development dialogue backed by investment lending strategically targeted at areas where the Bank 
and the IFC can contribute most effectively.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3 
Page 2 of 32 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
The 2006 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was the second to be submitted to 
the Board following the severe economic crisis that beset Argentina in 2001-02.  In 
contrast with the preceding 2004 CAS which had been drafted in the context of a still 
insecure economic recovery, the 2006 CAS followed three years of strong growth which 
had lifted GDP to the pre-crisis peak.  Prospects for continued growth appeared to be 
good in the short-term although the longer-term sustainability of growth was seen to 
depend on structural reforms to consolidate fiscal adjustment and foster investment in 
public services and infrastructure. 

2. 
In that context the CAS sought to build an investment partnership supportive of 
Government efforts to move Argentina forward from crisis recovery to sustained private 
sector growth with equity and with a reduction in poverty which had become increasingly 
structural.  The Bank program of assistance was based upon the same three pillars as the 
2004 CAS which had provided an effective operational framework in the previous two 
years – sustained growth with equity, social inclusion and improved governance.  The 
International Financial Corporation (IFC) would complement International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) support by providing long-term finance and 
structured finance products to companies and projects in strategic sectors with an 
emphasis on export orientation and groups that were expanding on a South-South basis. 

3. 
It was clearly acknowledged in the CAS that an effective transition from crisis 
recovery to sustained growth would depend upon the diligent implementation of 
structural and policy reforms.  In particular, the ability of IFC to support private sector 
engagement in the provision of infrastructure and public services would depend upon the 
adoption of a clear and stable policy framework conducive to private sector participation.  
To that end the Bank Group sought to continue its dialogue with the Government and 
with other stakeholders including civil society.  At the same time it was also 
acknowledged that there was room for advancing shared development outcomes in 
selected areas, particularly in the infrastructure and social sectors, which provides the 
Bank Group the opportunity to develop a significant medium term investment partnership 
with Argentina.  It was also recognized that expanding investment lending would stretch 
the country’s fiduciary and project implementation capabilities, leading to the definition 
of some specific initiatives aimed at reinforcing portfolio management and fiduciary 
compliance.   

II. LONG-TERM STRATEGIC GOALS 

THE GOVERNMENT’ S PROGRAM 

4. 
During 2006-2008 the Government continued to implement the broad program 
that was laid out by President Néstor Kirchner in an address to Congress when he took 
office in May 2003.  The preparation of a new CAS in 2006 afforded an opportunity for 
the Government to convey to the Bank in detail its economic policy framework which 
was attached as an annex to the CAS.   

 
 
Annex 3 
Page 3 of 32 

5. 
The economic policy guidelines communicated by the Government were 
predicated on the view that, following three consecutive years of strong macroeconomic 
performance, growth should no longer be viewed as a temporary rebound from a crisis 
situation but as the start of a new era of sustained high growth for Argentina.  Sustaining 
growth would remain a central objective of Government policy. 

6. 
The administration of President Cristina Fernandez that took office in December, 
2007, largely maintained continuity in these policies and has, by and large, maintained 
substantial continuity in the Government teams.  The new administration’s objective 
continues to be the maintenance of economic growth and stability, while a special focus 
has been put into the building of institutions and strengthening foreign relations.   

7. 
Other 
important objectives 
included social policies aimed at reducing 
unemployment and poverty.  Housing construction and improving the quality of 
education were two special focuses of attention.  In October 2005, the Government 
submitted to Congress a proposal for lengthening the school day, eliminating illiteracy 
and increasing the access of schools and students to computers and other technologies.  
The aim was to increase Government funding (both federal and provincial) for education, 
science and technology from 4.3 percent of GDP in 2005 to 6 percent by 2010. 

8. 
With respect to governance, the Government further developed the vision set forth 
in a 2004 publication by the Ministry of Production and Economy to make Argentina 
competitive in the global economy of the 21st century.19  Accordingly, the administration 
aimed at modernizing state institutions to improve trust in government which, in turn, 
would enhance inclusion, equity and citizen satisfaction.  In terms of modalities the 
Kirchner administration opted against further macro-reorganizations and legal changes, 
choosing instead to work within established frameworks.  Incremental adjustments were 
adopted where necessary but the major emphasis was on making the system work.  The 
vision of Government was that the state has a key role in the provision of social services 
and in regulating the market, including re-nationalizing private enterprises (such as 
Aerolineas Argentinas) whose poor performance was deemed to threaten key national 
interests.  While a market economy was accepted as the major engine of growth, it should 
be subject to pro-active regulation and state intervention as needed to ensure consistency 
with the Government’s broader social and economic agenda.  

9. 
Within that vision the Government reaffirmed that a new policy framework had 
emerged in Argentina.  Whereas, throughout the 1990s, the role of the state in the 
economy was steadily retrenched, the new framework required the Government to 
exercise a more active role in addressing long-standing social problems that still beset 
Argentina notwithstanding good macroeconomic performance and a strong recovery from 
the 2001 crisis.  Social transfer programs for the poor were extended to a significant 
portion of the population at the time of the crisis, and they still play a prominent role, 
albeit increasingly tied to employment generation.  The Government became much more 
directly involved in decisions affecting the provision of infrastructure and social services.  
Government controls extended to tariffs and investments determining access to services.  

19 “Argentina: Facing the 21 st Century ”

 Buenos Aires 2004 (www.jgm.gov.ar) 

 
 
                                                 
Annex 3 
Page 4 of 32 

10. 
In late 2008, towards the end of the CAS period, Argentina suffered the effects of 
a global financial crisis.  The crisis prompted many governments, including those of the 
United States and Europe, to adopt extraordinary measures of intervention to avert a 
catastrophic financial collapse.  Many Argentines interpreted the concerted actions of the 
international community as a vindication of their own government’s pro-active regulatory 
posture which had offered a measure of protection to Argentina.  Nevertheless, although 
the banking system remains fundamentally strong, the Argentina Government also found 
it necessary to adopt additional measures including the nationalization of the private 
pension system which the Government viewed as necessary to protect the system from 
the effects of the crisis.    

THE BANK’ S PROGRAM OF SUPPORT 

11. 
Since there was continuity with respect to the long-term strategic goals of the 
Government, the 2006 CAS proposed that the Bank ’s assistance strategy be structured in 
accordance with the same three pillars established under the previous CAS namely: (1) 
sustained growth with equity, (2) social inclusion, and (3) improved governance. 

12. 
The previous CAS had already proposed a substantial shift in the Bank program 
away from adjustment lending which had dominated the program in the late 1990s and in 
the early years of the new millennium towards investment lending.  The 2006 CAS 
propelled that shift even further and proposed an all-investment lending program.  It was 
expected that such a lending program would be self-regulating in the sense that it would 
automatically adjust if project performance, fiduciary management and the sector policy 
framework fell short of requirements.   

13. 
The CAS also acknowledged that the Bank is a relatively small player in 
Argentina and that it should be selective in its approach.  The focus was on poverty 
alleviation with projects and programs that would reach the poorest and most vulnerable 
groups, foster equality of opportunity, strengthen governance and improve the 
administration of public services to improve access for all Argentines.  It was envisaged 
that the focus on poverty alleviation would span all three pillars of Bank operations.  

14. 
The analytic agenda of the Bank featured prominently in the CAS because the 
policy dialogue, which had suffered a setback at the time of the economic crisis, was 
showing promising signs of progress.  In particular, the Bank had undertaken a study on 
growth and equality in close collaboration with authorities in the Ministry of Economy 
and Production, and the study had successfully stimulated a dialogue on macroeconomic 
issues such as the nexus between growth, poverty reduction and inequality.20  The sector 
policy dialogue, especially in areas where the Bank was operationally active or where it 
was preparing to become active, was also targeted as a focus of analytic work.  In 
addition, economic and sector work at the provincial level was identified as a potentially 
fruitful focus of the CAS. 

20Argentina:  Seeking Sustained Growth and Social Equity.  World Bank Report No. 32553-AR, October 
21, 2005.   

 
 
 
                                                 
Annex 3 
Page 5 of 32 

III. COUNTRY AND CAS OUTCOMES 

15. 
The CAS Results Matrix is reproduced in Annex A of this completion report 
together with additional data on outcomes.  The broad conclusion that emerges is that the 
CAS was largely successful in meeting its targets. 

PILLAR 1:  SUSTAINED GROWTH WITH EQUITY 

Macroeconomic performance 

16. 
The CAS adopted the Government ’s own macroeconomic projections as a frame 
of reference for the 2006-08 CAS period while, at the same time taking note that the 
growth forecast presented in the 2006 national budget appeared conservative.   

(In percent of GDP or annual percentage change unless otherwise indicated) 

Table 1: Macroeconomic Indicators 

 CAS Projections
2006 2007 2008 

     Outcomes 
 2006 
2007 2008 
(est.) 

GDP real growth 
4.0 
3.5 
3.5 
8.5 
8.7 
Investment/GDP 
21.5 
21.7 
21.7 
23.4 
24.4 
Federal Government primary surplus/GDP 
3.3 
3.4 
3.4 
3.5 
3.2 
Consumer prices (official index period average) 
9.1 
8.1 
7.5 
10.9 
8.8 
Exports of goods fob (US$ billion) 
41.3 
44.4 
47.3 
46.5 
55.7 
Imports of Goods cif (US$ billion) 
31.5 
34.9 
38.0 
34.2 
44.7 
Sources:  CAS projections taken from the 2006 Government budget sent to Congress in October 2005 
Outcomes from Ministry of Economy and Production 

6.0 
n/a 
3.3 
8.6 
71.3 
57.6 

17. 
Five consecutive years of rapid and pro-poor economic growth beginning in 2003 
have enabled poverty and unemployment to be cut back to pre-crisis levels.  Poverty 
declined – at least until end-2006 when the last reliable data was available.  Many of the 
country development goals articulated in the CAS were achieved.  Whereas the aim was 
to reduce unemployment from 14 percent in 2005 to no more than 11 percent in 2009, 
unemployment was already below 8 percent in 2008.  Similarly a targeted reduction in 
urban poverty from 38 percent in 2005 to no more than 30 percent in 2009 was already 
surpassed by 2007 when urban poverty was estimated at 28 percent.  It is difficult to 
determine trends in poverty after 2007 with accuracy because the data is uncertain, but it 
is clear that Argentina was able to make remarkable social and economic progress during 
the CAS period. 

18. 
However, that achievement was made at the cost of increasing inflationary 
pressures.  Private sector estimates suggest consumer prices rose by 20-25 percent in 
2007, and there is a lack of confidence in Government figures which place inflation only 
at 8.8 percent for 2007.  This inflation has likely negatively affected poverty during 2008, 
but there is no data to verify this.  In addition, the lack of credible inflation figures has 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Annex 3 
Page 6 of 32 

eroded market confidence, which has also had negative macroeconomic impacts, 
although actual inflation is now abating. 

Country Outcomes 

19. 
Sector specific objectives identified in the CAS Results Matrix were largely 
achieved.  The country development goals were extracted selectively from diverse 
Government publications.  Since the sources were Government position papers that 
frequently had a long-term horizon, they seldom specified expected outcomes for 2008.  
Hence, reasonable progress towards long-term goals would indicate a positive outcome 
where data is available. 

20. With respect to productive infrastructure, Argentina had already reached by 2008, 
or was close to reaching, long-term targets cited in the CAS.  In the case of oilseed and 
cereals, the long-term goal was to produce 100 million tons compared with a baseline 
figure of 75 million tons in 2005.  The goal was close to being reached with the 2006/07 
harvest which amounted to 93.6 million tons.  Similarly, with respect to road 
maintenance, the Government ’s target was to have 90 percent of all national non-
concessioned roads in good condition.  As of 2008, 89 percent were already found to be 
in good condition. 

21. 
The CAS also identified a number of country development goals with respect to 
environmental preservation.  They included investments in forestry, urban waste 
management and access to international carbon markets.  Satisfactory progress was made 
towards those goals as documented in Annex A. 

CAS Outcomes 

22. 
Outcomes with respect to the Bank lending program were substantially achieved.  
During the CAS period there was a significant renovation of the country’s investment 
portfolio which had been virtually exhausted during the post crisis period.  A substantial 
effort was undertaken to prepare new and innovative investment initiatives and expand 
the role of the Bank in the development of productive and poverty focused infrastructure 
and in the social sectors, with a strong emphasis in the health and social protection 
sectors.  There has also been further support provided in the strengthening of institutions 
and public sector agencies.  The Bank is on track to deliver 20 project loans for a total of 
US$3,425 million before end FY2009 under the current CAS21.  Although it is premature 
to make an overall judgment on the outcomes of this new cohort of investment initiatives, 
there has been a serious effort to ensure the highest standards in the preparation of these 
operations and a deliberate attempt to include the lessons learned from previous 
engagement in the respective sectors.  There has also been a strong focus on fiduciary 
matters in all aspects related to the preparation and implementation of the portfolio.  
Unfortunately, cumbersome and time consuming approval procedures within the 
Government have inhibited timely and early implementation of the new operations and 
affected portfolio performance.  

21 One project for US$ 841 Million is in the pipeline to be approved until the end of FY09.  

 
 
                                                 
Annex 3 
Page 7 of 32 

The Bank also delivered a strong program 
of Analytical and Advisory Activities 
(AAA) albeit less than envisaged in the 
CAS.  The Bank has been most successful 
when AAA is undertaken in a sector context 
where the Bank has an operational presence 
and where there is an active dialogue.  A 
study of transport logistics and a rural 
development strategy are examples of high 
quality analytic work that was successfully 
delivered and well received.22  

23. 
Infrastructure.   The CAS identified infrastructure development as a major focus 
for Bank support with an emphasis on (i) expanding services to the poor and increasing 
their mobility, and (ii) further developing the transport system to reduce logistics costs 
and to enhance trade and commerce.  It was envisaged that investment loans would help 
the Government restore investment in infrastructure which had been declining for many 
years.  Total investment in infrastructure averaged less than 2 percent of GDP during the 
1990s which put Argentina far behind several other Latin American countries such as 
Chile and Colombia which invested upwards of 4 percent of GDP in infrastructure.  In 
previous years Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) was actively engaged 
in infrastructure projects but its exposure has been greatly reduced (see Box 1). 

24. 
A key CAS milestone was to increase the percentage of paved non-concessioned 
roads maintained under the CREMA system, (performance based rehabilitation and 
maintenance contracts known by their Spanish acronym).  A National Highway Asset 
Management Project (US$200 million), for which an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) 
had been approved in 2004, was substantially implemented from 2006 to 2008.  The 
principal focus of that project was to improve the national road network by financing 
CREMA contracts.  This system has effectively improved the physical condition of roads 
over and beyond the technical specifications identified at project appraisal.  Building 
upon that success, a second APL in the amount of US$400 million was approved in 
March 2008 of which US$360 million will finance additional CREMA contracts.   

25. 
The success of the CREMA system at the national level prompted the Argentine 
authorities to seek Bank support for a Provincial Road Infrastructure Project (US$ 150 
million) and a loan was approved in 2005 to increase private sector participation in the 
management of the provincial road networks though the expansion of the CREMA 
system to four provinces.  In addition, part of the loan was earmarked to finance road 
paving and rehabilitation in roads that are crucial to the provincial economy but cannot be 
included in CREMA-type contracts due to the nature of the work required.   

22Argentina:  The Challenge of Reducing Logistics Costs.  World Bank Report No. 36606-AR; December 
2006 ;and Argentina:  Agriculture and Rural Development Selected Issues.  World Bank Report No. 32763-
AR; July 31, 2006. 

 
 
                                                 
Annex 3 
Page 8 of 32 

26. 
The first phase of the Buenos Aires Sustainable Infrastructure Development 
Project (US$200 million) has also had a positive impact, largely achieving its road 
maintenance targets by mid-2008.  These works will be augmented by the second phase 
APL (US$270 million) which began in 2007.  The Bank has also lent directly to the 
provinces of Buenos Aires, Cordoba and Santa Fe, in support of road projects that also 
contributed to the achievement of these milestones.   

Box 1: The role of MIGA 

As of June 30, 2008, MIGA ’s gross exposure in Argentina stood at US$34.5 million, which is 
approximately 0.4 percent of MIGA ’s total gross portfolio.  Net of reinsurance, MIGA ’s exposure was 
US$18.5 million, which is approximately 0.5 percent of its net portfolio.  This constitutes a significant 
reduction of exposure since end-FY01. At that time Argentina had the second largest gross exposure in 
MIGA ’s portfolio – amounting to US$693.6 million.  The reduction in exposure has resulted from the 
amortization of MIGA-guaranteed loans and from the cancellation of guarantee contracts. MIGA has not 
issued any new contract for investments in Argentina since 2002 for reasons explained below. 

MIGA has received two claims for expropriation in Argentina.  In FY05, MIGA paid US$0.5 million of a 
loss of US$1.4 million. The investor withdrew its claim to the remaining amount for reasons of its broader 
commercial interests in Argentina.  Argentine authorities have refused to recognize MIGA ’s claim for 
reimbursement of the amount paid.  Pending resolution of this matter, MIGA will not support additional 
foreign investment in Argentina. 

MIGA received another claim in FY07 related to difficulties that had arisen with an infrastructure project.  
However, that claim has been withdrawn for project-specific reasons and the project remains operational.  

MIGA has provisioned in connection with another project, which is currently the subject of arbitration by 
ICSID. MIGA ’s liability will depend on the result of the arbitration but would not exceed US$24.2 million. 

27. 
The objective to scale up support for other types of road maintenance, as well as 
expanding bank support to additional transport sub-sectors has been achieved.  Beyond 
the non-CREMA road support mentioned above, additional financing of US$100 million 
was approved for the Buenos Aires Urban Transport Project (PTUBA) in 2007.  That 
project began in 1997 and addressed issues of urban rail transport and the interface 
between rail and road transport in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area.  As with many 
projects of that period, progress was delayed by the financial crisis, but Bank supervision 
reveals a successful implementation record following the economic recovery of 2003. 

28. 
The CAS also aimed for the National Directorate of Highways to undertake 
actions under the Institutional Renewal Action Plan covering budgeting, road safety, 
and environmental management. 
 Support under the National Highway Asset 
Management Project toward this objective has not been successful to date, and the 
Government has requested an extension of the closing date to complete the project.   

29. 
The CAS sought to expand water and sewer coverage for approximately 500,000 
low income people in Buenos Aires Province.   While the water components of the 
Buenos Aires project are behind schedule, this target has been partially achieved with the 
regulatory and institutional framework progressing well.  The Province has signed 
Framework Agreements with provincial water operators, and the Basic Municipal 
Services Project (US$110 million) allocated 60% of proceeds to improving the coverage, 

 
 
Annex 3 
Page 9 of 32 

quality and efficiency of water supply in six provinces.  Initial implementation reveals 
promising progress on these and other urban sub-projects financed by the loan. 

30. 
The CAS sought to reduce flood risk in selected urban areas through civil 
works and the preparation of flood risk reduction plans.  In many parts of Buenos Aires 
Province, sustainable infrastructure development will only be possible if urban flooding 
can be prevented.  The Bank supported formulation of flood risk reduction plans in six 
provinces, and Buenos Aires Province has adopted norms for urban land zoning, 
measures for environmental protection and procedures for management and maintenance 
of urban drainage systems.  The Urban Flood Prevention and Drainage Project (€98 
million), is now implementing satisfactorily and expected to make a major contribution 
toward mitigating flood risk in the city of Buenos Aires.  A second APL (US$70 million) 
was approved in June, 2006, to extend flood protection measures to six other provinces. 

31. 
Agriculture and Rural Development.  The Bank has supported a number of 
initiatives in agriculture and rural development which contribute to growth with equity.  
The principal objective has been to increase the productivity and incomes of small and 
medium-sized producers.  Hence the focus has been on the “regional economies” in the 
north of the country and in the Andean region as opposed to the Pampas region where 
agricultural production is typically on a large scale.  The targeted outcomes for 
agriculture and livestock were substantially achieved.   

32. 
The CAS objective to improve the capacity to analyze, design, and manage 
agricultural and rural development investments was advanced with the establishment in 
2008 of a sub-secretariat of family agriculture and rural development, though the new 
sub-secretariat will require strengthening before it can fully meet its mandate. 

33. 
Another key milestone was for the National Government to complete an 
agricultural and rural development strategy and implement it in at least one region.  To 
date, 19 provinces have adopted strategies, though at a national level there is no cleared 
defined medium and long-term strategy for the agricultural sector. 

34. 
A third targeted outcome was the adoption and implementation of a Mercosur 
strategy to be free of Aftosa (foot and mouth disease).  The strategy was ratified in 2005, 
and an action plan was adopted in May 2008.   

35. 
The final benchmark, to have a 20% increase in production area under 
irrigation and to have integrated water resource management piloted in at least one 
province, was partially achieved.  A 6% increase was realized in the amount of cultivated 
land under irrigation, and the Province of Mendoza has adopted an integrated water 
resource management program. 

36. 
Achievements against these four benchmarks were supported through the 
accelerated implementation of a Provincial Agricultural Development Project (PROSAP) 
for which a loan of US$125 million was approved in 1997 but which suffered delays due 
to the financial crisis.  However, by 2006 implementation was progressing so well that 
the Bank approved additional financing of US$37 million.  Targets have been met with 

 
 
Annex 3 
Page 10 of 32 

respect to the construction of irrigation canals, rural roads, rural electrification and 
drainage rehabilitation.  Farmers have received training in animal and plant health, and 
ten centers were established to train young entrepreneurs.  Impact assessments 
undertaken by the project unit reveal significant increases in private productive 
investments that are clearly connected to PROSAP-supported infrastructure investments.  
Building upon this success and a study of the agricultural sector produced by the Bank in 
2006, a loan for US$300 million was approved in 2008 for a second PROSAP.  

37. 
In addition, the implementation of a Small Farmer Development Project 
(PROINDER) sought to increase the productive and organizational capabilities of poor 
rural communities through demand-based sub-projects.  A loan of US$75 million was 
approved in 1997, but project progress was impaired for years by the financial crisis.  By 
2007, however, the project had fulfilled or over-fulfilled all its development objectives 
and, in July 2007, the Bank approved additional financing of US$45 million to enable the 
well-performing project to be scaled-up.  The original project exceeded appraisal targets 
and reached some 50,000 families through more than 9,000 sub-projects.  Monitoring and 
impact assessment surveys indicate that the family income of beneficiaries and their 
quality of life improved significantly along with their organizational capabilities.  The 
additional financing is intended to expand the targeted coverage of rural households to 
72,000, but implementation has not been satisfactory to date.   

38. 
Rural Poverty:  An important CAS milestone with respect to more sustainable 
rural development was that the baseline data and analysis of rural poverty be improved.  
No progress has been made on that front, notwithstanding the delivery of Bank analytic 
work on rural poverty which clearly identified the data gaps that need to be addressed.23  
The lack of good data is a serious shortcoming because Argentina cannot advance further 
towards a credible policy for poverty reduction without a solid data base. 

39. 
Expanded small and medium farmer investment in forestry was another CAS 
milestone.  The forestry projects described under Environmental Management below are 
supporting investments by 5,000 small-scale farmers for 15,000 ha. of forests (triple the 
target) in at least 3 different provinces. 

40. 
Environmental Management.  The CAS recognized an urgent need to improve 
environmental management in Argentina.  In that context, it envisaged an Environmental 
management APL that would provide strategic support for both pollution control and the 
protection of natural resources.  As preparatory work progressed, however, it became 
clear that the sector issues could be addressed more effectively by dealing separately with 
“brown” issues of pollution control (especially in urban areas) and with “green” issues of 
land use management (especially in rural areas). Accordingly, separate lending operations 
were undertaken in each of those areas.  Start-up delays have prevented the achievement 
of the CAS milestones, but prospects are good that the targeted outcomes will be reached 
early in the following CAS period. 

23 “The Invisible Poor: A Portrait of Rural Poverty in Argentina ” Report No. 39947-AR; June 25, 2007 

 
 
                                                 
Annex 3 
Page 11 of 32 

41. 
The CAS sought to complete integrated waste management systems in 3 
provinces, an objective that was supported by efforts to address “brown” issues of 
Pollution control under a National Urban Solid Waste Management Project for which a 
loan of US$40 million was approved by the Bank in 2006.  The project was based on a 
National Strategy that had been developed with Bank assistance.  Project implementation 
was slow in the initial stages but accelerated in 2008.  In addition, the Mining 
Environmental Restoration Project (PRAMU, US$30 million), approved in 2008, will 
seek to reduce the potential health hazard posed by a uranium processing facility used by 
the government between 1954 and 1986 but never properly closed.  Civil works have 
already been contracted, and some 30 percent of the investment was complete by May 
2008.  Containment of 710,000 tons of low grade radioactive milling tailings is consistent 
with internationally accepted best practice.  The project also provides technical assistance 
to study and design options for cleaning up another 7 sites as well as efforts to strengthen 
environmental management of the mining sector more generally.   

42. 
Another key milestone was to realize integrated urban transport planning and 
investment, combined with pollution reduction, in at least five cities.  While this has not 
yet been achieved, 30 pollution control projects are being developed with support from 
the WBI Carbon Finance Assistance Program.  Carbon purchase agreements were signed 
under the Kyoto Protocol with the cities of Salta and Olavarria for the construction of 
landfill gas capture systems (see Box 2).   

43. While still in the final stages of preparation, the largest and most ambitious Bank-
supported environmental project in Argentina is to clean up the Matanza-Riachuelo (M-
R) river basin, the most contaminated river basin in Argentina.  More than 4,000 
industries are located in the water shed and many of them discharge untreated effluents 
into the storm drainage system or directly into the river.  As it passes to the south of the 
city of Buenos Aires, the river basin is home to one of Argentina’s largest concentrations 
of urban poor. The project will construct the main sewage transmission, treatment and 
disposal infrastructure to collect both the residential sewage currently discharged to the 
river as well as pre-treated industrial effluents. 

44. 
“Green” issues of environmental management also figured prominently in the 
CAS in support of the Government’s efforts to curb deforestation of native forests and 
increase planted forests.  In June 2007 a Global Environmental Fund (GEF) grant was 
approved in the amount of US$7 million for Biodiversity Conservation in Productive 
Forestry Landscapes Project that was blended with a 2008 Bank loan in support of a 
Sustainable Natural Resources Management Project (US$60 million).  The GEF project 
innovatively seeks to mainstream biodiversity conservation into plantation forestry 
practices and to demonstrate that the introduction of biodiversity conservation practices is 
both economically and ecologically viable in the context of commercial plantations.   

45. 
The Sustainable Natural Resources Management Project will finance measures to 
improve the management of protected areas and conservation corridors and support 
sustainable plantation forestry in parallel with the GEF-supported project.  The project 
built upon the experience of a previous Native Forests and Protected Areas Project 
which was closed in June 2007.  The Implementation Completion Report (ICR) for that 

 
 
Annex 3 
Page 12 of 32 

project showed that it was successful and achieved nearly all its development goals.24 In 
particular, significant progress had been made in strengthening the National Parks 
Administration and 
increasing 
tourism 
in a number of parks consistent with 
environmental sustainability.   

Box 2: GEF, Carbon Finance and the Montreal Protocol in Argentina 
As envisaged in the CAS, a decentralized medium sized grants program was established in Argentina in 
2006.  The program is funded with US$3 million of GEF resources and it constitutes a pilot initiative for 
the GEF worldwide.  Managed by the Argentine authorities, the program has responded to small-scale 
project proposals from civil society and the six grants that were authorized in 2007 have financed some 
exceptionally innovative initiatives including (i) the conservation of Patagonian steppe fauna, (ii) 
restoration of the upper Parana Atlantic forest, (iii) measures to combat land degradation in indigenous 
communities, (iv) the establishment of an eco-regional corridor in Northern Patagonia and (v) the 
production and use of hydrogen fuel. 

Other major GEF financed projects in Argentina begun during 2006-08 include an energy efficiency project 
and a project to conserve biodiversity in commercially productive forest landscapes.   Greater detail on 
each of those initiatives is given in the corresponding sections on Bank-supported projects. 

Having ratified the Kyoto Protocol, Argentina participates in the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) 
established under the Protocol.  In 2006 and 2007 respectively, carbon purchase agreements were signed 
with the city of Salta and the municipality of Olavarria.  Under the agreements, landfill gas capture systems 
were constructed so that methane may be flared rather than released into the atmosphere.  Both projects 
also included social components.  In Olavarria 5090 households were provided with drinking water and a 
school was provided with solar heating.  In Salta a recycling and separation plant was constructed to better 
serve the needs of waste pickers. 

The Bank also continued to assist with implementation of the Montreal Protocol during 2006-08.  A plant 
for the production of CFCs was closed in 2008 and supervision will continue for one more year to verify 
that there are zero emissions. A second sub-project aims to change the propellant used in medical dose 
inhalers from CFC to non-CFC.  When that sub-project is complete, it will conclude the Montreal Protocol 
program in Argentina. 

IFC 

46. 
IFC’s strategy as outlined in the FY06-08 CAS is aimed at primarily contributing 
to the pillar of “sustained growth with equity”, in the area where IFC has comparative 
advantage.  When the CAS was prepared, short-term credit to the private sector had 
improved substantially and long-term credit was available but at a low level, and, to a 
large extent, confined to blue chip companies.  In this context, IFC shifted its focus from 
short-term lines, where there is good liquidity at reasonable prices, to providing long-
term financing both for its own account and through its syndication program.  In addition 
to providing long-term financing, IFC ’s priorities for its direct investments were focused 
on providing structured finance products to companies and projects in strategic sectors 
with an emphasis on groups expanding on a South-South basis and export-oriented or 
export-facilitating projects.  Two important criteria in considering new projects were to 
focus on corporate social responsibility (CSR) and sustainability, as well as on the track 
record with respect to honoring contractual obligations.  The strategic focus sectors were: 

24 Implementation Completion Report No. ICR0000437; December 28, 2007 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Annex 3 
Page 13 of 32 

oil, gas and mining; agribusiness and forestry products; and the financial sector with a 
focus on high impact projects such as housing and support of export-oriented small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs). 

47. 
Since 2006 IFC has committed US$1,597 million (including US$798 million for 
syndications through the B-loan program) in 15 projects in the hydrocarbons, finance, 
agribusiness and transportation sectors.  As of August 2008, IFC’s committed portfolio 
stood at US$996 million for IFC’s own account, and an additional US$843 million for 
participants ’ accounts, with oil and gas, food and beverages, and the financial sector 
accounting for about 80% of the portfolio. 

48. 
In food and beverages, in FY06 IFC committed a US$280 million loan (including 
US$210 million for syndications) for Arcor Group, a leading producer and distributor of 
candies, chocolates and biscuits, to finance construction of plants in Chile, Brazil and 
Mexico (South-South investments) as well as to modernize and refurbished existing 
facilities.  An additional 2,000 jobs are expected to be recreated as a result of these 
investments.  The company has a proactive linkage program to small and medium 
farmers and expects to increase the number of farmers with which it works from 550 to 
600 by 2010. In addition to new jobs created in other countries, Arcor operations support 
over 13,000 jobs in Argentina.  A follow-up loan for US$130 million (including $80 
million in B-loans) was committed in FY08 to support further expansion investments. 

49. 
IFC’s investments in the financial sector during the period totaled $418 million 
under the Global Trade Finance Program in operations with four banks, and a $50 million 
loan to Banco Galicia for on-lending to SMEs, particularly in the poorer provinces of 
Argentina.  The SME overall portfolio is projected to increase by 15 percent a year.  The 
number of SMEs to be financed and the amount of finance going to poorer provinces are 
expected to grow at an average of no less than 7 percent a year. 

50. 
Finally, in the oil and gas sector, IFC provided US$237 million from its own 
account and US$420 million for syndications for three companies.  One operation was 
with an existing client, PAE, for $550 million which included IFC ’s largest syndication 
to date (US$400 million).  This investment financed the company’s 2007-08 capital 
expenditure program which will help them increase oil production by up to 30,000 barrels 
of oil equivalent and gas production by 62 million cubic feet per day. The incremental 
production generated from the investment is expected to result in US$2.1 billion in 
government revenue for Argentina, 
including $414 million for 
the provincial 
governments.  In June 2006, IFC committed a $70 million loan (including $20 million in 
a syndicated loan) for CAPSA, an independent Argentine oil producer operating in the 
province of Chubut. The loan facility will finance CAPSA’s capital expenditures, 
working capital requirements, and general corporate activities.  At the time, the 10-year 
facility was the longest IFC-syndicated tenor in Argentina since the crisis in 2001.  
CAPSA operates in the Chubut province, a region with few employment opportunities 
other than the oil and gas industry.  CAPSA is a source of direct and indirect employment 
in the region, and the majority of its workforce is sourced locally.  The company also 
procures about half of its purchases locally through community suppliers. 

 
 
Annex 3 
Page 14 of 32 

Other support for Growth with Equity 

51. 
The CAS recognized the need to enhance the business climate and foster private 
sector development in order to sustain growth.  The contribution of the IFC was 
particularly important in that regard as indicated in the section above.  The Bank was 
supportive of IFC efforts to enhance the business climate and foster private sector 
development in order to sustain growth with a loan for US$150 million that was approved 
in 2008 for an Unleashing Productive Innovation Project.  The basic objective of the 
project is to increase Argentina ’s capacity for innovation in knowledge-based production.  
That would be accomplished by (i) facilitating the establishment of new knowledge-
based companies; (ii) educating and training human capital in skills that can forge a better 
linkage between academia and industry and lead to the commercialization of new ideas 
from research; (iii) financing venture capital in selected areas of the economy; (iv) 
upgrading the infrastructure for research; and (v) strengthening the policy framework for 
science, technology and productive innovation. 

PILLAR 2:  SOCIAL INCLUSION 

52. 
The broad country development goal under Pillar 2 was to consolidate the 
reduction in poverty achieved since the crisis and expand efforts to reverse the longer 
term poverty trend by increasing household incomes and integrating marginalized groups 
into the productive market place. 

Country Outcomes 

53. 
Country development goals identified in the CAS were largely achieved, though 
data limitations make it difficult to precisely quantify recent trends in poverty.  
Unemployment was reduced to 7.5 percent by end-2007, surpassing the 12 percent target.  
Social security coverage for working adults easily reached the 61 percent country target, 
and the Heads of Households workfare program was gradually reduced through a 
successful, long-term effort to increase the sustainability of Argentina’s social safety net 
programs and use the labor market as a cornerstone of social policy.  As a result, 
beneficiaries of this successful emergency program are being integrated into the 
workforce or transferred to other programs according to schedule (see Annex A).  A 
number of country development goals were also identified in the education sector, 
relating to school enrollment rates and completion rates and to the development of a 
lifelong learning strategy.  Satisfactory progress was made towards those goals in the 
CAS period as detailed in Annex A. 

CAS Outcomes  

54. 
CAS milestones were also largely achieved.  The CAS proposed a lending 
program focused selectively on education, health and social protection – three areas 
where the Bank has a long record of support for Argentina.   Thirty projects were 
envisaged in the period through FY2009 for a total of US$3,300 million. The Bank is on 

 
 
Annex 3 
Page 15 of 32 

track to deliver twenty project loans for a total of US$3,425 million before end-FY200925 
under the current CAS.   

55. 
Under the first component of this pillar – Supporting Progress Towards 
Permanent Safety Nets and Fostering Employment, the CAS sought improvements to 
income support programs, notably making the transition from emergency income 
programs to initiatives that foster employment, and the establishment of more 
permanent safety nets providing direct support to vulnerable groups.  When Argentina 
was stricken by the economic crisis of 2001, a central focus of Bank support was for a 
social assistance program targeted at heads of households.  In 2006, when Argentina had 
recovered from the crisis the Bank approved a Heads of Household Transition Project 
(US$350 million) to move as many of the workfare beneficiaries as possible into 
productive employment and to transfer the remainder to a longer-term safety net linked to 
building the human capital of their children.  Measures were introduced to increase the 
employability of program participants by completing basic education, receiving job 
training and participating in sub-projects designed to provide experience and skills for 
future jobs.  The goal has been achieved, as about one third of the beneficiaries 
transitioned to the new Familias and Seguro de Capacitaci ón y Empleo programs.  
Another third were absorbed into the labor force, thus realizing another CAS milestone, 
the reduction in the number of people needing to participate in workfare programs by 
approximately one-third.   

56. 
As a compliment, the CAS set as a milestone the definition of an integrated, 
inter-ministerial lifelong learning strategy.  This strategy is being implemented with 
support from a Lifelong Learning and Training Project (US$200 million), approved in 
2006 to develop flexible learning opportunities for the unemployed and for low-income 
workers to acquire skills to enhance prospects for productive employment in the labor 
market.  The project built upon Bank analytic work which focused on increasing the 
linkages between the education system and the labor market.26  

57. 
The Bank has continued analytic work in these areas.  A labor market study was 
published in 2008 focusing on informal employment in Argentina.27  The study presented 
the findings of a two-year program undertaken by the Bank in cooperation with the 
Ministry of Labor and with the statistical institute (INDEC) to analyze the determinants 
of informality and its impact on poverty and equity.  It showed that informality in 
Argentina is relatively high, rendering the state less effective in providing social 
protection, especially for the poor and informal workers who are generally unable to 
make up for their lack of social protections through private means.  An important 
recommendation of the study was that education and training including lifelong learning 
programs could be instrumental in helping more workers to find employment in the 
formal sector and thereby enhance their incomes and improve their overall welfare. 

25 Three projects for US$ 273 Million are in the pipeline and may be approved until the end of FY09 (AR 
Provincial Roads, AR Financial Management, AR Buenos Aires Infrastructure) 
26 “Building a Skilled Labor Force for Sustained and E quitable Economic Growth:  Education, Training and 
Labor Markets in Argentina ” Report No. 31850-AR, May 5, 2006. 
27 “Informal Employment in Argentina: Causes an d Consequences ” Report No. 36092-AR, March 27, 2008 

 
 
                                                 
Annex 3 
Page 16 of 32 

Box 3:  The Heads of Households Program:  A Successful Partnership 
The Heads of Household Program was Argentina ’s main response to the social and economic crisis in 
2002.  Government rapidly developed and implemented this assistance program which provides a monthly 
payment equivalent to US$50 to individuals that (i) are the head of a household; (ii) are unemployed; (iii) 
live in a household with minors, disabled or pregnant women, and (iv) work 4 hours a day or take training 
or education classes.  The Bank supported the Program through the Heads of Household Project (Ln 7157-
AR), approved by the Board on January 28, 2003, and Heads of Household Transition Loan approved on 
March 23, 2006. 

The Bank supported the the part of the program in which beneficiaries did indeed comply with the workfare 
requirement.  The Program was very successful in (i) calming the social situation (which had nearly erupted 
into violent conflict), and (ii) targeting the poor, mitigating effectively the impact of the crisis.  
Government, with Bank support, has improved program governance (better internal controls, database 
crosschecks and supervision).  For example the Bank now finances only transfers made with debit cards, a 
more transparent mechanism than cash payments.   

Since 2002, the Bank accompanied Government implementation of the Program with analytical studies of 
its poverty and inequality impact.  Incidence data shows that the Program had good targeting performance.  
The share of Program participants among the 40 percent better-off households in Argentina was 6 percent 
in 2005 while the share of Program benefits going to the bottom two quintiles was 80 percent.  Given the 
good targeting performance, the HH Program was instrumental in tilting the overall economic growth 
period in a pro-poor way.  While the number of indigenous beneficiaries is not known, the program is 
active in dozens of municipalities with high proportions of indigenous populations. 

Governance improvements to Jefes included building additional cross-checks into the registry databases 
and adding additional controls within the MTESS. This included regular monthly cross-checks of the 
registry database with other databases by an independent agency (National System of Tax and Social 
Identification –SINTyS). The MTESS also introduced cr oss-checks of the registry against beneficiaries 
(and family members) among the participants in private health insurance plans.  In addition, the spouses of 
beneficiaries were cross-checked against private employment registries. 

Social accountability was also enhanced through greater use of public information and participation 
mechanisms. The MTESS coordinated with the National Consultative Council staff to hold a series of 
workshops on the program in order to consult and provide information, promoting the participation of local 
organizations (non-governmental organizations, unions, business groups, private companies, professional 
training centers, among others). 

With the normalization of the overall economic and social situation, the Government reoriented the HH 
Program.  The strategy was to distinguish among those beneficiaries that have higher re-employment 
chances from those that require a different type of longer-term safety net, linked to building human capital 
for children. 

58. 
The second component of this pillar sought improvement in selected health and 
education outcomes.   These outcomes and milestones were also largely achieved.   

59. 
Key milestones included improving health service delivery at the provincial 
level, a reduction of the infant mortality rate and expanded coverage of maternal-child 
health insurance.  Under the Provincial Maternal-Child Health Investment Project 
(US$300 million), infant mortality was reduced from 14.4 per 1000 births to 12.9, toward 
a goal of 12.0 by 2009.  Maternal and child health insurance was extended to 79 percent 
of the eligible population by 2008, surpassing the CAS target of 50 percent. In addition to 
increasing access to basic services, the project introduced important structural changes in 
the way health finance is provided to the provinces by the national government and in the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3 
Page 17 of 32 

way the provinces pay health providers.  For the first time in Argentina, the national 
government is linking the provision of finance to outputs and outcomes as verified by 
independent audits.  In order to link financing to outputs, both the national government 
and the provinces have introduced performance contracts and have strengthened their 
monitoring and reporting systems.  This has fundamentally changed the way in which 
maternal and child health policy is discussed at the two levels of government. 

60. 
The CAS also sought the definition of a core package of public health goods.  
With support from the Essential Public Health Functions and Programs Project (US$220 
million), this was achieved in 2007. 

61. 
Another key milestone was to raise school completion rates and learning 
outcomes, especially for children from disadvantaged families, evidenced by expanded 
coverage of pre-school education and increased effective promotion rate for classes 7-9 
in rural areas.  With support from a Rural Education Improvement Project (PROMER) 
(US$150 million), pre-school education rose from 89 percent in 2003 to 93.5 percent by 
2007, nearly realizing the 95 percent target for 2010.  The 2010 target of 80% promotion 
from class 7-8 in rural areas was achieved in 2006. 

PILLAR 3:  GOVERNANCE 

62. 
The Bank supported the Government’s efforts to strengthen the effectiveness, 
efficiency, transparency and accountability of public sector management; improve service 
delivery outcomes and trust in institutions; and strengthen public sector capacity to spur 
investment and growth.  Bank support also focused on enhancing the implementation and 
fiduciary integrity of Bank projects.  The CAS envisaged support for five projects in the 
total amount of US$135 million.  The Bank is on track to deliver two projects before end-
FY2009 for a total loan amount of US$40 million.  A fourth project to improve public 
sector management at the provincial level has been postponed to the next CAS period to 
accommodate the needs of the client for additional project preparation.  WBI has also 
been active in this area in Argentina with a focus on issues of governance and corruption.  
No free-standing AAA was programmed for pillar 3 of the CAS because analytic and 
advisory services are folded into the project work itself.   

Country Outcomes 

63. 
The only specific country development goal identified in the CAS results matrix 
was that the framework for co-participation should be strengthened to define more 
clearly the division of fiscal responsibilities between the central government and the 
provinces.  No significant progress was achieved on that account in the CAS period. 

CAS Outcomes 

64. 
The CAS sought to deepen the emerging investment partnership in favor of 
institutional strengthening in selected areas of public sector management including 
expenditure management, transparency, and service delivery.  This was largely 
achieved, as detailed below, with a package of Bank support.  The State Modernization 
Project began in 1998 and closed at end-2007, and it has been followed by the State 

 
 
Annex 3 
Page 18 of 32 

Modernization II Project which aims to develop and expand public sector management 
tools 
including e-government, procurement, human 
resource management and 
information management.  Another area supported by the Bank has been the Social and 
Fiscal National Identification System (SINTyS).  Established in 1998, SYNTyS aims to 
enable the exchange and cross-checking of information between government agencies.  A 
first-phase APL in support of SYNTyS closed in 2005, and the Bank supported the initial 
stages of a second phase by reallocation US$8 million from a State Modernization Loan 
which closed at end-2007.  The ICR for that project indicated that the SYNTyS 
component fully achieved its objectives.28  In 2008, the Bank approved a second phase 
APL of US$20 million that would support the second (ongoing) and third (forthcoming) 
phases of the system.  By the end of the project, all public sector agencies wishing to 
participate in the project should enjoy unencumbered access to information exchange.   

65. 
A key milestone aimed to increase in user satisfaction of ANSES, the National 
Social Security Administration, as measured by service-delivery outcomes and by 
citizen satisfaction surveys.  ANSES is particularly important because it constitutes the 
administrative pillar of the social security system which, in turn, accounts for more than 
one third of total federal government spending.  The Bank has been supportive of 
measures to strengthen the institutional effectiveness of ANSES since 1997.  The ANSES 
II Technical Assistance Project (US$25 million) supported interventions that reduced the 
average time to process new benefits from 140 days in 2005 to 130 days by November 
2007 and increased the number of regional centers and offices serving the public from 
244 in 2005 to 298 by November 2007.   

66. 
The CAS also sought to support the expansion of the integrated financial 
management (SLU/web- SIDIF) system (baseline: SLU covered 71% of federal level 
public institutions in 2005).  This objective was achieved, with the SLU being installed 
in 82% of federal level institutions. 

67. 
In addition, the CAS included the expansion of the public investment 
management system (BAPIN II) to additional provinces (baseline: 19 provinces in 
2005).  It has now been implemented in 23 of 24 provinces and 110 federal agencies. 

68. 
Finally, for provinces participating in the Sub-national Governments Public 
Sector Modernization Project, the CAS set the following milestones:  increase the 
percent of provincial expenditures on human resources operating under integrated 
payroll information systems from 30% to 45% in 2008 (and 55% in year 2009), and 
increase the ratio between collected and emitted tax revenue for provincial real 
property and motor vehicle taxes from 55 to 65 percent in 2008 (and 70% in 2009).  As 
of 2008, there had been no progress toward these targets. 

28 Implementation Completion Report No. ICR0000778; June 30, 2008 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Annex 3 
Page 19 of 32 

IV. OVERALL BANK PERFORMANCE AND LESSONS LEARNED 

69. 
Bank performance has been strong.  A strong lending program was 
effectively delivered, and a successful partnership was forged in the wake of a 
period of distrust of the Bank.  The CAS proposed an all-investment lending program 
in the amount of US$3.3 billion to be delivered in the period through FY09.  The Bank is 
on track to deliver a lending program of US$3.4 billion by end-FY09 (see Annex B).  
Beyond the lending numbers, there has been a substantial dialogue and joint effort to 
prepare innovative operations that imply significant improvements from past approaches, 
including the highly successful maternal-child health insurance scheme, a new generation 
of investment projects contracted directly with provinces and complex infrastructure 
operations involving significant safeguard and technical challenges.   

70. 
The Argentina Fiduciary Action Plan (AFAP) has implied that Bank-financed 
procurement activities are subject to close scrutiny by the public and there is an 
integrated effort to continuously assess the fiduciary related project risks. The strong 
integration of country, sector and fiduciary teams in matters related to portfolio 
implementation constitutes an 
important 
innovation 
that has ensured 
improved 
supervision and continuous risk assessment of the portfolio.  The Plan reflects an 
approach that is significantly different from past “ring fencing” of individual operations.  
It focuses on measures that cut across projects and that strengthen country systems for 
financial management and procurement.  Key achievements under the AFAP include. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

A web-based information system (known as SEPA) that provides the public with 
easy access to detailed information on all Bank-financed contracts in the country.  

A methodology (known as IFPA) to simplify, summarize, and communicate 
technically complex fiduciary assessments (at the project and portfolio level) 
through an easily understood system of red, yellow, and green “traffic lights.”  

An intensification of dialogue between the Bank and Argentina’s Supreme Audit 
Institution (AGN), the national body constitutionally mandated to audit all public 
sector accounts and entities.  Audit support activities have improved on-time audit 
completion and, more broadly, strengthened government audit capacity.  

A Price Monitoring Mechanism (PMM) on civil works contracts is currently 
being developed to help distinguish higher prices attributable to legitimate supply 
responses from artificial price inflation.  

Finally, an effort is being made across the board to mainstream project 
implementation by reducing the use and size of Project Implementation Units 
(PIUs) and thereby strengthen the state’s own institutions and systems.  

71. 
The SEPA is one of the most successful components of the AFAP.  Designed to 
disclose relevant information on project procurement plans and their implementation via 
the web, its initial scope included all contracts financed by the Bank in Argentina.  With a 
recent decision by IDB to adopt SEPA as its procurement dissemination tool, SEPA will 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3 
Page 20 of 32 

de facto cover a substantial share of Argentina’s public investment program and achieve 
impressive progress in the transparency of public procurement in Argentina.  Likewise, 
concurrent audits designed initially to ensure fiduciary standards of a results-oriented 
maternal-child health insurance scheme financed by the Bank has gradually been 
converted as the auditing standard for the health  insurance scheme at the national level 
and it is envisaged it may be adopted in future government programs in the sector. 

72. 
There has also been a strong focus on portfolio management which has enabled an 
intensive dialogue with the Government at the highest levels to address some of the 
issues affecting the portfolio as a whole and to ensure that the significant commitments 
that have been made in investments are effectively executed.  In addition to regular joint 
portfolio reviews, the Government has agreed recently to revise its loan approval 
procedures, improve the management information systems utilized by project entities and 
to the joint monitoring of civil work contracts to identify undue delays and bottlenecks.  
This last initiative is a welcome development since currently over 60% of Bank 
commitments are represented by high value civil work contracts.  These actions are 
expected to contribute to accelerate the pace of execution of investments which has 
deteriorated in recent years as a result mainly of project start up issues, including lengthy 
loan approval processes. 

73. 
The ability to deliver a substantial program of investment lending and to work 
jointly with the government counterparts in ensuring an effective implementation of the 
portfolio has been an important factor in strengthening the country relationship with 
Argentina which faces constrained access to the international financial markets and 
which views the Bank as an important source of external finance for the public 
investment program.   

74. 
At the same time the quality of Bank lending has been high.  Projects 
supported by the Bank have been innovative and are on their way towards making their 
expected development contribution as evidenced by the progress made in achieving CAS 
outcomes.  QAG assessments have confirmed largely satisfactory quality at entry, and 
especially of supervision.  The successful implementation of the investment lending 
strategy has helped dispel the difficulties in dialogue that characterized the crisis years, 
and it has opened new doors for cooperation and trust building.    

75. 
In addition, AAA was envisioned to strengthen the dialogue on financial 
accountability and procurement.  On financial accountability, this was achieved with the 
delivery of a Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and a (Accounting 
and Auditing Assessment) ROSC in FY07.  The country dialogue on procurement has 
likewise been significantly strengthened.  Agreement was reached with the authorities on 
protocols for the publication of procurement notices including improvements in technical 
specifications, short listing, and the standardization of bidding documents.  Agreement 
was also reached on principles for the aggregation of contracts, procedures for evaluation 
of contracts, and mechanisms for monitoring prices. 

76. 
The CAS included a number of targets related to some of the expected fiduciary 
improvements.  There were targets for increased audit compliance in Bank-supported 

 
 
Annex 3 
Page 21 of 32 

projects of 45% in 2005, 60% in 2006, 75% in 2007, and 80% in 2008 which were 
substantially achieved, albeit with some delay in 2008.  Actual audit compliance reached 
76% in FY06 and 81% in FY07.  The corresponding figure for FY08 was initially only 
48% due to delays in delivering audit reports.  As of November, 2008, however, 
compliance had reached 100%.  The CAS sought to mainstream project management 
under a framework agreement for phasing-out project implementation units (PIUs).  
An agreement was reached in 2005, and there has been steady progress in 
implementation.  As part of this understanding, in the case of repeater and follow-up 
projects, PIU staff were reduced by 46 percent between 2004/5 and 2006. 

77. 
The CAS provided also some specific outcomes related 
to portfolio 
performance, namely, a continuous decline in problem projects and a reduction in the 
number of projects at risk.  The suggested outcomes did not anticipate the difficulties 
that were encountered in the loan approval process which had a significant adverse effect 
in the level of projects considered at potential or actual risk.  The CAS sought to reduce 
the incidence of problem projects.  As of December, 2008, 13.8% of the portfolio was in 
problem status, down from 21 percent in 2005.  As reflected in Table 2, both problem 
projects and projects at risk went well beyond their expected ranges during FY07 and 08 
and have only recently began their descent towards more acceptable levels. 

78. 
Another key milestone was for the percentage of investment projects at risk by 
amount to not surpass 20 percent.  This target has not been achieved.  As of December, 
2008, projects at risk amounted to 24 percent of the portfolio, up from 19.5 percent at the 
beginning of the CAS period.  

79. 
Bank exposure to Argentina declined over the CAS period.  Bank exposure 
had declined to US$5.1 billion by end-2008.   This has derived from the initial focus 
during these years on the renovation of a rather depleted portfolio and a slower pace of 
disbursement expected from such an investment based portfolio.  Efforts to improve 
portfolio performance are an important part of the dialogue with the Administration and a 
comprehensive program has been agreed to that effect. There is optimism that after the 
significant start up problems faced by the project cohort approved in the CAS period, 
performance will improve in the coming years.  FY09 mid year disbursements already 
suggest a significant improvement from the implementation levels achieved during FY08.   
The Bank is also discussing with the Government ways to accelerate the approval of new 
Bank loans so that project start-up may not be delayed. 

80. 
A significant program of AAA was also delivered in parallel to the lending 
program.  Six tasks were already in progress when the CAS was under preparation, and 
all were completed and delivered on schedule.  A further 14 tasks were programmed in 
the CAS for FY07-08, of which six were delivered.  Others were either postponed beyond 
2008 or dropped from the program – sometimes for lack of client interest.  For example, 
the authorities requested the Bank not to undertake a CPAR. 

81. 
Experience with the program of AAA indicates that the Government is more 
interested in analytic work that has a clear and direct operational application.  In areas 
where the Bank and the Government share a common vision of development issues, the 

 
 
Annex 3 
Page 22 of 32 

Bank’s AAA has had significant impact.  A study on the cost of logistics was particularly 
well received and is providing valuable inputs for a Rosario Port project that is under 
preparation.  Similarly, a rural strategy that was delivered in March 2006 is helping the 
Government to design the further development of its agricultural program (PROSAP). 

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Table 2: CAS Annex B2 

As of Date 01/06/2009

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2006

2007

2008

2009

29
4.6
27.6
31.1
48.3
38.1
38.4

Yes
3521
98

29
3.9
3.4
1.0
41.4
21.4
21.7

Yes
2973
90

28
4.2
25.0
31.3
57.1
60.0
12.4

Yes
2642
98

32
4.0
12.5
16.9
28.1
29.6
8.4

Yes
1470
49

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80

105
17,844.7
26.7
35.2

Last Five FYs

24
3,578.8
16.7
8.2

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the 
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

82. 
The average cost of AAA reports in Argentina was greater than in comparator 
countries (see Table 3).  Furthermore, the average cost of AAA reports produced in 
Argentina under the 2006 CAS was 70 percent greater than reports produced under the 
2004 CAS when Argentina was ranked as one of the least cost countries.  The increase in 
costs may reflect that a number of reports were begun and later dropped. 

83. With respect to the lending program, project preparation costs and supervision 
costs in Argentina were similar to the corresponding costs in other countries.  The 
Argentina program ranked in the middle of the range. 

 
 
 
Table 3: Comparative Costs of Bank Program 
(FY06-08, U$S Thousand) 
Source: Business Warehouse as of August 15, 2008 

Annex 3 
Page 23 of 32 

Country 

Argentina 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Mexico 
Poland 
Russian Federation 
Turkey 

Average  
Supervision 
Cost  
per Project 
95 
83 
84 
93 
111 
83 
98 
106 

Supervision 
Cost 
Ranking 

4 
8 
6 
5 
1 
7 
3 
2 

Average  
Preparation 
Cost  
per Project 
307 
270 
181 
238 
230 
445 
534 
549 

Preparation 
Cost 
Ranking 

Average  
Cost  
AAA Report 

AAA  
Cost 
Ranking 

4 
5 
8 
6 
7 
3 
2 
1 

218 
114 
180 
143 
133 
112 
127 
146 

1 
7 
2 
4 
5 
8 
6 
3 

Lessons Learned 

84. Many lessons of the 2004 CAS are confirmed by the 2006-2008 experience.  The 
shift from adjustment lending, which dominated Bank lending at the beginning of the 
decade, to an all-investment lending program has strained the  project implementation 
capacity of the Government, particularly in the areas of loan approval processing and 
also the contracting of high value civil works.  This is evident in slow disbursements and 
underscores the importance of continuing to work with the client to improve its project 
implementation capacity. There is a constructive on going dialogue with the Government 
focused on initiatives to bring about improvements in project implementation capability 
and a specific action plan is being worked out as part of CSP dialogue.  There is a high 
level commitment to make substantial improvements in project implementation capability 
which is a central factor in making the investment led strategy successful.   

85. 
The Bank should work with the Government to reduce the lag between loan 
approval and loan signing.  Project implementation has been delayed because the 
Government has been slow to sign loans approved by the Bank.  This was particularly 
acute in 2007, when authorities were preoccupied with elections.  However, Government 
procedures continue to result in long delays between Board approval and loan signing. 

86. 
The progress in CAS implementation –particularly the progress in project 
preparation and the design of important and high quality investment initiatives-- has 
proven that there is sufficient space to develop an ambitious investment partnership 
despite the lack of coincidence in the structural reform agenda proposed by the 
government.  CAS should continue to focus on those areas where the Bank and the 
Government share a common view with respect to the policy framework and the 
operational environment.  The CAS should also provide for the close monitoring of 
progress 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3 
Page 24 of 32 

87. 
The Bank should tailor its program of AAA to address issues of priority interest 
to the client.  Experience with AAA reveals that the Government is more interested in 
analytic work that has a clear operational application.  An effort should be made to 
develop a demand driven AAA Agenda that ensures the ownership of the study by the 
Government and its endorsement by the Bank if there is a clear sense that it is consistent 
with the Bank’s assistance priorities. 

88. 
Progress in the fiduciary front should be continued and deepened to further 
ensure transparency and integrity of Bank operations.  The Bank should continue to 
promote a proactive and constructive dialogue with the Government to ensure 
transparency and competitiveness in the procurement of goods and services under the 
portfolio.  There has been very significant progress made in the area of transparency with 
the introduction of the Sistema de Ejecucion de Planes de Adquisiciones (SEPA).  It 
provides all actors with an interest in Bank-financed procurement --civil society, private 
sector, suppliers and executing entities-- a clear picture of the transactions financed by 
the Bank and facilitates monitoring the efficiency with which executing entities are 
implementing their respective procurement plans.   There has also been progress in 
identifying and assessing risks related to competition constraints.   There are, however, 
further areas for improved fiduciary management.  Among them the systemic review of 
risk involved in the procurement and financial management of projects through periodic 
integrated fiduciary assessments and the monitoring of contract processing to avoid 
bottlenecks and ensure the efficiency of  civil works contracting.  The Government shares 
and is committed to implement this expanded fiduciary agenda. 

 
 
  
A

n
n

e

x

3

P

a

g

e

o
5
2

f

2
3

N
N
A

E

A
X

:

R
A

G

E

N

T

I

A
C
A
N

S

R

E

S

U

T
L

S

M

A

T

R

I

X

P

I

L
L

R
A

1

-

S

U

S

T

A

I

N

E

D

G

R

O

W

T

H

W

I

T

H

E

Q

U

I

T

Y

C

o

n
u

t

r

y

D

e

v
a
o

e

l
9
2

o

p

m

e

n

t

G

l

s

A

c

t

u

v
a

l

P

r

g
o
o

e
e
r

s
s

t

a
a
o
o

w

r

d

s

D

e

e

l

p

m

n

t

G

l

s

A
C

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

0
3

A
A
C

c

t

u
u

a

l

P

r

g
o

e
r
e

s
s

t

o

w

a

r
e

d

s

S

O

t

c

o

m

s

a

d
n

M

l
i

s

t

o

n

e

s

1

.

I

n

f

r

a

s

t

r

u

c

t

u

e
r

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n

t

U

n
p
u
p
d
k
n
u
d
d
n
n
h
u
d
p
n
n
b

a
a
g

s
e
r
r

s
r
c
c
e
e
e
r

A

c
e
e
r
r

g

n

i
t
t

d
u
d
p
n
d

a
a
o
o

s

i

l
t
t
f

t

t

e
r
s
e
s
e
e
r
e

n
p

o

t

s
e
s
e

n

i
t

a

l

o
a
g

t
i

o

m
m

i
t
t
-
l
i
l
t

v

,

r
e
e

i
t

m

m

r

o

w

t

a

v
o

y

a

v

i

a

i
t

o

n

.

 T

r

a

n

s

o
p

t
r

•

R

o

a

d

s

i

d
o
o
g
n

c

d
n
o

i
t
i

n
o

:

t

a

r

g

e

t

i

s

0
9

%

o

f

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

n
o
n

-

c

n
o

s
s
e
c

i

n
o

e

d

r

o

a

d

s

n

e

t

w

o

r

k

;

t

a

r

g

e

t

i

s

0
5

%

o

f

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

r

o

a

d

s

n

e

t

w

o

r

k

.

•

D

i

s

o
p

a
s

b

l

e

i

n

c

o

m

e

d

e

d

i

a
c

t

e

d

t

o

r
t

a

n

s

o
p

t
r

o
o
p
y
b

r

s
e

t

u
q

i

n

l
i
t

e

r

e

u
d

e
c

d

t

o

l

s
s
e

t

h

a

5
1
n

%

.

 W

a

t

e

r

•

I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

a
s

f

e

w

a

t

e

r

o

f

t

h

e

o
b

t
t

o

m

t

w

u
q
o

i

n

l
i
t

s
e

t

5
7
o

-

0
8

%

.

•

I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

e
s

w

a

g

e

i

n

g

r

a
e

t

e

r

B

u

e

o
n

s

A

r
i

s
e

a

r

a
e

y
b

t

h

e

o
o
p

r

s
e

t

u
q

i

n

l
i
t

e

t

o

0
5

%

.

•

I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

e

l

c
e

i
r
t

c

t
i

y

a

d
n

n

a

t

u

r

a

l

g

s
a

y
b

t

h

e

o
o
p

r

s
e

t

u
q

i

n

l
i
t

e

t

o

5
9

%

a

d
n

0
5

%

,

r

s
e

p

c
e

i
t

v

e

l

y

.

       

A

s

o

f

8
0
0
2

,

9
8

%

o

f

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

r

o

a

d

s

a

r

e

i

n

d
o
o
g

c

d
n
o

i
t
i

n
o

.

D

a

t

a

p
n
o

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

r

o

a

d

s

i

s

o
n

t

a

v

a

l
i

a

b

l

e

.

 

N

d
o

a

t

a

a

v

a

l
i

a

b

l

e

    

A

s

o

f

7
0
0
2

,

5
8

%

o

f

o
b

t
t

o

m

t

w

o

i

n

c

o

m

e

u
q

i

n

l
i
t

s
e

h

a

v

e

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

w

a

t

e

r

n

e

t

w

o

r

k

.



A

s

o

f

7
0
0
2

,

4
3

%

o

f

o
o
p

r

s
e

t

u
q

i

n

l
i
t

e

h

a

d

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

e
s

w

a

g

e

.

 

A

s

o

f

7
0
0
2

,

4
3

%

o

f

o
o
p

r

s
e

t

u
q

i

n

l
i
t

e

h

a

d

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

n

a

t

u

r

a

l

g

s
a

.

T

r

a

n

s

o
p

t
r

•

L

e

v

e

r

a

g

e

t

h

e

p

r

g
o

r

s
s
e

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

i

n

r

o

a

d

r
t

a

n

s

o
p

t
r

y
b

a
c
s

i
l

p
u
g
n

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

f

o

r

r

o

a

d

m

a

i

n

t

e

n

a

n

e
c

t

h

r

u
o
h
g
u
o

t

t

h

e

c

n
u
o

r
t

y

a

d
n

e

p
x

a

d
n

i

g
n

t

h

i

s

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

t

o

i

n

c

l

d
u

e

r

o

a

d

g
p
u

r

a

d

s
e

,

s
a

w

e

l
l

s
a

b

r

o

a

d

e

n

i

g
n

t

h

e

c
s

p
o

e

o

f

B

a

k
n

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

t

o

e

n

c

o

m

p

s
s
a

a

d
d

i
t
i

n
o

a

l

r
t

a

n

s

o
p

t
r

s

b
u

c
e
s

t

o

r

s

.

•

I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

p

e

r

e
c

n

t

a

g

e

o

f

p

a

v

e

n
o
n
d

-

c

n
o

s
s
e
c

i

n
o

e

d

r

o

a

d

s

d
n
u

e

r

t

h

e

R
C

E

M

A

s

y

s

t

e

m

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

a

d
n

i

n

c

r

e

m

e

n

t

t

o

b

e

d

e

t

e

r

m

i

n

e

d

N

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

h

i

h
g

w

a

y

s

:

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

9

,

4
7
1

k

m

i

n

4
0
0
2

a

d
n

t

a

r

g

e

t

o

f

6
1

,

5
2
7

k

m

y
b

9
0
0
2

;

P

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

n

e

t

w

o

r

k

:

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

0

k

m

i

5
0
0
2
n

a

d
n

t

a

r

g

e

t

o

f

k
4
0
2
2

,

m

8
0
0
2
y
b

.

•

N

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

D

r
i

c
e

t

o

r

a

t

e

o

f

H

i

h
g

w

a

y

s

d
n
u

e

t
r

a

k

s
e

c
a

i
t

n
o

s

d
n
u

e

r

t

h

e

I

n

s

t
i
t

u

i
t

n
o

a

l

R

e

n

e

w

a

l

A

c

i
t

n
o

P

l

a

n

c

v
o

e

i
r

g
d
u
b
g
n

e

i
t

g
n

,

r

o

a

d

a
s

f

e

t

y

,

a

d
n

e

v
n

r
i

n
o

m

e

n

t

a

l

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

.
t

W

a

t

e

r

•

C

n
o

s

o

i
l

d

a

t

e

t

h

e

e

m

e

r

g

i

g
n

p

a

t
r

n

e

r

s

h

i

p

n
o

w

a

t

e

r

r

s
e

u
o

r

s
e
c

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

,
t

e

n

c

o

m

p

s
s
a

i

g
n

w

a

t

e

r

s

p
p
u

l

y

a

d
n

a
s

n

t
i

a

i
t

n
o

,

a

d
n

l
f

p
d
o
o

r

o

t

c
e

i
t

n
o

i
– 

n

t

h

e

c

n
o

t

e

x

t

o

f

m

v
o

i

g
n

t

o

w

a

r

d

s

m

o

r

e

s

r
t

a

t

e

g

i

c

w

a

t

e

r

r

s
e

u
o

r

e
c

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

.
t

•

E

p
x

a

d
n

w

a

t

e

r

a

d
n

e
s

w

a

g

e

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

f

o

r

a

p
p

r

x
o

i

m

a

t

e

l

y

n
o

e

-

h

a

f
l

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

l

o

w

i

n

c

o

m

e

p

e

p
o

l

e

i
l

v

i

g
n

i

n

a

r

s
a
e

o

f

h

i

h
g

a
s

n

t
i

a

r

y

o

r

e

v
n

r
i

n
o

m

e

n

t

a

l

u
v

l

n

e

r

a

b

t
i
l
i

y

i

n

A
B

P

r

v
o

i

n

e
c

.

•

E

s

t

a

b

i
l

s

h

l
f

d
o
o

i
r

s

k

r

e

u
d

c

i
t

p
n
o

l

a

n

s

i

n

a

t

l

s
a
e

t

5

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

.

•

R

e

u
d

e
c

l
f

d
o
o

i
r

s

k

i

n

e
s

l

c
e

t

e

d

u

r

b

a

n

a

r

s
a
e

i

n

c

l

d
u

i

g
n

A
B

c

t
i

y

a

d
n

e

o
p
x

e
s

p
d

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

c

i
t
i

s
e

.

 

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

B

a

k
n

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

f

o

r

r

o

a

d

m

a

i

n

t

e

n

a

n

e
c

a

t

t

h

e

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

a

d
n

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

l

e

v

e

l

s

t

h

r

p
h
g
u
o

e

f
r

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

-

b

e
s
a

d

c

n
o

r
t

c
a

t

s

.

B

a

k
n

d
n
u

e

t
r

k
o
o

a

n

a

l

y

i
t

c

w

o

r

k

n
o

l

g
o

i

s

i
t

c

c

o

s

t

s

a

d
n

n
o

o
p

t
r

s

a

d
n

a

n

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

l

o

a

n

t

o

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

o
p

t
r

f

c
a

i
t
i
l
i

s
e

a

t

R

o

a
s

i
r

o

i

s

d
n
u

e

r

p

r

e

p

a

r

a

i
t

n
o

.

  

P

a

i
t
r

a

l
l

y

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

A

s

o

f

8
0
0
2

,

t

h

e

R
C

E

M

A

s

y

s

t

e

m

a

p
p

i
l

e

d

t

o

0
0
6
3
1

,

k

m

o

f

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

h

i

h
g

w

a

y

s

a

d
n

0
0
0
1

,

k

m

o

f

t

h

e

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

n

e

t

w

o

r

k

.

   

N

o

t

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

    

N

o

t

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

    

P

a

i
t
r

a

l
l

y

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

C

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

e

x

t

e

d
n

e

d

t

0
0
0
0
7
3
o

,

l

o

w

i

n

c

o

m

e

p

e

p
o

l

e

y
b

8
0
0
2

.

A

d
d

i
t
i

n
o

a

l

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

i

s

a

n

i
t

c

i

p

a

t

e

d

w

h

e

n

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

i

s

c

o

m

p

l

e

t

e

d

w

t
i

h

a

d
d

i
t
i

n
o

a

l

i
f

n

a

n

e
c

.

 

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

R

e

u
d

c

i
t

n
o

p

l

a

n

s

s
e

t

a

b

i
l

s

h

e

d

i

n

S

a

n

t

a

F

e

,

C

o

i
r
r

e

n

t

s
e

,

E

n

r
t

e

R

i

o

s

,

C

h

c
a

o

,

M

i

s

i

n
o

s
e

a

d
n

B

u

e

o
n

s

A

r
i

s
e

.

 

P

a

i
t
r

a

l
l

y

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

W

o

r

k

s

h

a

v

e

s

t

a

t
r

e

d

i

n

B

u

e

o
n

s

A

r
i

s
e

.

R

e

u
d

e
c

d

l
f

d
o
o

i

g
n

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

i

n

c

i
t
i

s
e

i

n

c

l

d
u

i

g
n

S

a

n

t

a

F

e

.

.

9
2

L

g
n
o

e

-
r

t

e

r

m

,

h

i

h
g

e

-
r

o

r

d

e

r

d

e

v

e

l

p
o

m

e

n

t

b
o

j

c
e

i
t

v

e

s

i

d

e

n

i
t

f

i

e

y
b
d

t

h

e

c

n
u
o

t

r

y

.

0
3

C

n
u
o

t

r

y

r

e

s

u

t
l

s

t

o

w

h

i

c

h

t

h

e

B

a

k
n

e

p
x

c
e

t

s

t

o

m

a

k

e

a

d

i

r

c
e

t

c

n
o

t

r

i

u
b

i
t

n
o

t

h

r

h
g
u
o

t
i

s

C

A

S

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

.

I

d
n

i

a
c

t

o

r

s

i

n

c

l

d
u

e

s

o
h

r

t

e

-
r

t

e

r

m
m

l
i

e

s

t

n
o

e

s

w

h

e

r

e

o
p

s
s

i

b

l

e

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

n
n

e

x

3

P

a

g

e

o
6
2

f

2
3

R
A

G

E

N

T

I

A
N

:

A
C

S

R

E

S

U

T
L

S

M

A

T

R

I

X

P

I

L
L

R
A

1

-

S

U

S

T

A

I

N

E

D

G

R

O

W

T

H

W

I

T

H

E

Q

U

I

T

Y

C

o

n
u

t

r

y

D

e

v
a
o

e

l

o

p

m

e

n

t

G

l

s

A

c

t

u

v
a

l

P

r

g
o
o

e
e
r

s
s

t

a
a
o
o

w

r

d

s

D

e

e

l

p

m

n

t

G

l

s

A
C

S

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

a

d
n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

A
A
C

c

t

u
u

a

l

P

r

g
o

e
r
e

s
s

t

o

w

a

r
e

d

s

S

O

t

c

o

m

s

a

d
n

M

l
i

s

t

o

n

e

s

2

.

T

o

w

a

r

d

s

M

o

e
r

u
S

s

t

a

i

n

a

b

l

e

R

u

r

a

l

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n

t

a

d
n

E

n

v

i

r

o

n

m

e

n

t

a

l

M

a

n

g
a

e

m

e

n

t

I

m

p
d
n

r
e
s
e

o
v
x
o
o

s
r
c
r
e

o

m

p

e

i
i
t
i
t

v

e
c

n
u
n

e
s
r
s
e

,

d
n
u
q

a

t
i
l

y

,

v
a
•

p
k
p

t

o
o

f

g
a

r

t
l
:

u

a

i
l

t

c

u
d

c

i
t

o

R

c
a
e

0
0
1
h

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

t

n
o

s

i

n

e
c

r

a
e

l

a

d
n

o

l
i

e
e
s

d

p

r

u
d
o

c

i
t

n
o

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

5
0
0
2

,

5
7

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

)

.

•

R

c
a
e

h

U

S

3
$

n
b

i

n

m

a
e

t

e

o
p
x

t
r

s

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

U

S

0
$

.

5

n
b

i

n

1
0
0
2

,

U

S

n
b
4
1
$

.

i

5
0
0
2
n

)

a

d
n

r

e

u
d

e
c

p

l

a

n

t

a

d
n

a

n

i

m

a

l

h

a
e

t
l

h

r
-

e

l

a

t

e

d

l

o

s
e
s
s

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

:

a

n

i

m

a

l

h

a
e

t
l

h

l

o

s
e
s
s

U

S

0
5
1
$

m

n

a

d
n

p

l

a

n

t

l

o

s
e
s
s

U

S

5
7
$

m

p
n

e

r

y

a
e

)
r

.

 R

e

u
d

e
c

r

u

r

a

l

p

v
o

r
e

t

y

•

R

e

u
d

e
c

v
o
p

e

t
r

y

t

o

0
2

%

y
b

5
1
0
2

r
(

u

r

a

l

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

i

s

4
3

%

i

5
0
0
2
n

)

.

 A

u
d
d

e
s
c
s
e
r
r

a

a
o
g
g

r
r
e

w

i

n
d

o
g
a

n
p

r

o

b

l

e

m

o

f

s
e
r
•

o

d

i
t

.

P

r

e
s
e

r

v

e

3
1
1

.

%

o

f

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

a

r

a
e

s
a

n

a

i
t

v

e

f

o

r

s
e

t

i

1
1
0
2
n

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

6
2
1

.

%

i

7
8
9
1
n

;

2
1
1

.

%

i

7
0
0
2
n

s
e

.
t

;
)

a

d
n

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

f

o

r

s
e

r
t

y

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

5
0
0
2

:

1
1

.

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

h

s
a

)

.

•

I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

i

n

u

r

b

a

n

w

s
a

t

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

:

0
6

%

o

f

s

o

i
l

d

w

s
a

t

e

i

s

d

i

s

o
p

e
s

d

o

f

w

t
i

u
o
h

t

a
s

n

t
i

a

r

y

r
t

a
e

t

m

e

n

)
t

.

 •

I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

i

n

t

e

r

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

a
c

r

n
o
b

m

a

r

k

e

t

s

,

U

S

0
5
1
$

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

y
b

0
1
0
2

.

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

5
0
0
2

:

l

s
s
e

t

h

a

n

U

S

5
$

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

)

.

   

6
3
9

.

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

t

n
o

s

i

n

e
c

r

a
e

l

a

d
n

o

l
i

e
e
s

d

r

c
a
e

h

e

d

i

n

t

h

e

6
0
0
2

/

h
7

a

r

v

s
e

t



T

o

t

a

l

m

a
e

t

e

o
p
x

t
r

w

e

r

e

U

S

1
$

.

5
4

n
b

.

I

n

7
0
0
2

.

N

o

i

n

f

o

r

m

a

i
t

n
o

n
o

a

n

i

m

a

l

a

d
n

p

l

a

n

t

h

a
e

t
l

h

l

o

s
e
s
s

     

N

n
o

e

w

m

s
a
e

u

r

s
e

o

f

r

u

r

a

l

v
o
p

e

t
r

y

s

i

n

e
c

5
0
0
2

.

   

7
0
0
2

l

e

g

i

s

l

a

i
t

n
o

c

u

r

b

s

d

e

f

o

r

s
e

t

a

i
t

n
o

o

f

n

a

i
t

v

e

f

o

r

s
e

.
t

F

o

r

s
e

r
t

y

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

p

l

a

n

t

e

d

f

o

r

s
e

t

s

y
b

0
0
0
0
4

,

h

a

.

a

u
n
n

a

l
l

y

.

 

N

e

w

l

a

d
n

l
l
i
f

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

m

a

d

e

i

n

M

i

s

i

n
o

s
e

,

S

a

t
l

a

a

d
n

M

e

o
d
n

a
z

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

.

5
5

%

o

f

s

o

i
l

d

w

s
a

t

e

i

s

d

i

s

o
p

e
s

d

w

t
i

u
o
h

t

r
t

a
e

t

m

e

n

.
t

 

6
2

D
C

M

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

h

a

v

e

b

e
e

n

s

b
u

m

t
t
i

e

d

f

o

r

a

p
p

r

v
o

a

l

t

o

t

h

e

d

s
e

i

n
g

a

t

e

d

A

r

g

e

n

i
t

n

e

a

u

t

o
h

t
i
r

y

f

o

r

t

h

e

K

o
y

t

o

p

r

o

t

o

c

o

.
l

A

g

r

i

c

u

t
l

u

e
r

a

d
n

i
l

v

s
e

t

o

c

k

•

I

m

p

r

v
o

e

t

h

e

a
c

p

c
a

t
i

y

t

o

a

n

a

l

y

e
z

,

d

s
e

i

n
g

a

d
n

m

a

n

a

g

e

a

g

i
r

c

u

t
l

u

r

a

l

a

d
n

r

u

r

a

l

d

e

v

e

l

p
o

m

e

n

t

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

a

t

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

a

d
n

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

l

e

v

e

l

s

:

•

N

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

v
o
g

e

r

n

m

e

n

t

t

o

c

o

m

p

l

e

t

e

a

d
n

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

t
i

s

a

g

i
r

c

u

t
l

u

r

a

l

a

d
n

r

u

r

a

l

d

e

v

e

l

p
o

m

e

n

t

s

r
t

a

t

e

y
g

.

I

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

e

d

i

n

a

t

l

s
a
e

t

n
o

e

s

b
u

r

e

g

i

n
o

y
b

8
0
0
2

.

•

0
2

%

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

i

p
n

r

u
d
o

c

i
t

n
o

a

r

a
e

d
n
u

e

r

i
r
r
i

g

a

i
t

n
o

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

:

1

.

7

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

h

a

,

1
0
0
2

)

,

a

d
n

i

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

w

a

t

e

r

r

s
e

u
o

r

s
e
c

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

p

l
i

o

t

e

d

i

n

a

t

l

s
a
e

t

n
o

e

p

r

v
o

i

n

e
c

.

•

M

e

r

c

o

s

u

r

s

r
t

a

t

e

y
g

t

o

b

e

r
f

e
e

o

f

a

t
f

o

a
s

f
(

o
o

t

a

d
n

m

u
o

t

d
h

i

e
s
a
e
s

)

c

o

m

p

l

e

t

e

d

a

d
n

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

e

d

.

 R

u

r

a

l

p

v
o

r
e

t

y

•

I

m

p

r

v
o

e

d

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

d

a

t

a

a

d
n

a

n

a

l

y

s

i

s

o

f

r

u

r

a

l

v
o
p

e

t
r

y

.

•

E

p
x

a

d
n

e

d

s

m

a

l
l

a

d
n

m

e

d

i

u

m

f

a

r

m

e

r

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

i

n

f

o

r

s
e

r
t

y

(

a

t

l

s
a
e

t

0
0
0
5

,

h

a

t

o

t

a

,
l

i

n

3

d

f
f
i

e

r

e

n

t

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

)

.

 E

n

v

i

r

o

n

m

e

n

t

•

I

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

w

s
a

t

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

s

y

s

t

e

m

s

c

o

m

p

l

e

t

e

d

i

n

3

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

y
b

7
0
0
2

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

5
0
0
2

:

p
0

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

)

.

 •

I

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

u

r

b

a

n

r
t

a

n

s

o
p

t
r

p

l

a

n
n

i

g
n

a

d
n

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

,
t

c

o

m

b

i

n

e

d

w

t
i

h

o
p

l
l

u

i
t

n
o

r

e

u
d

c

i
t

n
o

,

i

n

a

t

l

s
a
e

t

i
f

v

e

c

i
t
i

s
e

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

:

0

c

i
t
i

s
e

i

n

5
0
0
2

)

.

 •

W

o

l
r

d

B

a

u
p
k
n

r

c

h

s
e
s
a

o

f

a

t

l

s
a
e

t

U

S

5
2
$

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

i

n

A

r

g

e

n

i
t

n

e

a
c

r

n
o
b

c

r

e

d

t
i

s

y
b

e

d
n

-

8
0
0
2

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

U

S

0
$

.

6

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

i

n

5
0
0
2

)

.

 

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

S

b
u

-

c
e
s

r

e

t

a

i
r

a

t

o

f

F

a

m

l
i

y

A

g

i
r

c

u

t
l

u

r

e

a

d
n

R

u

r

a

l

D

e

v

e

l

p
o

m

e

n

t

s
e

t

a

b

i
l

s

h

e

d

i

n

A

p

l
i
r

8
0
0
2

.

  

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

N

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

s

r
t

a

t

e

y
g

i

s

i

n

p

l

e
c
a

a

d
n

9
1

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

h

a

v

e

a

p
o
d

t

e

d

s

r
t

a

t

e

g

i

s
e

s
a

o

f

7
0
0
2

.

 

P

a

i
t
r

a

l
l

y

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

A

r

a
e

d
n
u

e

r

i
r
r
i

g

a

i
t

n
o

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

y
b

6

%

.

T

h

e

p

r

v
o

i

n

e
c

o

f

M

e

o
d
n

a
z

h

s
a

a

p
o
d

t

e

d

a

n

i

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

w

a

t

e

r

r

s
e

u
o

r

e
c

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

.

 

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

M

e

r

c

o

s

u

r

s

r
t

a

t

e

y
g

w

s
a

r

a

i
f
i
t

e

d

i

5
0
0
2
n

.

A

n

c
a

i
t

n
o

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

w

s
a

a

p
o
d

t

e

d

i

n

M

a

y

8
0
0
2

.

 

N

o

t

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

N

o

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

m

e

n

t

s

i

n

d

a

t

a

 

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

.

B
A

a

k
n

i
f
-

n

a

n

e
c

d

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

w

l
l
i

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

y
b

0
0
0
5

,

s

m

a

-
l
l

a
c
s

l

e

p

r

u
d
o

e
c

r

s

f

o

r

0
0
0
5
1

,

h

a

.

o

f

f

o

r

s
e

t

s

i

n

a

t

l

s
a
e

t

3

d

f
f
i

e

r

e

n

t

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

.

  

N

o

t

y

e

t

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

.

U

d
n

e

r

a

B

a

k
n

-

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

e

d

N

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

S

o

i
l

d

W

s
a

t

e

M

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

P

r

o

j

c
e

,
t

1

m

n
u

i

c

i

p

a

l

s

o

i
l

d

w

s
a

t

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

p

l

a

n

i

s

c

o

m

p

l

e

t

e

d

a

d
n

a

o
n

t

h

e

r

5

a

r

e

d
n
u

e

r

p

r

e

p

a

r

a

i
t

n
o

.

0
1

i

n

r
f

s
a

r
t

u

c

t

u

r

e

a

d
n

e

u
q

i

p

m

e

n

t

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

a

r

e

p

l

a

n
n

e

d

.

 

N

o

t

y

e

t

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

.

0
3

o
p

l
l

u

i
t

n
o

c

n
o

r
t

o

l

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

a

r

e

b

e

i

g
n

d

e

v

e

l

p
o

e

d

w

t
i

h

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

r
f

o

m

t

h

e

W

B

I

C

a

r

n
o
b

F

i

n

a

n

e
c

A

s
s

i

s

t

a

n

e
c

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

.

 

N

o

t

y

e

t

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

.

B

a

k
n

u
p

r

c

h

s
e
s
a

u
p

t

n
o

o
h

l

d

p

e

d
n

i

g
n

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

m

e

n

t

s

i

n

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

o
p

f
t
r

o

i
l

o

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
A

n
n

e

x

3

P

a

g

e

o
7
2

f

2
3

R
A

G

E

N

T

I

A
N

:

A
C

S

R

E

S

U

T
L

S

M

A

T

R

I

X

P

I

L
L

R
A

2

-

S

O

C

I

A

L

I

C
N

L

U

S

I

O

N

C

o

n
u

t

r

y

D

e

v
a
o

e

l

o

p

m

e

n

t

G

l

s

A

c

t

u

v
a

l

P

r

g
o
o

e
e
r

s
s

t

a
a
o
o

w

r

d

s

D

e

e

l

p

m

n

t

G

l

s

A
C

S

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

a

d
n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

A
A
C

c

t

u
u

a

l

P

e
r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

w

a

r
e

d

s

S

O

t

c

o

m

s

a

d
n

M

l
i

s

t

o

n

e

s

1

.

p
p
u
S

o

r

t

i

n

g

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

T

o

w

a

r

d

s

P

r
e

m

a

n

e

n

t

S

a

f

e

t

y

N

e

t

s

a

d
n

F

o

s

t

r
e

i

n

g

E

m

p

l

y
o

m

e

n

t

C

v
o
o
o
a

n

s
r
r
r
e
s
e
e
e
r
e
c

a
a
a
y
o
x

i
l
t

d

t

e
c

t
i

h

s
e
s
r
r
r
e
e
e
e
s
r
c

u
n
d

c
e
e
e
r
r
e
r
z
c
c

t
i
t

o

n
h

i

n

d
n
n
n
n
n
p

h
d
n

e
e

o
v
v
o
a
o

d

t
i

s
r
e
c
s
r
e
e

i
t
i

e
s

p

f
f

l
t
t

o
y
a
o

v

h

l
i
i
i

g

i
t
i
t

r
e

m

u
p
h

i
t
i
l

b
d
k
n
d
n

y

a
a
g
o

n
n
p

o
g
g

n
h

d

g
o

m

s
e
r
e

a

d
n
p
u
p

t
t

m

v
g

i
i
t

a
o

s
e
c

t

h

e

r

u
d

e

m

a

t

l

.

 •

R

e

u
d

e
c

u

r

b

a

n

v
o
p

e

t
r

y

r
f

o

m

8
3

%

(

5
0
0
2

)

t

p
4
3
o

e

r

e
c

n

t

(

7
0
0
2

)

a

d
n

0
3

%

(

9
0
0
2

)

.

•

R

e

u
d

e
c

E

x

r
t

e

m

e

v
o
p

e

t
r

y

r
f

o

m

6
3
1

.

%

i

5
0
0
2
n

t

1
1
o

%

(

1
1
0
2

)

a

d
n

9

%

i

9
0
0
2
n

•

R

e

u
d

c

i
t

o
n
o

f

n
u

e

m

p

l

y
o

m

e

n

t

r

a

t

e

r
f

o

m

4
1

%

i

5
0
0
2
n

t

2
1
o

%

(

7
0
0
2

)

a

1
1
d
n

%

i

9
0
0
2
n

.

•

E

p
x

a

d
n

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

a

d
n

a

v
d

a

n

e
c

r

e

f

o

r

m

o

f

t

h

e

S

o

c

i

a

l

p

r

o

t

c
e

i
t

n
o

s

y

s

t

e

m

:

1

.

S

h

a

r

e

o

f

w

o

r

k

i

g
n

a

u
d

t
l

s

c

v
o

e

r

e

y
b
d

s

o

c

i

a

l

c
e
s

u

t
i
r

y

i

n

c

r

s
e
s
a
e

r
f

o

m

2
5

.

6

%

(

5
0
0
2

)

t

o

1
6

%

(

7
0
0
2

)

a

d
n

5
6

%

(

9
0
0
2

)

.

•

T

r

a

n

s

i
t
i

n
o

o

f

H

a
e

d

s

o

f

H

u
o

e
s

o
h

l

d

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

i

n

t

o

n

e

w

i

n

c

o

m

e

r
t

a

n

s

f

e

r

c
s

h

e

m

s
e

,

i

n

c

l

d
u

i

g
n

r

o

l

e

o

f

n
o
n

-

c

n
o

i
r
t

u
b

t

o

r

n
u
y

e

m

p

l

y
o

m

e

n

t

b

e

n

e

t
i
f

a

d
n

/

o

r

e

p
x

a

n

s

i

n
o

o

f

c

h

l
i

d

b

e

n

e

t
i
f

s

.

        

A

s

o

f

7
0
0
2

,

u

r

b

a

v
o
p
n

e

t
r

y

w

s
a

p
6
0
2

.

e

r

e
c

n

.
t

N

o

r

e

i
l

a

b

l

e

s
e

i
t

m

a

t

e

a

v

a

l
i

a

b

l

e

f

o

r

8
0
0
2

.



N

o

r

e

i
l

a

b

l

e

d

a

t

a

a

v

a

l
i

a

b

l

e

.

  

A

s

o

f

e

d
n

-

7
0
0
2

,

n
u

e

m

p

l

y
o

m

e

n

t

w

s
a

5
7

.

p

e

r

e
c

n

t

 

A

s

o

f

7
0
0
2

,

S

o

c

i

a

l

S

c
e

u

t
i
r

y

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

w

s
a

p
1
6

e

r

e
c

n

t

     

H

a
e

d

s

o

f

H

u
o

e
s

o
h

l

p
d

r

g
o

r

a

m

i

s

b

e

i

g
n

h
p

e
s
a

d

u
o

t

w

t
i

h

B

a

k
n

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

a

b
d
n

e

n

e

i
f

c

i

a

i
r

s
e

r
t

a

n

s

f

e

r
r

e

d

t

o

n

e

w

i

n

c

o

m

e

r
t

a

n

s

f

e

r

c
s

h

e

m

s
e

.

•

I

m

p

r

v
o

e

m

e

n

t

s

t

o

i

n

c

o

m

e

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

s

,

o
n

t

a

b

l

y

m

a

k

i

g
n

t

h

e

r
t

a

n

s

i
t
i

n
o

r
f

o

m

e

m

e

r

g

e

n

c

y

i

n

c

o

m

e

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

s

t

o

i

n

i
t
i

a

i
t

v

s
e

t

h

a

t

f

o

s

t

e

r

e

m

p

l

y
o

m

e

n

t

a

d
n

s
e

t

a

b

i
l

s

h

i

g
n

m

o

r

e

p

e

r

m

a

n

e

n

t

a
s

f

e

t

n
y

e

t

s

g

a
e

r

e

d

t

p
o

r

v
o

i

d

e

d

r
i

c
e

t

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

t

o

u
v

l

n

e

r

a

b

l

e

g

r

p
u
o

s

.

•

R

e

u
d

c

i
t

n
o

i

n

u
n

m

b

e

r

o

f

p

e

p
o

l

e

h

a

v

i

g
n

t

o

p

a

i
t
r

c

i

p

a

t

e

i

n

w

o

r

k

f

a

r

e

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

s

r
f

o

m

4
1

.

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

(

5
0
0
2

)

t

o

n
o

e

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

(

6
0
0
2

)

a

d
n

l

s
s
e

t

h

a

n

5
0

.

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

(

9
0
0
2

)

.

•

T

r

a

n

s

i
t
i

n
o

o

f

H

a
e

d

s

o

f

H

u
o

e
s

o
h

l

d

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

i

n

t

o

n

e

w

i

n

c

o

m

e

r
t

a

n

s

f

e

r

c
s

h

e

m

s
e

,

i

n

c

l

d
u

i

g
n

r

o

l

e

o

f

n
o
n

-

c

n
o

i
r
t

u
b

t

o

r

y

n
u

e

m

p

l

y
o

m

e

n

t

b

e

n

e

t
i
f

a

d
n

/

o

r

e

p
x

a

n

s

i

o
n
o

f

c

h

l
i

b
d

e

n

e

t
i
f

s

.

 •

F

o

r

m

u

l

a

i
t

o
n
o

f

i

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

c

o

m
m

n
u

t
i

y

e
s

r

v

i

e
c

s

r
t

a

t

e

y
g

,

i

n

c

l

d
u

i

g
n

o
h

w

u
n

i
t
i
r
t

n
o

a

l

a

d
n

c

h

l
i

d

d

e

v

e

l

p
o

m

e

n

t

s

r
t

a

t

e

g

i

s
e

w

l
l
i

b

e

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

e

d

a

t

l

o

a
c

l

l

e

v

e

.
l

 •

D

e

i
f

n

i
t
i

n
o

o

f

i

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

,

i

n

t

e

-
r

m

i

n

i

s

t

e

i
r

a

l

f
i
l

e

l

g
n
o

l

a
e

r

n

i

g
n

s

r
t

a

t

e

y
g

.

•

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:
.

B

e

n

e

i
f

c

i

a

i
r

s
e

o

f

e
J

f

s
e

d

e

H

a
g
o

r

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

o
n

w

b

e

i

g
n

r
t

a

n

s

f

e

r
r

e

d

t

o

n

e

w

F

a

m

i
l
i

a

s

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

a

d
n

t

o

n

e

w

S

e

u
g

r

o

d

e

C

a
p
a

c

t
i

a

c

ión

y

E

m

p

l

e

o

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

.

   •

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

P

a

i
t
r

c

i

p

a

n

t

s

i

n

e
J

f

s
e

d

e

H

a
g
o

r

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

r

e

u
d

e
c

d

r
f

o

m

1

.

4

m

i
l
l
i

n
o

i

n

J

n
u

e

5
0
0
2

t

o

5
6
6

,

0
0
0

y
b

J

n
u

e

8
0
0
2

a

d
n

0
7
5

,

0
0
0

y
b

A

u
g
u

s

t

8
0
0
2

.

 •

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

N

u

m

b

e

r

s

r
t

a

n

s

f

e

r
r

e

d

r
f

o

m

e
J

f

s
e

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

y
b

m

i

d

-

8
0
0
2

w

e

r

e

s
a

f

o

l
l

o

w

s

:

4
3
6
0
4
3

,

t

o

F

a

m

i
l
i

a

s

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

.

0
0
8
5
9

,

t

o

S

e

u
g

r

o

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

.

•

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

A

s

r
t

a

t

e

y
g

f

o

r

m

u

l

a

t

e

d

y
b

t

h

e

C

e

n

t

r

o

I

n

t

e

g

r

o
d
a

r

C

o

m

n
u

t
i

a

r

i

o

i

s

b

e

i

g
n

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

e

d

i

n

5
9
1

m

n
u

i

c

i

p

a

i
t
i
l

s
e

n

a

i
t

n
o

-

w

i

d

e

.

  •

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

L

f
i

e

l
-

g
n
o

l

a
e

r

n

i

p
g
n

r

o

j

c
e

t

d
n
u

e

r

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

a

i
t

n
o

w

t
i

h

B

a

k
n

s

o
p
p
u

.
t
r

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
A

n
n

e

x

3

P

a

g

e

o
8
2

f

2
3

R
A

G

E

N

T

I

A
N

:

A
C

S

R

E

S

U

T
L

S

M

A

T

R

I

X

P

I

L
L

R
A

2

-

S

O

C

I

A

L

I

C
N

L

U

S

I

O

N

C

o

n
u

t

r

y

D

e

v
a
o

e

l

o

p

m

e

n

t

G

l

s

A

c

t

u

v
a

l

P

r

g
o
o

e
e
r

s
s

t

a
a
o
o

w

r

d

s

D

e

e

l

p

m

n

t

G

l

s

A
C

S

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

a

d
n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

A
A
C

c

t

u
u

a

l

P

e
r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

w

a

r
e

d

s

S

O

t

c

o

m

s

a

d
n

M

l
i

s

t

o

n

e

s

2

.

I

m

p

r

v
o

i

n

g

S

e

l

c
e

t

e

d

H

e

a

l

t

h

a

d
n

E

u
d

c

a

t

i

o

n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

 E

u
d
•

a
c

i
t

n
o

E

n

r

o

l
l

m

e

n

t

r

a

t

e

o

f

5

-

y

a
e

r

o

l

d

s

i

n

c

r

s
e
s
a
e

r
f

o

m

6
1
9

.

(

5
0
0
2

)

t

o

5
9

.

0

(

7
0
0
2

)

a

d
n

8
9

.

0

(

9
0
0
2

)

.

•

C

o

m

p

l

e

i
t

n
o

r

a

t

e

o

f

t

h

r
i

d

c

y

c

l

e

o

f

b

s
a

i

c

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

r
f

o

m

9
2
8

.

(

5
0
0
2

)

t

o

0
7
8

.

p

e

r

e
c

n

t

(

7
0
0
2

)

a

d
n

5
9

p

e

r

e
c

n

t

(

9
0
0
2

)

.

•

D

e

i
f

n

e

f
i
l

e

l

g
n
o

l

a
e

r

n

i

g
n

s

r
t

a

t

e

y
g

b

e

t

w

e
e

n

t

h

e

M

i

n

i

s

i
r
t

s
e

o

f

E

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

,

E

c

o
n
o

m

y

a

d
n

L

a

o
b

r

.

  

A

s

o

f

7
0
0
2

,

t

h

e

e

n

r

o

l
l

m

e

n

t

r

a

t

e

f

o

r

5

y

a
e

-
r

o

l

d

s

w

s
a

1
9

.

2

p

e

r

e
c

n

.
t

 

A

s

o

f

7
0
0
2

,

t

h

e

c

o

m

p

l

e

i
t

n
o

r

a

t

e

f

o

r

t

h

e

t

h

r
i

d

c

y

c

l

e

o

f

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

w

s
a

p
5
8

e

r

e
c

n

.
t

 

L

f
i

e

l

g
n
o

l

a
e

r

n

i

g
n

a

d
n

r
t

a

i

n

i

g
n

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

d
n
u

e

r

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

a

i
t

n
o

w

t
i

h

B

a

k
n

s

o
p
p
u

.
t
r

H

a
e

t
l

h

•

S

o
p
p
u

t
r

e

f
f

o

t
r

s

t

o

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

h

a
e

t
l

h

e
s

r

v

i

e
c

d

e

i
l

v

e

r

y

a

t

t

h

e

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

l

e

v

e

;
l

a

d
n

r

a

i

e
s

c
s

o
o
h

l

c

o

m

p

l

e

i
t

n
o

r

a

t

s
e

a

d
n

i

m

p

r

v
o

i

g
n

l

a
e

r

n

i

g
n

u
o

t

c

o

m

s
e

,

s
e

p

c
e

i

a

l
l

y

f

o

r

c

h

l
i

d

r

e

n

r
f

o

m

d

i

a
s

v
d

a

n

t

a

g

e

d

f

a

m

i
l
i

s
e

.

•

R

e

u
d

c

i
t

n
o

o

f

i

n

f

a

n

t

m

o

t
r

a

t
i
l

y

r

a

t

e

r
f

o

m

4
1

.

4

p

e

r

b
0
0
0
1

t
r
i

h

s

i

5
0
0
2
n

t

p
0
2
1
o

.

e

r

b
0
0
0
1

t
r
i

h

s

i

n

9
0
0
2

.

•

E

p
x

a

d
n

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

o

f

m

a

t

e

r

n

a

-
l

c

h

l
i

h
d

a
e

t
l

h

i

n

s

u

r

a

n

e
c

r
f

o

m

0
2

%

o

f

e

i
l

g

i

b

l

e

u
p
o
p

l

a

i
t

n
o

i

n

5
0
0
2

t

o

0
5

%

i

n

9
0
0
2

(

9

O
N

E

/

N

E

A

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

)

.

•

D

e

i
f

n

i
t
i

o
n
o

f

c

o

r

e

p

c
a

k

a

g

e

o

f

b
u
p

i
l

c

h

a
e

t
l

h

d
o
o
g

s

.

E

u
d
•

a
c

i
t

n
o

I

m

p

r

v
o

e

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

o

f

p

r

e

-

c
s

o
o
h

l

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

f

o

r

c

h

l
i

d

r

e

n

o

f

5

y

a
e

r

s

o

f

a

g

e

i

n

r

u

r

a

l

a

r

s
a
e

o

f

A

r

g

e

n

i
t

n

a

9
0
0
2
y
b

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

9
8

%

i

3
0
0
2
n

-

4
0

,

t

a

r

g

e

t

i

s

5
9

%

y
b

9
0
0
2

-

0
1

)

.

•

I

m

p

r

v
o

e

e

f
f

c
e

i
t

v

e

p

r

o

m

o

i
t

n
o

r

a

t

e

f

o

r

c

l

s
e
s
s
a

7

-

9

i

n

r

u

r

a

l

a

r

s
a
e

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

8
6

%

i

n

3
0
0
2

-

4
0

,

t

a

r

g

e

t

i

s

0
8

%

y
b

9
0
0
2

-

0
1

)

.

 

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

B

a

k
n

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

f

o

r

a

P

r

o

v

i

n

c

i

a

l

M

a

t

r
e

a
n

-
l

C

h

l
i

d

H

e

a

t
l

h

I

n

s
e
v

t

m

e

n

t

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

W

s
a

a

p
p

r

v
o

e

d

i

n

N

v
o

e

m

b

e

r

6
0
0
2

.

G

r

a

u
d

a

i
t

n
o

r

a

t

s
e

f

o

r

b

s
a

i

c

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

t

h

r

9
u

t

h

g

r

a

d

e

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

r
f

o

m

3
8

%

i

5
0
0
2
n

t

5
8
o

%

i

7
0
0
2
n

.

P

r

e

-

c
s

o
o
h

l

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

f

o

r

r

u

r

a

l

c

h

l
i

d

r

e

n

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

r
f

o

m

9
8

%

i

n

3
0
0
2

/

4

t

o

5
3
9

.

%

i

n

6
0
0
2

.



A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

A

s

o

f

6
0
0
2

i

n

f

a

n

t

m

o

t
r

a

t
i
l

y

w

s
a

p
9
2
1

.

e

r

b
0
0
0
1

t
r
i

h

s

.

  

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

A

s

o

f

8
0
0
2

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

o

f

m

a

t

e

r

n

a

-
l

c

h

l
i

h
d

a
e

t
l

h

i

n

s

u

r

a

n

e
c

w

s
a

9
7

%

o

f

e

i
l

g

i

b

l

e

u
p
o
p

l

a

i
t

n
o

.

 

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

T

h

e

B

a

k
n

a

d
n

t

h

e

A

r

g

e

n

i
t

n

e

a

u

t

o
h

i
t
i
r

s
e

a

g

r

e
e

d

n
o

t

h

e

d

e

i
f

n

i
t
i

n
o

o

f

a

c

o

r

e

p

c
a

k

a

g

e

i

n

S

e

p

t

e

m

b

e

r

7
0
0
2

.

  

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

A

s

o

f

6
0
0
2

,

c

v
o

e

r

a

g

e

o

f

p

r

e

-

c
s

o
o
h

l

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

f

o

r

5

y

a
e

-
r

o

l

d

c

h

l
i

d

r

e

n

i

n

r

u

r

a

l

a

r

s
a
e

w

s
a
e

p
5
3
9

.

e

r

e
c

n

.
t

 

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

A

s

o

f

6
0
0
2

,

t

h

e

e

f
f

c
e

i
t

v

e

p

r

o

m

o

i
t

n
o

r

a

t

e

r
f

o

m

c

l

s
s
a

7

t

8
o

i

n

r

u

r

a

l

a

r

s
a
e

w

s
a

p
4
1
8

.

e

r

e
c

n

.
t

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

n
n

e

x

3

P

a

g

e

o
9
2

f

2
3

R
A

G

E

N

T

I

A
N

:

A
C

S

R

E

S

U

T
L

S

M

A

T

R

I

X

P

I

L
L

R
A

3

-

I

M

P

R

O

V

E

D

O
G

V

E

C
N
A
N
R

E

C

o

n
u

t

r

y

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n

t

G

a
o

l

s

A

c

t

u

v
a

l

P

r

g
o
o

e
e
r

s
s

t

a
a
o
o

w

r

d

s

D

e

e

l

p

m

n

t

G

l

s

A
C

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

A

c

t

u

a

l

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

w

a

r
e

d

s

A
C

S

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

a

d
n

M

l
i

s

t

o

n

e

s

1

.

S

t

e
r

n

g

t

h

e

n
n

i

g

P

b
u

i
l

c

I

n

s

t

i

t

u

t

i

o

n

s

S

i
f
t
f

e
c
r
c
c
e

h
n
n
n
u
n

g

t

e
c

n

;
t
t
t
i
t
i
t
;
.
t
l
i
,

n
h

e
s
e

f
f

e
c
r
e

i
t

y
v

s
c
s
e
e
r
e
s
e
r
s
e
c
c
e

n

s
s
e

,

i

e

y
a

r

y
a

n
b
u
p
p
p

a

a

d
n

a

o
o
a
y
o
g
a
o
v
a

t

n
u
h
b
n
p

o

f

i
l

t
i
t

o

r
e
c

m

e
r
e

m

e

i

m
m

e
r
r
s
s
s
e

v
o
a

v

n
d

s
c
e
e
s

t
i
i
t
t
l

c

y
o
a

d
n
u
n
p

t
i
t

n
b
u
n
p
n
u
h
n

i

i

u

i
t

c
s

d
n

t

g

t
i
l

c

g
o

c
r
r

a

t

o

r

v

t

m

e

a

d
n

w

t

-
 -

S

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

t

h

e

r
f

a

m

e

w

o

r

k

f

o

r

f

e

d

e

r

a

l

c

a
p
o

r

i
t

c

i

a
p

c

i

n
o

t

o

c

l

a
e

l
r

y

d

e

i
f

n

e

t

h

e

i
f

a
c
s

l

r

s
e

n
o
p

s

i

b

t
i
l
i

y

r

s
e

n
o
p

s

i

b

i
t
i
l
i

s
e

b

e

t

w

e
e

n

t

h

e

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

d
n

t

h

e

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

.

         

T

h

e

r
f

a

m

e

w

o

r

k

f

o

r

c

a
p
o

r

i
t

c

i

a
p

c

i

n
o

w

s
a

o
n

t

s

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

e

d

r
f

o

m

6
0
0
2

t

o

8
0
0
2

.

•

 D

e
e

p

e

n

t

h

e

e

m

e

r

g

i

g
n

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

p

a

t
r

n

e

r

s

h

i

p

i

n

f

a

o
v

r

o

f

i

n

s

t
i
t

u

i
t

n
o

a

l

s

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

i

g
n

i

n

e
s

l

c
e

t

e

d

a

r

s
a
e

o

f

b
u
p

i
l

c

c
e
s

t

o

r

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

i

n

c

l

d
u

i

g
n

e

p
x

e

d
n

t
i

u

r

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

,
t

r
t

a

n

s

p

a

r

e

n

c

y

,

a

d
n

e
s

r

v

i

e
c

d

e

i
l

v

e

r

y

.

•

 I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

i

n

u

e
s

r

a
s

i
t

s

f

c
a

i
t

n
o

o

f

N
A

S
E
S

s
a

m

s
a
e

u

r

e

d

y
b

e
s

r

v

i

e
c

-

d

e

i
l

v

e

r

y

u
o

t

c

o

m

s
e

a

d
n

y
b

c
•

i
t
i

e
z

n

a
s

i
t

s

f

c
a

i
t

n
o

s

u

r

v

e

y

s

.

 E

p
x

a

n

s

i

n
o

o

f

t

h

e

i

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

i
f

n

a

n

c

i

a

l

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

(

L
S

w
U

/

e

b

-

S

I

D

I

F

)

s

y

s

t

e

m

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

:

L
S

U

c

v
o

e

r

e

d

1
7

%

o

f

f

e

d

e

r

a

l

l

e

v

e

l

b
u
p

i
l

c

i

n

s

t
i
t

u

i
t

n
o

s

i

n

5
0
0
2
•

)

.

 E

p
x

a

n

s

i

o
n
o

f

t

h

e

b
u
p

i
l

c

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

s

y

s

t

e

m

(

A
B

P

I

N

)
I
I

t

o

a

d
d

i
t
i

n
o

a

l

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

:

p
9
1

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

i

5
0
0
2
n

)

.

•

 F

o

r

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

p

a

i
t
r

c

i

p

a

i
t

g
n

i

n

t

h

e

S

b
u

-

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

G

v
o

e

r

n

m

e

n

t

s

P

b
u

i
l

c

S

c
e

t

o

r

M

d
o

e

r
r

n

i

a
z

i
t

n
o

P

r

o

j

c
e

:
t

 1

.

P

e

r

e
c

n

t

o

f

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

e

p
x

e

d
n

t
i

u

r

s
e

n
o

u
h

m

a

n

r

s
e

u
o

r

s
e
c

p
o

e

r

a

i
t

d
n
u
g
n

e

r

i

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

p
d

a

y

r

o

l
l

i

n

f

o

r

m

a

i
t

n
o

s

y

s

t

e

m

s

h

s
a

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

r
f

o

m

0
3

%

t

o

5
4

%

i

n

8
0
0
2

(

a

d
n

5
5

%

i

n

y

a
e

r

9
0
0
2

)

.

2

.

R

a

i
t

b
o

e

t

w

e
e

n

c

o

l
l

c
e

t

e

d

a

d
n

e

m

t
t
i

e

d

t

a

x

r

e

v

e

u
n

e

f

o

r

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

r

a
e

l

p

r

p
o

e

t
r

y

a

d
n

m

o

t

o

r

v

e

h

i

c

l

e

t

a

x

s
e

h

s
a

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

r
f

o

m

5
5

t

p
5
6
o

e

r

e
c

n

t

i

n

8
0
0
2

(

a

d
n

0
7

%

i

n

9
0
0
2

)

.

•

 A

r

g

e

n

i
t

n

a’s

r

a

k
n

i

g
n

s

n
o

W

B

I’s

G

l

b
o

a

l

G

v
o

e

r

n

a

n

e
c

I

d
n

i

a
c

t

o

r

s

o

f

G

v
o

e

r

n

m

e

n

t

E

f
f

c
e

i
t

v

e

n

s
e

s” 

a

d
n

C

n
o

r
t

o

l

o

f

C

o

r
r

p
u

i
t

o

n” 

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

r
f

o

m

c

u

r
r

e

n

t

p

e

r

e
c

n

l
i
t

e

r

a

k
n

s

o

f

3
2
4

.

,

a

d
n

9
2
4

.

,

r

s
e

p

c
e

i
t

v

e

l

y

.



A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

P

b
u

i
l

c

c
e
s

t

o

r

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

s

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

e

d

s
a

i

d
n

i

a
c

t

e

d

b

e

l

o

w

i

n

c

l

d
u

i

g
n

r
t

a

n

s

p

a

r

e

n

c

y

a

d
n

e
s

r

v

i

e
c

d

e

i
l

v

e

r

y

.

   

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

A

v

e

r

a

g

e

i
t

m

e

f

o

r

t

h

e

p

r

v
o

i

s

i

o
n
o

f

n

e

w

b

e

n

e

t
i
f

s

r

e

u
d

e
c

d

r
f

o

m

d
0
4
1

a

y

s

i

5
0
0
2
n

t

d
0
3
1
o

a

y

s

i

8
0
0
2
n

.

D

a

t

a

n
o

c

i
t
i

e
z

n

a
s

i
t

s

f

c
a

i
t

n
o

i

s

o
n

t

y

e

t

a

v

a

l
i

a

b

l

e

.

 

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

L
S

U

i

n

s

t

a

l
l

e

d

i

3
6
8
n

a

g

e

n

c

i

s
e

w

h

i

c

h

c

n
o

s

t
i
t

u

t

e

2
8

%

o

f

f

e

d

e

r

a

l

l

e

v

e

l

i

n

s

t
i
t

u

i
t

n
o

s

.

 

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

A
B

P

I

N

I
I

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

e

d

i

o
3
2
n

f

t

h

e

p
4
2

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

a

d
n

0
1
1

f

e

d

e

r

a

l

a

g

e

n

c

i

s
e

.

 

N

o

t

y

e

t

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

P

a

i
t
r

c

i

p

a

i
t

g
n

p

r

v
o

i

n

s
e
c

h

a

v

e

d

e

v

e

l

p
o

e

d

a

s

r
t

a

t

e

g

i

c

p

l

a

n

t

o

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

,
t

c

o

m

p

e

i
t
i
t

v

e

n

s
s
e

a

d
n

g

r

o

w

t

h

.

 1

.

P

e

r

e
c

n

t

o

f

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

e

p
x

e

d
n

t
i

u

r

s
e

n
o

u
h

m

a

n

r

s
e

u
o

r

s
e
c

p
o

e

r

a

i
t

g
n

d
n
u

e

r

i

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

p

a

y

r

o

l
l

i

n

f

o

r

m

a

i
t

n
o

s

y

s

t

e

m

s

s

t

a

d
n

s

a

t

0
3

%

i

n

8
0
0
2

.

.
   2

R

a

i
t

o

b

e

t

w

e
e

n

c

o

l
l

c
e

t

e

d

a

d
n

e

m

t
t
i

e

d

t

a

x

r

e

v

e

u
n

s
e

f

o

r

t

h

e

p

r

v
o

i

n

c

i

a

l

r

a
e

l

p

r

p
o

e

t
r

y

a

d
n

m

o

t

o

r

v

e

h

i

c

l

e

t

a

x

s
e

s

t

a

d
n

s

a

t

5
5

%

i

n

8
0
0
2

.

 

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

I

7
0
0
2
n

t

h

e

p

e

r

e
c

n

l
i
t

e

r

a

k
n

i

g
n

f

o

r

G

v
o

e

r

n

m

e

n

t

E

f
f

c
e

i
t

v

e

n

s
s
e

w

s
a

7
1
5

.

a

d
n

f

o

r

C

n
o

r
t

o

l

o

f

C

o

r
r

p
u

i
t

n
o

w

s
a

5
3
4

.

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

n
n

e

x

3

P

a

g

e

o
0
3

f

2
3

R
A

G

E

N

T

I

A
N

:

A
C

S

R

E

S

U

T
L

S

M

A

T

R

I

X

P

O

R

T

F

O

L

I

O

P

E

R

F

O

R

M

C
N
A

E

C

o

n
u

t

r

y

D

e

v
a
o

e

l

o

p

m

e

n

t

G

l

s

A

c

t

u

v
a

l

P

r

g
o
o

e
e
r

s
s

t

a
a
o
o

w

r

d

s

D

e

e

l

p

m

n

t

G

l

s

A
C

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

A

c

t

u

a

l

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

w

a

r
e

d

s

A
C

S

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

a

d
n

M

l
i

s

t

o

n

e

s

1

.

B

u

l
i

n
d

i

g

p
u

t

h

e

G

v
o

r
e

n

m

e

n

t’s

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

M

a

n

g
a

e

m

e

n

t

C

a

p

a

c

i

t

y

S

t

r
e
e
e
r

n

g

t

h
n

e
e

h
n
n
n
h
n
h

t
t
i

e

c

a

n
p
p
p

a
a

c

t
i

y

o
o
a

f

t

h
d
n

e

m
G

v
o

m
m

t

o
v

e
e
e
r
s
r
e

s
r
e
r

i
i
l

u
n
d
p
n

l

e

t
i
t
t
-

s
e
e
r

t

m

t

n
n
p

j

c
e

t
f

s

i

n

e
r
e

w

t
i

e
r
e

u
q
n

i

m
m

e
e

t
t

o

a

m

i
t

m

m

i

v

t

p

a

s
r
e

h

p

.

•

E

h
n

a

n

e
c

v
o
g

e

r

n

m

e

n

t

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

m

g

.
t

a
c

p

c
a

t
i

y

t

h

r

h
g
u
o

)
i
(

a

r
f

a

m

e

w

o

r

k

a

g

r

e
e

m

e

n

t

t

o

s

h

t
f
i

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

a

i
t

n
o

r

s
e

n
o
p

s

i

b

t
i
l
i

y

r
f

o

m

s

t

a

d
n

-

a

l

n
o

e

P

I

U

s

t

o

i
l

n

e

m

i

n

i

s

i
r
t

s
e

,

)
i
i
(

a

i
f

u
d

c

i

a

r

y

c
a

i
t

n
o

p

l

a

n

t

o

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

i
f

u
d

c

i

a

r

y

c

n
o

r
t

o

,
l

)
i
i
i
(

i

n

s

t
i
t

u

i
t

n
o

a

l

s

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

i

g
n

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

t

o

u
b

l
i

d

p
u

a
c

p

c
a

t
i

y

,

i
(

v

)

A
A
A

t

o

s

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

t

h

e

d

i

a

l

u
g
o

e

n
o

i
f

n

a

n

c

i

a

l

c
c
a

n
u
o

t

a

b

t
i
l
i

y

a

d
n

p

r

o

c

u

r

e

m

e

n

,
t

(

v

)

e

h
n

a

n

e
c

d

s

p
u

e

r

v

i

s

i

n
o

o

f

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

a

t

i
r

s

k

,

a

d
n

(

v

)
i

t

w

i

e
c

a

u
n
n

a

l

o
p

f
t
r

o

i
l

o

r

e

v

i

e

w

s

w

t
i

h

t

h

e

a

u

t

o
h

i
t
i
r

s
e

.

 •

%

o

f

p

r

b
o

l

e

m

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

y
b

u
n

m

b

e

r

d

c
e

i
l

n

s
e

c

n
o

i
t

u
o
u
n

s

l

y

t

h

r

h
g
u
o

t

h

e

A
C

S

p

e

i
r

d
o

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

:

0
2

.

8

%

i

n

5
0
0
2

)

.

  •

%

o

f

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

a

t

i
r

s

k

y
b

a

m

n
u
o

t

o
d

s
e

o
n

t

s

u

r

p

s
s
a

0
2

%

(

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

:

9
1

.

5

%

i

n

i
f

a
c
s

l

5
0
0
2

)

.

 •

A

d
u

t
i

c

o

m

p

i
l

a

n

e
c

f

o

r

B

a

p
k
n

r

o

j

c
e

t

i

n

c

r

s
e
s
a
e

r
f

o

m

5
4

%

(

5
0
0
2

)

t

o

0
6

%

(

6
0
0
2

)

,

5
7

%

(

7
0
0
2

)

a

d
n

0
8

%

(

8
0
0
2

)

.

•

A

c

h

i

e

v

e

d

:
.

)
i
(

A

r
f

a

m

e

w

o

r

k

f

o

r

h
p

s
a

i

g
n

-

u
o

t

P

I

U

s

w

s
a

a

g

r

e
e

d

i

n

m

i

d

-

5
0
0
2

a

d
n

P

I

U

s

t

a

f
f

f

o

r

r

e

p

a
e

t

e

r

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

w

e

r

e

r

e

u
d

e
c

d

y
b

6
4

%

r
f

o

m

4
0
0
2

/

5

a

d
n

6
0
0
2

;

)
i
i
(

A

i
f

u
d

c

i

a

r

y

c
a

i
t

n
o

p

l

a

n

i

s

d
n
u

e

r

i

m

p

l

e

m

e

n

t

a

i
t

n
o

.

I

n

f

o

r

m

a

i
t

n
o

n
o

a

l
l

B

a

k
n

i
f
-

n

a

n

e
c

d

c

n
o

r
t

c
a

t

s

i

s

o
p

s

t

e

n
o
d

t

h

e

w

e

b

.

A

u
n
n

a

l

i
f

u
d

c

i

a

r

y

s
s
e
s
s
a

m

e

n

t

s

a

r

e

o
n

w

m

a

d

e

f

o

r

a

l
l

B

a

k
n

-

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

e

d

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

.

)
i
i
i
(

B

a

k
n

l

o

a

n

s

f

o

r

a

c
e
s

d
n
o

S

I

N

T

y

S

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

a

d
n

a

S

c
e

S
d
n
o

t

a

t

e

M

d
o

r
e

n

i

z

a

i
t

p
n
o

r

o

j

c
e

t

a

r

e

s

u

s
s
e
c
c

f

u

l
l

y

s

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

i

g
n

i

n

s

t
i
t

u

i
t

n
o

s

a

u
b
d
n

l
i

d

i

g
n

a
c

p

c
a

t
i

y

;

i
(

v

)

C
A

F
F

A

a

d
n

O
R

S

w
C

e

r

e

d

e

i
l

v

e

r

e

d

i

n

F

Y

7
0

.

(

v

)

A

d
d

i
t
i

n
o

a

l

g
d
u
b

e

t

a

l
l

o

a
c

i
t

n
o

s

w

e

r

e

m

a

d

e

i

n

F

Y

5
0

-

8
0

t

o

e

h
n

a

n

e
c

s

p
u

e

r

v

i

s

i

n
o

o

f

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

a

t

i
r

s

k

;

(

v

)
i

P

o

f
t
r

o

i
l

o

r

e

v

i

e

w

s

h

a

v

e

b

e
e

n

n
o
d

e

t

w

i

e
c

a

u
n
n

a

l
l

y

w

t
i

h

t

h

e

a

u

t

o
h

i
t
i
r

s
e

.

•

N

o

t

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

A

t
f

e

r

d

c
e

i
l

n

i

g
n

t

o

4
3

.

p

e

r

e
c

n

t

i

n

7
0
0
2

,

p

r

b
o

l

e

m

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

y
b

u
n

m

b

e

r

r

o

e
s

t

o

5
2

p

e

r

e
c

n

t

i

n

8
0
0
2

.

T

h

e

i
r

e
s

w

s
a

u
d

e

t

o

d

e

l

a

y

s

i

n

t

h

e

G

v
o

e

r

n

m

e

n

t

a

p
p

r

v
o

i

n
g
n

e

w

l

o

a

n

s

a

d
n

t

h

a

t

p

r

b
o

l

e

m

i

s

b

e

i

g
n

a

d
d

r

e
s
s
e

d

.

 •

N

o

t

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

:

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

a

t

i
r

s

y
b
k

a

m

n
u
o

t

r

o

e
s

t

p
0
6
o

e

r

e
c

n

t

i

n

8
0
0
2

.

H

o

w

e

v

e

r

,

t

h

e

i
r

e
s

w

s
a

u
d

e

t

o

b

r

o

a

d

c

n
u
o

r
t

y

r
-

e

l

a

t

e

d

i

s
s

u

s
e

a

d
n

o
n

t

t

o

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

s

p

c
e

i
f
i

c

p

r

b
o

l

e

m

s

.

 •

S

b
u

s

t

a

n

i
t

a

l
l

y

c
a

h

i

e

v

e

d

.

C

o

m

p

i
l

a

n

e
c

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

t

o

6
7

%

i

n

F

Y

6
0

a

d
n

1
8

%

i

n

F

Y

7
0

.

A

t
f

e

r

d

r

p
p
o

i

g
n

t

e

m

o
p

r

a

l
i
r

y

t

o

5
4

%

i

n

F

Y

8
0

t

h

e

0
8

%

t

a

r

g

e

t

w

s
a

r

c
e

v
o

e

r

e

d

3

m

n
o

t

h

s

l

a

t

e

r

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
ANNEX B: Lending Program Summary (Base Case) 

Annex 3 
Page 31 of 32 

LENDING 

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

2006 

AR Governance 21 

2007 

 2008 

2009 

AR Urban Flood Prevention (APL2) 
AR Basic Municipal Services 1 
Total FY 2006 

AR Provincial Agricultural Development 
(supplemental financing for PROSAP) 
AR Mining Decontamination (PRAMU) 
AR Cordoba Provincial Investment Loan 
AR Santa Fe Provincial Investment Loan 
AR Catamarca Provincial Investment Loan 
AR Maternal-Child Health Insurance Functions 
(APL2+3) 
AR Essential Health Functions 

AR State Modernization 2 

AR Provincial Preschool and Basic Education 

AR Urban Public Transport 

Total FY 2007 

AR SINTyS (APL2)  
AR Environment Management (APL1) 
AR National Highway Asset Management (APL2)  
AR BA SIDP (APL2) 
AR Income Support for the Poor 
AR Infrastructure (Logistics Node of Rosario Port) 
AR Provincial Agricultural Development (PROSAP 2) 
AR Lifelong Learning 
AR Integrated Water Resources Management (APL1) 
Total FY 2008 

AR Provincial Roads 
AR Infrastructure (Freight Corridors) 
AR Environmental Management (APL2 
AR Sub-national Governments Modernization 
AR Early Childhood Development 
AR Innovation 
AR Basic Municipal Services 2 
AR Rural Poverty and Growth 
AR Provincial Public Management 
Additional project not included in the 2006 CAS: 
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustainable Development 
Total FY 2009 

Overall Result 

STATUS OF DELIVERY as of 09/2008 

US$(M) 

25 

Postponed to FY10 (Foundations for Performance-
Informed Budgeting 
70 Approved 06/06/2006  
110 Approved 06/06/2006  
205 Total FY 2006 

30 Approved 01/23/2007 

35 Approved 07/31/2008 
75 Approved 07/11/2006 
125 Approved 02/13/2007 
25 Dropped 

300 Approved 11/02/2006 

200 Approved 11/21/2006 

Approved 05/29/2007 

25 
100 Postponed  
Approved 03/27/2007 
As Additional Finance for Loan 4163 
1,115 Total FY 2007 

200 

15 Approved 07/08/2008 
75 Approved 03/18/2008 
200 Approved 06/28/2007 
150 Approved 06/28/2007 
300 Postponed  
100 Postponed  
150 Postponed  
100 Approved 06/28/2007 
100 Postponed  
1,190 Total FY 2008 

Postponed 
150
Postponed  
175
75 Dropped 
Postponed 
40
Postponed 
90
100
Approved09/25/2008 
60 Dropped 
Postponed  
70
Postponed  
Programmed for 2009 

30

…. 

790 

3,300 

US$(M) 

28  

70 
110 
180 

 37 

30 (FY09) 
75 (FY08) 
126.7 

300 

220 
20 

100 

783.7 

20 
60 
400 
270 

477 
300 
200 

1055 

120 

40 
100 
150 

(841) 

3,436.7 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX C: AAA Program Summary (Base Case) 

ECONOMIC & SECTOR WORK 

STATUS OF DELIVERY as of 09/2008 

Fiscal year 

Ongoing Studies in Italics   

Annex 3 
Page 32 of 32 

2006 

Programmatic Poverty  1 (Informality) 

Old Age Welfare and Social Security 

Logistics and Transport Sector, Competitiveness      

Infrastructure Finance 

Rural Strategy 

Institutional Governance Review 

2007 

Youth at Risk 

CFAA (Federal Level) 

Fiscal Space for Public Investment 

Programmatic Poverty 2 (Rural) 

Provincial Economic Memorandum 1 (Central Region) 
CPAR (Federal Level) 

ROSC 

2008 

Programmatic. Poverty 3  (Urban and Water) 
Programmatic Social Protection  
(Options to Transition from Heads of Household Program) 
Provincial Economic Memorandum 2 (Northern Region)  
Country Environmental Analysis 

Policy Notes 

CPAR (Provincial Level) 
CFAA (Provincial Level) 

AR Programmatic Poverty 
Delivered 06/29/2006 
Facing the Challenge of Aging and Social Security 
Delivered 10/13/2006 
The Challenge of Reducing Logistics Costs 
Delivered 07/03/2006 
AR Infrastructure Finance 
Delivered 09/29/2006 
AR  Rural Strategy 
Delivered 03/31/2006 
AR Institutional and Governance Review 
Delivered 06/28/2006 

Social Inclusion: Issues of Youth in Argentina 
Delivered 06/20/2007 
CFAA (Federal Level) 
Delivered 06/19/2008 
Dropped 

The Invisible Poor: A Portrait of Rural Poverty in Argentina 
Delivered 06/27/2007 
Dropped 
Dropped 
Accounting and Auditing Report (ROSC) 
Delivered 06/08/2007 

Dropped 
Informal Employment in Argentina 
Delivered 03/27/2008  
Dropped 
Postponed 
Policy Notes 
Delivered 12/19/2007 
Dropped 
Postponed 

    2009 

Provincial Economic Memorandum (Buenos Aires) 
Impact analysis of Reform in Education and Health Sectors 
Social Accountability 
Private Sector Development 
Energy Review 
Innovation Study 
Financing of Development 

Programmed for 2009 
Not programmed 
Not programmed 
Not programmed 
Not programmed 
Not programmed 
Not programmed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4 
Page 1 of 5 

Argentina’s Public Debt 

Overview 

Argentina’s public debt stood at US$175 billion as of end-2008, equivalent to 58 
percent of GDP. These figures account for the US$6.3 billion of interest and capital 
arrears owed to the Paris Club and other bilateral creditors, and also include holdouts 
from the 2005 debt restructuring that total US$29 billion, equivalent to 10 percent of 
GDP (Table 1). It also includes approximately US$7 billion of provincial debt owed to 
creditors other than the Federal Government. Medium- and long-term debt currently 
represents 86 percent of federal performing debt, while short-term debt, mainly due to the 
Central Bank and other Government agencies, and interest and capital arrears, 
respectively account for 10 and 4 percent of debt. 

Table 1: Stock of Public Debt (US$ billion) 

Federal government debt1
Performing Debt
Medium-long term
Short term
Arrears
Holdouts
Provincial debt2

Fed. gov. debt as % of GDP
excl. holdouts
incl. holdouts
Prov. gov. debt as % of GDP

2004

191.3
191.3
141.5
4.5
45.3
0.0
5.8

126%
126%
4%

2005

152.2
128.6
116.0
7.8
4.9
23.6
5.0

73%
86%
3%

2006

162.8
136.7
122.9
8.4
5.4
26.1
5.5

64%
76%
3%

2007

173.6
144.7
128.8
10.5
5.5
28.9
6.1

56%
67%
2%

2008

175.0
146.0
125.7
14.0
6.3
29.0
7.1

49%
58%
2%

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4 
Page 2 of 5 

Table 2: Composition of performing federal debt 
by type of instrument 

Instrument

Public Bonds
Domestic currency
Foreign currency
Loans
Guaranteed Loans
International Organizations
Paris Club and Official Bilaterals*
Guaranteed Provincial Bonds-BOGAR
Commercial Banks
Other Ceditors
Central Bank Advances
Short-term intra public sector debt
TOTAL

        * Excludes interest and capital arrears.  
           Source: Ministry of Economy. 

Share in 
Total Debt 
%

Average 
maturity in 
years

Average 
interest rate 
%

61%
22%
39%
29%
9%
11%
1%
8%
1%
0%
6%
4%
100%

15.4
-
-
6.2
5.5
6.4
3.7
5.9
13.6
1.1
1.0
0.9
11.7

5.0
5.0
5.2
3.5
4.4
4.0
3.0
2.0
2.0
-
0.0
9.3
4.5

52 percent of Argentina’s debt is denominated in foreign currency, while the bulk of 
the remaining 48 percent of peso-denominated debt is indexed to inflation. The share of 
foreign currency-denominated and inflation-indexed debt has been relatively stable since 
2005, and exposure to foreign exchange and inflation risk thus remains important. 

Figure 1: Currency composition of performing federal debt  

Other 
currenc ies
2%

Euro
10%

Peso
48%

US dollar
40%

not inf lation 
indexed
11%

inf lation 
indexed
37%

Source: Ministry of Economy. 

Since the debt restructuring in 2005, Argentina has not accessed international capital 
markets. Debt issuances have been concentrated in short-term notes to public sector 
agencies, the direct placement of bonds to Venezuela and domestic issuances. In 2008, 
the Government raised US$5.9 billion, of which 46 percent corresponded to intra-public 
sector notes, mainly allocated to the social security agency, ANSES (49 percent), and the 
tax collection agency, AFIP (30 percent). 49 percent were obtained from two direct sales 
for more than US$2.8 billion in Bonar 2015 bonds to Venezuela (see Box 2), while 
domestic issuances of peso-denominated bonds only accounted for 4 percent.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4 
Page 3 of 5 

Figure 2: Bonds and intra-public sector notes (US$ billion) 

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

1.4

1.6

1.0

2.5

2.9

3.1

3.0

2.0

2.8

0.3

2.7

2005

2006

2007

2008

Intra-Public Sec tor
V enezuela

AR peso-Bonds
Other US dollar-Bonds

Note: Calculations based on cash values. Source: Ministry of Economy 

Box 1: Venezuela as a financing source 

Throughout the past four years Venezuela has bought nearly US$7.6 billion (cash value) in 
Argentine bonds. Even though total outstanding debt to Venezuela only accounts for 7.7 percent 
of the stock of performing public bonds, given Argentina’s lack of access to international capital 
markets, issues to this country have become increasingly important. While in 2006 total direct 
placements to Venezuela amounted to US$2.3 billion and represented 49 percent of that year’s 
new bond issues, the US$2 billion of the Boden-2015 series bought by Chavez in 2008 account 
for more than 88 percent of public bond issues during the year (cash value). 

The last of these operations, at a record high spread of over 1,100 bps and an interest rate close to 
15 percent, triggered fears about the Government’s payment capacity and generated turmoil in the 
bond market. On August 8, 2008, the day on which this last US$1 billion placement to Venezuela 
was officially announced, interest rates hiked 700 bps above those observed at the beginning of 
the year, and were also 300 bps higher than those registered at the worst point of the conflict with 
the farmers earlier in the year. 

Argentinean Public Bonds Bought by Venezuela 
(US$ million) 

Nominal Value
% of total new bond issues

Cash Value
% of total new bond issues

2005
1,563
39.2%

1,290
38.3%

2006
2,865
53.4%

2,300
49.1%

2007
2,254
34.2%

2,021
33.5%

2008
2,825
91.0%

2,000
88.3%

TOTAL*
9,506
49.9%

7,611
46.5%

Return
8.5%
8.1%
10.2%
13.9%
10.4%
Spread /UST
434
333
598
1029
620
Price
82.6%
80.3%
89.7%
70.8%
80.1% 
*Total price, interest rate, spread, and average life figures correspond to nominal value weighted averages 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4 
Page 4 of 5 

Debt Sustainability Analysis 

Under the baseline scenario, the public debt-to-GDP ratio would be on a gradual 
downward path. Based on the macroeconomic assumptions of the base case scenario 
presented in Table 1 of the main text, public sector debt would fall only slowly from 58.3 
percent in 2008 to 57.9 percent of GDP in 2010, as the primary balance is projected to 
remain well below 3 percent of GDP and growth below 2 percent. Beginning in 2011, as 
the fiscal accounts and economic growth recover, debt levels are projected to decline at a 
faster pace, reaching 49.3 percent of GDP in 2013 (Table 3). 

Table 3: Base case debt projections* 

Act.

Proj.

Base case scenario
Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w domestic debt excl. short-term intra-public sector debt
o/w short-term intra-public sector debt 

Key assumptions for baseline scenario
Real GDP growth (%)
Primary balance (% of GDP)
Overall balance (% of GDP)

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

67.3
23.9
39.3
4.1

8.7
3.4
1.4

58.3
18.6
35.0
4.7

7.0
3.1
1.3

58.1
23.2
28.7
6.1

1.0
2.4
0.2

57.9
23.2
26.8
8.0

1.5
2.6
0.9

57.2
22.9
24.6
9.7

3.0
2.8
1.0

53.1
21.2
22.7
9.2

3.0
3.1
1.0

49.4
19.7
20.7
9.0

3.0
3.0
1.0

1/ Defined as short-, medium- and long-term Federal Government and federally-guaranteed provincial 
government debt. Includes intra-public sector debt. 
Source: Ministry of Economy, and Bank staff estimates. 

Stress tests show that public debt is particularly sensitive to a decline in real GDP 
growth. Stress tests show that the most important deterioration of public debt levels vis- à-
vis the base case scenario would take place in a scenario of a combined shock to the real 
domestic interest rate, real GDP growth and primary surplus of 1 standard deviation in 
2009 and 2010. In this case, the public debt ratio would increase to 91.2 percent of GDP 
by end-2010, compared to 57.9 percent under the base case scenario. Another scenario 
with significantly worse outcomes than the base case is a scenario in which real GDP 
growth falls two standard deviations below the historical average in 2009 and 2010, 
which would lead to an increase in the debt stock to 75.3 percent by end-2010 (Figure 4). 

However, stochastic simulations assign a low probability to the above-mentioned 
extreme scenarios. According to the results of stochastic simulations, there is a 97.5 
percent probability that the debt ratio will remain between 29 percent and 72 percent of 
GDP during the projection period. There is only 2.5 percent probability that debt will be 
above 72 and below 29 percent by the end of the projection period (Figure 5). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Debt ratios under sensitivity tests 
(% of GDP) 

Figure 5: Probability of different public debt 
levels (% of GDP) 

Annex 4 
Page 5 of 5 

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
2008

Baseline

Second most extreme stress test (B2)

Most extreme stress test (B4)

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2.5-25

25-75

75-97.5

Baseline

B2: Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2009 and 2010 
B4: Combination of shocks to interest rate, GDP growth and primary balance 

 
 
 
 
 
Banking Sector Update  

Annex 5 
Page 1 of 7 

In the last years, the Banking System has 
consolidated its recovery and seems to 
have left behind most of the effects of 
the 2001-2002 crisis.  

Proactive Central Bank (BCRA) policies 
coupled with proper banking regulation 
and supervision were key elements in the 
recovery process. Beginning on the third 
quarter of 2003, 
financial 
system 
deposits and credit started to recover and 
have grown at a strong pace since then 
(Figure 1). Asset quality has improved 
as well with non performing 
loans 
(NPLs) reaching record low levels in the 
third quarter of 2008, but with high 
variations among 
individual banks. 
Banks profitability continued to improve 
and additional capital contributions have 
helped to further strengthen systemic 
solvency, but capital adequacy ratios still 
need some improvements among banks. 
Although deposits have become the core 
source of funding for most financial 
institutions, banks have gradually started 
to make use of alternative sources of 
financing to manage their liquidity needs 
in the form of debt issuance, capital 
inceptions, loan sales and securitizations, 
among others.  

Figure 1: Financial System Deposits and 
Loans 

n
o

i
l
l
i

M

$

r

A

270,000
240,000
210,000
180,000
150,000
120,000
90,000
60,000
30,000
0

1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data. 

Total Loans

Total Depos its

Nevertheless challenges remain: mainly 
the increase in long term credit to the 
private sector and better access 
to 
financial services of certain groups of 
the population, including low-income 
households, microenterprises and small 
farmers. In light of the international 
financial crisis, reforms introduced after 
the 2001-2002 crisis have helped the 
system to be better prepared against the 
turbulences striking from abroad. Local 
banks are adopting different measures to 
weather the storm. In addition, Central 
Bank intervention has become a constant 
need to assure financial stability. 

The International Financial Crisis and 
its effects on the Financial System 

This section examines the channels of 
impact the current international financial 
crisis has 
taken on 
the Argentine 
economy: 1) Stock and Bond Market 2) 
Banking Sector 3) Real Economy 

1) A Volatile Stock and Bond Market 

One of the most apparent effects of the 
international crisis has been the surge of 
a widespread risk aversion.  This has 
translated into increased volatility in the 
Argentine stock and bond market.   

As it has been the case with many Latin 
American countries and other emerging 
economies, the Argentine stock market 
has not been able to shield itself from the 
global developments. During 2008, the 
Argentina Merval index lost 54 percent 
of its value. Additionally, the cost of the 
Credit Default Swap for sovereign debt 
has 
increased substantially 
reaching 
nearly 50 percent of the insured amount, 
as of December 2008.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Argentine bond market has also not 
been immune from its effects. Prices of 
Government bonds have deteriorated 
with a partial rebound in December 
2008.  On October 31, 2008, S&P 
downgraded the rating of the Argentine 
long term and short term debt from B to 
B- and from B to C, respectively.  The 
lower 
ratings were based upon a 
weakening 
economic 
and political 
environment. A similar course of action 
was taken by Fitch. At the end of 
December, 2008, the EMBI spread for 
Argentina was 
above 1600 bps,   
representing approximately 1200 bps 
increase on a year basis.  

2) Banking 
System 
indicators 
experienced 
improvements although 
liquidity risk has become a concern 

After the domestic financial crisis of 
2002, 
the banking system gradually 
recovered and deposits soon became the 
core source of funding for most financial 
institutions. As of December 2008, 
deposits 
represented more 
than 70 
percent of total funding. In addition, 
banks have made use of alternative 
funding 
to 
promote 
financial 
intermediation 
and manage 
their 
liquidity needs in the form of debt 
issuance, capital contributions, loan sales 
and securitizations, among others. 

Figure 4: Banking system profitability 

20 .00%

10 .00%

0 .00%

-10 .00%

-20 .00%

-30 .00%

-40 .00%

-50 .00%

-60 .00%

-70 .00%

98

99

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08*

4 .00%

2 .00%

0 .00%

-2 .00%

-4 .00%

-6 .00%

-8 .00%

-10.00%

ROE

ROA (righ t axis )

*As of October 2008. 
Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data. 

Despite the international financial crisis, 
the overall profitability of the financial 

Annex 5 
Page 2 of 7 

system continued to improve during 
2008 with a ROA of 1.6 percent and 
ROE of 14 percent as of October, 2008 
(Figure 4). Furthermore, NPLs as a 
percentage of total loans maintained its 
decreasing pattern and achieved new 
record low levels (below 3 percent) in 
the 
third quarter of 2008 while 
provisions covered approximately 135 
percent of NPLs.  The capital adequacy 
ratio for the system appears adequate, 
although 
there 
is variability among 
banks. Under current circumstances 
results have experienced some pressures 
due mainly to a gradual slowdown in 
origination 
volumes 
coupled with 
increasing 
funding 
costs, growing 
administrative expenses and the poor 
performance of investments in public 
bonds (most of them marked to market). 
Systemic liquidity measured as liquid 
assets (excluding BCRA paper) relative 
to total deposits remains at adequate 
levels. As of October 2008, 
these 
liquidity 
levels were 25.5 percent 
relative to 21.1 percent a year earlier. 

Liquidity Stress Episodes Remain  

In the last year and a half the Argentine 
banking system has witnessed 
the 
development of three liquidity shortages 
that placed financial institutions under 
relative 
stress. 
These 
successive 
episodes have contributed to show the 
ability and commitment of the BCRA to 
preserve financial stability:   

• 

In the second half of 2007, the 
Argentine financial system experienced 
the first significant episode of liquidity 
stress as a consequence of the negative 
prospects attributed to the subprime 
crisis. Yet, by the end of the year the 
situation went back to normal as BCRA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 5 
Page 3 of 7 

funds increased from a level of less than 
10 percent in October to almost 19 
percent in the first week of December 
2008. Additionally, 
time 
deposits 
originally held by AFJPs which now 
belong 
to ANSES pose additional 
uncertainty towards liquidity distribution 
among the system.  At this point, the 
situation seems to be contained although 
elevated costs of funding still persist.  

BCRA Commitment 
Systemic Liquidity 

to Enhance 

Starting in 2007 and throughout 2008, 
BCRA has been implementing several 
measures aimed at enhancing systemic 
liquidity, achieve exchange rate stability 
and ultimately assure financial stability. 
Among 
these measures 
the most 
traditional ones include repurchases of 
Central Bank Notes (Lebac and Nobac), 
repo facilities, open market operations of 
Government securities and a liquidity 
window; while less common and more 
sophisticated 
actions 
include 
the 
acceptance of more exotic assets as 
collateral to receive liquidity assistance.  

Recently, BCRA introduced additional 
tools to boost systemic liquidity, mainly 
the opening of a window to pre-approve 
collateral in order to obtain liquidity 
upon request; and redefined its strategy 
in order to incorporate a wider range of 
financial entities (mainly smaller and 
segment oriented entities) in its liquidity 
bailout program. For the time being, 
actions taken by the BCRA seem to have 
maintained adverse conditions under 
control. Moreover, 
the BCRA has 
demonstrated its willingness and ability 
to preserve financial stability. 

interventions contributed to a recovery 
of confidence. 

• 

Another situation of distress took 
place in the second quarter of 2008, a 
consequence of the farmers’ lock-out. In 
this case, the system lost approximately 
Ar$ 3,300 million in deposits and the 
BADLAR rate rose from an average of 9 
percent observed in the first quarter to a 
peak of 18 percent.  A package of 
measures 
introduced by 
the BCRA 
brought relief to the system. 

• 

Finally, a 
third episode of 
liquidity 
stress was unleashed 
in 
November 
2008 
due 
to 
the 
nationalization of private pension funds. 
As a result, deposits fell by Ar$ 4000 
million pesos on average as of December 
2008 relative to the levels observed in 
October 2008. Interest rate on time 
deposits, measured 
in 
terms of 
the 
BADLAR benchmark rate, 
increased 
significantly from around 12 percent to a 
peak of 25 percent in November while 
asset dollarization stepped 
in as a 
reasonable 
response 
to 
existing 
uncertainty. Interbank call market rate 
soared from 10 percent to a 19.5 percent 
in November evidencing an incipient 
funding shortfall. The Central Bank 
introduced additional measures to again 
ease the stress.  Adverse conditions seem 
to have eased but banks continue to 
maintain a conservative approach. 

Liquidity Distribution within 
System 

the 

The 
liquidity 
stress 
seems 
to be 
evidencing an uneven distribution of 
liquidity within the system. The value 
and interest rate of interbank money 
market operations from entities that only 
lend funds to entities that only borrow 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3) Strong Growth on the Real Side of 
the Economy  

Higher disposable income resulting from 
strong 
economic growth 
triggered 
increased household consumption and 
demand for credit. The overall level of 
household indebtedness appears sound. 
Despite the surge in consumer and 
housing credit in the recent years, the 
ratio of indebtedness to formal wages 
only increased slightly to over 2 percent, 
which is still a comparatively low level.  
While the economy continues to perform 
relatively strong, there are first signs that 
the global economic situation led to a 
deceleration of growth most likely due to 
a slowdown of exports of primary goods 
and agricultural manufactures. Most 
recent 
forecasts predict 
a 
further 
slowdown of economic activity for 2009. 
If current forecasts finally materialized it 
could have negative implications for the 
financial system in terms of financial 
intermediation, 
asset 
quality, 
profitability and liquidity.  

Banks Have Left Behind Many of the 
Effects of the 2001-2002 Crisis 

Figure 8: Deposits Distribution by Sector 

Public Sec tor

Private Sec tor

n
o

i
l
l
i

M

$

r

A

300 ,000

250 ,000

200 ,000

150 ,000

100 ,000

50 ,000

-

2000

2002

2008

Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data. 

Economic recovery consolidation and 
the gradual improvement in confidence 
have contributed to the normalization of 
total system liabilities. In the last years, 
private 
and public deposits have 
experienced further growth (Figure 8). 

Annex 5 
Page 4 of 7 

As of December 2008, total deposits 
represented more than 70 percent of total 
funding 
relative 
to 62 percent 
in 
December 2005. However, measured as 
a percentage of GDP, deposits are still 
below pre crisis 
level. Moreover, 
deposits are still very short term. More 
than 75 percent of the deposits are for 
less than 60 days, which continues to 
limit the capacity of banks to provide 
long-term credit. 

Consumer 
and 
commercial 
credit 
maintains its dynamism but long term 
credit still shows signs of stagnation. 
While 
consumer 
lending 
has 
significantly surpassed 
its pre-crisis 
level, mortgage and corporate credit still 
have 
the 
potential 
for 
further 
improvement. As a ratio to GDP, private 
sector credit represents approximately 12 
percent compared to 23 percent prior to 
the crisis (Figure 11) 

Figure 11: Private 
evolution 

sector 

loans 

(% of GDP)

25,00%

20,00%

15,00%

10,00%

5,00%

0,00%

1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data. 

Banks continued with the process of 
reducing their balance sheet mismatches 
(interest rates, currency and term) The 
exposure to foreign currency mismatches 
has been reduced significantly thanks in 
part to BCRA regulation. In particular, 
dollar denominated credits may only be 
granted to borrowers whose income is 
also denominated in foreign currency. 
Additionally, these loans have to be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
funded with foreign currency deposits. 
As of mid- 2008, foreign currency 
mismatch relative to net worth had 
declined to 27.3 percent from 40 percent 
as of end-2005. Interest rate mismatch 
has also decreased from 124 percent of 
net worth as of December 2005 to about 
75 percent of net worth as of June 2008. 
Therefore, 
the risk of 
interest rate 
mismatch shows up as moderate while 
different measures are being considered 
to reduce it even further such as the 
introduction of interest rate swaps. Part 
of the improvement observed in balance 
sheet mismatch indicators should also be 
attributed to a recovery in net worth 
figures in the last years (Figure 13) 

As of June 2008, the banking system had 
reported seven consecutive semesters of 
profits (Figure 4). In general terms, 
recovery of systemic profitability can be 
explained 
by 
increasing 
banking 
intermediation activity mainly related to 
the private sector. Specifically, high 
interest rate margins and the introduction 
of new products combined with a wider 
client base and 
increased fees and 
commissions were 
the main drivers 
behind the recovery. However, part of 
the positive effect on net results has been 
recently 
offset 
by 
the 
volatile 
performance of bonds and securities 
holdings and increasing administrative 
expenses. Overall, the system seems to 
have stabilized and strengthened 
its 
recurrent earnings while declining NPLs 
and 
loan 
loss provisioning provide 
additional profitability enhancements. 
Still, the full effects of the recent 
international crisis are not yet apparent. 

Since 2005, banks have managed to 
reduce significantly their exposure to the 
public sector (Figure 14). In particular, 
public sector share (including BCRA 

Annex 5 
Page 5 of 7 

paper) of total system assets decreased 
from a high 32 percent in December 
2005 to approximately 19 percent in 
October 
2008. Different BCRA 
requirements such as the introduction in 
July 2007 of a 35 percent limit for 
holdings of public related assets have 
contributed to the observed reduction in 
public sector exposure.  

Figure 13: Banking system net worth 

45000

40000

35000

30000

25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

n
o

i
l
l
i

M

$

r

A

in Ar$ Million

0
Dec-02 Oct-03

Aug-04

Jun-05

Apr-06

Feb-07 Dec-07 Oct-08

Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data. 

The system has improved its efficiency 
since 2003. The 
efficiency 
ratio 
measured as financial margin relative to 
operating expenses has increased from 
93 percent in 2003 to 169 percent in 
October 2008. However, 
systemic 
efficiency might deteriorate as financial 
intermediation decelerates and operating 
expenses increase due in part to effects 
of the international financial crisis. 

The capitalization of 
the 
financial 
system has improved during the last 
years as a result of an increase in 
earnings and new capital contributions 
(Figure 13). A more favorable operating 
environment 
and 
a 
recovery 
of 
confidence have allowed the financial 
sector 
to 
increase 
financial 
intermediation and stabilize its sources 
of recurrent earnings. BCRA regulations 
have also contributed 
to enhance 
systemic solvency. Improvements 
in 
asset quality have also contributed to the 
strengthening 
of 
capital 
levels. 
Moreover, legal proceedings (amparos) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inherited from the crisis are no longer 
significant for the system. Therefore, the 
systemic capital adequacy ratio has 
improved in the last years reaching a 
level of 17.1 percent in October 2008 
relative to 14 percent in December 2003.  

Figure 14: System exposure to public sector  

40.00%

35.00%

30.00%

25.00%

20.00%

15.00%

10.00%

5.00%

0.00%

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Public Sec tor Assets / Total Assets + Net worth

*As of October 2008. 
Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data. 

During the last three years, banks have 
cancelled most of the BCRA assistance 
received during the crisis. Moreover, the 
number of entities indebted declined 
from 24 to 1. As of June 2008, banking 
debt 
to 
the BCRA represented 0.4 
percent of 
total 
system 
liabilities. 
Therefore, 
this 
debt 
has 
finally 
disappeared from banks´ balance sheets.  

As a result of the 2001-2002 crisis, some 
foreign banks left the country and others 
including 
local banks reduced 
their 
operations in the market. However, since 
2004 increasing financial intermediation 
has led to a marked recovery in the 
number of employees, branches and 
ATMs. The number of entities has 
remained stable, above 80 franchises, 
after the significant dropped experienced 
during the crisis and the aftermath. 

The regulatory environment ruling the 
Argentine banking system has been 
significantly enhanced after the 2001-
2002 crisis. At this moment, the system 
exhibits a solid regulatory framework 
which 
is 
in 
line with 
international 

Annex 5 
Page 6 of 7 

standards. In addition, BCRA has proved 
to be very effective in supervising and 
enforcing current regulation.  

The Current Challenges and 
Vulnerabilities 

During the last years, the system has 
benefitted from high consumer lending 
interest rates and low deposits rates, 
even negative in real terms. However, 
increased competition among institutions 
added 
to 
the episodes of 
liquidity 
shortages have led to a reduction in the 
interest rate gap. Moreover, deposits 
interest rates which are currently high in 
nominal terms are also positive in real 
terms thanks in part to a slowdown in 
inflation (Figure 17).   

The tax on financial transactions is 
another pending issue that does not show 
signs of an imminent resolution. The 
financial 
transaction 
tax 
lowers 
the 
demand 
for payment services and 
reduces 
banks´ 
fee-based 
income. 
However, given its importance in fiscal 
revenues, it is unlikely that this tax will 
be eliminated in the foreseeable future.  

Domestic supply of long-term lending to 
the private sector remains a major 
challenge. Although credit has recovered 
since the crisis, major improvements 
have only been observed in consumer 
lending. In addition, available long term 
credit usually supposes a relatively high 
cost of financing.  As part of the steps 
for long-term credit recovery, measures 
are needed to reconstitute domestic long-
term funding and therefore reduce the 
risks of long term lending. These efforts 
become even more important taking into 
account the effects of the international 
financial crisis. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 5 
Page 7 of 7 

There have not been any significant 
improvements in the reconstitution of 
long term funding in local currency. The 
system has not been able to revert to the 
predominance of very short-term deposit 
funding as deposit confidence is still 
very fragile. During 
the 
last years, 
private pension funds (AFJPs) and life 
insurance companies were seen as 
options to fill the gap of long-term 
financing. However, no 
significant 
improvements were achieved except for 
their contribution in the development of 
the structured finance market which still 
remains mostly short-term. The recent 
nationalization of private pension funds 
has 
provided ANSES with 
the 
opportunity and 
the challenge of 
developing missing long term financing.   

Figure 17: Time deposits interest rate (real 
terms) 

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

e
n
e
-
0
5

f
e
b
0
5

-

ma

r
-

0
5

a
b

r
-

0
5

ma

y
0
5

-

j

u
n
0
5

-

j

ul
0
5

-

a
g
o
0
5

-

s
e
p
0
5

-

o
c
t
-

0
5

n
o
v
0
5

-

di
c
-
0
5

e
n
e
-
0
6

f
e
b
0
6

-

ma

r
-

0
6

a
b

r
-

0
6

ma

y
0
6

-

j

u
n
0
6

-

j

ul
0
6

-

a
g
o
0
6

-

s
e
p
0
6

-

o
c
t
-

0
6

n
o
v
0
6

-

di
c
-
0
6

e
n
e
-
0
7

f
e
b
0
7

-

ma

r
-

0
7

a
b

r
-

0
7

ma

y
0
7

-

j

u
n
0
7

-

j

ul
0
7

-

a
g
o
0
7

-

s
e
p
0
7

-

o
c
t
-

0
7

n
o
v
0
7

-

di
c
-
0
7

e
n
e
-
0
8

f
e
b
0
8

-

ma

r
-

0
8

a
b

r
-

0
8

ma

y
0
8

-

j

u
n
0
8

-

j

ul
0
8

-

a
g
o
0
8

-

s
e
p
0
8

-

o
c
t
-

0
8

30 days

More than 60 days

A

l
a
u
n
n

%,

i

r
e
t
l
a
e
r
n 

Mo
ms

.

e
g
a
r
e
v
a
y 
hl
nt

*As of October 2008. 
Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data. 

Financial trusts have consolidated their 
role as an alternative source of funding 
linking banks and long term investors. In 
particular, after the financial crisis of 
2002, securitizations have emerged as an 
attractive 
investment 
choice 
in 
Argentina. 
Despite 
the 
current 
international 
financial 
crisis, 
the 
domestic 
securitization market has 
maintained its dynamism compared to 
other financial assets such as corporate 
bond 
issuances 
in Argentina. The 
Argentine securitization market has also 
been very active when compared to other 
markets in the region. However, the 
market is still concentrated in consumer 

loans and credit card 
securitizations.  

receivables 

Broadening access to financial services 
to the under-served remains a major 
challenge. Low 
income households, 
small 
farmers and microenterprises 
continue 
to have 
limited access 
to 
financial 
services 
although 
some 
progress has been observed. The 
domestic microfinance industry remains 
underdeveloped 
relative 
to 
other 
countries in the region. However, many 
improvements have been introduced on 
this matter such as the “Microcredit 
Promotion Law” passed in 2006 that 
assigns 
specific 
funds 
to 
support 
originators of micro-credit. The BCRA 
has also introduced certain facilities to 
promote 
the microcredit 
industry. 
Although, commercial banks presence in 
the microcredit industry is still low, 
many banks are showing 
increased 
interest in the business. Additionally, 
credit 
to small and medium sized 
enterprises has still significant room for 
improvement. 

What lies ahead? 

Economic prospects for the upcoming 
months 
are not very promising. 
However, the banking system continues 
to exhibit relatively good performance as 
it 
is evidenced by most 
financial 
indicators. In addition, it benefits from 
the legacy of the 2001-2002 crisis in 
terms of enhanced regulation and more 
conservative 
business 
strategies. 
Therefore, the system seems to have 
some cushion to resist a deteriorating 
operating environment. Moreover, the 
menu of measures introduced by the 
BCRA during the last year has so far 
demonstrated its willingness and ability 
to preserve financial stability. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 6 
Page 1 of 12 

IBRD and Carbon Finance Program Summary 

Strategic Approach of the Proposed CPS 

1. 
The 2010-2012 CPS will continue to focus on the three pillars successfully 
supported under the previous CAS:  (i) sustainable growth with equity, (ii) social 
inclusion, and (iii) improved governance.  However, there will be significant evolution in 
the support provided as this flexible but focused framework will allow rebalancing the 
portfolio toward greater emphasis on social inclusion as the Bank’s key response to the 
global economic crisis.  The CPS proposes the following approach: 

2. 
Joint work with the Government in sectors or themes that: (1) are strategic 
and where there is strong demand not only from the authorities but from Argentine 
society more generally, and (2) in which the Bank has developed good dialogue with 
the authorities and feels comfortable with the basic policy and institutional 
framework.  The progress in implementing the previous CAS– particularly in project 
preparation and the design of important and high quality investment initiatives – has 
demonstrated that there is sufficient space to develop an ambitious investment 
partnership despite the lack of coincidence is some areas of the Government’s agenda.   

3. 
The CPS will focus on cross-cutting issues such as governance and 
institutional strengthening through a focus on public sector governance work both on 
the supply and demand-side, in line with the Bank ’s GAC agenda, as well as through 
greater integration and mainstreaming of public sector governance across sectors.  The 
latter will be achieved through appropriate institutional strengthening activities tailored to 
the needs of the specific sector, complemented by specific portfolio management 
activities to enhance the quality of project management and impact. 

4. 
The CPS is performance-based.  One inherent characteristic of the investment 
lending-only portfolio is its self-selectivity.  Along with macroeconomic stability, 
portfolio management and fiduciary performance are among the factors that will 
determine actual lending levels.  At the sector level, the quality of the policy framework 
and implementation performance will continue to determine the pace and extent of new 
lending.  At the project level, Bank-financed activities will continue to be designed 
around clear development outcomes and incorporate incentives toward those outcomes. 

5. 
The CPS will focus on the national level of government and, in line with the 
federal nature of government in Argentina, seek to deepen its engagement with the 
subnational levels of government.  This aspect focuses on strengthening the partnership 
with subnational governments, particularly provinces.  Strategic engagement with the 
provinces takes place on the basis of the estimated social and economic impact, 
particularly the poverty impact, as well provincial leadership and demonstrated reform 
commitment.  Collaboration with subnational governments will be carried out through 
operations channeled through the national Government or operations and other support in 
close coordination with (and duly guaranteed by) the national Government to ensure full 
synergies between federal and subnational operations.  This strategy includes using AAA 
and NLTA to support conceptualizing development approaches and investment loans in 
provinces that have demonstrated strong capacity to implement.  To further complement 

 
 
 
 
Annex 6 
Page 2 of 12 

lending and responding to strong subnational governments’ demands for Bank support, 
the use of FFS at the subnational levels of government, such as the on-going FFS with 
Corrientes province, may be expanded.  Multi-sector SWAps, through which strategic 
impact is feasible, are also explored in small provinces with high levels of poverty. 

6. 
The CPS proposes to capitalize on the value-added of its expertise and 
international experience by preparing and implementing more complex and likely 
larger programs or projects.  Such an approach is responsive to the Government’s 
expectations of the partnership and is more likely to make a significant impact on growth 
constraints and/or poverty traps.   

7. 
The Bank will strengthen its AAA program, in particular by being more 
selective and ensuring active client participation in identifying any significant activities 
to be carried out.  The key instrument to strengthen client demand will be to prepare with 
the client annually a list of AAA to be carried out the following FY during the spring 
portfolio review in which all main counterpart agencies participate.   

8. 
The CPS seeks to improve the implementation of the Bank portfolio.  A key 
lesson of the 2006 CAS is that the shift from adjustment lending to an all-investment 
lending program has strained the project implementation capacity of the Government.  
This CPS responds to those issues.  The authorities will implement --with the support of 
an IDF grant – the new procedures referred to in paragraph 62 (a) of the main text.  The 
country team is reviewing with the authorities the modalities of support to provinces both 
to reduce administrative constraints and more importantly respond more flexibly to 
requests from selected subnational governments.  

9. 
The CPS proposes further efforts to improve fiduciary safeguards.  The 
experience of the Fiduciary Action Plan under the last CAS has shown that attempts to 
ring-fence Bank investments from potential fiduciary risks can be designed to expand 
their impact beyond discrete Bank investments to encompass a broader sector and/or 
national dimension.  There are significant benefits to this bottom-up fiduciary approach 
for developing a relevant governance dialogue in a country where there have traditionally 
been misgivings regarding the role of IFIs in this area.  The pilot nature of project-level 
innovations like SEPA and their unpretentious approach in resolving practical fiduciary 
challenges have opened productive opportunities for cooperation which could generate 
important benefits to the country as the pilots are successfully mainstreamed. 

The WBG ’s Indicative 2010-2012 Program 

10. 
The Country Team is proposing an IBRD lending envelope of US$ 3.3 billion for 
FY10-FY12.  As mentioned previously, the proposed program would provide selective 
support under the three pillars to influence specific outcomes in support of Argentina’s 
strategic development goals.  Annex 2 elaborates the outcomes and milestones the 
activities are expected to support, and an indicative listing of the planned activities is 
detailed below. 

 
 
Annex 6 
Page 3 of 12 

Table 1:  CPS Program Objectives and Select Activities 

Government of Argentina Strategic Objectives 
Pillar I 
Pillar II: 
Pillar III: 
Sustainable Growth with Equity 
Social Inclusion 
Improved Governance 
Outcomes toward which the CPS will contribute 

Upgrade Argentina’s 
infrastructure to address 
potential bottlenecks to 
competitiveness, and underpin 
medium-term growth and poverty 
alleviation 

Improve competitiveness, 
quality, and exports of 
agriculture and livestock 
production 

Address a growing problem of 
resource degradation 

Consolidate the reduction in 
poverty and expand efforts to 
reverse the longer-term 
poverty trend by increasing 
household incomes and 
integrating marginalized 
groups into the productive 
marketplace 

Consolidate improvements in 
health indicators and improve 
quality of education while 
reducing drop out rates 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Improving the transport 
network 
Increasing public transport 
ridership 
Increasing rural access to 
electricity supply 
Improved access to water 
and sanitation  
Increase the diversification 
of production in the 
agricultural sector 

• 

Selected Programs for Support 
Improving employability 
of the most vulnerable 
• Expansion of provincial 
health insurance 
• Hospital restructuring and 
expansion 
• Strengthening health 
sector governance 
• Universal access to 
primary education 
• Lower teen dropout rates 

Strengthen the effectiveness, 
efficiency, transparency and 
accountability of public 
sector management 

Expand performance 
management and improve the 
quality of public expenditure, 
enhance service delivery 
outcomes and trust in 
institutions 

Strengthen public sector 
capacity to spur investment 
and growth 

• Strengthening 
transparency of decision-
making, increase access 
to information 
• Expanding effective 
performance-
management and 
performance-informed 
budgeting 
• Ensuring compliance 
with the Fiscal 
Responsibility Law 

Cross-Cutting Themes 
Strengthen capacity of the Government to prepare, approve and implement investment projects in 
line with the requirements of a medium-term investment partnership. 
Ensure awareness and knowledge with Government about IBRD financial products that could 
provide flexibility to Argentina in managing its debt, including the ability to change the financial 
characteristics of existing and future loans as to better manage the financial risks relating to 
currency, interest rate, roll over and commodity price volatility 

Pillar 1:  Sustainable Growth with Equity 

11. 
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM).  This key AAA activity will review 
short- and long-term determinants of economic growth and examine the role of 
macroeconomic policies in responding to external shocks and their effectiveness in 
mitigating output volatility.  It will study the link between the quality and composition of 
trade, as well as its long-term growth potential.  In addition, and among other issues, it 
will look at the link between business environment and firm-level productivity. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 6 
Page 4 of 12 

12. 
Private Sector Development, Innovation and Competitiveness Study.  This 
study would analyze the evolution of credit and support the authorities in identifying 
alternative sources of credit to maintain its availability to the economy ’s most vulnerable 
sectors.  This would include analysis of countries – to be identified in conjunction with 
the Central Bank -- representing the Americas, Europe and Asia and utilizing the value 
added of the Bank’s international perspective to draw lessons from other contexts to 
inform the formulation of a strategy for Argentina. 

• Objective:  Upgrade Argentina’s infrastructure to address potential bottlenecks 
to competitiveness, and underpin medium-term growth and poverty alleviation 

13. 
Over the next several years, the Bank will both broaden the range of infrastructure 
sectors it supports in Argentina and deepen the impact of its technical value-added by 
focusing on those interventions within sectors that make best use of the Bank’s 
knowledge and comparative advantage in complex, multi-jurisdictional projects.  Many 
of these projects (particularly in urban transport, water supply/sanitation and urban flood 
protection/drainage) are also expected to expand the infrastructure assets of the poor, 
including indigenous populations. While most of the Bank’s infrastructure investments 
under the 2006-2008 CAS supported maintenance and expansion of the national and 
subnational highway networks, the new portfolio will present a more diversified picture 
with several complex investment operations that leverage the Bank’s technical value-
added and a growing focus on improved efficiency and poverty alleviation.  The Bank 
will undertake an innovative approach in supporting the Government’s objective, with 
activities designed to improve the quality and safety of the transport network, increase 
public transport ridership, increase rural access to electricity supply, and improved access 
to water and sanitation.  New activities to support these objectives include: 

14. Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustainable Development Project.  The Bank will 
contribute toward improved access to water and sanitation with this major environmental 
initiative.  The US$840 million loan (APL-1) will finance most of the transmission, 
treatment and disposal infrastructure needed to provide the infrastructure backbone for 
cleaning up an urban river basin that is home to some 3.5 million people and more than 
4,000 industrial facilities stretching across 14 municipalities and the city of Buenos Aires. 
An APL-2 loan in support of the same project is likely to be presented to the board after 
the end of the proposed 2009-2012 CPS period.   

15. 
Rosario Metropolitan Area Infrastructure Project.  The objectives of this 
proposed two stage APL program are: (i) to reduce logistics costs for cargo shipped to 
and from the Port of Rosario by improving accesses to port facilities and increasing the 
railway ’s modal share in freight transport; and (ii) to improve the quality of life in the 
Metropolitan Area of Rosario by reducing traffic congestion and using the urban land 
released by the project (i.e. railway tracks, warehousing and maneuver facilities) to 
improve the quality of the urban environment.  An APL-1 loan for US$460 million is 
expected to be delivered under this CPS. Additional analytical work on logistics 
bottlenecks hampering development of Argentina ’s poor northwest as well as the Buenos 
Aires container port system may provide the basis for further engagement. 

 
 
Annex 6 
Page 5 of 12 

16. Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport project (PTUMA).  This proposed two-
phase APL would expand Bank support for urban transport beyond the Greater Buenos 
Aires area and build on the results of Buenos Aires Urban Transport Project (Proyecto de 
Transporte Urbano de Buenos Aires, PTUBA).  PTUMA is being designed to improve 
the quality, sustainability and efficiency of urban transport systems in selected cities.  
The objectives are to: (i) support the creation of institutional frameworks and initiatives 
that enhance the authorities ’ ability to make decisions, plan, set priority and assign 
resource for public transport; (ii) improve the physical integration of public transport 
networks and safety conditions in Greater Buenos Aires; (iii) improve the quality and 
operation of existing public transport systems in selected cities. 

17. 
National Urban Drainage project.  Flooding is a major natural hazard in 
Argentina.  Floodplains cover over 1/3 of the country's geographic area and include most 
of the developed industrial and agricultural zones.  Over the past 50 years, the country 
has seen 11 major floods.  In terms of GDP exposure to flood risk, Argentina ranks 
number two in LAC (behind Ecuador) in GDP terms and number one in absolute terms. 
The proposed operation would build on the ongoing Argentina Flood Prevention and 
Drainage APL-2 loan to further strengthen flood protection planning and defenses, 
primarily in Argentina's highly vulnerable Littoral Provinces. 

National Highway Assets Maintenance III project.  Under the ongoing 

18. 
National Highway Asset Management program (APL-1 and APL-2 loans for US$200m 
and US$400m, respectively), the Bank has supported a successful roll-out of 
Rehabilitation and Maintenance contracts (CREMAs) with private contractors to nearly 
15,000 km of the non-concessioned national highway network.  The Bank may continue 
support to highway maintenance as first-generation CREMA contracts turn-over and are 
replaced by contracts with greater emphasis on maintenance and less on rehabilitation. 

19. 
Provincial Roads Project (Additional Financing).  This operation would help to 
complete the rehabilitation and/or upgrading of nearly 1,970 km of provincial roads, in 
part by extending the use of Rehabilitation and Maintenance Contracts (CREMAs).   

20. 
Córdoba Road Infrastructure (Additional Financing) .  This operation would 
allow the execution of rehabilitation and maintenance contracts (CREMAs) covering 287 
km of the provincial road network and a paving contract for a selected segment of 48.9 
km. It would build on achievements of the ongoing project, contributing to reducing the 
maintenance and infrastructure backlog and enabling the Province’s road assets to keep 
pace with the demands of its agriculture and tourism sectors.  

21. 
Second Generation Road Safety project.  The Bank may provide support to the 
National Road Safety Agency to reduce Argentina’s high traffic injury and fatality rates.  
The objective of the proposed operation would be to support the reduction of road traffic 
fatalities and injuries and resulting economic losses through the development of 
improved institutional capacity to manage for results, enhanced monitoring and 
evaluation of road safety performance, and the achievement of safety improvements with 
targeted investments on defined pilot corridors.  The Bank is leveraging its resources in 
Argentina to bring the best in international practice and knowledge through pilot 

 
 
Annex 6 
Page 6 of 12 

initiatives such as iRAP (International Road Assessment Program) and the Global Road 
Safety Facility (or GRSF).  

22. 
Buenos Aires Province Sustainable Infrastructure Development Project 
(Additional Financing).  This operation will scale up a successful operation covering 
water supply and sanitation, provincial roads and storm water drainage in the Province of 
Buenos Aires, primarily in Greater Buenos Aires.  The additional financing is expected to 
provide access to sanitation to 120,000 poor beneficiaries, improve stormwater drainage 
in an area with 555,000 poor beneficiaries and rehabilitate 185 km of provincial roads. 

23. 
Reducing Logistics Costs in the Buenos Aires Container Port System and the 
Northwest (Logistics II).  In 2006, the Bank completed a study entitled Argentina: The 
Challenge of Reducing Logistics Costs.  The study identified four areas that need to be 
addressed in the short/medium term: road and rail bottlenecks (and their interface with 
ports) in the area of Rosario, capacity constraints in the Port of Buenos Aires, high 
logistics costs in the NOA region and the lack of an adequate institutional set up to 
improve logistics performance.  The logistics problems in Rosario will be addressed by 
the Rosario Metropolitan Area Infrastructure Project.  The other areas will be the subject 
of a deeper analysis to be conducted during 2009.  More concretely, the proposed 
analysis will focus in the explanatory variables of high logistics costs in the northwest 
region (NOA) as well as policy alternatives to avoid unnecessary transportation costs that 
would arise from the Port of Buenos Aires operating at full capacity.  Finally, the study 
will give guidelines on how to set up a National Logistics Council that could become a 
forum to anticipate and propose solutions to logistics bottlenecks in Argentina. 

24. 
Rural Transport Assessment.  This study will analyze transportation access to 
health, education and other public services as well as obstacles to the movement of goods 
in rural areas.  The objective will be to assess the rural and/or secondary road networks, 
including coverage, quality of networks, management and maintenance practices, 
available financing and corresponding expenditures.  To provide a useful national 
snapshot of the situation, the study will be based on a sample of provinces so as to 
provide sufficient depth, but the sample should be representative of the national situation. 

25. 
Assessment of water and sanitation service (WSS) providers.  Argentina has 
more than 1700 public, private and cooperative WSS service providers of different sizes.  
This would assess the performance of the larger WSS service providers as well as a 
sample of smaller ones to identify strengthening needs. 

26. 
The Bank and Borrower may also consider a Rural Electrification and Energy 
Efficiency Project (PERMER II) and/or a Power Transmission Project.  The 
PERMER II project would help further develop the energy efficiency and renewable 
energy markets, building on the PERMER project and the GEF-financed energy 
efficiency operation.  Activities would include investments in rural electrification and 
small hydro generation projects and mechanisms to foster investments in energy 
efficiency.  A Power Transmission Project would seek to increase availability, quality 
and reliability of the power supply network, increasing the competitiveness of the country 
and fostering economic growth.  The project would finance the construction/upgrade of 
key regional transmission lines identified as high priority to reduce risks of power supply 

 
 
Annex 6 
Page 7 of 12 

interruptions and to increase service quality.  Such reinforcements will also help reduce 
the total fuel cost of the power sector by lessening transmission constraints. 

• Objective:  Improve competitiveness, quality, and exports of agriculture and 
livestock production 

27. 
The CPS will contribute to increasing the diversification of production in the 
agricultural sector.  Bank work will continue to focus on enhancing competitiveness of 
the non-Pampean economies and increasing the assets and opportunities of small farmers 
and the rural poor.  At the national level, the Bank will seek to engage the Government in 
a discussion of agricultural policy options that reflect the changing international and 
domestic context based on just-in-time analytical work.  The Government has recently 
sought additional lending from both the IDB and the World Bank (which approved a 
US$300 million loan in October, 2008) for the Second Provincial Agricultural 
Development (PROSAP) project.  It has also received an additional financing loan for the 
PROINDER small farmers project (US$45 million in July, 2007) to scale up the 
successful strategy of supporting productive and community projects for small farmers 
and strengthening institutional capacities for the implementation of rural development 
strategies at the national and provincial level.  New activities are proposed to include the 
following. 

28. 
Rural Poverty Reduction Project. The project would be complementary to 
PROINDER and PROSAP, targeting indigenous people, rural workers, landless farmers, 
and other rural citizens who are among the most impoverished in Argentina.  The project 
is being designed under a CDD format and would include resources for strengthening the 
newly-formed Subsecretariat for Rural Development and Family Agriculture. 

• Objective:  Address a growing problem of resource degradation 

29. 
The Bank program will support increasing the areas of forest and forest 
plantations under sustainable management, strengthen urban and solid waste 
management, improve environmental management and governance, and increase access 
to international carbon markets.  Support for green (natural resources) issues will build on 
ongoing operations in Sustainable Natural Resource Management and Biodiversity 
Conservation in Productive Forestry Landscapes (GEF).  The proposed CPS will expand 
the Bank ’s work on brown environmental issues through the previously discussed 
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustainable Development Project. 

30. 
Rural Corridors and Biodiversity Conservation project.  This GEF-funded 
project would assist the Government of Argentina in its efforts to conserve biodiversity 
of global and national importance by strengthening the Protected Areas System.  At least 
six new protected areas (including marine and terrestrial ecosystems) are to be 
incorporated into the national system and effectively managed.  The operation would 
stitch together conservation corridors necessary for the survival of several endangered 
species and the sustainable management/ use of native forest and arid steppe.  

31. 
Sustainable Industrial Development Project.  The main objective of this project 
would be to help small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Argentina with inadequate 

 
 
Annex 6 
Page 8 of 12 

access to credit to improve their compliance with environmental regulations, while 
simultaneously boosting their industrial competitiveness.  Focused on selected highly 
polluting sectors, this would support Government efforts to better control, manage, and 
prevent industrial pollution of river basins and other sensitive ecosystems.  The project 
would support conversion of small and medium-size industries in highly polluting sectors 
to cleaner production processes.  

32. 
Argentina’s Third National Communication .  Bank support for this activity 
under the UNFCCC is expected to deepen the absorption of climate change 
considerations in sectoral planning, particularly in infrastructure and agriculture.   

33. 
Country Environmental Assessment (CEA) or Strategic Environmental 
Assessments (SEA).  This analytical work is expected to help Argentina and the Bank to 
set priorities for additional investments and was identified during CAS consultations as 
one of the key country-level diagnostic tools which will help evaluate environmental 
priorities for Argentina, the environmental implications of key policies, and the country ’s 
capacity to address the priorities identified.  In parallel, SEAs will provide analytical 
options and participatory approaches for mainstreaming and upstreaming environmental 
and social considerations in policies, plans and programs to influence decision-making 
and implementation processes at the strategic level in different sectors. 

34. 
Carbon Finance (CF). The Bank will complement the above lending and 
analytical work with the Petrobras Gas Transport System project, a CF transaction to 
recover waste heat from the combustion turbines of the gas compression plants on the 
San Martín and Neuba II gas pipelines.  By converting waste heat to energy, the project 
will reduce the need for new thermal electricity generation, thereby limiting future 
greenhouse gas emissions.  The Petrobras project will complement two ongoing CF 
transactions: The Salta Landfill Gas Capture Project (FY08) (which flares methane gas 
release by three municipal landfills) and the Olavarría Methane Capture Project ( FY05) 
(landfill gas flaring at one municipal landfill). The pipeline for future CF transaction will 
be built using the ongoing CF Assist grant for the national Secretariat of Environment. 

Pillar 2:  Social Inclusion 

• Objective:  Consolidate the reduction in poverty and expand efforts to reverse 
the longer-term poverty trend by increasing household incomes and integrating 
marginalized groups into the productive marketplace 

35. 
A key element of the Bank’s ongoing and future policy dialogue toward this 
objective is to improve the employability of the most vulnerable.  The focus of social 
service delivery has shifted from emergency relief and expanding access to basic services 
to better inter-governmental coordination and improved quality of services.  The Bank is 
therefore supporting the Government in facilitating the transition of beneficiaries out of 
Jefes and developing a longer term strategy for social protection.  According to the 
discussions with the national Government, the Bank is planning to design and implement 
new operations to extend and complement the existing social protection programs.   

 
 
Annex 6 
Page 9 of 12 

36. 
Basic Protection Project.  The first phase of this two-phase APL focus on 
increasing the effectiveness of Argentina’s income transfer programs for the unemployed 
and families with children by improving design features, transparency and accountability 
in two core social protection programs and transferring beneficiaries from other, less 
effective schemes to them.  It would seek to improve the equity, transparency, and 
efficiency of social programs and on the Seguro Program to: (i) create conditions to 
extend the services of Seguro to the population generally, beyond the former 
beneficiaries of Plan Jefes (at this time the only ones eligible); (ii) improve the execution 
and adaptation of employment services, taking into consideration the particular 
conditions in each locality where the program is executed; and (iii) adapt the benefits 
offered to the participants to ensure appropriate support and incentives.   

37. 
Social Protection Survey.  This AAA will be undertaken, under the above 
project, to provide updated information on the trends and impacts of social protection 
programs.  The Bank will enhance the Government’s monitoring capacity by providing 
technical assistance in the design and implementation of the survey. 

38. 
Safety Nets AAA. The proposed AAA would study the key social programs to 
identify beneficiaries, overlaps, and conflicts to propose integration options to increase 
the coverage of the most effective programs while improving the efficiency and 
effectiveness of Argentina’s safety net. 

39. 
Impact of Labor Market Development on Inequality AAA.  The objective of 
this programmatic AAA is to deepen the analysis of the effects of labor and social 
protection programs on income inequality, and generate dialogue among stakeholders 
about policy approaches to reduce inequality and expand opportunities.  The AAA will 
generate new quantitative data for analysis of income inequality at the provincial level.  It 
will focus on answering key policy questions facing the Government including: (i) how 
has income inequality in Argentina evolved over the past 10 years? (ii) why has 
inequality been stagnant despite reductions in poverty and unemployment since the 2002 
crisis? (iii) what is the potential impact of existing social protection programs and labor 
market policies on inequality over the medium term? (iv) what are the equity impacts of 
some specific public spending policies (in particular, social spending and subsidies)? (v) 
what potential policy reforms could reduce inequality and expand opportunities – through 
transfer and labor market programs? 

40. 
An additional aspect that has been explored jointly by the Bank and the Argentine 
Government at various levels is the possibility of supporting social inclusion policies at 
the provincial level. The implementation of programs that complement (in a coordinated 
manner) the services of the national programs, financed and executed by provincial 
governments, is a challenge which the Bank can help address based on its experience in 
other countries and by providing technical training for their start up. 

• Objective:  Consolidate improvements in health indicators and improve quality 
of education while reducing drop out rates 

41. 
The Bank aims to expand the scope of its support for the realization of this goal 
through (i) expansion of health coverage through provincial health insurance, (ii) hospital 

 
 
Annex 6 
Page 10 of 12 

restructuring and expansion, and (iii) strengthening the leadership of the Ministry of 
Health and health sector governance.  Specific Bank-financed activities will focus on 
promoting institutional transformations, improving information systems, increasing 
transparency of outcome data, and providing financial incentives for provincial health 
systems.   

42. 
The health project to continue the Plan Nacer would support the best options to 
improve health outcomes and coverage.  Currently this option is to expand provincial 
health insurance, an alternative that was already identified in the San Nicolás Agreement, 
as the base of the current Plan Nacer, that aimed at addressing insurance coverage at the 
national level, supported by the provincial structure. The project would move forward 
with several innovations, such as: (i) expanding the age groups that would benefit from 
existing provincial insurance arrangements (for example to all school age children);  (ii) 
defining a larger service scope to be guaranteed (for example, related to chronic, non-
transmissible diseases); and (iii) introducing health quality attributes to services (for 
example reducing waiting lists). Once again, the federal administration, acting as primus 
inter pares with all the provinces, could utilize the experience of the Plan Nacer in terms 
of outcomes, incentives, and administrative systems to support the provinces in extending 
effective coverage to other population groups and in a greater number of services. This 
project would render positive results in terms of equity of access and health outcomes, 
including (i) gradual improvement in equity of access, by providing all Argentines with a 
similar health plan regardless of where they live; and (ii) with the services to be defined, 
a structured and comprehensive approach could be generated to address the disease load 
associated with chronic conditions such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, cancer and 
regional pathologies affecting in greater level the poorest population. 

43. Health Sector Support Project.  Based on AAA on strengthening management 
and governance of the public hospitals network, the project would introduce a new 
management system for the hospitals network that would improve the articulation 
between first and second levels of health care.  There would be clear criteria for patient 
references to improve quality of health care and optimize use of resources.  The new 
management model would determine decisions to recover existing facilities and to 
construct new ones.  The Bank support to the funding of new health facilities would be 
provided within a result-based framework, similar to existing Bank projects in Argentina, 
to ensure close coordination between national and provincial health authorities. 

44. 
Essential Public Health Functions (FESP) (Additional Financing).  The 
proposed additional financing would include support for a Health Human Resources 
program.  Argentina has a serious imbalance in the health sector ’s human resources.  In 
the public sector the clearest indicator of the problem is that there are too few nurses for 
the number of doctors, with the source of the problem being both too many medical 
doctors and too few nurses.  The project would focus mainly on addressing the deficit of 
nurses.  Key project activities in this direction would be further professionalization of 
nurses and a scholarship program.  However, an improved supply of nurses by itself will 
not solve the problem.  The project would also work with health institutions in the 
provinces to ensure improved hiring practices.   

 
 
Annex 6 
Page 11 of 12 

45. 
The Health Sector Governance program would reinforce the governance 
capacities of the National Ministry of Health to improve the operation of the health 
system in Argentina, in aspects related to the fairness of access, effectiveness and 
transparency of health services delivery through the developing of management, 
procurement and transparency and accountability arrangements. 

46. 
Strengthening Management and Governance of Public Hospitals Networks 
AAA.  The main objective of this study is to assist the National Health Ministry to 
improve the current hospital management approach and create a framework for regulating 
the hospital network decentralized system effectively. The findings will support policy 
decisions in the context of the National Plan proposed by the MSN to construct primary 
health care and hospitals and to strengthen hospital networks management for improving 
health services access to the poorest and most vulnerable groups, strengthening the 
efficiency and increasing the quality of care in public hospitals. 

47. 
“Healthy Schools”.  The client has expressed its interest in having a proposal 
from the Bank in the area of “healthy schools, ” which could be supported under a health 
sector support operation. Organizations such as UNESCO, UNICEF, WHO and the 
World Bank partnered to develop the FRESH (Focus Resources on Effective School 
Health) framework, an approach for effective implementation of health and nutrition 
services within school health programs.  Building upon the FRESH framework the Bank 
is ready to support the MOH in identifying a system specifically designed for 
Argentinean schools to identify and certify effective Healthy Schools.  

48. 
Universal coverage of 5-year old children and retention of teenagers are two 
key elements of the Government ’s strategy for strengthening the education system.  The 
Bank ’s program targets exclusion from educational attainment, which is highest among 
children and teenagers of the poorest families.  Although attendance to primary school is 
similar among all income groups, there are large differences in attendance to pre-primary 
school and even larger ones in the attendance of the higher levels of secondary education.  
The latest education legislation is improving the financing of the education sector to 6% 
of GDP by 2010.  The sector needs support to improve educational attainment and 
retention rates in secondary education in poorer school districts.  The Bank ’s involvement 
in subnational education systems over many years gives it a comparative advantage to 
improve quality of education and management of the education system.  The Bank's 
emphasis on provincial education can best be seen through an ongoing US$150 million 
rural education project that will provide support until October 2011. 

49. Higher Education AAA.  The Government is committed to improve the 
competitiveness of the economy through innovation.  Argentina ’s universities produce 
some outstanding research but mostly cater to three traditional studies.  Law, business 
and economics, and medicine provide 44% of university graduates living in the country.  
To help shape the discussion of reform options the proposed study will evaluate the 
contribution of knowledge institutions to economic growth and in particular how 
universities contribute to the dynamism of the local private sector.  It will identify options 
for the use of local knowledge institutions to promote local economic development. 

 
 
Annex 6 
Page 12 of 12 

Pillar 3:  Governance 

• Objective: 
 Strengthen 
the effectiveness, efficiency, 
accountability of public sector management 

transparency and 

50. 
Building on the Government’s objective, the proposed CPS will build on the on-
going engagement on public sector management strengthening by deepening engagement 
on existing loans and responding to new requests through support to additional 
operational and analytical work.  The ongoing State and Subnational modernization 
projects are complemented by the Institutional Strengthening of the National Social 
Security Administration Project and the Social and Fiscal National Identification System 
(SINTyS) second-phase APL.  In addition, a study of provincial finances will be 
undertaken to review provincial performance under the Federal Fiscal Responsibility 
Regime and identify options to support provincial fiscal sustainability within the existing 
inter-governmental fiscal system. 

• Objective:  Expand performance management and improve the quality of public 
expenditure and enhance service delivery outcomes and trust in institutions 

51. 
The Bank program will concentrate on strengthening public expenditure 
management tools, including an increased focus on performance-management and 
budgeting.  The program also emphasizes support to cross-cutting public sector 
management areas across 
the federal administration, such as human resource 
management, e-government, procurement, quality management, and M&E through the 
ongoing State Modernization II loan.  Specific organizational reform issues will be 
addressed through the Institutional Strengthening loan of ANSES, the National Social 
Security Administration and specific e-government tools will be promoted through the 
second phase of the National Social and Fiscal Identification System Project. At the 
subnational level, the program will focus on a variety of public sector management areas 
at the provincial levels, such as performance-management and –budgeting, human 
resource management, tax administration, e-government and strategic planning.  This will 
be supported by the on-going Subnational Governments Modernization Project.  In 
addition, Fee-for Services products will be carried out in a number of subnational 
governments, starting with the on-going FFS in the province of Corrientes. 

52. 
Foundations for Performance-Informed Budgeting Project.  This operation 
will focus on public expenditure management, performance-management and budgeting.  
Performance informed budgeting as a critical public sector reform aimed at improving the 
whole public investment cycle has been identified as a longer term focus of Bank 
interventions both at the national and provincial level.   

 
 
Annex 7 
Page 1 of 5 

IFC Program Summary 

1. 
IFC’s strategy in Argentina is designed to support the growth of export-oriented 
sectors and a select group of financial institutions, in order to create jobs and meet the 
needs of low-income populations, particularly those in frontier regions.  The overarching 
strategy is to proceed cautiously, with sponsors in strong industries that have an 
established record of sound, profit-oriented, and therefore sustainable management.  This 
means that IFC will tend to concentrate its activities on existing clients in both corporate 
and financial sectors.  

2. 
Argentina’s private sector recovered strongly from the crisis of 2001-2002. 
Companies did so first by reutilizing idle capacity and then by financing investments 
from cashflow as their domestic and export markets grew strongly. However, they have 
continued to face difficulties in raising long-term financing for investments. This problem 
is likely to become more acute as the global financial crisis deepens. IFC will deploy 
existing and new financial structures to support viable companies during this period of 
uncertainty.  

3. 
IFC will work to provide medium- and long-term financing for select companies. 
It will also work with its banking partners in Argentina to help meet the liquidity and 
working capital needs of small companies and farms through trade finance and dedicated 
MSME lines. The Corporation will concentrate its attention on those MSMEs, 
companies, and banks that focus on underserved groups and frontier regions.  

4. 
Argentina represents IFC’s second-largest exposure in the region and IFC’s 
seventh-largest country exposure by committed portfolio.  It constitutes 12% of IFC's 
committed portfolio in the Latin American and Caribbean region. IFC ’s exposure to 
Argentina peaked in 2000 and fell by half through 2005. Nonetheless, IFC remained 
active in Argentina during this period. It worked closely to support those clients which 
demonstrated underlying competitive strengths and helped clients restructure their 
liabilities. Private sector demand for fresh IFC financing declined in the post-crisis period 
as companies rebuilt their balance sheets and financed expansion mainly from their own 
resources.  

5. 
By 2004-2005, companies began to seek additional financing. However, the local 
banking system and capital markets were not able to fully meet private sector 
requirements. Normally, companies would access global markets that typically offer 
longer-term financing at lower costs than is available in the local markets. However, 
access to international financial markets by Argentine banks and corporates narrowed 
considerably in the post-crisis years (see Figure 1). 

 
 
 
Figure 1: Access to international financial markets narrows 

Pr ivate s e ctor e xte r nal inde bte dne s s - % of GDP

Annex 7 
Page 2 of 5 

Non- f inanc ial sec tor
borrow ers
Financ ial sec tor
borrow ers

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Source: Ministry of Production 

6. 
IFC ’s role in supporting Argentina ’s private sector has grown in importance as a 
result of this pattern. Our exposure to Argentina has climbed since 2005 to reach a 
forecast US$860 million in FY 2009 (see Figure 2).  

Figure 2: Argentina - Outstanding IFC Balance - $ million 

7. 
Argentina was able to sustain a strong recovery in investment levels. Gross fixed 
capital formation as a percentage of GDP rose steeply and leveled out in 2006-2008 at its 
highest level in over 25 years (see Figure 3). It is IFC ’s objective to continue supporting 
companies ’ investment programs whenever this is feasible in risk and market terms, and 
is aligned with our strategy to reach underserved low-income populations, frontier 
regions, and industries with strong job-creation capacity.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Investment rebounds 

Annex 7 
Page 3 of 5 

Source: World Bank, EIU 

8. 
The Corporation ’s investments since 2007 (see Figure 4) have focused on 
financial institutions, (with a heavy emphasis on trade finance), extractive industries, and 
agribusiness. These investments have provided a good balance between risk management 
objectives and financial returns. 

Figure 4: IFC Commitments - Argentina 2007-2009 

Sector 

Commitments (US$ 
million) 

Global Financial Markets Group 
Oil, Gas, Mining And Chemicals 
Global Manufacturing & Services 
Agribusiness 
Infrastructure 
Private Equity and Investment 
Funds 

TOTAL 

408.8 
187 
70 
60 
35 

10 

770.8 

9. 
IFC’s largest exposure in Argentina by sector is to the financial services 
industry, where IFC has established partnerships with six foreign- and locally-owned 
banks. Trade finance lines accounted for nearly all of IFC’s committed portfolio to 
Argentine banks of almost US$409 million in 2007-2008. Trade finance has become a 
lifeline for Argentine companies, particularly after the collapse of US banks in late 2008 
that had provided liquidity to this market.  

10. 
Argentina has a large agribusiness sector and a significant oil and gas industry. 
IFC finances export-oriented companies in both these sectors. Internationally-traded 
commodities such as soy, wheat, and oil, are priced in dollars and are produced almost 
entirely for export. This enables IFC to provide competitive financing for these 
companies. Agribusiness and oil and gas producers withstood the 2001-2002 crisis well 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 7 
Page 4 of 5 

and have proven resilient to recent declines in international commodity prices due to their 
efficiency.  

11. 
IFC’s exposure to Argentina’s oil and gas industry is about US$335 million, 
with an additional US$510 million in B loans disbursed and outstanding.  The portfolio 
comprises six oil and gas projects.  IFC clients in this industry are fully funded for the 
foreseeable future, either through internal cash generation or through existing debt 
facilities.  The main risk to these companies’ future cash generation would be through a 
severe and continued reduction in oil prices, or further Government intervention.  These 
risks are limited since the Government has capped domestic producer prices at US$42 per 
barrel—now above market levels.  

12. 
IFC ’s agribusiness portfolio in Argentina is mainly composed of export-
oriented companies, which demonstrated their resilience during the 2001-2002 crisis and 
grew steadily during the global commodity price boom.  IFC has supported the 
transformation of Argentina ’s oilseeds complex into one of the most competitive in the 
world by financing four major players in the industry.  IFC has partnered with locally-
owned companies with South-South expansion plans. IFC has also reached medium-sized 
agribusiness companies through specialized funds.  

13. 
Given its great competitiveness, IFC expects Argentina ’s agribusiness sector to 
sustain its operations even in volatile market conditions. However, companies may be 
constrained by working capital limitations.  IFC’s trade finance lines can help clients 
manage their liquidity and short term financing requirements more effectively during the 
global financial crisis.  IFC will also support established agroindustrial exporters to 
enhance the competitiveness of Argentina’s food supply chains.  The Corporation will 
provide technical and financial support to farmers and agricultural MSMEs on a 
sustainable basis.  The Corporation has successfully worked through local banks to offer 
secured lending to marginal farms in remote regions that have traditionally struggled to 
access the financial system.  

IFC ’s Role In Supporting Argentina ’s Small Companies 

14.  Micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) employ about 11 million 
people, over half Argentina ’s work force. MSMEs are typically under-capitalized, which 
leaves them vulnerable to shifts in economic and market conditions.  IFC aims to increase 
its support for viable companies, allowing them to maintain employment levels during 
the current crisis and position them for growth as the economy recovers.  

 
 
 
 
Annex 7 
Page 5 of 5 

Figure 5:  Employment and employers – Q1 2005 

Em ploym e nt and em ploye r s - Q1 2005

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

45%

47%

8%

3%

43%

54%

Employment

Number of
companies

Source: Ministry of Production 

Large companies
Small companies
Mic ro companies

15.  Argentine MSMEs rely on short-term financing, usually cashflow and bank 
overdraft facilities, to finance their operations. As a result, these companies are among 
the first to reduce output and lay off workers when economic activity weakens.  IFC 
intends to support competitive MSMEs and small farms with longer-term financing at 
more affordable rates provided through the banking system and microfinance partners. 
This would enable viable companies suffering liquidity problems to remain in operation 
and maintain employment levels.  

Job cr e ation by em ploye r s - Q1 2005

Jobs los t

25%

51%

24%

Jobs c reated

28%

47%

24%

Large companies
Small companies
Mic ro companies

Net change

31%

45%

24%

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

                                                 Source: Ministry of Production 

16.  
IFC reaches small companies through its microfinance, trade finance, and 
dedicated SME lines provided through partner banks in Argentina.  IFC has also 
established partnerships with banks to support small companies and farms in northern and 
western frontier regions.  This support will become increasingly important as conditions 
in local and global credit markets continue deteriorating. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 8 
Page 1 of 2 

Proposed GEF Program 

The GEF provides financing for activities that achieve global environmental benefits. It is the 
designated financial mechanism for the international conventions on biological diversity, climate 
change, persistent organic pollutants, and desertification. It also collaborates closely with the 
Montreal Protocol - the legal instrument to implement the objectives set out in the Vienna 
Convention on Ozone Depleting Substances - and regional and international waters agreements. 
The three main GEF implementing agencies in Argentina are the World Bank, UNDP, and 
UNEP.  

Current GEF program 

The current World Bank GEF program in Argentina comprises six operations with total financing 
of US$ 38.14 million. Operations span biodiversity, climate change and international waters. The 
Bank's GEF strategy in Argentina is to blend GEF-financed activities with Bank loans, not only 
to better leverage GEF resources but also to better mainstream global environmental concerns in 
country programs. World Bank’s comparative advantage for implementing GEF projects is based 
on the following: 

- Leveraging investments, particularly as part of co-financing with IBRD operations in the 
area. The GEF helps develop, catalyze, and complement investment operations. 
- Leveraging dialogue based on areas of current engagement and technical expertise. The 
GEF is often a new entry point for dialogue in key sectors, including energy and 
transport. 
- Fostering new ideas and innovation, often with NGOs, the private sector, and others.  

The last Bank program included GEF co-financing in rural development, transport and 
environmental projects, including in the following: 

- 

- Biodiversity Conservation in Productive Forestry Landscapes Project (US$7.0 million) 
- Energy Efficiency Project (US$15.1 million)  
Sustainable Transport and Air Quality Project (US$3.9 million)  
- Decentralized Medium-Sized Grants Program (US$2.5 million) 
- Coastal Contamination Prevention and Marine Management Project (US$8.5 million) 
Second National Communication to the Convention on Climate Change (US$1.14 
million) 

- 

GEF potential in Argentina  

Argentina is a large client country that not been engaged in GEF as much as other countries of its 
size. Many areas have been addressed – from la nd degradation, protected areas (national parks) 
and coastal areas to climate change priority-setting and renewable energy -- but potential remains 
for program deepening in nearly all GEF thematic areas. Current Government priorities are in the 
areas of climate change, biodiversity, land and fisheries management, and air and water quality.  

Whereas biodiversity and climate change have been the dominant areas of World Bank GEF 
programming over the past few years, there are additional opportunities in nearly all areas eligible 
for GEF support. Currently the World Bank is implementing large-scale projects on biodiversity 
(Biodiversity Conservation in Productive Forestry Landscapes), climate change and energy 
(Energy Efficiency) and smaller-sized ones in multi-focal areas (Decentralized Medium-Sized 
Grants Program). These large projects are typically a blend between GEF-funds and WB loans 
while some only receive financing from the GEF.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 8 
Page 2 of 2 

A crucial issue to consider is the evolution of the Resource Allocation Framework that the GEF 
Council adopted in September 2005, which implies a maximum allocation for Argentina in the 
areas of Climate Change (US$14.5 million) and Biodiversity (US$15.1 million) over 4 years 
divided among all Implementing Agencies. The current administration has decided to take 
maximum advantage of GEF. Although not all projects have thus far been endorsed by the GEF 
Secretariat, Argentina has planned the use of 96% of its biodiversity allocation and 53% of its 
climate change allocation. A challenge in the future will be the size and the assignment of a new 
Resource Allocation Framework for biodiversity and climate change, to be replenished by the 
GEF Council during FY10. 

During the proposed CAS period, the Bank will continue its strategy of blending GEF activities 
with Bank loans and will support stand-alone operations in those areas where there is a high 
potential of sector transformation while addressing global environmental issues. As an example 
of this approach, the Bank will work with Argentina to finance the incremental costs of 
conservation in rural areas by means of a corridors strategy in Arid Patagonia and Chaco thereby 
strengthening the Federal System of Protected Areas. The potential of renewable energies and 
energy efficiency in rural services programs (PROSAP) will be explored, and a new grant to 
prepare Argentina’s Third National Communication under the UNFCCC is expected help 
mainstream climate change considerations in sector planning. In addition, the Bank’s financial 
support for infrastructure, environment and rural development under the proposed CPS are 
expected to open additional opportunities for GEF co-financing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 9 
Page 1 of 2 

CPS Consultations 

During December of 2008, the CPS team carried out a series of seven thematic CAS 
consultations in Argentina on the issues of: transportation and logistics, water and 
sanitation, agriculture, environment, human development, federal-provincial relations and 
public sector management 

The consultations were designed with the objective to engage in in-depth exchanges with 
key opinion leaders from specific areas. Each thematic consultation was led by the 
respective World Bank Sector Leader with the participation of other Bank staff. 
Participants were representatives of the national and provincial government, private 
sector, academia and non-governmental organizations.  

Even with the diversity of topics covered and the methodology used that allowed in depth 
examination of each topic, there were common cross-cutting concerns expressed: 

• The need to support with capacity building for public officials at the local and 
national level.  
• The need to identify strategic plans by sectors and the support the Bank could 
bring to do so.  
• The opportunity to work at the provincial and municipal levels and not just at the 
national one. In relation to this, participants mentioned the need for the Bank to 
invest in capacity building at these levels if there is a decision to work with them.  
• Participants expressed an overall appreciation of the work done with the Bank yet 
they mentioned that Bank’s rules could be more flexible to improve the execution 
of projects. 

More specifically 
in 
the session on public sector management 
there were 
recommendations that Argentina could develop a map of existing initiatives in public 
sector management both at the national and provincial level in order to identify 
inequalities and focus on the weaker regions.  Other participants mentioned the 
possibility of reinforcing results-based management initiatives in the areas of health, 
education and social policies.  The need to develop a medium term strategic framework 
to promote results-based management was agreed among all participants as well as the 
need to strengthen the professionalization of public officials in order to be able to 
implement results based management, especially at the provincial and municipal level.  

In the session on the environment, issues covered ranged from the need to enhance the 
use of Clean Development Mechanisms to the need to promote the institutional 
strengthening of the Secretary of Environment both at the national and local government 
level. In terms of institutional strengthening participants also mention the need to do it for 
non-governmental organizations. In relation to the experience of working with the Bank, 
Government representatives highlighted that the experience has been very positive, 
especially in the forestry sector and biodiversity conservation.  A common concern 
expressed by the participants, was the need to enhance training of public officials in 
topics such as environmental impact evaluation or territorial development. Another 
important concern raised during the consultation was the need to strengthen capacity 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 9 
Page 2 of 2 

building at the provincial level since in Argentina 80% of the natural resources are 
protected areas depending from the provinces.   

In terms of the human development agenda, the issue of institutional strengthening at 
the provincial level was one of the main comments received. In terms of the education 
agenda, the main issue to solve is the quality of education and the integration between the 
national and provincial systems of education. In this regard, ideas to strengthen the 
monitoring role of the national Government were expressed. In terms of the health 
agenda, ideas to strengthen the formation of nurses and to implement a national health 
program at the school level were mentioned, as well as the need to strengthen hospital 
infrastructure. In terms of the social agenda, the need to open social programs such as 
Heads of Households or other existing programs was presented. 

During the session on water and sewerage the main discussion was around the issue of 
tariffs in relation to water in Argentina, the need to cover with the tariff the operating 
costs of the service and how to expand access to rural areas. Another key topic mentioned 
by the participants was the need to have a strategic plan to identify priorities and the idea 
of creating an institute to regulate the sector at the national level like the one that exists in 
Brazil or Colombia.  

At the consultation on agriculture the main concerns expressed by participants were the 
recuperation of the grain market and how prices are determined at it; issues of access to 
land, land distribution and taxing of land, infrastructure development at the rural level; 
the impact of taxes in the development of the sector; rural poverty and how to diminish it;  

The Bank also held a specific session on national-provincial relations in which 
participants representing provinces in which the Bank has projects and Government 
officials executing projects from the national Government at the provincial level 
highlighted the significant support in terms of resources and technical contributions these 
projects represents. Some participants proposed to focus investments in the north east and 
north west, the poorest regions of the country. Others proposed to focus investment at the 
municipal level rather than the provincial one to maximize implementation of them. 

The session on transport was very effective to identify possible bottle necks to improve 
the sector. Discussions range from the need to invest in a stronger railway system in 
which most participants agreed, to whether to develop the Atlantic or the Pacific Rim, or 
to re design the net of roads and expand coverage of provincial roads. In general, 
participants expressed support to the CREMA model in which contracts are allocated to 
maintain and recuperate a road for 5 years.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
La t in 
America 
& Carib. 

Upper- 

income 

Argentina 

39.5 
6,050 
238.9 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

2007 
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

Average annual growth, 2001-07 

Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 

Mos t recent estimate (latest year available, 2001-07) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% o f children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% o f population) 
Literacy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% o f school-age population) 
Male 
Female 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS 
1987 

1.0 
2.3 

92 
75 
14 
2 
96 
97 
112 
113 
112 

1997 

292.9 
19.4 
10.5 
17.1 
15.2 

111.1 
19.6 
7.9 
19.9 

.. 

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross capital formationlGDP 
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP 
Gross domestic savingslGDP 
Gross national savingslGDP 

Current account balancelGDP 
Interest paymentslGDP 
Total debffGDP 
Total debt servicelexports 
Present value of debffGDP 
Present value of debffexports 

(average annual growth) 
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

STRUCTURE o f the ECONOMY 

(% o f GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

Annex A2 
Page 1 of 2 

- 

Life expectancy 

capita 

Gross 
primary 
enrollment 

Access to improved water source 

A r g e n t i n a 
- Upper-middle-income group 

Economic ratios' 

Trade 

, 

Domestic 
savings 

, 

Capital 
formation 

Indebtedness 

A r g e n t i n a 
Upper-middle-income group 

.. 

200.8 

1987-97 1997-07 

2006 

4.1 
2.7 
8.6 

1.9 
0.9 
5.2 

8.5 
7.4 
7.4 

8.7 
7.6 

1987 

1997 

Ioo6 2007 

Growth of capital and GDP ( X ) 

Household final con'sumption expenditure 
General gov't final consumption expenditure 
Imports of goods and services 

75.4 
4.7 
7.6 

70.8 
12.1 
12.8 

58.6 
12.4 
19.2 

.. 

-60 1 

G

C

F

-GDP 

(average annual growth) 
Agriculture 
lndustry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

Household final consumption expenditure 
General gov't final consumption expenditure 
Gross capital formation 
Imports of goods and services 

Growth of exports and imports ( O h ) 

-75 1 

E x p o r t s 

-Imports 

Note: 2007 data are preliminary estimates. 
This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database. 
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will 
be incomplete. 

I 

I 

I 

 
Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Argentina

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1987

1997

2006

2007

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

169.2
127.1

0.3
-0.5

9.8
13.5

8.6
14.1

0.0
0.0
0.0

18.4
-0.4
-1.5

24.2
4.3
1.8

..
..
1.6

TRADE

1987

1997

2006

2007

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
   Food
   Meat
   Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
   Food
   Fuel and energy
   Capital goods
Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

8,934
744
655
3,661
5,820
..
653
973
83
104
80

26,431
3,007
1,025
8,335
30,450
..
970
13,259
114
112
102

46,569
2,964
1,610
14,801
34,159
..
1,729
14,384
123
108
114

52,238
..
..
..
43,700
..
..
..
..
..
..

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1987

1997

2006

2007

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

8,134
7,627
507
-4,738
..
-4,239
2,070
2,169

30,943
37,481
-6,538
-6,202
..
-12,224
8,951
3,273

54,058
41,121
12,937
-5,456
..
7,997
-11,527
3,530

..
..
..
..
..
6,246
..
..

1,617
2.10E-4

22,320
1.0

..
3.1

..
3.1

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1987

1997

2006

2007

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
    IBRD
    IDA
Total debt service
    IBRD
    IDA
Composition of net resource flows
    Official grants
    Official creditors
    Private creditors
    Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
    Portfolio equity (net inflows)
World Bank program
    Commitments
    Disbursements
    Principal repayments
    Net flows
    Interest payments
    Net transfers

58,458
2,146
0
6,244
224
0

128,156
5,494
0
18,192
635
0

122,190
6,206
0
18,994
1,480
0

..
5,674
0
..
1,387
0

5
664
939
-19
0

37
-69
8,765
9,160
2,319

47
-761
2,515
4,840
662

..
..
..
..
..

639
795
133
662
91
571

1,221
797
299
498
335
162

960
459
1,134
-675
346
-1,021

1,184
505
1,037
-532
350
-882

Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.

9/24/08

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

Current account balance to GDP (%)

0

20,000

40,000

60,000

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

Exports

Imports

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

-10

10

30

50

02

03

04

05

06

07

GDP deflator

CPI

Inflation (%)

35039

6206

8635
4959

67351

A - IBRD
B - IDA    
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

Composition of 2006 debt (US$ mill.)

CAS Annex B2 -
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As of Date 04/23/2009

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item

Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2006

29
4.6
27.6
31.1
48.3
38.1
38.4

Yes
3521
98

2007

29
3.9
3.4
1.0
41.4
21.4
21.7

Yes
2973
90

2008

28
4.2
25.0
31.3
57.1
60.0
12.4

Yes
2642
98

2009

32
4.2
12.5
15.8
25.0
26.9
12.6

Yes
1983
66

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

106
17,844.7
26.5
35.2

25
3,578.8
16.0
8.2

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the 
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary

Argentina

As of Date 04/23/2009

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal 
year

2009

2010

Proj ID

AR Basic Protection Project
AR (APL1) Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustain. Develop.

AR (AF-C) Buenos Aires Province Sustainable Infrastr.
AR Foundations for Performance-Informed Budgeting process
AR (AF) Cordoba Road Infrastructure
AR Sustainable Industrial Development
AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport Project
AR-(AF-C) Provincial Road Infrastructure
AR Rural Poverty
AR San Juan Social Inclusion & Local Develop.
AR (AF) Provincial Government Modernization
AR (AF) Essential Public Health Functions- FESP
AR Health Sector Governance Strengthening
AR Second Generation Road Safety Project
AR Basic Protection Project (Phase II)

2011-12

AR Rosario Metropolitan Area Infrastructure
AR National Urban Dreinage Project
AR National Highway Asset Maintenance Project III
AR Provincial Roads II
AR Health Sector Support
AR Provincial Health
AR Communities Integrating Social Services

US$(M)

 450.0
 840.0

 50.0
10.0 - 20.0
30.0- 60.0
40.0- 60.0
 150.0
 200.0
30.0- 50.0
20.0- 50.0
 15.0
 90.0
 4.5
 20.0
 550.0

 460.0
 100.0
 200.0
 100.0
 200.0
 300.0
 170.0

H
H

M
H
M
H
H
M
H
H
H
H
H
H
H

H
M
M
M
H
H
L

Annex B3
Page 1 of 2

Strategic 
Rewards b 
(H/M/L)

Implementation b  
Risks (H/M/L)

L
H

L
M
L
M
M
M
H
M
M
M
M
L
L

H
M
M
M
M
M
H

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years. 
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate 
(M), or low (L). 

Argentina: IFC Investment Operations Program

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Annex B3

Commitments (US$m)

Gross
Net**

2006

2007

2008

2009*

666.50
283.50

177.47
117.47

973.28
483.28

263.52
173.52

70.21
29.79

7.66
40.61
51.73

100

100

70.21
29.79

7.66
40.61
51.73

100

100

48.13
48.99
2.88

100

48.13
48.99
2.88

100

92.77
5.29
1.94
100

92.77
5.29
1.94
100

Net Commitments by Sector (%)

EQUITY
GUARANTEE
LOAN
QUASI LOAN
RISK PRODUCT

Total

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)

Equity
Guarantee
Loan
Quasi loan
Risk product

Total

*  As of March 31, 2009
** IFC's Own Account only

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Argentina

As of Date 04/23/2009

Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audience a

Objective b

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

1. Recent completions
  ESW

  Programmatic Poverty (Rural)
FY07
  Infrastructure Finance
FY07
  Country Financial Accountability AssesFY07
  A&A ROSC
FY07
  Social Inclusion (Youth)
FY07
  Logistics and Transport Sector Compe FY07
  Policy Notes
FY08
  Programmatic Income Support (ESW) FY08
  Programmatic Poverty (Informality)
FY08

  Technical Assistance & External Training

  Seminar of Exports and Growth 
FY07
  CFAA Follow-up NLTA
FY08
  Ministry of Interior Strategic Planning PFY08
  Pollution Mngt , EIs and Inst
FY08

2. Underway

  CFAA Provincial Level
FY09
  Analysis of impacts of export taxes
FY09
  Corrientes Strategic Plan
FY09
  IFMS Province of Buenos Aires
FY09
  Prov. Performance Informed Budgettin FY09
  Prov Econ Memo Buenos Aires
FY09

3. Planned

  Employment Inequality
  Provincial Fiscal Framework
  Logistics II AAA
  Prov Econ Memo Buenos Aires
  Country Environmental Assessment
  Accountability services delivery

FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10

____________

a.  Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b.  Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

168.8
301.3
195.2
164.7
239.1
159.9
157.3
634.2
90.5

120.0
164.2
1.6
12.8

170.9
80.0
200.0
125.0
150.0
182.6

130.0
100.0
170.0
182.6

                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                     
                   
                   
                       
                     
                   
                     
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
 
Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B6 - Key Economic Indicators

As of Date 04/23/2009

2008
2009
(Annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)

2010

2011

National income and prices

GDP at constant prices
  Domestic demand (contribution to growth)
  Net exports (contribution to growth)
GDP deflator

External sector

Trade balance (billions of US$)
Exports, f.o.b. (billions of US$)
  Of which:  net exports of hydrocarbons
Imports, c.i.f. (billions of US$)
Export growth (in US$ terms)
Import growth (in US$ terms)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade
Commodity prices
  Wheat (USD/ton)
  Corn (USD/ton)
  Soy (USD/ton)
  Sunflower (USD/ton)
  Copper (USD/lb)
  Oil (USD/barrel)
Exchange rate (pesos per U.S. $)
  Period average
  End of period
Real exchange rate (ratio of domestic to foreign prices, p
Gross international reserves
  (In months of imports of goods and services)
Net international reserves

(In percent of GDP)

Consolidated public sector

Nominal revenues (yoy)
Nominal expenditures (yoy)
Primary fiscal balance
  Federal government primary fiscal balance
Overall balance
  Revenues
  Expenditures
Total debt (end-of-year)
  Of which:  external debt

7.0
6.9
-0.4
19.4

16.6
71.3

57.6
27.6
28.8

332
200
442
482
347
97

3.29
3.45
20.6
46.4
8.3

38.2

28.8
31.0
3.2
3.1
1.2
33.0
31.7

1.0
0.9
0.1
12.2

4.3
53.9

52.2
-24.5
-9.4
-10.2
-9.4
-15.9

190
150
330
280
190
35

3.71
3.97
22.8
41.9
8.1

33.7

9.8
13.2
2.2
2.4
-0.1
31.9
32.0

1.5
1.3
0.2
12.9

5.0
55.6

53.2
3.3
2.0
2.6
2.0
0.6

190
150
330
280
190
35

4.19
4.40
16.3
38.0
7.2

29.8

12.0
11.4
2.3
2.6
0.5
31.2
30.7

3.0
2.7
0.3
11.6

5.0
59.2

57.0
6.4
7.1
5.0
4.0
-1.6

190
150
330
280
190
35

4.67
4.93
14.5
33.8
6.0

25.5

13.7
13.0
2.4
2.8
0.5
30.9
30.3

GDP ‐ demand side

Consumption
  Private
  Public
Investment
  Private
  Public

Saving‐investment balance

Gross domestic investment
  of which:  public sector
Gross national  saving
  of which:  public sector
Current account balance

Trade balance
Net foreign direct investment
Non financial private sector capital account

Gross international reserves (billions of US$)
  In months of imports of goods and services
Net international reserves (billions of US$)

Money and Credit 

M0 yoy growth
M1 yoy growth
M3 yoy growth
M3 velocity (ratio of nominal GDP to end-period stock of

Credit to the private sector

Nominal growth of credit to private sector
Real growth of credit to private sector

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

2008

2009

2010

2011

71.6
58.3
13.3
24.1
20.6
3.4

24.1
3.4
26.6

3.2
5.3
1.2
-3.6

46.4
9.7
40.0

13.3
10.3
18.0
3.2
15.2
33.6
11.4

74.3
60.8
13.5
25.2
21.2
4.0

25.2
4.0
24.3

-0.4
1.3
1.0
-0.9

41.9
8.1
36.0

9.3
9.0
9.0
3.3
14.7
10.2
-4.2

73.6
60.5
13.1
25.6
21.5
4.1

25.6
4.1
25.3

0.2
1.6
0.9
-0.9

38.0
7.2
31.3

14.1
11.6
11.6
3.4
14.9
16.0
4.5

73.3
60.4
12.9
25.9
22.0
3.9

25.9
3.9
25.5

0.1
1.5
0.8
-0.9

33.8
6.0
26.9

21.7
16.7
16.7
3.4
15.2
17.1
4.6

International prices (average cpi of advanced economies
Real GDP growth in advanced economies
Nominal GDP (billions of pesos)

2.6
1.3
1036.2

-1.0
0.0
1174.2

1.0
1.0
1346.0

2.0
2.0
1547.4

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Argentina - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual     
2005
2006

2004

2007

Estimated
2008
2009

Projected
2011

2012

2010

165043

133045

121292

101032

95120

91918

88836

86327

83760

-4184

2362

-3019

3122

-8018

4173

3900

4696

-9679

4283

-4989

2605

-4385

2551

-3956

2342

-4327

2164

477.3
107.8
6.8
0.8

329.4
72.6
7.7
0.9

261.1
56.6
9.0
..

180.6
38.5
8.4
..

133.3
30.2
6.0
..

170.7
29.0
4.8
..

159.7
27.6
4.6
..

145.9
26.0
4.0
..

..
..
..
..

42.3
78.5

37.6
68.2

37.5
80.5

16.4
40.9

15.7
37.3

22.4
47.8

21.6
48.1

21.1
50.1

20.7
52.1

3.1
7447

3.0
6881

3.2
6206

2.5
5674

1.7
5069

1.7
4864

1.5
5036

1.3
5541

..
6089

0
6.7
0

FY04
582
79

0
6.6
0

FY05
463
65

0
6.2
0

FY06
557
55

0
5.7
0

FY07
578
50

0
5.0
0

FY08
764
61

0
4.1
3

FY09*
769
61

0
3.7
0

0
3.7
0

0
3.7
0

-
-

-
-

-
-

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Indicator

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m) a

Net disbursements (US$m) a

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators 
(%)
   TDO/XGSb
   TDO/GDP
   TDS/XGS
   Concessional/TDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
   IBRD DS/public DS
   Preferred creditor DS/public
   DS (%)c
   IBRD DS/XGS
   IBRD TDO (US$m) d
      Of which present value of
      guarantees (US$m)
   Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
   IDA TDO (US$m) d

IFC (US$m)
   Loans
   Equity and quasi-equity  /c
*as end of Mid-March
MIGA
   MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a.  Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital
b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
    Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e.  Includes equity and quasi-equity types of equity instruments.

A

o
x
1
n
n
g

e
e

B

8
2

P

a

f

C

l

P
d
e
s
o

r

c
e
o

j

t

s

7
1
1

I

D
R
B

I
/

A
D

*

o
T

t

a

l

D

i

u
b
s

r

d
e
s

(

A

c

i
t

e
v

)

1

,

1
0
6

.

0
3

o

f

w

h
c
h

i

s
a
h

n
e
e
b

r

d
a
p
e

i

1
8
2

.

5
2

o
T

t

a

l

D

i

u
b
s

r

d
e
s

(

C

l

d
e
s
o

)

8
1

,

8
9
2

.

2
1

o

f

w

h
c
h

i

s
a
h

n
e
e
b

r

d
a
p
e

i

4
1

,

5
9
8

.

2
2

o
T

t

a

l

D

i

u
b
s

r

d
e
s

(

A

c

i
t

+
e
v

C

l

d
e
s
o

)

9
1

,

9
9
8

.

3
4

o

f

w

h
c
h

i

s
a
h

n
e
e
b

r

d
a
p
e

i

5
1

,

6
7
1

.

7
4

o
T

t

a

l

U

u
b
s
d
n

i

r

d
e
s

(

A

c

i
t

e
v

)

2

,

7
1
8

.

7
9

o
T

t

a

l

U

u
b
s
d
n

i

r

d
e
s

(

C

l

d
e
s
o

)

0
0
0

.

o
T

t

a

l

U

u
b
s
d
n

i

r

d
e
s

(

A

c

i
t

+
e
v

C

l

d
e
s
o

)

2

,

7
1
8

.

7
9

A

c

i
t

e
v

P

r

c
e
o

j

t

s

P

r

c
e
o

j

t

I

D

P

r

c
e
o

j

t

N

a

m

e

O
D

n
s
e
e
v
p
o
c
e
e
v
b
e

l
j

m

t

i
t

I

m

s
a
s
n
e
e
g
o
e
P
p

l

m

t

i
t

n
o

r

r

a
c
s
F

i

l

Y

a
e

r

I

D
R
B

I

A
D

N
A
R
G

T

C

e
c
n
a

.
l

U

b
s
d
n

i

.

O

r

i

g

.

F

r

m

R

d
v
e

'

P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P

u
s
e
8
0
5
1
4
0
9
4
4
9
5
6
4
2
3
0
3
3
1
1
6
8
6
2
2
1
5
3
8
3
5
8
8
0
8
2
1
9
8
7
6
8
8
1
2
3
1
6
5
1
4
6
4
7
2
4
0
5
3
5
8
9
0
8
2
2
4
2
2
2
5
4
6
1
5
5
4
1
4
8
5
4
1
0
0
9
0
1
9
4
8
7
0
0
5
9
0
4
0
6
0
9
a
5
8
5
3
6
1
5
9
0
0
4
2
5
0
8
6
6
0
6
1
9
0
0
6
8
9
9
0
4
5
1
0
5
5
0
8
9
9
0
0
9
3
6
9
9
9
9
1
8
0
0
7
0
0
8
7
0
0
8
9
9
9
1
5
7
7
4
0
e
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
v

U
S
S
S
U
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
e
n
a
F
d
Z
n
c
K
S
s
c
n
a
u
Y
C
y
N
R
e
a
u
a
O
o
P
e
e
Y
c
e
h
h
G
a
A
e
n
T
s
s
a
o
a
V
S
b
v
n
s
p
a
R
F
s
a
s
R
e
a
d
n
z
h
D
g
u
s
a
e
s
E
O
e
d
d
v
e
v
g
n
m
D
a
c
e
n
o
a
o
o
e
g
Y
a
n
e
n
y
n
e
y
R
u
n
a
h
n
N
N
o
o
e
g
T
G
n
u
A
a
c
n
a
L
v
d
c
e
E
e
s
n
V
E
a
o
o
O
T
e
d
O
F
F
c
d
a
n
e
n
w
R
T
a
d
s
a
s
P
n
n
E
s
R
E
o
o
a
p
e
o
h
o
h
E
N
a
b
u
a
o
T
n
n
n
o
u
n
o
L
n
a
v
a
g
S
c
c
a
g
D
N
a
R
e
n
o
R
C
o
g
C
a
e
g
E
P
B
e
b
o
b
T
n
e
v
H
E
c
A
e
R
a
U
n
n
G
u
S
s
n
b
n
F
A
u
e
u
d
L
F
u
s
a
a
v
a
B
o
e
E
A
d
a
o
a
a
a
o
D
o
a
N
g
a
F
h
B
A
u
R
y
E
L
n
b
c
c
E
B
S
n
g
n
V
&
a
s
T
n
S
s
n
n
E
2
1
2
2
P
S
U
g
E
L
a
a
1
o
R
L
L
L
2
c
o
n
o
d
n
N
d
e
d
L
F
O
N
a
A
C
e
L
F
v
v
N
P
P
P
P
d
d
L
A
s
e
e
n
b
s
A
s
a
o
o
P
E
s
R
E
M
O
R
o
E
e
E
R
A
A
A
n
n
a
n
a
o
u
u
n
S
s
A
G
n
N
R
R
U
C
C
E
G
H
P
P
R
A
2
2
A
B
B
E
L
P
S
S
S
S
S
P
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A

P
B
U
U

i

r

r
-
r
I

v
e
n

r
f

U
S
S
U
S
U
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
U
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

7
5
7
6
9
7
7
7
6
8
7
6
7
9
4
7
9
6
8
9
6
6
8
9
5
7
7
7
9
6
4
5
9
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
9
0
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
9
0
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
9
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
3
0
7
0
2
0
0
1
2
1
3
3
4
3
1

1
1
5
2
0
6
1
4
1
5
2
9
4
0
2
9
9
3
5
9
0
7
0
5
2
7
6
5
1
4
6
0
1
7
8
9
2
1
2
3
3

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

8
4
5
2
1
4
1
4
5
0
9
7
4
1
8
6
1

.
.
.
.

(
(
(

)
)
)
r
t

r
r
r

l

P

M

t

r

l

l

P

v
e

M

M

A

r

i

D

t

M

r

i

i
t

9
9
6
1
0
0
0
0
6
7
2
8
2
1
3

.
.
.
.

i
t
.

l

H

i

w

-
-

.

.
i

-

2
1

.

6
0

M

i
i
f
.
f

i
i

l

P
S

r
r

s
c
e
e
c
o
n
v

j
i

M

M

r

E

5
1

.

0
7
5

r
i
t

C

r

i

r

0
9
9
0
7
4
8
4
0
5
6
3
5
0
0
9
2
6
0
2
1
0
7
7
2
9
0
4
0
1
8
0
0
7
5
7
7
8
8
0
2
2
3
8
5
9
8
7
9
0
9
8
6
5
1
8
3
1
2
5
1
4
1
3
3
5
5
3
9
3
4
1
1
1
1

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

I

.
l
i
i
t
t

r
t
r

i

-
r
t

5
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
5
0
2
0
3
0
6
8
5
2
2
4
4
6
5
0
7
2
6
2
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
1

9
6
0
7
6
8
7
2
8
0
7
2
2
3
2
4
0
2
4
3
0
1
2
1
1
7

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

f
i
i

i

P

j
l

M

M

M

i
i

m

l

A

t

M

M
M

I

-

-

6
6
1
2
8
9
4
1
0
1
3

.
.
.

W

.

.
.
r

M

u

r

l

i
t

n
o

I

p

e
v
o

-

M

I

I

5
6
0
5
0
0
9
9
8
0
4
3
1
0
0
0
1
7
0
4
7
0
0
8
2
2
7
2
2
3
5
3
4

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

i
l

W

t

M
G
N
P

m

M

M
M

i
t
i

l

P

i
l

t

l

t

r

i
l
t

R

-

l

i

r

I
r
f
r
r
f
t
t
.
I
l

(
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
/

)

D
A
A

i

r

I

.

0
5

.

9
0

r

-

I

r
f

i
t

t
l
l
l
f

i
l

H

M

M

i

.

r

3

.

9
9

H

-
r
l
l
f

r

0
8
0
5
5
5
3
1
3
1

7
6
8
2
9
9
9
5
1
1
7
8
9
0
8
6
2
3
1
2
0
3
1
8
2

.
.
.
.
.
.

7
6
2
2
2
0
9
5
7
1
1
4
9
0
8
6
1
2
1
2
8
8
7

.
.
.
.
.
.

r
r

i
i

i
i

M

t

I
r

C

l
r
i
t

.

M

M

W

0
5
9
1
2
4

5
2
5
3
1
0
4
1
2

.
.
.

M

-

I

-

-
-

O

r

l
l

R

t
l

4
3
4
4

.

5

1
6

.

O

r

i

a
n
g

i

l

A

m

n
u
o

t

i

n

S
U

$

M

i
l
l
i

s
n
o

D

i

u
b
s

r

e
s

m

n
e

t

s

a

/

D

f
f
i

e

r

e
c
n
e

B

e

t

w

n
e
e

E

c
e
p
x

t

d
n
a
d
e

A

c

t

a
u

l

e
p
u
S

r

n
o
s
v

i

i

R

a

i
t

g
n

A

r

n
e
g

i
t

a
n

s
a
L

t

R
S
P

A

s

O

f

D

a

t

9
0
0
2
3
2
4
0
e

/

/

A
S
A
C

x
e
n
n

B

8

-

O

e
p

r

a

i
t

s
n
o

o
P

f
t
r

o

i
l

o

I
(

D
R
B

I
/

A
D

d
n
a

G

r

n
a

t

s

)

a

.

I

n

t

u
b
s
d
d
e
d
n
e

i

r

e
s

m

n
e

t

s

t

a
d
o

t

e

m

i

s
u
n

a
u
c
a

t

l

u
b
s
d

i

r

e
s

m

n
e

t

s

t

a
d
o

t

e

s
a

p

r

c
e
o

j

t

d
e

a

t

p
p
a

r

a
s
a

i

.
l

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

B8 (IFC) for Argentina

Argentina
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 03/31/2009
(In USD Millions)

FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM

Partici 
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM

Partici 
pant

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

2004
2006/08
2000
1998
2000/06
05/08/1999
2006
2009
2009
0
1998
1992
2004
0/97
1996/99
2006
2005/08
2008
1998
2008
2005
1995
1997
2000
1995
2007
2001
2005

Aceitera general
Arcor
Asf
Autcl
Bacs
Banco galicia
Capsa
Cencosud arg
F.v. s.a.
Grupo galicia
Hospital privado
Huantraico
Jumbo argentina
Milkaut
Neuquen basin
Noble argentina
Pae - argentine
Pampa fund
Patagonia fund
Roch
S.a. san miguel
Sancor
T6i
Tower fund
Tower fund mgr
Trp project
Usal
Vicentin

31.25
103.85
0.73
5.02
13.1
81.63
50
50
15
0
0
0
0
5.33
0
12
222.23
0
0
20
19.21
8.52
0
0
0
29.82
3.34
16.67

0
0
0
0
6.25
0
0
0
0
1.25
0
27
34.94
1.23
31.4
0
0
20
0.1
17.36
0
0
0
0.85
0.05
0
0
0

Total Portfolio:

687.7

140.43

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
8.1
0
0
9.44
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
19.48
5
0
0
0
0
15

92.02

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12.98
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

7.5
197.6
0.75
0
0
14.28
20
90
0
0
0
0
0
1.44
0
19
478.75
0
0
0
7.5
0
0
0
0
8.09
0
33.48

12.98

878.39

31.25
103.85
0.73
5.02
13.1
79.13
50
50
0
0
0
0
0
5.33
0
12
222.23
0
0
7.25
19.21
8.52
0
0
0
29.82
3.34
16.67

657.45

0
0
0
0
6.25
0
0
0
0
1.25
0
0
34.94
0
0
0
0
4.27
0
10.36
0
0
0
0
0.05
0
0
0

57.12

15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
8.1
0
0
9.44
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
19.48
5
0
0
0
0
15

92.02

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
11
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

11

7.5
197.6
0.75
0
0
14.28
20
90
0
0
0
0
0
1.44
0
19
478.75
0
0
0
7.5
0
0
0
0
8.09
0
33.48

878.39

AA
A

nn
n

dd
d

ee
e

ss
s

PP
P

aa
a

tt
t

aa
a

gg
g

oo
o
DD ee sseeaaddoo  
D e seado 

nn
n

ii
i

aa
a

AA
A

nn
n

dd
d

ee
e

S A L T A
S A L T A
S A L T A
ss
s

PP
P

aa
a

mm
m

pp
p

aa
a

ss
s

J U J U Y
J U J U Y
J U J U Y

TUCUMÁN
TUCUMÁN
TUCUMÁN

SANTIAGO
SANTIAGO
SANTIAGO

DEL ESTERO
DEL ESTERO
DEL ESTERO

LALA
LA

RIOJA
RIOJA
RIOJA

CATAMARCA
CATAMARCA
CATAMARCA

FORMOSA
FORMOSA
FORMOSA

CHACO
CHACO
CHACO

S A N T A
S A N T A
S A N T A
F EF E
F E

CORRIENTES
CORRIENTES
CORRIENTES

M ISI O
M ISI O
M ISI O

N
N
N

E S
E S
E S

E N T R E
E N T R E
E N T R E
R Í O S
R Í O S
R Í O S

B U E N O S
B U E N O S
B U E N O S
A I R E S
A I R E S
A I R E S

C O R D O B A
C O R D O B A
C O R D O B A

SAN
SANSAN
JUAN
JUANJUAN

SAN
SANSAN
LUIS
LUISLUIS

M E N D O Z A
M E N D O Z A
M E N D O Z A

L A
L AL A
P A M P A
P A M P A
P A M P A

R I O N E G R O
R I O N E G R O
R I O N E G R O

NEUQUEN
NEUQUEN
NEUQUEN

T IERRA
T IERRA
T IERRA
DE L FUEGO
DE L FUEGO
DE L FUEGO

C H U B U T
C H U B U T
C H U B U T

S A N T A
S A N T A
S A N T A
C R U Z
C R U Z
C R U Z

CerroCerro
Cerro
Aconcagua
Aconcagua
Aconcagua
(6960 m)
(6960 m)
(6960 m)

Mar del Plata
Mar del Plata
Mar del Plata

Bahía Blanca
Bahía Blanca
Bahía Blanca

Rosario
Rosario
Rosario

Stanley
Stanley
Stanley

Santa Rosa
Santa Rosa
Santa Rosa

Neuquén
Neuquén
Neuquén

Viedma
Viedma
Viedma

Rawson
Rawson
Rawson

Comodoro Rivadavia
Comodoro Rivadavia
Comodoro Rivadavia

Ushuaia
Ushuaia
Ushuaia

Río Gallegos
Río Gallegos
Río Gallegos

Mendoza
Mendoza
Mendoza

San Luis
San Luis
San Luis

San Juan
San Juan
San Juan

Cordoba
Cordoba
Cordoba

Paraná
Paraná
Paraná

Santa Fe
Santa Fe
Santa Fe

La Rioja
La Rioja
La Rioja

Catamarca
Catamarca
Catamarca

San Miguel De Tucumán
San Miguel De Tucumán
San Miguel De Tucumán

Santiago Del Estero
Santiago Del Estero
Santiago Del Estero

Salta
SaltaSalta

San Salvador De Jujuy
San Salvador De Jujuy
San Salvador De Jujuy

Formosa
Formosa
Formosa

Resistencia
Resistencia
Resistencia

Corrientes
Corrientes
Corrientes

Posadas
Posadas
Posadas

BUENOS AIRES
BUENOS AIRES
BUENOS AIRES

Laguna
Laguna
Laguna
Mar Chiquita
Mar Chiquita
Mar Chiquita

Paraná
Paraná
Paraná

Colorado
Colorado
Colorado

á
á
á
n
n
n
a
a
a
a
a
a
P
P
P

r
r
r

Paraguay
Paraguay
Paraguay

Pilcomayo
Pilcomayo
Pilcomayo

SS
S

aa
a

ll
l

aa
a

dd
d
oo
o

NN
N

ee
e

ggrroo  
gro 

CC
C
hhiicc
hic
aa  
a 

CChhiiccoo  
Chico 

CC
C
hh
h
uu
u

bb
b

uu
u

tt
t

DD
D

ee
e

ss
s

aa
a

gg
g
uu
u
a
aa

dd
d

ee
e

rr
r

oo
o

UU rruu gg uu aa yy  
U ru g u a y 
To
Santa Rosa

SS
S

aa
a

ll
l

aa
a
dd
d

oo  
o 

La Plata
La Plata
La Plata

PA R A G U AY 

B R A Z I L

U R U G U AY 

C H I L E

C H I L E

BOLIVIA

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

PACIFIC
OCEAN

To
Coihaique

To
Puerto Montt

To
Los Ángeles

To
Talca

To
Valparaíso

To
La Serena

To
Copiapó

To
Calama

To Tarija

To
San Pedro

To
Cascavel

To
Santa Maria

To
Artigas

To
Tacuarembó

To
Montevideo

80°W

70°W

70°W

60°W

60°W

50°W

50°W

5 0 ° S

4 0 ° S

3 0 ° S

30°S

50°S

40°S

ARGENTINA

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.  
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

0

100

200

300 Miles

0

100

200

300

400

500 Kilometers

IBRD 33362R

AUGUST 2008

A R G E N T I N A

FA LK LAND IS LANDS ( IS LAS MA LV INAS )

A D IS PU TE CONCERN ING SOVERE IGN TY OVER THE
IS LANDS EX IS TS BE TWEEN ARGEN T INA WH ICH C LA IMS
TH IS SOVERE IGN TY AND THE U .K . WH ICH ADM IN IS TERS
THE IS LANDS .

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

PROVINCE CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

RAILROADS

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARGENTINA 
ADDENDUM TO THE PROPOSED COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

The purpose of this note is to update Executive Directors on most recent economic 
developments in Argentina, to be considered together with the Country Partnership 
Strategy (CPS) that is scheduled for Board consideration on June 9 ,2009' . 

While economic forecasts are subject to high uncertainty in Argentina, the economic 
slowdown has led to a downward revision in the real GDP growth forecast for 2009. 
The consensus forecast for Argentina's real GDP growth in 2009 has widened, now 
ranging from 1.7 to -5.8 percent (note that the dispersion in consensus forecasts is 
significantly wider for Argentina than for other countries in the world, as shown in the 
graph below). Nevertheless, most analysts have revised Argentina's growth projections 
downward, reflecting the economic contraction since the last quarter of 2008. The 
economic deceleration results from weak demand in Argentina's main export markets as 
well as adverse domestic demand and supply factors, including a severe drought. Ensuing 
imports decline has been deeper than projected at the beginning of the year. Given these 
developments, we have revised downwards Argentina's real GDP growth forecast for 
2009 (from 1 percent in March 2009 to a lower range, between 0 and -1.5 percent, as of 
May, 2009). Official economic indicators are more positive, and Government officials 
still expect positive real GDP growth in 2009. 

6 

Consensus Forecasts GDP Growth in 2009 

- USA 

-ARG 

- - LAC 

I 

The slowdown in economic activity results from supply and demand factors. 
According to private estimates2 the economy contracted at an average rate of 4 percent 
(yoy) for six consecutive months (November 2008 through April 2009). The economic 
deceleration reflects both demand and supply factors: 

' Cut-off date for the update is May 4 ,2009 
Source: Index of economic activity estimated by OJ Ferreres & Asociados. A similar pattern is observed in the IPI (index of 
industrial production estimated by FIEL). 

On the demand side, the slowdown reflects weakness in both external and 
domestic markets. On the external side, exports fell by 27.2 percent in the first 
quarter of 2009 (yoy). On the domestic front, with the exception of public 
consumption, all other domestic demand aggregates (private consumption, private 
investment) have contracted since the last quarter of 2008. With regards to net 
exports, while they fell in the last quarter of 2008, the sharp contraction in imports 
results in a positive contribution to growth in the first quarter of 2 0 0 9 . ~ 

On the supply side, the slowdown is generalized across all sectors. In March, 
overall economic activity fell by 2.4 percent (yoy)4. Industrial production dropped 
by 12 percent (yoy) while the fall in the automobile sector reached 55 percent5. 
There are also signs of deceleration in construction and other services (retail 
trade). Agricultural production is expected to drop by around 27 percent6, due to 
the most severe drought in the last fifty years, depressed domestic and especially 
external demand, and continued concerns in the farm sector about the level of 
export taxes and other regulations. 

The combined impact of the global and domestic economic slowdown on external 
balances is positive. The trade and current accounts are likely to deteriorate less than 
expected. Whereas the dollar value of exports dropped about 24 percent (yoy) in 
February, 2009, imports fell about 37 percent (yoy). These developments result in an 
improved trade and current account position compared to our earlier forecasts. 
Nevertheless, the current account surplus is expected to be lower, between 0 and 1.1 
percent of GDP, compared to the previous year (3.2 percent of GDP in 2008). 

In contrast, the fiscal accounts are likely to deteriorate. The lower levels of activity, 
the drought and the smaller demand for Argentinean exports will affect tax revenue 
collection and overall fiscal accounts. In March 2009, government revenues from export 
and import taxes fell sharply (by 13 percent and 16 percent, respectively) while income 
taxes, and in particular VAT revenues increased (3 percent and 9.5 percent respectively). 
Nevertheless, the Federal Government maintained a primary fiscal surplus during the first 
quarter of the year (of about 1.7 percent of GDP) thanks to the additional social security 
contributions following the nationalization of the private pension funds. As a result, the 
2009 overall fiscal balance is expected to close with a slight deficit of -0.4 percent of 
GDP. The revised fiscal projections also take into account recent developments in the 
exchange rate (see below) and in the fiscal position of provincial governments. In 
particular, we have accounted for the measure announced by President Cristina 
Fernandez on March 19, 2009 (about 30 percent of soybeans export tax revenues would 
be subject to revenue sharing with provincial governments). While this measure might 
result in a slight improvement in the fiscal position of provincial governments, the 

'According to official data (Indec), in the first quarter of 2009 exports quantities fell by 13.0 percent (yoy), whereas imports quantities 
contracted at 32.5 percent (yoy). 
Source: OJ Ferrers &Associados 
Source: F lEL 
6The harvest area for soy and other commodities has declined according to official data and private analysts. Available data from the 
Secretary of Agriculture points to a decline of about 26.8 percent (yoy) in the harvest area for wheat. 

provincial primary fiscal balance is expected to remain in deficit in 2009 (-0.2 percent of 
GDP). 

In spite of recent depreciation pressures, the Central Bank continues to maintain 

exchange rate stability. Following continued market uncertainty, and the announcement 
of early elections, pressure on the peso has been rising in recent months. Argentina's 
Central Bank, which still enjoys a comfortable reserve stock position, intervened in the 
foreign exchange market during March to maintain exchange rate stability. The exchange 
rate is currently a t AR$ 3.71/US$ (about 7 percent higher than as of the end of 2008). 
Futures contracts (for operations dated on May 4, 2009) suggest that the exchange rate 
might reach levels slightly above A R $ 4 N S $ by end 2009. 

Despite this higher volatility, financial markets are stabilizing. Financial market 

volatility increased during the month of March, on account of growing demand for hard 
currencies and reduced supply from exporters. But the domestic financial conditions 
improved in April, supported by external factors (improved global market sentiment 
following the G20 meetings and an increase in soybean prices) and domestic events 
(strong Central Bank intervention in the foreign exchange markets and increased forex 
sales by soybean exporters). Higher volatility led to a slight increase in short-term interest 
rates in March (by about 75bps), but since then interest rates have remained broadly 
stable, since commercial banks have accumulated strong liquidity positions. 

The combined result of these developments points to a moderate shift in the relative 
weight of economic risks identified in the CPS. While the CPS underscored balance of 

payment risks over fiscal risks, the main vulnerability now seems to lie on the fiscal 
front. With low economic growth and collapsing imports, the consolidated primary fiscal 
surplus will be lower than expected, at a time when public financing requirements are 
high and financial conditions are tight. To offset the fiscal risk, growth in primary 
expenditures (in the first quarter it reached 28 percent yoy) could be reversed during the 
second half of the year as the government attempts to preserve its primary surplus target. 
In this context, parliamentary elections (scheduled for June 28, 2009) contribute to 
increased uncertainty as the outcome of these elections might eventually lead to a change 
in policies. 

Our updated CPS baseline macro projections for 2009 are summarized below: 

Growth and inflation. In view of the deteriorating global and domestic economic 
situation, we have adjusted our previous baseline scenario, correcting the outlook for 
real GDP growth in 2009 from +1 percent to a lower range (between 0 percent and - 
1.5 percent). 

Fiscal accounts. The primary fiscal surplus of the central government is estimated to 
decline from 3.1 percent of GDP in 2008 to 2.1 percent (if the economy contracts by 
1 percent) or to 2.2 percent (in the case of 0 percent growth). 

Financing gap. Gross public sector7 financing needs are estimated at US$16.3 billion 
in 2008 and are projected at US$15.6 billion and US$13.0 billion in 2009 and 2010, 
respectively. The net financing gap of the Federal Government is projected at about 
US$3.9 billion in 2009 and US$0.6 billion in 2010, after taking into account the 
additional resources from the nationalized social security  contribution^.^ 

External accounts. Compared to 2008 (3.2 percent of GDP), the current account 
balance is expected to deteriorate, but will remain positive in 2009 and 2010. In 2008, 
this surplus is estimated at 3.2 percent of GDP (2.9 percent in 2007). In 2009, if the 
economy contracts by 1 percent, the current account surplus is projected at 1.1 
percent of GDP, whereas in the case of zero growth the current account would reach 

0.7 percent of GDP. 

Monetaly accounts. Money growth is expected to slow, reflecting weaker domestic 
demand. In 2009 the monetary base is expected to increase by 7-8 percent in nominal 
terms,9 after growing at 10.2 percent in 2008. 

The table below presents a summary of the medium-term macroeconomic framework, 
under a baseline operational assumption of real GDP growth of -1 percent in 2009. 

' Including the Federal and Provincial Governments. 
The figures of the financing gap correspond to the scenario with -1 percent growth. In the case of zero growth, the financing gap is 
projected to reach US$3.7 billion in 2009 and US$0.4 billion in 2010. This number does not take into account expected gross 
disbursements of some US$I -1 .S billion by IFIs in 2009. 
7 . 2 percent if the economy contracts at 1 percent, and 8.4 percent in the zero-percent growth scenario. 

Table 1. Argentina: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators 

2008 
(Annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated) 

2009 

2010 

2011 

(In percent of GDP) 

National income and prices 
GDP at constant prices 
GDP deflator 

External sector 
Trade balance (billions o f US$) 
Exports, f.0.b. (billions of US$) 
Imports, c.i.f. (billions o f US$) 
Export g row th ( in US$ terms) 
Import growth ( in US$ terms) 
Export volume 
Import volume 
Terms of trade 
Commodity prices 
Wheat (USDJton) 
Corn (USDJton) 
Soy (USDIton) 
Sunflower (USDIton) 
Copper (USDIlb) 
Oil (USDIbarrel) 

Consolidated pub l ic sector 
Nominal revenues (yoy) 
Nominal expenditures (yoy) 
Primary fiscal balance 
Federal gove;nment primary fiscal balance 
Overall balance 
Revenues 
Expenditures 
GDP - demand side 
Consumption 
Private 
Public 
Investment 
Private 
Public 

Saving-investment balance 
Gross domestic investment 
o f which: public sector 
Gross national saving 
Current account balance 
Trade balance 
Net foreign direct investment 
Non financial private sector capital account 

Gross international reserves (billions o f US$) 
In months o f imports o f goods and services 
Net international reserves (billions of US$) 

Money and Credit 
MO yoy growth 
M l yoy growth 
M 3 yoy growth 
M 3 velocity (ratio o f nominal GDP t o end-period stock o f M 3 ) 
Credit t o the private sector 
Nominal g row th of credit t o private sector 

International prices (average cpi o f advanced economies) 
Real GDP growth i n advanced economies 
Nominal GDP (billions o f pesos) 

