Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No. 72334-BI

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI
FOR THE PERIOD FY13-16

September 18, 2012

International Development Association
East Africa Country Cluster 1, AFCE1
Africa Region
International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The previous Country Assistance Strategy for Burundi (Report no. 44193-BI) was discussed by the
Board of Executive Directors on August 8, 2008.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange rate effective as of July 6, 2012)
Currency Unit = Burundi Franc
US$1 = 1,480.4 FBu
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 1 – December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AFAB
AfDB
ARV
API
CAS
CASA
CASCR
CASPR
CEM
CPR
CNDD-FDD
COMESA
CP
CPIA
CPPR
CSOs
CWS
DDR
DeMPA
DFID
DHS
DPs
DPG
DPO
DSA
DTIS
EAC
EC
ECCAS
ECGLC
EITI
EPA
ERSG
ESP
ESW
FDI
FMIS
FY
GAVI
GDP

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Association des Femmes Entrepreneurs du
Burundi
African Development Bank
Anti-retrovriral
Investment Promotion Agency
Country Assistance Strategy
Conflict Affected States in Africa
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report
Country Economic Memorandum
Contraceptive Prevalence Rate
National Council of the Defense of DemocracyForces for the Defense of Democracy
Common Market for Eastern and Southern
Africa
Completion Point
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Civil Society Organizations
Coffee Washing Stations
Demobilization, Disarmament, and Reintegration
Debt Management Performance Assessment
Department for International Development
Demographic and Health Survey
Displaced Persons
Development Policy Grant
Development Policy Operation
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
East Africa Community
European Commission
Economic Community of Central African States
Economic Community of the Great Lakes
Countries
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Economic Partnership Agreement
Economic Reform Support Grant
Education Sector Plan
Economic and Sector Work
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Management Information System
Fiscal Year
Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization
Gross Domestic Product

GPE
HIPC

Global Partnership on Education
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries

HIV/AIDS

Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Health Systems Strengthening
Implementation Completion Report
Information and Communication Technology
International Development Association
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Independent local power producers
Information Technology
Latin America and Caribbean
Low-Income Country
Monitoring and Evaluation
Monetary and Capital Markets
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative3
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
National Education Strategy
Non-Governmental Organizations
National Statistical System
National Strategy for Statistic Development
Office Burundais des Recettes
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Public Expenditure Review
Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
Public Finance Management
Project Implementation Unit
Public Private Partnerships
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Private Sector Development
Result-Based Financing
Rapid Results Initiative
Sexually transmitted diseases
Small and Medium Enterprises
Technical Assistance
Trust Funds
Total Fertility Rate
Gender-based Violence
United Kingdom
United Nations
Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS

HSS
ICR
ICT
IDA
IFAD
IFC
IMF
IPPs
IT
LAC
LIC
M&E
MCM
MDG
MDRI
MTEF
NES
NGOs
NSS
NSSD
OBR
PEFA
PER
PETS
PFM
PIU
PPPs
PRSP
PSD
RBF
RRI
STDs
SMEs
TA
TFs
TFR
GBV
UK
UN
UNAIDS

UNDP
USAID
VAT
WBI
WHO
WISE

United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International
Development
Value Added Tax
World Bank Institute
World Health Organization
Women’s Initiative for Self-Empowerment

Vice President:
Country Director/Director:
Country Manager:
Task Team Leader:

IDA
Makhtar Diop
Philippe Dongier
Mercy Tembon
Mercy Tembon/
Jean-Pascal Nguessa Nganou

IFC
Executive Vice President: Rashad R. Kaldany
Regional Director: Jean Philippe Prosper
Regional Manager: Aida Kimenia
Task Team Leader: Eric Mabushi
Country Economist:

During the preparation of this Country Assistance Strategy, invaluable contributions were received from
the following team members: Alain-Désiré Karibwami; Albert Zeufack; Alexandre Marc; Andrew Sunil
Rajkumar; Aurélien Serge Beko; Aurelien Kruse; Aurore Simbananiye; Armand Evariste Rwobahirya;
Armaud Niyindereye; Bella Diallo Lelouma; Chantal Ruvakubusa; Chiara Bronchi; Clarette Rwagatore;
Cyprien Mbonigaba; Déo-Marcel Niyungeko; Dodeline Niyongere; Dominic Haazen; Eric Mabushi;
Fabrice Lusinde Kabemba Wa Lusangi; Ferdinand Bararuzunza; Gertrude Ndabemeye; Goretti
Rukohoza; Hege Hope Wade; Humberto Lopez; Jacques Morisset; Javier Suarez; Jean Mvuyekure,
Jerome Chevallier; Judith Laufman; Julia Lendorfer; Katherine A. Bain; Lantoharifera Ramiliarisoa;
Leanne Michelle Bayer; Marco Larizza; Marie-Claire Nzeyimana; Mélance Ndikumasabo; Michael
Wilson; Nneoma Nwogu; Noa Nizane; Novence Gahungu; Oscar Nzaramyimana; Pacifique Kwizera;
Paula Agostini; Peggy Mischke; Pia Peeters; Rasit Pertev; Rigobert Mpendwanzi; Rolande Pryce;
Rosalie Kigeme; Rosemary Mukami Kariuki; Sajjad Ali Shah; Shobhana Sosale; Syed Hye; Tidiane
Diop; Vonjy Rakotondramanana; and William Rex.

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI (FY13-16)
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i

I.

1

INTRODUCTION

II.
A.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

2

Political Context

2

B.

Economic Context
Recent Economic Developments
Medium-term Economic Prospects
Debt Sustainability
Governance

C.

Social Context
Poverty
Health and Malnutrition
Education and Youth Unemployment
Drinking water
Gender

3
5
5
7
8
9
9
9
11
12
12

D.

Environmental Protection and Climate Change

13

E.

Regional Integration

14

III.

SUMMARY OF DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES 15

IV.

THE GOVERNMENT’S VISION AND DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY

17

V.

WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

18

A.

Lessons learned from previous CAS and Stakeholder Feedback
Lessons learned from the CAS Completion Report
Findings from the Client Survey

18
18
19

B.

Proposed World Bank Group Assistance Strategy
World Bank Group Assistance Strategy Overview
Existing Portfolio
Program of Lending and Non-lending Activities and Expected Results

20
20
22
22

C.

Implementing the FY13-16 Country Assistance Strategy
Financial Envelope
Managing Program Implementation
Partnerships and Donor Coordination
Monitoring and Evaluation

26
26
26
27
28

VI.

MANAGING RISKS

29

TABLES
Table 1: Selected Indicators of Economic Performance, 2001-11
Table 2: Medium-Term Economic Outlook – Main Economic Indicators, 2012-2015
Table 3: Proposed IDA and Other Financing (indicative) and AAA, FY13-16
Table 4: Proposed Analytical and Advisory Activities (indicative), FY13-16

4
7
22
23

BOXES
Box 1: Development Challenges Constraints and Opportunities

17

FIGURES
Figure 1: Fertility rate by age and location, 2010
Figure 2: Demographic Projections

10
10

ANNEXES
Annex 1: Burundi at a Glance
Annex 2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex 3: Social Indicators
Annex 4: Key Economic Indicators
Annex 5: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex 6: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Annex 7: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
Annex 8: Donors’ Total Disbursements for Year 2011
Annex 9: Development Partners Division of Labor
Annex 10: CAS Results Framework
Annex 11: Burundi CAS Completion Report

30
32
33
34
38
39
40
41
42
43
47

Map of Burundi: IBRD No. 33380

66

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
Burundi, a small, predominantly rural and landlocked country, is at a critical stage in its
development. More than 13 years of conflict have devastated much of the country’s physical, social and
human capital until the Arusha Peace Agreement was signed in 2000. Burundi is one of the poorest
countries in the world, with one of the highest population densities. Its annual population growth rate is
at an estimated 2.4-2.8 percent (2010), among the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa. Competition for scarce
land resources has been an important driver of continued fragility, among other causes.
ii.
Burundi faces many challenges. Around 90 percent of the population depends on agriculture for
livelihood, though cultivable land is extremely scarce. The human capital base is weak due to limited
access to basic social services. Many youths are under-employed because of lack of opportunities. There
is limited access to basic infrastructure. For example, less than 3% of the population has access to
electricity and access to potable water supply is also very low. Governance issues also create challenges
for consolidating legitimacy of the Government, and for accelerating private sector development, growth
and poverty reduction.
iii.
Since 2000, Burundi has made progress in consolidating peace and security, establishing a
relatively stable macroeconomic environment, rebuilding institutions, and improving sector outcomes, in
particular in basic health and education. Burundi now needs to intensify efforts to avoid a fragility trap.
To achieve greater stability and prosperity, Burundi needs to move on a path of faster and more inclusive
growth with a view to reducing poverty, including by taking advantage of the opportunity for greater
integration within the East Africa Community. Burundi also needs to reduce the risk of renewed
instability by building more trust between the state and its citizens and mitigating pressure on scarce land
resources. Strengthening governance is an essential enabler of continued progress at all levels.
iv.
The new Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the period FY13-16 provides the framework for
the World Bank Group’s support to Burundi over the next four years. It aims to support Burundi’s
development as an increasingly stable, competitive and diversified economy with enhanced opportunities
for productive employment and improved standards of living. The CAS focuses on two strategic
objectives: first, improving competitiveness by establishing an enabling environment for inclusive growth
and poverty reduction; and second, increasing resilience by consolidating social stability. Strengthening
governance is the foundation of the proposed CAS, as it is expected to contribute to both strategic
objectives.
v.
To improve competitiveness by establishing an enabling environment for inclusive growth and
poverty reduction, the Bank Group will focus on programs aimed at reducing infrastructure-related
bottlenecks and improving the business climate. To help increase resilience by consolidating social
stability, the Bank Group will support interventions that improve access and quality of social services and
increase safety nets to reduce livelihood volatility, all aimed at improving trust between state and citizens.
To strengthen governance, the Bank will aim to increase the efficiency of public expenditure by
strengthening public sector management, including public financial management and efforts to prevent
corruption and increasing the demand for good governance.
vi.
The CAS is aligned with priorities of the Government of Burundi’s development strategy,
outlined in its second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP II). The CAS draws on the lessons learned
from the implementation of the previous CAS and from stakeholder feedback and takes into account the
Bank Group’s ongoing commitments and its comparative advantage in Burundi. Further, drawing on the
findings of the 2011 World Development Report on Conflict, Security and Development, the CAS
supports building stronger social cohesion in communities and ensuring a more constructive relationship
and greater trust between the state and its citizens. The CAS is aligned with the Bank’s Africa Strategy.

i

vii.
The CAS will achieve the defined outcomes through a mix of lending and knowledge services.
The Bank’s current portfolio – 14 projects for US$423.7 million – is one of the best performing programs
in the Africa Region. The proposed new program will include a programmatic series of development
policy operations, investment lending, policy dialogue, economic and sector work and technical
assistance. To leverage IDA resources, the CAS will promote innovative financing, such as output-based
schemes or guarantee products which could attract private sector financing.
viii.
The CAS recognizes three main risks: the global economy may experience greater volatility; the
risk of renewed conflict and political violence; and insufficient resources to implement the strategy.
Burundi’s land-locked situation aggravates food and fuel price volatility; peace and stability could be
threatened by domestic fragility and instability in neighboring countries; and Burundi may experience a
gradual reduction in external aid.
ix.
The CAS will help Burundi mitigate these risks through continued and increased support for
public financial management and budget planning, improving the business climate, heightening
agricultural productivity to help boost Burundi’s export competitiveness, and support continuation of
existing safety net programs that include labor-intensive public works to provide employment
opportunities, community and social development interventions that promote more equitable local service
delivery, and ongoing efforts to demobilize ex-combatants and support their socioeconomic reintegration.

ii

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
Burundi is making the transition from a post-conflict to a developing economy. In the last
decade, the country has made progress in establishing a relatively stable macroeconomic environment,
rebuilding institutions, and consolidating peace and security.
2.
Nevertheless, many development challenges combine to restrict poverty alleviation. The last
household survey (carried out in 2006) estimated that around 67 percent of the population lives below the
poverty line. Some of the major challenges Burundi faces include: (i) the narrow range of existing
sources of economic growth; (ii) the high dependence on agriculture with, around 90 percent of the
population depending on agriculture for livelihood, and the vulnerability of the agrarian economy to
climatic and external shocks; (iii) the high population density and growth rates and increasing competition
for scarce resources, including land in particular, (iv) the return of refugees; (v) a weak human capital
base, due to limited access to and poor quality of basic social services; (vi) the limited access to basic
infrastructure such as potable water and electricity (e.g. less than 3% of the population has access to
electricity); (vii) the high youth unemployment; (viii) a small private sector; and (ix) weak governance
structures and institutions.
3.
The Government of Burundi is committed to tackling these critical challenges to economic
growth and social stability. The first Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP I, 2006-2011) introduced
first-generation structural reforms designed to consolidate peace and security and set the stage for
economic growth and public sector effectiveness. With a foundation of relative peace and macroeconomic stability established, the Government of Burundi’s recently launched second Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper (PRSP II, 2011-2015) builds on the achievements to date and supports far-reaching
economic, social and political reforms to improve Burundi’s competitiveness and stimulate inclusive and
sustainable economic growth while consolidating peace and social stability.
4.
The CAS (FY13-16) supports key elements of the PRSP II and seeks to help Burundi to: lay the
foundation for faster and more inclusive growth with a view to reducing poverty; and mitigate the risk
of renewed instability by building trust between the state and its citizens. The CAS is framed around two
strategic objectives: (i) improving competitiveness by establishing an enabling environment for inclusive
growth; and (ii) increase resilience by consolidating social stability. Improving governance is the
foundation and cross-cutting theme that is expected to contribute to both strategic objectives. There is a
significant degree of continuity between this CAS and the previous one. However, the new CAS is more
selective. The CAS incorporates lessons from the implementation of the previous CAS. It is further
informed by the findings of the Client Survey (2012), and consultations held with the Government, civil
society, the private sector, and other development partners.
5.
This CAS document presents the proposed approach and strategic directions for the Bank
Group’s assistance to Burundi over the four-year period ending in June 2016. It is organized into the
following five sections: Section II reviews the country context, including the political, security,
economic, poverty, and social dimensions; Section III summarizes Burundi’s development challenges and
opportunities; Section IV outlines the Government’s planned development program as set out in the PRSP
II; Section V summarizes the lessons learned from the implementation of the previous CAS (FY09-12)
and outlines the proposed strategy, along with key principles to guide the Bank’s engagement; and
Section VI assesses the key risks and describes mitigation strategies.

1

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A.

Political Context

6.
Since the 2000 Arusha Peace Agreement, Burundi has made progress towards restoring peace
and political stability. The Peace Agreement initiated the end of hostilities and helped launch democratic
election processes. From 2000-2005, Burundi made a transition to a multi-party system of Government. A
transitional Government shared power between the country’s two main ethnic groups and by the end of
2003, had signed peace agreements with all but one of the rebel movements. In February 2005, the
country approved, by referendum, a new constitution emphasizing power sharing and protection of
minority rights.
7.
The first democratic elections under the new constitution took place in August 2005 and paved
the way for progress on consolidating political stability. The CNDD-FDD, led by Pierre Nkurunziza,
won over 58 percent of the vote; and Parliament elected him President the following month. In December
2008, the Government signed a power-sharing agreement with FNL-PALEPUHETU the last remaining
rebel group which became a political party afterwards. Elections that took place from May through
September 2010 at all levels of Government constituted a milestone in the country's political transition
from conflict to stability but also underscored Burundi’s political fragility. According to international
observers, the elections conformed to international standards despite minor observed irregularities in local
council elections. However, 13 opposition parties, alleging fraud and vote rigging, formed a coalition to
boycott the Presidential election, leaving the incumbent President unopposed.
8.
Security has improved but remains fragile. Even though the security environment has improved
significantly in recent years, the situation remains fragile. The increasing cost of living triggered by recent
volatility of fuel and basic commodity prices placed severe strain on the poor. Scarcity of land and
competition for land resources is a continued underlying driver of conflict and fragility. At the end of
August 2012, a former rebel group announced it would take up arms against the Government. Narrow
space for political dialogue, weak governance, corruption, high levels of poverty, and high youth underemployment are potentially destabilizing factors, given the high expectations that political stability would
bring about rapid economic improvement in people’s lives.
9.
The Government has launched important initiatives to mitigate potential sources of conflict. In
provinces with high levels of insecurity, the authorities launched socio-economic recovery activities and
the mandatory collection of weapons held illegally by the population. To address land scarcity, the
Parliament adopted a revised land code that includes the establishment of a national land commission
tasked with managing the redistribution of land and resolution of disputes. The Parliament adopted the
National Governance and Anti-corruption Strategy that provides a framework for supporting reforms in
justice and public sectors, protection of human rights, election procedures and interaction with the media.
Following extensive national consultations, the Government is preparing a transitional justice strategy
that includes the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission and judicial mechanisms to
address impunity.
10.
Complementary reforms seek to consolidate social stability and stimulate private sector
development, to prepare the country for positive and sustainable change. The authorities demobilized
former combatants, and several programs are under way (financed by the Government and international
development partners) to help ex-combatants to integrate into communities. These programs also aim to
assist vulnerable groups and to reduce social tensions. In addition policies are in place to promote
increased access to education and health services with gender equity, to develop the private sector,
improve the business climate and stimulate progressive integration into the East African Community,
with the reduction of barriers to trade.

2

B.

Economic Context

11.
Burundi is one of the poorest countries in the world. In the last decade economic growth has
been slow, averaging about 3% in the first eight years but increasing to 3.9% in 2010 and 4.2% in 2011.
Burundi’s gross domestic product per capita of US$ 170 in 2011 is still far below the GDP per capita of
US$ 286 before the crises in 1993. Even though the country is endowed with natural resources and a large
network of rivers, economic growth is held back by several factors including poor diversification, lack of
adequate infrastructure, an unattractive business climate and unskilled or a low capacity labor force.
Furthermore, there is high pressure on land and natural resources due to high population growth rate
(2.6% in 2011 percent) and high population density (300 inhabitants per square kilometer).
12.
Burundi’s economy is undiversified, making the country vulnerable to external shocks and
dependent on foreign financing. The economy is dominated by agriculture which accounts for about 32
percent of GDP and 90 percent of employment. However, traditional farming methods coupled with the
adverse effects of soil erosion have caused a decline in agricultural production capacity over the years and
has in turn had enormous socio-economic consequences on the poor whose livelihood depends on
agriculture. Coffee and tea to a small extent are the main export crops, accounting for more than 60
percent of export revenues and the source of income for about 800,000 households (about 3 million
Burundians). In 2011, good weather and the liberalization and other reforms led to the production of
30,000 tons of coffee compared to 23,000 tons in 2010. Tea is also an important export crop, though to a
much lesser extent than coffee. A similar positive trend was registered in the production of tea, from
8,016 tons in 2010 to 9,000 tons in 2011. However, due to climate fluctuations and other cyclical factors,
production might be low in 2012.
13.
The services sector, within which the public sector is predominant, accounts for 43 percent of
GDP. The industrial sector is narrow (17 percent of GDP) but growing. Growth in the industrial sector
increased from 3.7% in 3007 to 5% in 2010 mainly from construction and mining. The economy is
characterized by a high dependence on external aid and low domestic revenue leading to relatively low
Government expenditures. Furthermore as a small, landlocked country Burundi faces other significant
challenges in accessing global markets. High trade costs, uninviting business climate (though improving
in recent years), poor infrastructure and underdeveloped services sectors limit Burundi’s ability to attract
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).
14.
The private sector in Burundi is small and underdeveloped. The private sector is embryonic
and it includes a relatively large number of small and medium size enterprises. Most of them operate in
the informal sector and are concentrated mostly in Bujumbura and two or three other provincial towns.
The private investment’s share of GDP increased significantly from 2.2 percent in 2000 to 13 percent in
2010, although it is still relatively small. Lack of infrastructure, notably lack of electricity and an
inadequate road network within and linking the country to neighboring countries constitute major
impediments to private sector development. Corruption, poor access to credit, long bureaucratic
procedures and political instability are some of the factors that have stymied the growth of the private
sector and hampered Burundi’s economic competitiveness. Furthermore, the financial sector is small and
not well developed; and access to finance is a major obstacle for companies including SMEs in the formal
and informal sectors. As a result of these characteristics Burundi is ranked 140th out of 142 in the global
competitiveness report and 169 out of 183 in the 2012 Doing Business report.
15.
The private sector’s contribution to growth is increasing but remains limited. Foreign direct
investment (FDI) remained low (less than one percent of GDP) with a moderate improvement from
US$0.8 million in 2010 to US$3.4 million in 2011. Domestic private investment increased from 7.6
percent of GDP in 2005-08, to 10.1 percent of GDP in 2010-11, reflecting renewed activity by the private
sector mostly in tourism and agriculture. Increased macroeconomic stability, HIPC and MDRI relief (see
below) as well as the disbursement of the Extended Credit Facility in 2009, boosted gross international
reserves to a high of US$332 million in 2010, which is equivalent to about 4.8 months of imports on

3

average. Foreign reserves declined to US$296 million in 2011 (3.8 months of imports) as development
assistance fell.
16.
Burundi’s deposits of mineral resources are a potential source of growth. Burundi possesses 56 percent of known world reserves of nickel as well as other minerals such as gold, cobalt, tungsten, and
ore. Currently, the mines are exploited informally and about 50,000 workers are employed in this sector.
Even though mining activities are undertaken in a small scale the sector does contribute to the country’s
GDP. With the improvement in internal security and transport links, there is investor interest in the
mining of nickel. The Government is working on improving the legal and regulatory framework of the
sector and has started with the revision of the mining code, which is pending approval by the Cabinet.
Moreover, the authorities are considering undertaking the initial steps of accession to EITI to promote
transparent reporting of mining revenues. The development of the mining sector will also depend on
infrastructure, including energy and transport. Exploiting regional links (especially toward the border with
Tanzania, given the location of these mineral reserves) offers positive prospects to develop mineral assets
in Burundi. Investment in electricity, roads and urban infrastructure, together with regional port and rail
links, will lay the foundations for growth, with trade facilitated by EAC agreements. 1
Table 1: Burundi – Selected Indicators of Economic Performance, 2001-11
Output and Prices
GDP (current prices, US$ billions)
Real GDP growth (%)
Inflation (average CPI, %)
Nominal exchange rate (US$)
Terms of trade (% change)
Savings and Investment
Gross investment (% of GDP)
Gross national savings (% of GDP)
Balance of Payments
Overall balance of payments (% of GDP)
Current account balance
(Incl. official transfers, % of GDP)
Gross international reserves
(months of imports)
Export growth, goods only (f.o.b; US$; % change)
Export growth, goods and service (f.o.b; US$; % change)
Public Sector Finances
Overall fiscal balance (after grants, excl. HIPC, % of
GDP)
Debt
Debt service to exports ratio (%)
External debt stock (% of GDP)
Source: Burundi authorities; World Bank; IMF.
1

2001-05

2006-11

0.9
3.0
7.8
1005.2
5.7

1.7
4.5
10.4
1168.2
-2.4

7.3
3.5

17.7
6.4

-1.2

2.0

-4.2

-10.7

2.9
5.3
13.7

4.2
11.6
15.5

-4.3

-3.7

77.6
151.7

5.2
65.6

The Kabanga project in Tanzania, referred to as the world's largest undeveloped nickel sulphide deposit, is part of a
nickel belt, which crosses Burundi. Moreover, Burundi is also known to be endowed with other mineral resources
such as uranium, tin, cobalt, copper, platinum-group metals, columbium (niobium), tantalum, gold, tungsten,
chromium and vanadium. Burundi had significant deposits of feldspar, kaolin, nickel, phosphate, platinum-group
metals, quartzite, rare-earth metals, vanadium, and limestone for cement. Although gold production has waned in
recent years, there are gold deposits at Mabayi, Muyinga, Cankuzo, and Tora-Ruzibazi, where artisanal mining took
place. The nickel’s potential was estimated at 45,000 metric tons per year in the Musongati region alone.

4

Recent Economic Developments
17.
Real economic growth rates in the last three years, averaged 4 percent which is lower than the
projected 7 percent owing to a series of exogenous shocks. Burundi’s economy grew by 4.5 percent in
2008 due to improved agriculture performance, an expansion of small manufacturing and increased donor
financing. However as a result of the impact of the global economic and financial crisis and continued
energy shortages, private transfers and foreign direct investment were lower than expected and real
economic growth slowed to 3.5 percent in 2009. After that, the economy rebounded modestly to 3.9
percent in 2010 and 4.2 percent in 2011. Economic growth has been volatile partly due to its dependence
on the widely fluctuating agricultural sector and partly due to lower than expected private transfers and
weak investment.
18.
Despite slippages in 2009, the authorities generally pursued sound macroeconomic and
prudent fiscal policies during 2010–11 that managed to contain the fiscal deficit. Tight expenditure
management, improved domestic revenue mobilization and foreign aid inflows helped to stabilize the
fiscal deficit (on a cash basis before HIPC grants) to an average of 3.8 percent of GDP in 2010-11, from 5
percent of GDP in 2009. 2 This deficit was financed with limited recourse to domestic borrowing.
Domestic revenue stabilized in 2011 at 15.4 percent of GDP (up from 14.6 percent in 2010 and 13.6
percent in 2009), reflecting improved collection of income and other taxes. following the implementation
of the tax revenue mobilization program and the establishment of the Burundi Revenue Authority (OBR).
Despite a slight reduction in total expenditure (from 41.0 percent of GDP in 2010 to 40.0 percent in 2011)
and improved revenue collection, overall fiscal out-turn in 2012 (cash basis after grants, excluding HIPC
grants) is projected to have deteriorated slightly, to 4.0 percent of GDP from 3.6 percent in 2010.3
19.
A narrow export base, and the reliance on oil and capital-goods imports, accounted for
Burundi’s substantial current account deficits. In 2009, the current account deficit (including official
transfers) reached 11.5 percent of GDP mainly due to declining donor assistance (over 60 percent of net
current transfers). The external current account deficit declined to 9.4 percent of GDP in 2010, because of
higher exports and official transfers but increased to 12.3 percent of GDP in 2011 due to increased
imports of petroleum products and official current transfers.
20.
The private sector’s contribution to growth is increasing but remains limited. Foreign direct
investment (FDI) remained low (less than one percent of GDP) with a moderate improvement from
US$0.8 million in 2010 to US$3.4 million in 2011. Domestic private investment increased from 7.6
percent of GDP in 2005-08, to 10.1 percent of GDP in 2010-11, reflecting renewed activity by the private
sector mostly in tourism and agriculture. Increased macroeconomic stability, HIPC and MDRI relief (see
below) as well as the disbursement of the Extended Credit Facility in 2009, boosted gross international
reserves to a high of US$332 million in 2010, which is equivalent to about 4.8 months of imports on
average. Foreign reserves declined to US$296 million in 2011 (3.8 months of imports) as development
assistance fell.
Medium-term Economic Prospects
21.
The medium-term economic outlook is challenging but remains positive. Real GDP growth
forecast for 2012 has been revised downward to 4.2 percent from 4.8 percent previously projected in
2011, reflecting the anticipated impact of the unfolding sovereign debt and banking crisis in Europe. The
macroeconomic framework for 2012-2014 projects that the recovery will continue, however at a slower
2

The authorities have shown restraint in adjusting their fiscal program to changing circumstances. Given the volatile
nature of foreign aid to Burundi, the 2008 and 2009 budget laws put more emphasis on the prioritization of public
expenditures and make the provision of non-priority expenditures contingent upon assured disbursement of external
budget support.
3
This reflects a reduction in donor support.

5

pace than originally expected (GDP growth is expected to increase gradually, reaching an average of 5.3
percent in 2014-15). The assumptions behind this scenario are: (i) inflation declining to 10 percent in
2013 and beyond, with price stabilization opening up a path to growth; (ii) stable revenue with declining
outlays for defense and security; (iii) exports improving due to increased agricultural productivity (based
on small-scale irrigation and feeder roads rehabilitation) and growth in agri-business, mining and
construction, with imports falling from 29.5 percent of GDP (2011) to 24.0 percent in 2013-2014; and (iv)
gradual softening of the energy constraint, with new investments in hydroelectric generation. A renewed
impetus in the services sector, including banking, telecommunications and tourism, within EAC, should
have an added positive effect on growth.
22.
The modest growth path (5 percent average) projected in the baseline scenario is insufficient to
reduce poverty levels significantly. Growth has the potential to be significantly higher, depending on
exogenous factors and on the Government’s commitment to reforms. Demographic growth rates of 3
percent limit the per capita growth rate to only 2 percent. Moreover, much of the projected growth is
linked to official foreign transfers, which may have reached a plateau. FDI remains modest and linked
mainly to EAC projects. As the experiences of other post-conflict countries, such as Rwanda and Sierra
Leone, have demonstrated, Burundi could achieve higher growth if exogenous factors are favorable (e.g.
contained Eurozone debt crisis and reduced international food and fuel prices) and if the Government’s
commitment to accelerate the execution of its overall reform program remains strong. The 2010 Country
Economic Memorandum (CEM) for Burundi argues that, assuming continued social and political
stability, and prudent macroeconomic and public sector policies and structural reforms, the emergence of an
enabling business environment could help boost economic growth to about 8 percent per annum. Such
sustained growth would increase non-farm employment significantly, creating an estimated one million
jobs over the next two decades. Driven by improved access to infrastructure, lower costs, and private
sector growth, jobs would emerge mainly in urban areas, with industry (including mining) projected to
account for almost 10 percent of the work force and the services sector projected to account for 20 percent
of the work force. The key features of the infrastructure investment plan would include:
•
Access to reliable power supply 24 hours a day by establishing a national transmission
and distribution grid by 2015, with all 15 of the provincial capitals linked and 25 percent of
households connected by 2020, and 40 percent connected by 2030.
•
Improved access to local and international markets through upgrading and expansion of
the country’s road network over the next decade, with the expansion and modernization of the
international airport, extension of the Tanzanian rail network into Burundi, and with port
improvements.
•
Improving access to the international communications network as well as a national
communications grid providing communities and business with low-cost voice and data
communications. A high priority is the immediate development of a national communications
grid of fiber-optic cable and digital microwave linked to the regional network (a task well
underway).

6

Table 2: Medium-Term Economic Outlook - Main Economic Indicators, 2012-2015
Actual
2010
(annual percent change)
Real GDP growth
Consumer prices (period
average)
Exports, f.o.b (change in US$
value)
Imports, f.o.b (change in US$
value)
(percent of GDP)
Current account deficit (incl.
grants)
Revenue (excl. grants)
Total expenditure and net
lending
Overall balance (excl.
grants)a
Overall balance (incl. grants)

Prel.
Projections
2011
2012

Projections
2013
2014

2015

Ave
201215

3.8
6.4

4.2
9.7

4.2
19.6

4.5
6.4

5.1
7.4

5.5
6.3

4.8
9.9

48.0

22.5

3.1

0.2

-1.0

9.3

2.9

105.3

3.7

-2.9

3.5

1.2

3.7

1.4

-9.4

-12.3

-11.6

-11.0

-10.8

-11.1

-11.0

14.6
41.0

15.4
40.0

15.1
33.6

15.5
34.9

15.6
34.8

15.6
32.5

15.6
34.1

-26.4

-24.6

-18.5

-19.4

-19.2

-16.9

-18.5

-3.6

-4.0

-2.7

-4.6

-4.9

-3.9

-4.5

4.2

3.9

4.0

ab

Gross international reserves c
4.9
4.4
4.0
3.8
Source: IMF. Note: a cash basis, b excluding HIPC, c in months of imports.

23.
Food production and services are key sectors for a Burundi’s development and growth
strategy, particularly as they create jobs. The linkage analysis conducted confirms that agriculture,
livestock and food and beverage processing, marketed services (including real estate services and IT
activities), trade services, and financial services, are key sectors with significant linkages to the rest of the
economy. Other sectors with strong backward linkages include tourism, wood-based manufacturing,
mining, utilities (electricity and gas), water treatment and distribution, textiles, forestry/sylviculture, and
housekeeping services.
24.
A combination of factors pose significant risks going forward, including spillover from
Eurozone debt crisis and continued upward trend in international food and fuel prices, with negative
consequences for the poor. Increased food and fuel prices will impact economic growth as well as
domestic inflation. Aid inflows might also be lower than projected, leading to a larger fiscal gap. If the
Government responds to crises with fiscal stimulus (as it did most recently), while facing lower external
financing, it could be forced to make difficult adjustments (such as cutting allocations for key social
programs including school feeding and free health care for vulnerable populations) to keep inflation in
check. Second, the ongoing European debt crisis could have ripple effects on Burundi since Europe is the
destination for 60 percent of Burundi’s exports. Moreover, lower than projected foreign direct investment
would exacerbate pressure on the balance of payments and negatively affect prospects for privatization of
the tourism industry and coffee sector, further reducing growth prospects. Lastly, land pressures
aggravated by the return of refugees and displaced people could affect agriculture productivity and
growth. These risks, taken together, could place Burundi in a very difficult position.
Debt Sustainability
25.
Burundi’s external debt situation has improved since the country reached the Highly Indebted
Poor Countries (HIPC) Completion Point. In January 2009, Burundi reached the HIPC Initiative
Completion Point and became eligible for US$833 million (net present value) in debt relief, including

7

US$425 million from IDA and US$38 million from the IMF. This reduced the country’s public and
publicly-guaranteed debt by more than 90 percent in net present value terms, and reduced scheduled debt
service by some US$30-40 million per year for the next 30 years. The most recent joint World Bank-IMF
Low Income Country (LIC) Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) (December 2011) concluded that due to
the country’s narrow export base and low capacity of Government institutions, the risk of external debt
distress remains high. Moreover, according to the DSA, strong growth is crucial to prevent any
deterioration of debt indicators even though Burundi is in a position to service its public and publicly
guaranteed debt. Burundi should maintain prudent borrowing policies and accelerate the structural
reforms required for private sector-led growth, particularly in infrastructure and export diversification, to
mitigate risks to debt sustainability.
Governance
26.
Weak governance is a major obstacle to growth and private sector development, discouraging
investors and increasing the cost of doing business. According to the 2011 World Governance Indicators
Burundi ranks in the lowest 10th percentile on Government effectiveness, the rule of law, regulatory
quality and control of corruption. However, the country performs relatively better on voice and
accountability, in itself a major achievement in a post-conflict and fragile environment.
27.
Governance challenges include high levels of corruption, weak public financial management
and poor performance of public administration. Weaknesses in the civil service include: (i) low levels
of remuneration that are inadequate for attracting and retaining high-skilled staff; (ii) perceived
clientelism in appointments, promotions and remuneration levels; and (iii) the lack of a system of
incentives for performance. Inefficiencies in the justice system include: (i) lack of transparency in judicial
processes; (ii) weak capacity to draft laws; (iii) lack of participation of stakeholders; as well as (iv)
perceptions of endemic corruption practices. These problems are compounded by the small number of
trained judges and lawyers, and the low salaries levels Strengthening the justice system and the integrity
of the courts is important for encouraging investment but also for protecting the poor.
28.
The Government has created many institutions and systems for transparency and
accountability and improving the effectiveness of these institutions is the next step. To tackle the
governance challenges, the Government has recently put in place a number of corrective measures,
notably the creation of the Anticorruption Brigade, the Audit Court, and the Office of the Inspector
General, charging them with the responsibility to fight corruption. Moreover, the country is also pursuing
economic reforms with the support of partners, to improve governance and transparency. Recent
Government achievements in this area include: (i) the effective operation of the Burundi Revenue
Authority (Office Burundais des Recettes); (ii) the introduction of VAT; (iii) the revision of the customs
code; (iv) a decree on the rules and regulations of the management of the budget and control, a key
element of the implementation of the budget framework law (Loi Organique); and (v) the creation of a
single treasury account and the strengthening of controls and audits. The creation of the Investment
Promotion Agency (API) in 2010 was an important development in creating an enabling business
environment (see above). In 2011, the Government adopted the National Strategy for Good Governance
and Anti-corruption and a related action plan, which provides a solid foundation to move the governance
agenda further. More recently in 2012, the Government approved the ‘National Program of Public
Administration Reform.
29.
The Government has initiated significant reforms in public financial management. The
Government is committed to a comprehensive reform of PFM that seeks to (i) improve budget
formulation by strengthening the linkage between policies and budgets; and (ii) improve budget execution
by strengthening cash management and overhauling treasury operations. The Government is also
committed to strengthening administrative and economic governance particularly at the decentralized
levels so as to improve the quality of service delivery, reduce corruption and resolve land disputes.

8

Improving governance is essential to mitigate factors of instability and to enable growth for poverty
reduction.
C.

Social Context

30.
Despite recent progress in social sectors, Burundi is unlikely to reach the 2015 Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) on poverty, health and education. The long period of political and social
crisis negatively affected the country’s baseline and performance towards achieving the set development
targets.
Poverty
31.
Burundi is one of the poorest countries in the world with about 2/3 of its population living in
poverty. 4 Poverty is widespread, but higher in rural areas where the poverty rate is twice that of urban
areas. Up to 60 percent of the population suffers from food insecurity, particularly in the season between
crops. 5 Poverty varies widely across regions, from a low of 29.7 percent in Bujumbura to a high 82
percent in the province of Kirundo. It also varies significantly across the urban-rural divide, with urban
households typically better educated and less likely to be poor or under-employed.
32.
Poverty is linked to many factors and is predominant among certain vulnerable groups. Factors
contributing to poverty include: low agricultural productivity; underemployment with few income
opportunities outside agriculture (and food production is typically limited to family consumption);
shrinking and inequitable access to land (owned 70 percent by men); lack of infrastructure – electricity,
lack of clean water and adequate rural roads; weak local governance; and rapidly depleting forestry and
fisheries resources. Groups especially vulnerable to poverty include those displaced by strife, minority
groups such as Batwa, and households headed by single women who are often forced into food “coping”
strategies (reducing portions or skipping meals), which impact negatively on child nutrition and
schooling.
33.
While there is no recent estimate of the poverty level, there have been improvements in some
social sector outcomes. 6 Burundi still ranks at the bottom of UNDP’s Human Development Index (185th
out of 187 countries in 2011) but education and health outcomes improved significantly over the past few
years. Life expectancy rose from 43 years in 2000 to 50.4 years in 2011. A poverty assessment and the
production of regular statistical information would help build the Government’s knowledge base and
facilitate the design of effective pro-poor policies and programs and the adjustment of existing programs
to address vulnerability and maximize the impact on poverty.
Health and Malnutrition
34.
The Demographic and Health Survey of 2010 shows that the population’s health status is
improving; however the results are insufficient to meet MDG targets. Thanks to better immunization
coverage (83-90 percent) and free health services for under-five children and pregnant women, maternal
mortality (499 per 100,000 live births in 2010) and under-five mortality (96 per 1,000 live births in 2010
from 167 per 1,000 in 2005) have declined significantly. The incidence of malaria rose from 26 percent in
2005 to 34 percent in 2010, but the distribution of insecticide-treated mosquito nets (now used by
44 percent of households) is expected to have positive effects going forward. Limiting the spread of
HIV/AIDS continues to be a priority of the Government (the prevalence rate in the general population
4

According to data from the official World Development Indicator, the percentage of the population living below
the national poverty line in 1990 was 36.4 percent. This figure had roughly doubled by 1998 to 68.0 percent and
reached 67 percent in 2006 (based on the latest household survey available).
5
In rural Burundi, food insecurity affects about 30 percent of the population in harvest periods, and up to 60 percent
during lean periods.
6
The next household survey will be available in end-2013 and provide updated poverty figures.

9

was 3.3 percent in 2009). From 2005 to 2010, the rate of deliveries assisted by qualified staff increased
from 34 percent to 60 percent. Yet, with the slow increase in contraceptive use (11.4 percent in 2008, 14
percent in 2009, and 18 percent in 2010), reaching universal access to reproductive health by 2015 is
highly unlikely. Further improvements are constrained by the lack of essential medicines, scarcity of
qualified staff and limited financing. However, with donor support including that of the World Bank,
access to basic health services has increased significantly. Further improvements in assuring greater
equity of access and quality of care would require: (i) improving the functionality of existing
infrastructure to provide adequate health care to the whole population; (ii) strengthening performancebased financing and free care policies by ensuring the financial sustainability of the system; and (iii)
providing better health insurance to the rural and poor population through community mutual associations
for health and the promotion of health insurance.
35.
Very high rates of population growth are expected to put a major strain on the delivery of
social service and access to basic infrastructure in the coming years. The current population of Burundi
is estimated at 8.3 million, having almost quadrupled from 2.5 million in 1950. The population is very
young, with a high proportion of girls and women in their peak child-bearing years. Figure 1 shows the
fertility rate for rural and urban women according to age group. The fertility rate is significantly lower in
urban areas. An increasingly significant fraction of the population is now migrating toward urban centers.
This trend will add pressures on social and physical infrastructures in cities. Current projections are for
the population to increase at a rate of 3.4 percent a year, as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 1: Burundi – Fertility rate by age and location, 2010

Fertility Rate per 1000 women

Fertility rate by age and location
350
300
250
200

Urban

150

Rural

100

Total

50
0
15-19

20-24

25-29
30-34
35-39
Women's Age Group

40-44

Source: 2010 Burundi DHS Survey

Figure 2: Burundi Demographic Projections

10

45-49

36.
Malnutrition and anemia are endemic and likely to have a negative inter-generational impact
on human development. Malnutrition in infants and young children can lead to delayed cognitive
development and malnutrition at any age makes people more susceptible to other diseases. The product of
poverty, compounded by prolonged conflict, spatial displacement and periodic food crises, malnutrition
needs priority attention with safety nets to improve nutrition pre-school and in-school. To begin to reverse
the negative impact on physical and mental development and the knock-on effects for the economy,
sustained financial allocations to the local Government level are crucial. According to the WHO
definition, almost 58 percent of children in Burundi suffer from chronic malnutrition, half of whom (27
percent) are afflicted by severe malnutrition (2010). Stunting increases progressively with age, reaching
60-65 percent of all children between the ages of 18 and 59 months. The Northern and Center-East
regions are the most affected, 62 percent each. In addition, 45 percent of children between the ages of 6
and 59 months are anemic: 23 percent with light anemia, 21 percent moderate and 1 percent severe. The
consequences of anemia for children and mothers are far-reaching.
Education and Youth Unemployment
37.
The free primary education policy has resulted in a significant increase in enrollment and
greater gender parity, but the quality of learning services is poor. Primary gross enrollment rates
improved significantly from 80 percent in 2003-04 to 156.3 percent in 2010, although significant
shortcomings remain in terms of achievement and quality. The ratio of girls-to-boys at primary level is
almost 100 percent. The completion rate is only 56 percent making it unlikely that Burundi will reach the
second MDG target (primary completion rate of 100 percent). The rapid growth in enrolment has stressed
the delivery system. Large class sizes combined with poor teaching skills and limited resources have
undermined the quality of instruction. Enrollment levels in secondary and tertiary education are much
lower (24.8 percent and 3.2 percent, respectively). Consequently, only 40.5 percent of the population is
literate, with significant gender disparities 7. The Government is committed to improving access and
quality further. In 2010, the Government announced the introduction of “basic education” which extends
the duration of compulsory primary schooling from 6 to 9 years. The Government is also updating the
2009-2016 Sector Development Plan for Education and Training, with the support of donors to address
enduring bottlenecks such as lack of qualified teachers, teaching materials and adequate infrastructure.
38.
Under-employed youth present a special challenge. Rural exodus is turning youth
unemployment or under-employment into a worrying phenomenon in urban areas. In 2008, the youth
unemployment rate in Bujumbura was estimated at 14.4 percent, in Gitega at 9 percent and in Karusi at
6.5 percent according to a “1-2-3” survey, undertaken in three phases, in several African countries. The
unemployment phenomenon in Burundi has not been studied in detail. Nevertheless some of the causes of
high youth unemployment as discussed in the PRSP II include among others lack of a national
employment policy, poor knowledge of the labor market, mismatch between training and employment,
lack of access to credit, and absence of relevant vocational training programs.
39.
Measures are already being undertaken to address the youth unemployment problem. For
example, the Government has developed work programs for demobilized soldiers and with financing from
development partners such as the World Bank and the United Nations, many non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) are serving as implementation partners for re-integration programs that are job
related for ex-combatants and returnees. Furthermore the “Agence burundaise pour l’emploi des jeunes”
(ABEJ Burundi Youth Employment Agency), has been created to link up employers with unemployed
youth through internship programs to build their capacity. The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) is currently working with the Government to develop a youth employment strategy. Increasing
youth employment will not only increase their income and reduce poverty but it will also help to
consolidate peace, security and economic growth in the country.
7

35 and 47 percent for women and men respectively

11

Drinking water
40.
Access to safe drinking water is slowly improving, contributing to better health outcomes.
Access to safe drinking water in urban areas increased marginally from 80 percent of households in 2005
to 85 percent in 2010. Most of the water is collected from Lake Tanganyika, which is increasingly
polluted and could require costly treatment, impacting on water tariffs. In rural areas, access to safe
drinking water still lags though there have been improvements – access rose from 63 percent of the
population in 2005 to 74 percent in 2010, 8 with almost all water points in working conditions. However,
women and children still spend an average of 2 hours a day on water fetching, impacting negatively on
school attendance and performance.
Gender
41.
Progress has been made in achieving gender parity in education but challenges remain.
Having achieved gender parity in primary education, Burundi is likely to reach the MDG-3 on gender
equality. However, (i) inequality persists in some regions and girls’ dropout rate is higher than that for
boys; and (ii) gender disparities in the primary completion rate (PVCR) remain, with 55 percent of girls
completing versus 57.4 percent of boys in 2010, though the gap is narrowing. A positive economic
outcome is that the literacy rate for women and men ages 15-24 is equal (within the margin of error).
However, in secondary education, girls’ enrollment is only 70 percent of boys. On average young girls
leave school earlier. The consequence is that in the 25 and above population only 5 percent of women
have a secondary education versus 9 percent of men. Girl’s enrollment in higher education is 40 percent
of boys.
42.
In health, services to women and children have improved. Maternal health is improving as a
result of the Government’s priority placed on expanding access and improving quality. The maternal
mortality rate dropped from 615 per 100,000 live births in 2005 to 499 in 2010. Government’s policy
(2006) of free health care for pregnant women and children under the age of five has increased clinic
utilization rates and the number of women giving birth in health facilities. The proportion of children and
pregnant mothers accessing medical services has increased from about 28 percent in 2006 to 69 percent in
2009. However, current usage rates are still below what is needed for health indicators to improve
significantly and lack of medicine is regarded as a continuing obstacle to health maintenance.
43.
The maternal mortality rate is significantly decreasing, but is still slightly above the regional
average. In 2005 the maternal mortality rate was 615 per 100,000 live births (Source: MICS 2005) and in
2010 the rate was 499 per 100,000 live births (Source: DHS 2010); the same year the Sub-Saharan Africa
regional average was 480 per 100,000 live births (Source: WHO-World Health Statistics 2012). Even
though the improvement is obvious, Burundi is still far to reach the targeted level toward MDGs which is
expected at 250 per 100,000 per live births by 2015. Although free health care policy provides a
tremendous incentive to beneficiaries, remaining challenges undermine this positive trend as more than
35% women are still delivering at home while fertility rate is among the highest in the world.
44.
In terms of economic opportunities, households headed by females are extremely vulnerable
and more acutely affected by poverty than households headed by men (76 percent versus 64 percent for
men) due to limited access to land, capital and credit. A national poverty study shows that poor heads of
household are generally less educated; rely heavily on agricultural activities, and are predominantly
female. The majority of the Burundian labor force (84 percent) is in the agriculture sector and women
make up 56 percent of that group. Rural women therefore play a major role in the economy and the
stagnation of the agricultural sector due to low productivity is a critical factor with respect to the income
8

There are comparability issues to bear in mind while interpreting these data.

12

and status of women. Compared to men, they can less afford inputs to modernize their plots farming,
since they lack land tenure and cannot inherit land, thereby limiting their access to credit. However,
access to micro loans appears to be increasing. The Association of Women Entrepreneurs of Burundi
(Association des Femmes Entrepreneurs du Burundi (AFAB)) has the mission of promoting women’s
entrepreneurship and has created a micro-finance system for women through the formation of WISE Bank
(Women’s Initiative for Self Empowerment). The participation of women in cash-for-work road works,
and in micro-credit schemes have helped increase Burundian women’s ability to be self-employed.
45.
With regard to political power and decision-making, the representation of women in
Government has improved significantly since the 2010 election. Forty-five percent of the Cabinet
members are women. The evolution of women’s representation is mainly due to the Constitution (2005),
which allocates 30 percent of senior positions at both the legislature and executive level to women. In
Parliament, 32 percent (54 out of 167 seats) are currently held by women. The Election Code (2009)
introduced an allocation of at least 30 percent of women in councils at the local level and an official
network for elected women officials, giving the 700 Councilors a framework for consultation. Another
important gain is the increased role in public decision making, with the entry of women to the
Ubushingantahe, a traditional institution which plays a significant role in conflict resolution but which
was traditionally reserved for men. Today, the election of women to the Ubushingantahe marks
recognition of women’s right to participate in conflict resolution.
46.
Despite this progress, some legislation is still biased in favor of men. Matrimony is still
governed by male-dominated customs which discriminate against women. The law on citizenship does
not allow a woman married to a foreigner to give her nationality to her child or to her husband. Divorce
law discriminates against women and tax laws treat women heads of household as single tax payers,
ignoring their dependents. Finally the labor code is not in harmony with regional agreements on women’s
rights. The penal code in adultery-related matters also discriminates against women. Gender-based
violence (GBV) remains a major obstacle to the achievement of gender equality. While the law provides
strong protection for women on paper with respect to domestic abuse, in practice that protection is not
applied.
D.

Environmental Protection and Climate Change

47.
Burundi’s endowment of natural resources, abundant rainfall, a dense network of rivers,
fertile land and a huge ability to harness its marshlands and lakes is key to Burundi’s agricultural
productivity and socio-economic development. Yet the country continues to be vulnerable because of
poor biodiversity management and inability to harness the benefits from these resources. Consequently,
the country is unable to perform to its maximum potential. Furthermore the country has been facing rapid
degradation of the environment resulting in a decline in agricultural productivity which provides
livelihood to about 90% of the population who depend on agriculture.
48.
Agriculture production in Burundi has contributed to environmental issues. The use of
marginal lands on steep slopes and the elimination of shade cover for increased production have
contributed to land degradation, biodiversity loss as well as to the encroachment of agriculture on
protected areas. Water pollution has been caused mainly by effluents of solid and liquid waste from
coffee washing stations (CWS). Effluents from the CWS flow into the streams and rivers, carrying large
quantities of decomposing organic matter. Using this water for drinking, irrigation, cultivation, or even
personal hygiene negatively affects the health of farmers and their families. The exploitation of wetlands
has disrupted the hydrological balance, resulting in biodiversity loss, notably birds, impoverishment of
soils and hampering natural flood. Corrective measures were proposed after an environmental assessment
supported by the Bank.
49.
Burundi confronts major environmental issues that will jeopardize its development given its
limited land availability. Burundi has one of the highest deforestation rates in the world (9 percent per

13

year between 1990 and 2000) due to excessive use of timber for domestic energy and resulting in soil
erosion. The uncontrolled exploitation of mineral resources such as gold and coltan continues to be a
problem. These issues are being addressed by land and watershed management, by forest and wildlife
protection, by maintenance of forest roads and trails through cash-for-work programs with women’s
participation (modeled on similar programs in Vietnam), as well as by Great Lakes environmental
agreements and protection programs.
50.
The economic impacts of weather related extremes - and the costs of these to the growth and
development in East Africa and Burundi are already significant. Future climate change may lead to a
change in the frequency or severity of such extreme weather events, potentially worsening impacts. In
2011, a United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) study examined climate change impacts and
their economic costs for Burundi and the benefits of adapting to these effects over different time scales. 9
The findings indicated that extreme flood and drought events are estimated to reduce long-term growth in
the region by about 2.4 percent of GDP per annum. Almost 30 percent of Burundi’s population lives in
areas which are likely to be affected by recurrent droughts and floods. Increased average temperatures and
changes in annual and seasonal rainfall will be felt across key economic sectors, possibly affecting
agricultural production, health status, water availability, energy use, infrastructure, biodiversity and
ecosystem services (including forestry and tourism). Impacts are likely to have disproportionately strong
effects on the poor as such vulnerable groups have fewer resources to adapt to climatic change
E.

Regional Integration

51. Regional integration is a key pillar of Burundi’s development agenda and the country’s efforts in
this direction have begun to bear fruit. Since joining the EAC, Burundi has made remarkable progress
in the integration process. Regional and international integration are expected to provide Burundi with
economies of scale and opportunities to attract investment, increase access to regional public
infrastructure, strengthen political stabilization and improve security, create employment, generate
incomes and reduce poverty. The country is land-locked and has pursued a strategy of gaining
membership in regional, political and economic groupings such as: the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa (COMESA), the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries (ECGLC), the Nile Basin Initiative, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, and the East African Community (EAC). Burundi’s membership
in the EAC, since July 2009, has prompted structural reforms aimed at improving the business climate
and medium-term general economic policy, notably the free movement of the labor force, goods and
capital and the creation of jobs. Important reforms were set in motion to promote foreign trade, such as
the application of the EAC common tariff, the new investment code, and new bankruptcy and commercial
arbitration legislation.
52.
The country is currently implementing the Customs Union Protocol of July 1, 2009. The
Protocol includes the introduction of a three-tier common external tariff, 25 percent for consumer goods
and 10 percent for intermediate products, with no levy on commodities and equipment. The Common
Market Protocol came into effect July 1, 2010. While Burundi is likely to reap larger gains from the
Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) with the EU than through the EAC, 10 trade with the EAC has
enabled Burundi to export to the EAC goods which it does not export to Europe. Regional trade
agreements among natural trading partners are also more likely to facilitate differentiation and
diversification, which further expand welfare gains. The EAC offers a good opportunity for Burundi to
export new products. The Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS) update under preparation is
expected to provide the analytical underpinning for a series of reforms that Burundi will need to
implement in order to successfully maintain and increase exports.

9
10

UNEP 2010, “ADAPTCost Project: Analysis of the Economic Costs of Climate Change Adaptation in Africa.”
Burundi's export structure is very complementary with the EU import structure, and vice versa.

14

III.

SUMMARY OF DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

53.
Reducing poverty remains one of Burundi’s most pressing development challenges and it can
only be addressed through faster and more inclusive growth. A high proportion of the population lives
below the income poverty line, and there is limited access to electricity, potable water and basic social
services. Agricultural productivity is low and there are few opportunities to generate income aside from
agriculture upon which approximately 90 percent of the population relies. The private sector is
embryonic.
54.
The key to unlocking growth in Burundi lies in tapping the country’s private sector, mining
and agricultural potential as well as creating the appropriate enabling environment. At present poor
infrastructure and an unfriendly business climate inhibit the development of the private sector. This can
be improved by establishing an enabling environment by reducing infrastructure bottlenecks by, among
other things, increasing energy production and services and improving regional transport connectivity,
and improving the business climate to generate private sector development. Potential sources of growth
include nurturing the development of small and medium size enterprises (SMEs) in urban areas,
increasing agriculture productivity particularly among export crops, and developing the mining sector.
Unemployed or under-employed youth in urban areas is turning into a worrying phenomenon and one that
the Government should look to address as it pursues its policy on urbanization.
55.
Regional integration is fundamental to Burundi’s drive to improve competitiveness. It is
expected to provide Burundi with economies of scale and opportunities to attract investment, increase
access to regional public infrastructure, strengthen political stabilization and improve security, create
employment, generate incomes and reduce poverty.
56.
At the core of the poverty reduction challenge are fragmented and insufficient data and/or
information systems necessary for monitoring and evaluation and effective decision making. Poverty
indicators have not been updated since 2006, making it difficult to consistently assess the impact of
poverty reduction efforts. In general, the statistical information is not readily available. The National
Statistics System (SSN) produces limited data on an irregular basis, standard surveys are not conducted at
regular intervals, and analytical capacity is weak making it difficult to discern major trends and their
policy implications. To build its knowledge base that will inform the design of pro-poor policies and
adequately monitor the impact of development programs, Burundi should aim to produce high-quality
statistical information regularly.
57.
Addressing the challenge of maintaining social stability is indispensable to continued progress
on all aspects of Burundi’s development. The situation in Burundi remains fragile as evidenced by
sporadic violent incidents that still occur. This violence is mainly driven by the scarcity of resources
associated to increasing demographic pressures. High population density puts pressure on land and water
(given the limited area of arable land and low access to water), threatening agricultural production and
exports, and undermining social stability. The PRSP II recognizes these serious threats and sets the
ambitious goal of reducing the total fertility rate significantly, from the current 6.4 children per woman to
5.3 children per woman in 2015.
58.
Land scarcity is an important source of social tension. It is estimated that between 70-90
percent of cases brought before tribunals are linked to land matters. Land conflict seriously affects family
and community cohesion and scarcity is a particularly volatile issue given that around 90 percent of the
population relies on cultivable land for its livelihood. 11 Burundi’s environmental issues, related among
other things to mining and agricultural production, further limit the availability of land. Additionally,
11

Arable land per person is about 0.1 ha (World Bank 2009) and the average size of family farms is around 0.4 to
0.5 ha, mostly divided into two to four parcels.

15

Burundi has one of the highest deforestation rates in the world (9 percent per year between 1990 and
2000) due to excessive use of timber for domestic energy and resulting in soil erosion.
59.
There have been positive developments, grounded in improved social stability and cohesion
that reflect coordinated efforts, with strong donor support. Demobilized soldiers and child soldiers are
being re-integrated socially and economically, with the parallel development of host communities, and
construction of social and economic infrastructure (health clinics, primary schools, water supply).
Moreover, a country-wide network of civil society organizations (CSOs) has emerged, operating
programs targeting the vulnerable (single mothers, recently resettled displaced persons, ethnic minorities,
and other vulnerable groups) through safety net programs such as cash for work and food for work on
rural infrastructure, general distribution of food to vulnerable groups and school feeding. Delivery of
education and health services has improved substantially, providing major instruments for social
cohesion. Education in particular serves as a powerful vector of communication of national goals and
civic responsibilities. However, the impact of these interventions on poverty has not yet been measured. A
poverty assessment would enable the Government to design effective pro-poor policies and programs and
adjust existing programs to address vulnerability and maximize the impact on poverty.
60.
Poor governance remains a challenge for Burundi, seriously undermining its economic and
social potential and increasing the risks of conflict and fragility. The central strategic challenge now
facing Burundi is how to create a strong link between stability and prosperity. Burundi’s key risk is that
insufficient or highly unequal progress toward prosperity – in its economic, social and environmental
dimensions – may undermine the platform of stability that the country has been carefully putting together
over the last decade. How can Burundi promote urbanization and help to relieve the pressure on land in
rural areas? How can it improve agricultural productivity and diversification to improve incomes and
reduce the structural narrowness of Burundi’s exports? And how can it develop its mining sector to ensure
that revenues are transparently captured by the state and benefit the citizens? The World Bank’s Group’s
CAS (FY13-16) will selectively support key elements of the PRSP II and help the Government in
supporting policies and programs to contribute to answering the above questions.

16

61.
Some of the key challenges and opportunities/corrective measures underway are summarized in
Box 3 below.
Box 1: Burundi’s Development Challenges, Constraints and Opportunities

OPPORTUNITIES AND CORRECTIVE
MEASURES

CHALLENGES AND CONSTRAINTS

IV.

•

Unfriendly business climate

•

•

Constrained /high costs transport
system

•

•

Insufficient energy – (major
impediment to PSD and only 2
percent household access)

•

Slow regional integration

•

•

Rapid population growth

•

•

Weak governance/corruption

•

•

High unemployment

•

•

Accelerated forest and land
degradation

•

•

Sub-optimal use of donor
resources

•

•

Streamline business creation
procedures & make tax regimes
more favorable
Increase investment in
highways and feeder roads; in
port and airport infrastructure
Improve energy generation and
transmission investment
Improve regional trade
facilitation and infrastructure
Expand Result Based Financing
(RBF) in Human Development
activities (incl. HRS)
Strengthen the legal and judicial
systems and create public
demand for accountability and
transparency through
communication campaigns of
local communities
Create opportunities for cashfor-work (women and men) and
youth unemployment programs
Improve land and watershed
management
Exploit donors comparative
advantages/better distribution
of tasks across donors

THE GOVERNMENT’S VISION AND DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY

62.
In accordance with the objectives of Burundi’s Vision 2025, the Government of Burundi
launched its second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP II) in February 2012. The overarching
goals are to promote economic growth, create jobs, reduce poverty, strengthen the rule of law and
consolidate peace and security.
63.

The PRSP II is designed around the following four strategic pillars:
(a)

Strengthening the rule of law, consolidating good governance and promoting gender
equality. This pillar includes plans to rehabilitate the justice system, promote human
rights, and strengthen security while reintegrating ex-combatants into their communities.
Governance and public sector performance will be strengthened through the
implementation of the National Governance and Anticorruption Strategy, strengthening
the democratic process, improving civil service performance and accelerating the
decentralization process, while promoting gender equality.

(b)

Transforming Burundi’s economy to generate sustainable and job-creating growth.
The Government plans to: (i) increase productivity in sectors with growth potential such
as agriculture and mining; (ii) promote the private sector and job creation; (iii) expand
access to better-quality economic infrastructure; and (iv) enhance regional integration.

17

(c)

Improving access to and quality of basic social services and strengthening social safety
nets. In education the Government plans to focus on improving quality at the primary,
secondary and tertiary levels, as well as capacity building through vocational, technical,
and professional education. In health, the Government plans to improve the capacities
and performance of the health care system while controlling non-communicable and
communicable diseases (including intensifying efforts against HIV/AIDS), as well as
controlling population growth.

(d)

Promoting development through sustainable environmental and spatial management:
Given the interdependence of the environment and other sectors with growth potential
(such as agriculture, tourism, industry, energy, infrastructure, and mines), the
Government plans to pursue sustainable development through (i) rational, balanced
regional development; (ii) protection of the environment and sustainable resource
management; (iii) pollution control and cleanup; and (iv) consideration of climate change
in development policies and programs.

64.
Burundi also seeks to improve its international image, diversify its foreign relations and attract
more foreign investors given its limited resource base and huge development needs. A key priority of
the Government is to enhance its economic links with countries within regional groupings such as the
East African Community (EAC), International Conference of the Great Lakes Region (CIRGL) and
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA). The Government intends to raise
awareness within the broader international community of Burundi’s progress and challenges and to
mobilize additional resources to help achieve its goals during a Partners Conference scheduled for the end
of October 2012.
65.
In consultation with the Government, the World Bank Group’s program of support is linked to
selected key development priorities outlined below to set the foundation for sustainable and broad
based economic growth and poverty reduction and to consolidate social stability by improved access to
basic social services and social safety nets.
V.

WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. Lessons learned from previous CAS and Stakeholder Feedback
Lessons learned from the CAS Completion Report
66.
The key lessons learned are: the need for selectivity; avoidance of overly ambitious project
goals; and recognition of capacity constraints. The multiplicity of objectives - many complex with tight
implementation schedules - were overly optimistic and placed Government in new territory, beyond their
experience.
67.
The Bank Group must be more selective in its interventions. It should focus on high priority
activities where it has a comparative advantage, ensuring continuity in Bank or other staff needed to
support reform implementation through the medium term, and leveraging its funds with other partners for
higher impact.
68.
Project and program design must give more attention to capacity constraints. Human resources
and skills are constrained. There is a need for agricultural technicians, teachers, health workers, as well
as cross-cutting skills such as planning, programming and project preparation. Service delivery is
vulnerable to the continuing weakness of public administration, compounded by problems pertaining to
the selection, management, deployment of civil servants, and by low remuneration and a lack of career
development tracks. Effective deployment is a challenge for the geographically extensive services such as
agriculture, education and health. Capacity building remains a high priority, cross-cutting issue.

18

69.
In a fragile and weak capacity environment, project intermediate outcomes should be realistic.
The privatization of coffee assets, for example, failed to reach targets in a first tender. However, a second
tender had more promising results, with the sale of the largest washing station triggering independent
private investment.
70.
Programmatic development policy operations supported the Government’s actions in a
particular area over a period of time which facilitate policy reforms by the Government that could
otherwise have been difficult to achieve without sustained engagement. These operations were a good
instrument for facilitating door coordination in critical areas where a number of development partners
wished to engage such as the economic growth enhancing initiatives and improving public financial
management.
71.
Governance requires ongoing attention. Governance (including accountability mechanisms and
public financial management (PFM)) remains a challenge and is critical for operational efficiency,
transparency in the use of funds and in the delivery of public services. The Government will require
continued support on PFM issues in reducing corruption, improving external and internal audit, and
strengthening procurement. Governance issues transcend PFM and fiduciary safeguards. Specifically,
more focus is needed on political analysis and on the demand-side of good governance (“voice”,
participation, accountability and grievance mechanisms).
72.
Given the strong collaboration that has developed in Burundi among development partners,
there are opportunities for a better division of labor, with different partners taking the lead where they
enjoy a comparative advantage. The working committees established for key sectors provide the
framework for re-balancing the work load and harmonizing procedures to deliver aid more effectively,
with lower transaction costs for Government.
Findings from the Client Survey
73.
The FY12 Burundi Client Survey demonstrates that in general stakeholders in the country
share very positive views of the World Bank in terms of the programs that it supports, its relationships,
and its outreach. Rural and agriculture development, energy, education, stimulating growth and
preventing corruption emerged as the main development priorities and the areas in which the Bank should
focus its resources. While the Bank was most valued for its financial resources, strategy formulation and
to a lesser degree training and capacity building were also highly valued. The Bank was criticized for
imposing technocratic solutions without appropriate concern for political realities, being too heavily
influenced by developed countries, and not collaborating sufficiently with state actors.
74.
Having noted the Bank’s weaknesses and strengths, stakeholders observed that the slow pace
or failure of reform efforts was less attributable to the Bank and more attributable to: (a) the substance
of the reform; (b) the Government’s ineffectiveness; (c) political pressures; and (d) lack of citizen input.
Stakeholders perceive the Bank’s work in rural and agricultural development and education and growth as
highly effective. In contrast, effectiveness ratings for energy and anti-corruption, high-priority areas, are
relatively low compared with other sectoral ratings. Stakeholders tended to be positive about the Bank’s
relevance and priority alignment in Burundi. However, half of the stakeholders interviewed suggested
that the Bank should reduce the complexity of its financing, while one-quarter noted the need for more
innovative financing products. Stakeholders also noted that beyond its interaction directly with
Government, the Bank should work more closely with beneficiaries, community-based organizations and
the private sector.

19

B. Proposed World Bank Group Assistance Strategy
World Bank Group Assistance Strategy Overview
75.
The proposed Country Assistance Strategy (CAS or Strategy) is aligned with priorities of the
second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP II) and aims to help Burundi to: lay the foundation
for faster and more inclusive growth with a view to reducing poverty; and mitigate the risk of renewed
instability by building trust between the State and its citizens. In the proposed CAS, the World Bank
Group will undertake programs that will step up efforts to enhance development impact as explicitly
requested by the Government, private sector and civil society groups during consultations. The proposed
CAS provides the framework for World Bank Group support to Burundi over the next four years ending
June 30, 2016. The CAS is also closely aligned with the Bank’s Africa Strategy.
76.
Burundi has the potential to experience significant acceleration in private investment and
productivity gains across the economy, including in the delivery of public services. This potential could
translate into rapid economic growth and improvements in poverty and human development indicators.
Burundi may therefore be poised to enter a phase of catch up with many of its neighbors.
77.
Realizing Burundi’s potential requires a balanced approach that focuses on laying the
foundations for greater competitiveness, growth and poverty reduction, as well as on interventions that
will help consolidate stability and security. Realizing the potential of Burundi will not only require
improved infrastructure and financial services, a strengthened business environment, and more effective
institutions of governance. As the country remains fragile and exposed to important risks of re-emergence
of insecurity and instability, it is essential to also address the different dimensions of continued fragility.
While much of the political and security dynamics are driven by factors that are beyond the sphere of
economic development, the inter-dependencies between the development and political and security
agendas are increasingly understood. In this respect, it is essential to structure development interventions
in a manner that contributes to building trust between the state and citizens, as one of the contributing
factors to sustained stability.
78.
The FY13-16 Strategy focuses on two strategic objectives: first, to improve competitiveness by
establishing an enabling environment for inclusive growth; and second, to increase resilience by
consolidating peace and social stability. Strengthening governance is the foundation of the proposed
CAS, as it is expected to contribute to both strategic objectives. The CAS will be selective in its
approach, retreating to more focused interventions. This will permit the Bank Group to utilize its
financing, analytical and advisory expertise to leverage other development partners and the private sector,
with a division of labor that reflects their comparative advantages and financial capacity. Interventions
that benefit women and girls will be mainstreamed throughout the CAS program. Further, and particularly
in relation to increasing competitiveness, the CAS will target projects that support regional integration,
which is a development priority for Burundi. The Bank Group has a comparative advantage in designing
and implementing regional programs relative to other development partners. The proposed CAS draws
on the lessons learned from the implementation of the previous CAS and from stakeholder feedback
(paras. 74-75 above) and takes into account the Bank’s ongoing commitments and its comparative
advantage in the Burundi. Further, drawing on the findings of the 2011 World Development Report on
Conflict, Security and Development, the proposed CAS supports building stronger social cohesion in
communities and ensuring a more constructive relationship and greater trust between the state and its
citizens.
79.
The Bank Group’s engagement is guided by the following key principles: a) Selectivity; b)
Leverage; and c) Increasing aid effectiveness.
a. Selectivity. The Bank’s resources are limited relative to Burundi’s needs. Against that backdrop,
concentrating resources in a few high priority areas is key. The choice of sectoral or thematic
interventions will be based on the following: (i) impact potential in increasing competitiveness for

20

inclusive growth and poverty reduction, and in enhancing stability and addressing different dimensions of
fragility; (ii) balancing interventions that produce short-term results with interventions aimed at longerterm impact; (iii) opportunity to build on successful programs and assuring continuity of support to these
programs if no other donor and/or the Government are continuing with the activity; (iv) support of local
champions who have a track record of achievement; (v) comparative advantage of the World Bank
Group; (vi) potential for regional operations, in view of the need for Burundi to become more integrated
with regional and international markets, and the opportunity to leverage the IDA resources for regional
activities
b. Leverage. The Bank Group will utilize its programs as a catalyst for leveraging and combining other
sources of financing and support to enhance development impact. In this regard, where possible, the
Bank will endeavor to: (i) access trust funds to finance analytical and advisory work; (ii) encourage cofinancing of its operations by other development partners to scale up interventions; and (iii) provide the
platform for other development partners’ interventions through the preparation of robust analytical work.
c. Increasing aid effectiveness. Burundi receives roughly 60 percent of its available investment
resources from donors and development partners and is thus highly impacted by whether these resources
are effectively and efficiently translated into results. The Bank will continue to assist the Government in
facilitating effective use of aid by, among other things, coordinating interventions with other development
partners and seeking opportunities for better division of labor amongst development partners. (Annex 8 &
9 provides a picture of donor assistance).
80.
To help improve competitiveness and establish an enabling environment for inclusive growth
(Pillar 1), the Bank Group will support interventions aimed at reducing infrastructure-related
bottlenecks and improving the business climate and increase private sector development. The Bank has
a comparative advantage in economic infrastructure, and will increase its support to improving access to
electricity and regional transport linkages. With regard to the business environment, the Bank will support
interventions aimed at strengthening the regulatory and institutional environment to strengthen the
financial system, improving agricultural productivity, particularly in the coffee sector, and promote
private sector investment, in particular in the mining and ICT industries. The IFC’s complementary
interventions, guided by its strategy for Conflict Affected States in Africa (CASA), include advisory
services aimed at: (a) improving the business enabling environment, particularly on tax simplification,
implementing the East Africa Community Common Market Protocol and public-private dialogue; (b)
improving access to finance; (c) developing Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises by building capacity
of potential entrepreneurs; and (d) supporting the creation public-private partnerships. The IFC will also
seek out opportunities for financing investment in the following sectors: telecommunications, tourism and
financial services. Together, the Bank and the IFC are working on the broader agenda of improving the
business environment for both external investors and domestic enterprises, including small and medium
size enterprises, through local financing and capacity-building, with a focus on empowering female
entrepreneurs.
81.
To help increase resilience by consolidating peace and social stability (Pillar 2), the Bank
Group will support interventions aimed at improving governance in the provision of basic services.
This will include improving public financial management and anti-corruption measures, strengthening the
access to and quality of health service, supporting community driven agriculture investment and laborintensive works, and increasing safety nets to reduce livelihood volatility. The Bank will continue to
provide support for results-based financing in the health sector, with a view to strengthening the health
system to improve health outcomes for pregnant women and children under five and improving the
delivery of reproductive health services essential to reducing the fertility rate. The Bank will continue and
expand its support to community-driven agriculture and labor-intensive public works, as part of the
Government’s efforts to provide safety nets for the vulnerable. In many instances, these projects give
special attention to the participation of women, and are expected to provide tangible benefits that will be
felt in the short term. In addition, the Bank will help the Government develop its strategy for safety nets

21

targeting the vulnerable to reduce livelihood volatility, including the high and growing numbers of urban
unemployed.
82.
To strengthen governance (Foundation), the Bank will support interventions aimed at
increasing the efficiency of public expenditure by strengthening public financial management;
strengthening public sector management, including efforts to prevent corruption and increasing the
demand for good governance. Policy-linked budget support and technical assistance programs will
contribute to strengthening public financial management. A continued and restructured program of
technical assistance will support other improvements in public sector management, including for reforms
in decentralization frameworks, measures to combat corruption, and, as mentioned above, strengthening
of policy and regulatory frameworks for private sector development in the coffee, mining, and ICT
sectors.
Existing Portfolio
83.
On July 1, 2012 the Bank’s portfolio comprised fourteen projects representing a total
commitment of US$423.7 million (ten IDA grants/credits totaling US$371.8 million, one GEF for
US$1.8 million and three regional operations totaling US$50.1 million) of which US$233.34 million or
55% had been disbursed. The trust fund portfolio consists of four recipient-executed trust funds totaling
US$36.5 million, of which US$17.9 million or 49% have disbursed. At the end of FY12, Burundi’s
disbursement ratio was 32.5% compared to 20.4% region-wide. Currently, Burundi portfolio does not
have any projects at risk, although there are a number of projects rated “Moderately Satisfactory”.
Program of Lending and Non-lending Activities and Expected Results
Table 3: Proposed IDA and Other Financing (indicative) mapped to CAS Pillars, FY13-16
CAS Pillars and Foundation
Operations according to Fiscal Year (FY)

FY13
Economic Reform Support Grant (ERSG) VI
Health Sector Development Project Additional
Financing
Regional NELSAP Rusumo Falls
GEF Watershed Approach to Sustainable
Coffee Production
FY14
ERSG VII
Economic Management Support follow-on
Public Works and Urban Management Project
Additional Financing
FY15
ERSG VIII
Hydro Energy Project
FY16
ERSG IX
Regional Transport
Agro-pastoral Productivity and Market
Development Project Additional Financing

Source of Financing
(US$ million)
IDA
TF
25
25

Improving
Competitiveness

Consolidating
social stability

Strengthening
governance

X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X
X
X

20

40
4.2

X
X

25
10
15

X
X
X

X

25
60

X
X

X

X
X

25
20
15

X
X
X

X

X
X
X

22

X

X

Table 4: Proposed Analytical and Advisory Activities (indicative), FY13-16

Pillar 1 – Improving competitiveness by establishing an enabling environment for inclusive growth
and poverty reduction
Regional Inter-modal Study
Facilitating Agribusiness and Facilitating Tourism in Burundi (IFC)
Skills for Private Sector Development Study
Burundi Economic Update
Pillar 2 – Increase resilience by consolidating social stability
Poverty Assessment and Safety Nets Study
Non-lending TA to Support implementation of the Social Protection Policy
PSIA of reforms in the coffee, tea and sugar sectors
Early Childhood Development Study
Pillar 3 – Strengthening governance
Programmatic Public Expenditure Review/Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
ROSC follow-up
Non-lending TA to strengthening capacity in budget planning
Non-lending TA to support accession to EITI and develop the mining sector
Non-lending TA to promote accountability and demand for good governance

Pillar 1 – Improving competitiveness by establishing an enabling environment for inclusive
growth and poverty reduction
Results Area 1: Reducing infrastructure related bottlenecks
84.
Several operations already active are expected to produce results during the proposed CAS
period. Increased generation and efficient transmission of electricity, the development and maintenance of
the feeder road network, the extension of the water distribution network and the accelerated development
of information and communications technology (ICT) infrastructure will help improve competitiveness
and private sector development in Burundi. Through the Road Sector Development Project, the Bank is
supporting Burundi’s efforts to restore a portion of the priority road network and improve road sector
management. Through the Multi-Sector Water and Electricity Infrastructure Project, the Emergency
Electricity Infrastructure Project, and the GEF Energy Efficiency Project, the Bank helps to extend water
services into selected peri-urban areas of Bujumbura, rehabilitate the primary electricity distribution
network and improve institutional capacity to maintain the electricity systems and oversee investment in
new electricity generation sources. The Regional Communications Infrastructure Program in which
Burundi participates is expanding telecommunication access, reducing the cost of connectivity to global
ICT infrastructure, and improving Government efficiency and transparency through e-Government
applications.
85.
The Bank’s planned interventions under the proposed CAS will focus on scaling up ongoing
engagement designed to increase and improve transport networks and electricity production. The planned
Regional Intermodal Study will examine the development of multi-modal transportation links (ports,
airport, roads and rails) in the EAC region and beyond, and provide a basis for leveraging financing to
enhance regional transportation to co-finance (with other countries and the Regional Integration Program)
the Regional Transport Project in the outer years of the CAS. The Bank will also support the
development of additional energy generation capacity through the planned NELSAP Regional Rusumo

23

Falls Hydroelectric and Multipurpose Project (multi-country project supported under the regional
integration IDA program) and the Hydro Project (to be jointly financed by the European Investment Bank
and other development partners).
Results Area 2: Improving the business climate and increasing private sector development
86.
The Bank Group will contribute to improving the economic, legal and regulatory environment for
business (particularly in growth areas such as tourism), encouraging public-private partnership initiatives
and increasing private investment. There is strong synergy between IFC’s investment and advisory
interventions and the Bank’s financing and analytical and advisory work in this area. The IFC’s portfolio
will include: investments in telecommunications and tourism, advisory services under the IFC Program
on Investment Climate and technical assistance under the IFC’s Africa Strategy to micro, small and
medium enterprises, enabling enterprises to launch ventures in diverse areas such as agri-business, light
industry, ICT and tourism. The IFC will improve access to finance through the extension and guarantee of
lines of credit at local banks and simultaneously provide technical assistance to potential borrowers to
assist in the development of "bankable" projects. IFC will also support the economic empowerment of
women, complementing the Bank's efforts to mainstream gender throughout the program.
87.
Creating a basis for strong private sector-led growth requires a robust legal and regulatory
framework and targeted actions to stimulate under-performing sectors such as Burundi’s export crop
sector, in particular coffee. The private sector development promotion and diversification component of
the proposed programmatic development policy operation (DPO) series, Economic Reform Support Grant
VI-IX, supports the aforementioned objectives. The programmatic DPO is complemented by the
Financial and Private Sector Development Project and the Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Market
Development Project. Under these two existing operations the Bank is supporting the modernization of
the financial sector infrastructure and improving financial sector regulations as well as increasing
agricultural productivity by strengthening research and extension services centered on tea and coffee, and
identifying new value chains through feasibility studies. The planned GEF Watershed Approach to
Sustainable Coffee Production Project would pilot a shade-grown coffee program. Shade-grown coffee is
an approach which promotes the cultivation of coffee with other tree and plant varieties generating
additional income opportunities while protecting biodiversity. Through the planned Mining and EITI
Technical Assistance, the Bank will support Burundi’s accession to the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI) and will continue its support to develop Burundi’s mining sector. This
offers an opportunity to further diversify the Burundian economy to yield significant revenues for
Burundi, while EITI compliance will help to ensure the transparent reporting and accounting of mining
revenues.
88.
To support the development of a skilled work force as a foundation for growth of high potential
industries, the Bank proposes to carry out a Skills for Private Sector Development Study (to identify
options for skills development, based on assessments of the challenges related to skills formation, and the
needs relative to the job market) and the planned Economic Management Support follow-on Project that
would include interventions for addressing skills gaps in growth industries. These efforts will be
complemented by IFC's support to facilitate private sector training providers (particularly in ICT) to take
the lead in training personnel in the education sector, other public services and for the benefit of private
enterprise.
Pillar 2 – Increasing resilience by consolidating social stability
Results Area 3: Improving access to and quality of social services
89.
Through the additional financing of the Health Sector Development Project from IDA resources,
and a grant from the Health Results Innovation Trust Fund, the Bank will consolidate the success
achieved in Results Based-Financing (RBF) for human capital development, in the reduction of

24

HIV/AIDS prevention and in the delivery of treatment. Additionally, the Bank will broaden the scope of
its interventions to include support for the achievement of the PRSP II goal of lowering the total fertility
rate from the current 6.4 children per woman to 5.3 by 2015, by increasing the contraception prevalence
rate.
90.
The Bank will seek to leverage financial support, from development partners to improve education
quality in Burundi. Under the previous CAS, the Bank’s technical assistance facilitated the development
of the National Education Strategy (NES) that was endorsed by the education donor group led by
Belgium. The NES was pivotal for Burundi’s access to financing from the Global Partnership on
Education (GPE), a multi-donor trust fund. If the GPE grant is approved, its execution will be supervised
by Belgium. The Bank will remain engaged in the education sector through the planned Early Childhood
Education Study that will diagnose issues in the early childhood education sector in Burundi and suggest
options for an early start to schooling.
Results Area 4: Increasing safety nets to reduce livelihood volatility
91.
Social protection, notably safety nets, reduces livelihood volatility by promoting social and
economic stability. This is an essential element to restoring public trust in Government. The planned
Poverty Assessment and Social Safety Nets Analysis will improve the poverty data and assist the
Government in the design of effective pro-poor policies and programs and to better target social
protection programs help address vulnerability and to reduce poverty. Through the proposed
programmatic development policy operation series, Economic Reform Support Grant VI-IX, the Bank will
support the Government in its efforts to strengthen safety nets and improve targeting through poverty
maps and the planned Public Expenditure Tracking Survey (PETS) over the CAS period. The Bank will
play a crucial supporting role in all phases of the social protection reforms: provision of annual budget
allocations to deliver local-level emergency rations and staple foods to restore children’s diets to
appropriate levels; design and implementation of an action plan to operationalize the National Social
Protection Policy adopted in 2011; and the requisite institutional framework for the delivery of social
protection services. The planned Economic Management Support follow-on project will support efforts to
improve capacity within the public sector, particularly at the local Government level, and for CSO
providers to manage programs to deliver social protection services.
92.
Cash-for-work and matching grant programs, with specific targets for female participants, are
vehicles for the Bank’s support to social safety nets via the existing Community and Social Development,
Emergency Demobilization and Transitional Re-integration, Public Works and Urban Management, and
the Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Market Development Projects. During the CAS period, the Bank
plans to scale up activities through additional financing for the Public Works and Urban Management
Project (labor-intensive public works), and for the Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Market Project
(community-driven agricultural projects using matching grants). It is expected that continued support for
the Community and Social Development project will be provided by other development partners. The
ongoing Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project addresses land degradation in the Kagara
River catchment through community-driven investments that improve land management.
Foundation and Results Area 5: Strengthening Governance
93.
To promote inclusive growth and strengthen state-society relationship, the CAS places
governance and public sector capacity at the center of the Bank’s intervention. In particular, the Bank will
support interventions to strengthen public financial management and budget transparency, through the
proposed programmatic development policy operation (DPO) series, Economic Reform Support Grant VIIX, consolidating measures initiated under the earlier ERSG series while extending the reforms in scope
and depth. A Public Expenditure Tracking Survey (PETS) will be initiated for both the education and
health sectors to identify bottlenecks and leakages in public finances at the national and local levels.
Through the planned Economic Management Support follow-on project, the Bank will support efforts to

25

improve capacity within the public sector, particularly related to implementation of the National Strategy
for Good Governance and Anti-Corruption, the National Program of Public Administration Reform, and
supporting implementation of decentralization reforms. It is important to note that support for the
essential reforms and capacity development of the judicial system is expected to be provided by other
development partners, with the Belgian Government taking the lead. Through Technical Assistance on
Accountability and Good Governance, support will also be provided to strengthen the capacity of Anticorruption agencies to conduct investigations and promote dialogue with civil society organizations.
Finally, ongoing work on the harmonization of standards and codes with international practice will
continue through the ROSC Initiative. This is particularly important as Burundi begins to explore public
private partnerships – such as in mining and energy – which depend on substantial quantities of
internationally procured imports.
94.
The Bank will play a stronger role in promoting an enabling environment for citizens’
engagement in the development process. Building demand for good governance requires the involvement
of citizens in management and oversight, particularly with regard to service delivery which touches every
citizen. Creating and training citizen committees, especially in local Government, is an important vehicle
for this purpose. Through Technical Assistance on Accountability and Good Governance, the Bank will
identify activities to support demand for good governance such as improving monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms, implementing the Open Budget Initiative, promoting information-sharing mechanism, third
party monitoring by CSOs, grievance mechanism and other tools for citizens’ feedback and participation.
All these interventions will work to forge a new ‘social contract’ for development and build trust between
the state and the citizen.
C. Implementing the FY13-16 Country Assistance Strategy
Financial Envelope
95.
The indicative amount of resources available to Burundi for the remaining IDA 16 period
(FY13-14) is SDR94 million (US$143 million equivalent). While the amount of the available resources
under IDA 17 will not be known until the end of FY14, it is assumed for the purposes of the proposed
CAS that a similar level of financing is expected for the FY15-16 (the first 2 years of IDA 17). Therefore,
the amounts shown in the outer years are indicative only. Actual allocations will depend on: a) the
country’s own performance; b) its performance relative to that of other IDA recipients; c) the amount of
overall resources available to IDA; d) changes in the list of active IDA-eligible countries; e) terms of
financial assistance provided (grants or loans); and f) the amount of compensatory resources received
from the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI). IDA resources are expected to be made available to
Burundi on a grant basis.
Managing Program Implementation
96.
The Strategy will achieve the defined outcomes through a mix of lending and knowledge
services. A programmatic series of development policy operations will account for roughly one-third of
the program. This is complemented by policy dialogue, investment lending, economic and sector work
and technical assistance by the Bank and IFC. To leverage the country’s limited resources, consideration
will be given to utilizing innovative financing products such as output-based schemes or guarantee
products which could attract private sector financing. To increase development impact and efficiency in
the utilization of resources, an effort has been made to consolidate the portfolio and, if successful, this
should result in a 30% reduction in the number of projects under implementation by the second year of
the CAS.
97.
In-keeping with the Paris Declaration and the Accra Agenda for Action, the Bank is committed to
making progress in the use of country systems for channeling Bank funds to partner countries. The
ongoing series of Economic Reform Support Grants (DPO), as well as Burundi's PRSP I, have brought

26

improvements in the overall Public Financial Management (PFM) system. The Bank is currently
conducting a review of Burundi's PFM systems. A comprehensive action plan will be developed for
public sector accounting reform and budget preparation and execution, by the Government in consultation
with the AfDB, IMF, and European Union. This review and action plan will help facilitate the Bank’s use
of country financial management systems in Burundi.
98.
The Bank Group will facilitate activities that deepen regional integration as this will provide
Burundi with the economies of scale, enhance opportunities to attract investment, and increase access to
public infrastructure. Additionally, a leverage opportunity will arise with the proposed regional transport
project and other possible regional projects in the future. 12
Partnerships and Donor Coordination
99.
The Bank Group has played and will continue to perform an active role in supporting donor
coordination. A more efficient division of labor among the development partners is “front and center” on
the agenda of consultations for the new World Bank Group CAS in Burundi. While the Bank Group will
continue to be involved in several sectors, its program is expected to become more focused under the
proposed new CAS. Building on the expertise, experience and expressed commitments of other
development partners, they are expected to take the lead in funding and supporting programs in many
sectors including in water supply and sanitation, national highways and rural roads, education, conditional
cash transfers, community and social development, youth development, land management, and in selected
areas of institutional reform related to the judiciary and the security forces – among others.
100.
Burundi’s formal donor coordination framework is known as the Partners Coordination Group
(Groupe de Coordination des Partenaires or GCP). The GCP provides a forum for dialogue and
coordination between the Government and development partners to ensure that sector policies and
financing are aligned with Burundi’s development priorities. The GCP operates at three levels namely the
sector working groups (Groupe Sectoriels), the Strategic Forum (Forum Strategique) and the Policy
Forum (Forum Politique). The Sector Working Groups led by the respective sector ministries discuss
technical and policy issues and monitor the implementation of projects and development programs. The
Strategic Forum chaired by the Minister of Planning and Finance is responsible for strategic dialogue on
issues arising from sector group discussions and the Policy Forum chaired by the vice presidents
discusses policy issues emanating from the Strategic Forum. To facilitate more effective aid
coordination, aid flows are tracked through the Aid Management Platform (but this mechanism could be
more effective.
101.
There is division of labor amongst development partners. (Annex 9 reflects the list of partners and
the sectors they support). Agriculture -- the largest sector -- is supported by most donors notably, the EU,
Belgium, Netherlands, African Development Bank, UN agencies such as the World Food Program, Food
and Agricultural Organization, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the
World Bank. The Swiss Cooperation primarily responds to issues related to land by contributing to the
design and implementation of land reforms. Decentralization, social cohesion and capacity building are
supported by the European Union, Germany, Belgium and others. Private sector development is
supported by USAID, the World Bank and IFC. The IMF works closely with the World Bank to ensure
macroeconomic economic stability and TRADEMARK East Africa (supported by Belgium, Sweden,
Netherlands, DFID and the Danish Cooperation) support the Burundi Revenue Authority to improve
12

IDA regional projects are IDA operations: a) that involve two or more countries, if at least one IDA fragile country, all of
which need to participate for the project’s objectives to be achievable; b) whose benefits spill over country boundaries (e.g.,
generate positive externalities or mitigate negative ones across countries); c) where there is clear evidence of country or regional
ownership (e.g., by EAC) which demonstrates commitment of the majority of participating countries; and d) that provide a
platform for a high level of policy harmonization between countries and are part of a well-developed and broadly-supported
regional strategy.

27

domestic revenue collection and to improve cross border trade amongst countries within the East African
Community. Overall, most of the key sectors in Burundi are covered by development partners and some
international non-Governmental organization.
102.
Development assistance is provided either be in the form of project financing or direct budget
support aimed at improving public finance management. Budget support is expected to be provided by
three main multilateral partners, the European Union, African Development Bank and the World Bank.
Due to the international financial crises, external financing for Burundi may decline despite the relatively
small volume of external financing which Burundi receives in absolute terms.
103.
The Bank’s assistance within this CAS will therefore be in selected strategic sectors and the Bank
will continue to work closely with other development partners and the Government within the donor
coordination framework to ensure synergy and complementarities of efforts.
Monitoring and Evaluation
104.
The CAS Results Framework presents the results chain for the Bank’s program of support. (See
Annex 10.) The framework uses Burundi’s PRSP II as a starting point, and narrows down the range of
outcomes to those that the Bank Group can demonstrably influence over the CAS period. Since most of
the new operations in the CAS will not likely conclude implementation until after the end of the CAS
period, results during this CAS period will be drawn from existing operations and the quicker disbursing
interventions included in the CAS.
105.
The CAS outcomes will be monitored jointly by the Bank Group and the Government over the
CAS period. The Bank Group will monitor and evaluate the CAS through periodic results-based CPPRs,
among other methods of portfolio monitoring and will prepare a CAS Progress Report in mid-2014 to
evaluate the progress towards CAS outcomes and adjust the strategy and program as appropriate. The
Government will monitor and evaluate the strategy using the same country systems that will be used to
monitor the PRSP II.
106.
Burundi adopted its 2010-2014 National Strategy for Statistic Development (NSSD) in February
2010. Its comprehensive and budgeted priority action plan aims to address the constraints faced by the
National Statistical System (NSS) in developing a robust national monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
system for poverty reduction programs. An output under the previous CAS 13, the NSSD was expected to
improve harmonization among development partners’ interventions in the area of statistics and lead to
better alignment of these interventions with Government priorities. But the lack of a leading donor and
relatively small allocation of domestic and external financial resources have limited the results of the
NSSD priority action plan. 14 Low domestic budget allocation, weak human capacity, and lack of easy
access of users to timely and reliable information are the main difficulties faced by the NSS. 15
107.
The Bank will support the development of a fully integrated national M&E system capable of
reliably tracking poverty reduction and employment outcomes, and monitoring the implementation of
national development initiatives, as envisaged under the PRSP2. For this purpose, the Bank will leverage
the support of other development partners, including through the use of trust funds.
13

The World Bank (through the TFSCB) and AfDB provided financial support to this project.
The major achievements under the action plan include: (i) the training and recruitment of local statistical engineers and agents;
(ii) the progressive rebuilding and publication of national accounts; (iii) the launch of a National Statistical Office (NSO)
website; (iv) the development of a national M&E system (MDGs and other PRSP indicators) publicly accessible through the
Internet; and (v) the realization of two representative household surveys (2010 DHS and 2011-2012 agrarian survey).
15
The budget allocated to the NSS is small (US$1.069 million in 2012), relative to estimated needs (US$40.5 million over a 5
year period). Statistical activities aimed to build human capacity have benefited mostly the NSO’s staff, their counterparts in
finance, education and health sectors, while statistical capacity continues to be weak in other sectors. As a result, the demand for
and utilization of statistics and M&E results are greatly inhibited, preventing more robust involvement of citizens, service users,
and civil society organizations in eliciting sustained Government accountability.
14

28

VI.

MANAGING RISKS

108.
There are three major risks that might impact the implementation of the CAS: the global
economy may experience greater volatility; the risk of conflict and political violence; and insufficient
resources to implement the strategy. Burundi’s land-locked situation aggravates food and fuel price
volatility; peace and stability could be threatened by domestic fragility and instability in neighboring
countries; and Burundi is experiencing a gradual reduction in external aid. The key risks and the Bank’s
mitigation strategies follow.
109.
Ongoing global financial instability could result in a decline in donor assistance. Burundi is
extremely vulnerable to reduce aid inflows, as grants represented 22.7% of GDP in 2010 and nearly 60%
of total Government resources, as the Government garnered international support for political and
economic reforms. Grants as a percentage of GDP are expected to decline, to 20.7%, in 2012, while room
for increasing fiscal space through taxation is limited. The CAS will help Burundi maintain external
assistance by supporting continued reforms in public financial management, the public wage bill,
accelerated export earnings, and improving the business climate through transparency and anti-corruption
measures. The Bank Group will also play a pro-active role in supporting Burundi’s effort to re-position its
image as a country where major improvements have been made in recent years, and where aid
investments deliver high “value-for-money”. As part of this support, the Bank Group will engage with the
Burundi’s Partners conference taking place in Geneva on October 29-30, 2012, to advocate the need for
greater aid flows to Burundi because of the likely positive impact of aid and because of the importance
that these flows represent to sustain country stability.
110.
As a small, land-locked, predominantly rural country with limited land, Burundi is vulnerable
to high transport costs, fuel-price volatility and food insecurity. The CAS will help manage these risks
through various interventions that promote improved agricultural productivity while restoring scarce land
resources. Planned operations in regional transport and mini-hydropower will help address Burundi’s
ongoing infrastructure challenges, reducing transportation costs and the reliance on fuel. The Strategy’s
support for development of the mining sector could yield significant revenues for Burundi; while
accession to the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) will help ensure the transparent
reporting and accounting of such revenues.
111.
Social cohesion is critical, to avoid a return to conflict and violence, through strengthening of
local-level structures, reform of the judiciary, and boosting youth employment. The CAS program
seeks to address these risks through ongoing projects that include labor-intensive public works to provide
employment opportunities; community and social development interventions that promote more equitable
local service delivery; and ongoing efforts to demobilize ex-combatants and support their socioeconomic
reintegration. While the Bank does not lead on judiciary reforms, such work is ongoing with the support
of bilateral development partners.
112.
Economic governance slippages and weak technical capacity could jeopardize the effective use
of scarce public resources, undermining public confidence and eroding donor support for Burundi.
The CAS provides for the continuation of the series of development policy operations that support
improvements in public financial management and budget planning to improve the quality of public
spending, while streamlining management of the public wage bill.
113.
Burundi is also vulnerable to exogenous shocks such as climate impacts on agriculture output;
the security situation in neighboring countries; and global prices for export commodities (notably
coffee). The CAS provides for support for agricultural productivity through technology acquisition and
small-scale irrigation that will help mitigate the climate risks and technical assistance to the coffee sector
(both divestiture of state-owned washing stations and enhanced quality of the coffee) to help boost
Burundi’s export competitiveness in the coffee sector.

29

Annex 1: Burundi at a Glance

30

31

Annex 2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 8/3/2012

32

Annex 3: Social Indicators

33

Annex 4: Key Economic Indicators
As of Date 8/3/2012

34

35

36

37

Annex 5: Key Exposure Indicators
As of Date 8/03/2012

38

Annex 6: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of 7/10/2012

39

Annex 7: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 6/30/2012

40

Annex 8: Donors’ Total Disbursements for Year 2011 (US$)

41

Annex 9: Development Partners Division of Labor
World Bank
Group

European
Union

African
Dev
Bank

USAID

Belgium

Agriculture

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Community
Dev/Decentralization

X

X

X

X

X

X

DDR

X

X

X

Education

X

X

X

Sector

1

Energy

X

X

Environment

X

Financial/Priv Sect Dev

X

Governance

X

X

Health

X

X

Humanitarian

X

ICT

X

Human rights

X

X

X

X

Germany

X

Norway

X

Justice
X

Regional Inter

X

Japan

China

United Nations
Agencies

IMF

X
X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Public Admin.

Switzerland

X

X
X

Netherlands

X

X
X

Land
Macroeconomics

France

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

Security Sector

X

X

Road/Transport

X

X

X

X

Water and Sanitation

X

X

X

X

Budget Support

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

(Source CNCA and other donor sources, March 2012)

_____________________________
Avec le 11ème FED le secteur de l’énergie sera une priorité de l’Union Européenne
Le FMI fournit un appui à la balance des paiements.

42

X

X
X
X2

Annex 10: CAS Results Framework (FY13-16)
Proposed CAS
Outcomes/ Results
Clusters

Major Challenges

Results influenced by the CAS Program FY13-16
Results Indicators

World Bank and Partner Support

Milestones

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE I: IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
Aligned with PRSP II, Pillar 2: Transforming Burundi’s Economy to Produce Sustainable Job-creating Growth – Improving access to quality economic infrastructure
Roads network rehabilitated and
Roads database completed and
1. Reduced
Ongoing Operations:
• Landlocked with
maintained
tested in the Office des Routes for
Burundi Road Sector Development – AF
infrastructureinadequate rural
Non-rural roads rehabilitated (km)
paved and unpaved roads
(P064876);
related bottlenecks
feeder roads
Baseline: 27 km in August 2012
Energy Efficiency project/ Global Energy
to growth
Target: 44km by December 2014
Trust Fund (P117225);
• Insufficient and
Multi-Sector Water and Electricity
unreliable electricity
Infrastructure project (P097974);
generation and
Electricity supply improved
Completion of the Feasibility
Emergency Energy project from CRW
transmission
Generation capacity of hydro-power Assessment of Potential
(P122217); Regional Communications
plants (Jiji and
Infrastructure PPPs by June 2014
Infrastructure project (P094103).
• Limited ICT
Mulwembe)constructed
networks to support
Planned Operations:
growth in education, Baseline: 0 in June 2012
Target: 25MW by June 2016
Regional NELSAP Rusumo Falls project
eGov, and private
(energy);
sector
Volume and affordability of ICT
Roll out of 60% the Backbone
Mini-hydro project;
services improved
system achieved by June 2013.
Regional Transport project.
Reduce retail price of monthly
internet services (per Mbit/s)
Planned AAA and TA:
Baseline: $1,600 in June 2012
Regional Transport Study;
Target: $600 in Dec. 2013
ICT for Transformation
Project pipeline screening and Initial
Feasibility assessment of Potential
Infrastructure PPPs (PPIAF)
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE I: IMPROVING COMPETITIVENESS
Aligned with PRSP II, Pillar 2: Transforming Burundi’s Economy to Produce Sustainable Job-creating Growth –Promoting the private sector and job creation
Establishment of a modern payment Ongoing Operations:
2. Improved business • Poor governance and Financial infrastructure
strengthened
system including electronic check
Financial and Private Sector Development
climate and
weak capacity limit
Time for check clearance in
clearing and card payment.
project (P107851);
increased private
private sector
Bujumbura reduced
Agro-Pastoral and Market Access
investment
development and
Baseline: 5 days in June 2012
Development project (P107343);
increase the cost of
Public Works and Urban Management
Target: 3 days by February 2014
doing business
project (P112998);

43

•

•

•

Most public
enterprises face a
distressed financial
situation and are
burdened by
governance
problems
Watershed
management and
extension services
needed to boost
agricultural
productivity and
spur growth

Market access for targeted
commodities increased
Percent of production of commodity
in targeted value chains marketed
by participating producers
Baseline:10 in June 2012
Target:25 by April 2016

10% of participating producer
groups/associations/cooperatives
have contractual arrangements with
marketing agents by December
2014.

Promote development of the mining
sector
Revised Mining Code submitted to
Parliament by June 2014

Untapped
opportunities in
tourism

IFC Portfolio:
Advisory: Investment Climate Program
(574687);
SMS Africa (578327);
Africa Micro, Small and Medium-Scale
Enterprises (576488);
Investment: Hotel/Tourism and
Telecommunications.
Planned Operations:
Economic Reform Support Grant VI-IX
Economic Management Support Project
follow-on
Watershed Approach to Sustainable Coffee
Production project (GEF)
Ongoing AAA and TA:
DTIS update; coffee marketing strategy
Planned AAA and TA:
ESW: Skills for Private Sector Development
Study; ESW: Facilitating Tourism (IFC);
ESW: Facilitating Agribusiness (IFC).
ROSC followup

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE II: INCREASING RESILIENCE BY CONSOLIDATING SOCIAL STABILITY
Aligned with PRSP II, Pillar 3: Improving Access to and Quality of Basic Services and Strengthening the Social Safety Net
Children under age 5 treated for
3. Improved access
• Infant and maternal
moderate or severe malnutrition
Completion of Annual Health
to and quality of
mortality rates,
Number children under 5 receiving
Management Information System
health services
while much
treatment for malnutrition
survey by July 2013
improved, remain
Baseline: 90,350 in 2012
high
Target: 92,200 in 2015
• High rates of fertility
Increased utilization of
place pressure on
contraceptives by couples of
land/water
resources, jeopardize reproductive age
Contraceptive prevalence rate
women’s health and
Baseline: 19.8% in 2012
social stability
Target: 22% in 2015
• High child

44

Ongoing Operations:
Health Sector Development (P101160);
East Africa Public Health Laboratory
Networking (P111556)
Planned Operations: Health Sector
Development AF (P131919)
Ongoing AAA and TFs:
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis for
Results-Based Financing in Health

Planned AAA, TA and TFs:

malnutrition rates

Health Results Innovation Trust Fund;
ESW: Poverty Assessment and Social Safety
Nets Study
ESW: Early Childhood Development Study

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE II: INCREASING RESILIENCE BY CONSOLIDATING SOCIAL STABILITY
Aligned with PRSP II, Pillar 3: Improving Access and Quality in Basic Services and Strengthening the Social Safety Net
Enhance security of livelihoods and
4. Expanded safety
• Expiration of DDR
improve local service delivery
Reinforced capacity of local
nets to reduce
financing heightens
consulting firms to develop training
volatility of
importance of social Generate short-term employment
programs and ability to produce
livelihoods
protection programs through labor-intensive public
works
design and tender documents for
for livelihoods and
Baseline: 2.94 million personthe public-works programs.
social stability
days of work by August 2012
Target: 4.92 million person-days
• Insufficient capacity
of work by December 2014
to make local service
of which at least 15percent for
delivery equitable
women
Completion of Social Safety Nets
• Pollution and
Establish the framework for the
Assessment by September 2014
degradation of
effective delivery of social
natural resources
protection systems
jeopardizes
Adoption
of the National Social
livelihoods (notably
Protection
Strategy by FY15
Lake Victoria Basin
communities)

Ongoing Operations:
Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Markets
Development project (P107343);
Public Works and Urban Management
project (P112998);
Regional Lake Victoria Environmental
Management project (P118316);
Community and Social Development project
(P095211)
Planned Operations:
Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Markets
Development project AF;
Public Works and Urban Management
project AF;
Watershed Approach to Sustainable Coffee
Production project (GEF) (P127258).
Ongoing AAA and TFs:
Emergency Demobilization and Transitional
Reintegration project (P113506)
Planned AAA and TA:
ESW: Bio-Diversity and Water Management
Study
TA to develop a National Social Protection
Strategy

45

Foundation: STRENGTHENING GOVERNANCE
Aligned with PRSP II, Pillar 1: Strengthening the Rule of Law, Consolidating Good Governance and Promoting Gender Equality – Consolidating good governance
and institutional performance
Promote dialogue with civil society
5. Enhanced
Planned Operations:
• Weak financial
GoB to establish a joint AntiValidate the census of public
ESRG-VI –IX;
transparency and
management limits
employees to allow for an update of Economic Management Support Project
Corruption Forum with CSOs by
accountability in
efficiency and
the payroll data base by July 2013
December 2014
follow-on
public expenditure
impact of resource
allocations
Promote citizen engagement and
Ongoing AAA and TFs:
monitoring
• High level of
Share of communes where budget
Adoption of a mining sector policy.
corruption
information is made publicly
Planned AAA and TFs:
available
TA: to promote accountability and demand
• Weak institutions
Baseline:
26.5
%
by
March
2012
for good governance;
with lack of
Target:
50
%
by
December
2015
PETS/Public Expenditure Review
transparency and
TA: Mining and EITI
accountability in
Promote transparency and
public management
accountability in the use of revenues
from extractive industries
GoB to publish a financially
sustainable work plan for
implementing the EITI criteria by
January 2015

46

Annex 11: Burundi Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR)
June 30, 2012
Date of the County Assistance Strategy (CAS): July 8, 2008 (Report no. 44193-BI) 16
Date of the CAS Progress Report (PR): April 21, 2011 (Report no. 60339 – BI)
Period covered by the CAS Completion Report (CASCR): FY09-12
I.

Introduction

1. This Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR) presents the main findings from an
assessment of the FY09-12 CAS program performance and the World Bank’s performance in designing
and managing the implementation of the program. The objective of this Country Assistance Strategy
Completion Report (CASCR) is to: (i) evaluate how the program of support articulated in the Burundi
CAS FY09-12 influenced the outcomes as laid out in the results matrix in the CAS Progress Report
(CASPR); and (b) to derive lessons to guide the design and implementation of the new program for
Burundi, as presented in the CAS FY13-16.
Political, Economic and Social context
2. In 2008, the Government was faced with daunting challenges to achieve sustained peace, security and
economic stability. The country had just made the transition to a multiparty system of Government after
several power struggles including coups and armed conflicts. The 2005 elections provided an opportunity
for Burundi to strengthen democracy and exit the conflict trap but challenges remained formidable, as
sporadic hostilities were initiated by the one remaining active rebel movement which was not party to the
Arusha peace and cease-fire agreement.
3. Government faced overwhelming challenges in increasing and sustaining peace and security. Subsequent
to successful demobilization negotiations, Government had moved, with strong donor support, to
reintegrate thousands of former combatants into civilian life, offering incentives that would prevent them
from returning to illegal military activity. Widespread corruption, coupled with weak institutional capacity,
remained a major impediment to political and economic development. The risk of a relapse to conflict
remained high.
4. Nevertheless, the Government undertook steps to implement an economic reform program that improved
economic performance and enabled Burundi to reach the Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) decision
point in 2009. The country had also advanced regional integration by becoming a member of the Common
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) in 2005 and joined the East Africa Community (EAC)
in 2007. To minimize the risk of future conflict, the country sought to build a diversified economy, capable
of creating modern sector jobs with better pay, providing basic social services, with special protection for
the poor and vulnerable, back-stopped by more accountable and inclusive institutions, to improve
governance and ensure efficient and equitable delivery of basic services.
5. While progress has been made in some sectors of the economy (education, health and transport),
macroeconomic performance has been adversely affected by exogenous shocks. During the CAS period,
successive crises worked to slow growth – surging energy costs (2007), high global food commodity costs
(2008) and the 2009 world financial crises. The economy remains vulnerable to volatile world prices,
especially in the agricultural sector, which accounts for half of GDP annually, and employing almost 90
percent of the population. Burundi is a net food importer so any surge in world food prices immediately
16

The CAS (Report No. 44193-BI) of July 8, 2008 was presented to the Board of Executive Directors on August 8,
2008.

47

impacts on households, increasing the risk of malnutrition, with increased exposure to endemic disease. At
the time of the 2008 food crisis, the IMF listed Burundi among the 18 most vulnerable countries in terms
of food and oil price volatility. Reflecting the impact of these shocks, headline inflation rose from 4.1 at
end-2010 to a high of 13.3 percent in October 2011.
6. The lack of diversified exports, reliance on imported fuel and capital goods, and the limited contribution of
the narrow private sector, all suggest that current account deficits will continue through the medium term.
The external debt position has improved, thanks to prudent macroeconomic management, with limited
access to non-concessional financing. Increased macroeconomic stability and increased donor funding, 60
percent of net current transfers, resulted in an increase of foreign reserves equivalent to five months of
imports over the CAS period.
7. At the time of the preparation of the FY09-12 CAS, Burundi was one of the poorest countries in the world.
More than two thirds of the population lived below the poverty line and severe food insecurity and high
levels of child malnutrition were endemic country-wide (2005 Demographic and Health Survey). Poverty
was deeper and more pervasive in the rural areas, with those without or with little education suffering
disproportionately and women heads of household the most severely impacted. Due to lack of investment,
basic infrastructure and facilities such as water, electricity, were in severe disrepair, constraining economic
activity. Coffee production, which accounted for 5 percent of GDP and more than 70 percent of export
revenues had fallen drastically as a result of poor management and low productivity. The economy
remained dominated by public enterprises and the private sector was embryonic – 96 formal enterprises severely constrained by an unfavorable investment climate.
8. The poverty outlook remains daunting. GDP per capita remains very low, although it increased from
US$147 in 2008 to US$178 in 2010 (IMF). The years of conflict led to high internal displacement of the
population, especially rural dwellers, and to the destruction of key economic and social infrastructure
(roads. bridges, schools and clinics), limiting incomes and growth. An estimated 67 percent of the
population is deemed poor, far from the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of 18 percent. Although
progress is being made in education enrollments, in access by pregnant women and children under five to
health care, after the abolition of fees and charges, and in improved prevention and treatment of
HIV/AIDS, the MDGs are unlikely to be met by 2015, the target date. Burundi remains one of the poorest
countries, ranking 167 out of 169 countries in 2010 in the UNDP Human Development Index.
The World Bank Group Program
9. The CAS sought to assist Burundi to make a smooth transition from a post-conflict economy to one of
diversified growth. The World Bank Group’s Strategy for FY09-12 supported two strategic objectives: (i)
promoting broad-based, sustainable economic growth; and (ii) improving access to social services and
consolidating social stability. Improving governance is a cross-cutting objective of the CAS.
The
strategic objectives and development outcomes of the CAS are aligned with Burundi’s priorities as
articulated in the poverty reduction strategy– Cadre Stratégique de croissance et de Lutte contre la
Pauvreté (2006 – 2010). The CASPR (2011) reaffirmed the relevance of the CAS and the CAS outcomes,
adjusting the timing and allocation within the program slightly to accommodate delays in project
preparation and facilitate a rapid response to the global food, fuel and energy crises.
10. For each strategic objective, the CAS defines three related outcomes. To promote broad-based sustainable
economic growth, the program sought to attain the following outcomes: (a) increased productivity of
agriculture, leading to food security and the export of high-value crops; (b) a business climate favorable to
foreign direct investment (FDI) and domestic investors; and (c) a robust economic infrastructure to
underpin commerce and trade, facilitated by integration with the East African Community (EAC). To
improve access to social services and consolidation of social stability, the program sought to attain the
following outcomes: (a) improved reintegration of ex-combatants and vulnerable groups into society and
the economy, with enhanced social stability; (b) efficient and transparent public financial management;

48

and (c) improved access and enhanced quality of basic social services, with decreased vulnerability to
HIV/AIDS.
11. The original investment lending program of US$309 million was increased by nine percent (to US$336
million) to help Burundi respond to the global food and fuel crisis. At the CAS closing date, US$331
million were committed. The lending program included 15 operations, supplemented by 20 analytical and
advisory support activities, on priorities ranging from investment climate, coffee sector reforms, financial
sector and debt management assessment, to reviews of public expenditure. Trust funds, amounting to
US$30 million, supplemented IDA resources, including a US$10-million grant under the Global Food
Crisis Response Program. IFC significantly increased its investment engagement by investing US$36
million in four investment projects which underpin the CAS outcomes in the areas of improving the
investment climate.
12. In sum, program performance is rated as “Moderately Satisfactory” owing to mixed progress towards
achieving CAS outcomes. Bank performance is rated “Satisfactory” due to the strong design of the
program, the responsiveness of the program to client demand, and the leveraging of partnerships during
program implementation to scale up interventions and strengthening of relationships with civil society, the
media and the Parliament all of which resulted in greater development impact.
13. This report is organized as follows: Section II below details the assessment of the program’s performance,
and provides a concise review of the progress made towards achieving each CAS outcome and identifies
key challenges remaining; Section III below details the evaluation of the Bank Group’s performance in
designing and implementing the CAS and managing risks; and Section IV presents key lessons learned—
outlining recommendations for future program design and implementation.
II.

CAS Program Performance

14. Program performance merits a rating of “Moderately Satisfactory” as progress in achieving the goals of the
CAS was uneven. There were notable successes in three of the six outcomes, improving the business
environment; the reintegration of ex-combatants and vulnerable groups into the society; and the access to
and quality of basic health services, with decreased vulnerability to HIV/AIDS.
A. Progress on Objective I: Promote Broad-Based and Sustainable Economic Growth
15. The CAS outcomes under the first strategic objective are: (1.1) Increased productivity of food and highvalue export crops; (1.2) Improved business environment; and (1.3) Improved infrastructural services with
enhanced regional integration. Seven of the eleven results indicators under this strategic objective have
been achieved; three were partially achieved, despite having made some progress; and there is no available
data to confirm the progress on the remaining indicator. Progress on achieving the strategic objective has
been mixed.
16. In summary, Agricultural productivity indicators for irrigated rice and palm oil have been; while for
cassava and milk, little progress was made towards the target. The target for the indicator related to
improved productivity of export crops was exceeded. Business environment indicators were achieved.
Related to improved infrastructure services, the targets for improved roads and energy supply were
exceeded, good progress was made on improved water supply though the target was not achieved, while
data on current international internet traffic is unavailable.

49

CAS Outcome 1.1: Increased productivity of food and high-value export crops
17. There have been marked improvements in rice and oil palm production achieved with inputs from the
Agriculture Rehabilitation and Sustainable Land Management Program, while the growth in traditional
export crops, such as tea and coffee, was stagnant or declined. This sluggish growth during the CAS period
is mainly the result of weak agricultural production and exports, with sector growth 3 percent lower than
during the preceding period, 2006-2009. During the period, cassava cultivation in particular was negatively
impacted by blight and other diseases. Urgent measures are required to improve the productivity of
agriculture investment. These include: (i) introducing new varieties and technology to increase yields; (ii)
focusing greater attention and resources to research and extension, with the goal of crop diversification;
and (iii) improving distribution of seed, fertilizer, and tools. Other key priorities include developing new
irrigated perimeters, extending and rehabilitating rural feeder roads, and improving internet access to
facilitate access to pricing information.
18. The target for the CAS indicator related to the privatization of coffee assets was exceeded. The related
subsector reforms were supported through the Economic Reform Support Grant (ERSG) series with
complementary technical assistance financed by the Economic Management Support Project. Increased
liberalization of the coffee subsector (including the privatization of publicly-held assets) together with
improved quality control is key to increasing Burundi’s coffee exports. It is estimated that Burundi could
export 60,000 tons of fully-washed coffee during peak production years (compared to 15,000 tons in
2011). Coffee is the dominant crop produced by about 800,000 households and accounted for about 70
percent of the country’s export revenues (3.3 percent of GDP) in 2011. Consequently, given its
potentially-high impact on growth and poverty reduction, the coffee sector has been targeted as a priority
sub-sector. Private sector interest in the industry is now taking hold, as twenty-six new washing stations
were constructed recently, financed by private capital. The private sector must take the lead in investment
if there is to be sustained progress on productivity.
CAS Outcome 1.2: Improved business environment
19. There has been good progress in improving the business climate in Burundi. With resources from the
Economic Reform Support Grant series, in 2011, the Government cleared its arrears to the private sector
existing at the start of the CAS period, encouraging new investment. The IFC’s Investment Climate
Program supported a number of key reforms that ultimately led to the “Doing Business Report” (2012)
rating Burundi the seventh most improved economy in the world. Some of these key reforms and ongoing
activities are summarized below. There has been a marked reduction in the time it takes on average to
receive a judgment from the Commercial Court. Progress was also made in revising legislative codes
(commerce, companies, and investments) and in streamlining contracts. A “one-stop shop” for starting
businesses has been set up and the Export and Investment Promotion Agency was launched in 2011. The
Burundi Revenue Authority (Office Burundais des Recettes (OBR)) was created with the support of IDA
and DFID and is developing a more friendly tax regime for SMEs which facilitates compliance. In terms of
regulations, real estate property transactions have been facilitated with streamlining of procedures for
obtaining construction permits. These changes in the regulatory environment are harmonized with those of
the East Africa Community (EAC) and will help to smooth and increase trade across borders.
Complementary measures include: more robust lending to the SMEs by the banks; strengthening of
business institutions such as the Chambers of Commerce and employer associations; and developing a pool
of training providers to help enterprises introduce new production technologies. Further, a joint Bank-Fund
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) conducted in FY09, identified weaknesses in the financial
sector and formed the base for the preparation of a financial sector strategy by the Government which is
expected to contribute to private sector development and help form the foundation for economic growth.
20. The Economic Management Support Project has provided technical assistance aimed at improving
institutional capacity to the agency responsible for the Government’s privatization program (SCEP),
particularly with regard to analyzing financial statements of firms. Nevertheless, SCEP remains weak and

50

urgent measures are required to increase its capacity to plan and program divestiture and to evaluate
proposed investments, in particular the proposed public-private partnerships (PPPs) in the power, water
and telecommunication sectors. An important achievement of the SCEP was to build the knowledge base
about state–owned enterprises (SOE) prior to the privatization. As such under the Economic Reform
Support Grant series, the financial and technical audits for a list of 10 SOE firms were conducted with
financial support from PAGE and results were made accessible to public.
21. The IFC also significantly increased its investment engagement by investing $36 million in four
investment projects including: (i) a line of credit to Diamond Trust Bank, a greenfield subsidiary of
Diamond Trust Kenya Limited, to increase credit availability to small and medium size enterprises,
enhance competition in the banking sector in Burundi, and expand credit availability across all segments of
the market; (ii) a loan to Leo Burundi, the country’s major telecommunications company, to finance the
expansion of the company’s network in rural areas, which accounts for 90 percent of the Burundian
population; (iii) a loan to Opulent (B) Ltd (Hotel company) to develop the first Double Tree by Hilton
Hotel in Burundi after acquiring the State-owned Hotel Novotel. The hotel will help improve the country’s
essential business infrastructure by providing international-standard rooms and conference facilities. This
is expected to stimulate a range of indirect jobs and SMEs to provide goods and services to the hotel and
its clients; and (iv) a loan to Progimmo (local real estate company) to address the huge need for office
space of international standards in Bujumbura.
CAS Outcome 1.3: Improved infrastructural services with enhanced regional integration
22. Substantial progress has been made in improving transport, water, energy and broad-band IT
infrastructure. The IDA-financed Road Sector Project and the Multi-Sector Water and Electricity
Infrastructure Project, that have been supplemented by resources from the EU, supported the improvement
of road maintenance, with funding doubling between 2007 and 2010. The percentage of paved roads rated
“fair to good” increased from 21 percent to 49 percent in the same period. However, Burundi’s
international transportation costs, representing 40 percent of the value of agriculture exports, remain
exorbitant, due to high port costs and customs issues. For landlocked Burundi, the rapid development of
regional transportation infrastructure is essential to lowering costs and boosting competitiveness of
exports. Investment in domestic secondary and rural feeder roads is crucial to get products to local markets
and onward to external shipment points–railheads, ports, and airports. The development of appropriate
regulatory frameworks for both investment and regulations, to encourage new PPPs, is a work in progress.
23. Limited access to energy is a major impediment to economic development, with only 3 percent of the
population served by the public electricity supply. Supported by the ongoing Multi-Sector Water and
Electricity Infrastructure Project, the Government is preparing the ground for the next generation of
domestic hydropower projects. Feasibility studies and engineering drawings were completed for four of the
most promising hydro sites by REGIDESO, the national utility company, in September 2011. Each of
these plants will have installed capacity of between 10-30 MW, totaling about 70 MW, with generating
costs around US$0.10 per kWh. Once completed (2014/2015), the plants will make a major contribution in
delivering low-cost energy to the rural population. The Bank and the IFC are developing an “energy
marketplace” and standard procurement documents to encourage PPP investments in both small hydro
plants and other renewable power sources.
24. Bringing electricity tariffs more in line with generating costs was an important policy decision taken in
2011. Until then, tariffs were the lowest in the region, US$0.08 per kWh (2010), as compared with
US$0.21 in Rwanda and US$0.18 in Kenya. The tariff revision and the introduction of the pre-payment
program to improve cost recovery were reforms aimed at improving the financial and operational viability
of the national utility authority which the Bank supported through a Bank-financed tariff study and the
Economic Reform Support Grant (ERSG) series. The tariff increase was introduced gradually, first in
September 2011, after a communications campaign explaining the decision to customers. The new tariff
regime reflects operating costs, a sinking fund to cover maintenance and eventual equipment replacement

51

costs, as well as a reserve fund to cover the costs of power imports under regional power-sharing
agreements. This approach is likely to promote increased generating capacity through PPPs and
independent local power producers (IPPs), with the goal of increasing access from the current 3 percent to
18 percent by 2018, through public and private investment. It is expected that these developments will
impact favorably on the private sector that has been paying approximately US$0.35 per kWh for power
from stand-alone diesel generators.
B. Progress on Objective Two: Improve Access to Social Services and Consolidating Social Stability
25. The CAS outcomes under the second strategic objective are: (2.1) Improved reintegration of excombatants and vulnerable groups; (2.2) More efficient and transparent public financial management; and
(2.3) Improved access and quality of basic social services and decreased vulnerability to HIV/AIDS. Ten
of the thirteen results indicators under the second strategic objective have been achieved. The three
indicators that were partially achieved concern public financial management and education.
CAS Outcome 2.1: Improved reintegration of ex-combatants and vulnerable groups
26. Through the Emergency Demobilization and Transitional Reintegration project, the re-integration of excombatants and vulnerable groups has progressed well as all results indicators relative to this outcome
have been achieved or exceeded. Since the 2008 peace agreement with the FNL to transform the rebel
movement into a political party, the Government of Burundi moved forward with the final phase of
demobilization, disarmament, and reintegration (DDR) resulting in over 6,500 FNL ex-combatants being
demobilized. The Government is now focusing on economic and social reintegration efforts for excombatants in their host communities, as well as specialized services for disabled ex-combatants.
Leveraging partnerships has been a key element for achieving results in the demobilization and
reintegration activities in Burundi. The Demobilization Disarmament and Reintegration Project has
brought together the four main bilateral donors and the Government of Burundi, with implementation of
program activities entrusted to 12 local agencies, representing a broad spectrum of the civil society. These
implementing agencies represent regional civil society organizations working on the ground in Burundi, as
well as specialized agencies working in the domain of medical service provision for disabled excombatants, psycho-social support services, and communications. Economic reintegration remains a focus
for the Government, as activities to consolidate livelihoods, such as support to economic associations and
technical assistance, are strengthened. Further, gaps have been identified in how women are targeted in the
demobilization and reintegration process. The Bank, through the DDR Project, is supporting efforts to
develop and implement a gender action plan. Partnerships have been a strong element of demobilization
and reintegration activities in Burundi. The DDR project has brought together four donors, working with
12 NGO implementation partners, representing a broad spectrum of civil society actors. These
implementing agencies represent regional CSO’s working on the ground in Burundi, as well as specialized
agencies working in the domain of medical service provision for disabled ex-combatants, psycho-social
support services, and communications. DDR programming in Burundi is achieved by the successful
management of partnerships at all levels. Through these interventions, the Bank has an important role in
supporting the country’s efforts to achieve lasting peace and inclusive development.
27. Access to social services and the consolidation of social stability have been augmented through support to
decentralized financing at the commune level. The Community and Social Development Project supported
the creation of the first communal development plans. Through this mechanism, 593 social infrastructure
projects and 293 projects in support of social cohesion, largely focused on vulnerable groups, have been
implemented. The capacity of local officials has been enhanced in areas such as budgeting, procurement,
and project management. As the majority of Burundians access all services at the commune level, this
level of Government decision-making and participation represents the nexus of social service provision in
the country.
CAS Outcome 2.2: More efficient an transparent public financial management

52

28. Significant progress has been made in establishing the framework and systems for more efficient and
transparent public financial management. The enactment of the 2009 Budget Law represented a milestone
for the Government as it provided the requisite framework for the budget preparation, execution,
procurement, and oversight and controls. However, the Government still experiences delays in presenting
the budget to the National Assembly, and as a consequence the result indicator related to this outcome was
not achieved. But this should not diminish the significant advances made by the Government in the area of
public financial management during the CAS period, including: (i) the modernization of the procurement
code; (ii) the rolling out of the financial management system which now encompasses most transactions
and cash flow; (iii) the implementation of medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) to facilitate
planning, programming and budgeting; (iv) the increase in allocations to priority sectors, including the
sustained financing of poverty-related programs; and (v) the improvement of payroll and human resource
management of the public sector. In addition, the percentage of expenditures allocated to priority sectors
increased significantly from about 41 percent in 2005 to 55 percent in 2009. All of these reforms were
supported under the ERSG series.
29. These actions were supported by a comprehensive suite of analytical and advisory services provided by the
Bank including: the FY2009 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) report that prepared
the ground for the introduction of MTEF and the design and implementation of cash management systems;
the FY2011 Public Expenditure Review that focused on public investment, with recommendations for
stimulating growth, with poverty reduction, and also a review of civil service pay and incentives; and a
debt management performance assessment carried out. The Bank’s technical assistance focused on
building MTEF capacity at the ministry level, on poverty monitoring and the development of a macrofiscal simulation model. However, key challenges remain which include building the Government’s
capacity for planning, programming, and budgeting, and improving the quality of public expenditures.
CAS Outcome 2.3: Improved access to and quality of basic social services and decreased vulnerability to
HIV/AIDS
30. Substantial progress has been made in improving access to and quality of basic social services, particularly
in the health sector, and decreasing vulnerability to HIV/AIDS. There has been good progress in both
health and education as reflected in Table 1 below. All the results indicators associated with health that
support this CAS outcome have been achieved. In health, a notable achievement has been the introduction
of results-based financing (RBF) supported by the Health Sector Development Support Project which has
underpinned the policy of free health care for pregnant women and their children and, as a consequence,
increased the utilization rates of primary health care services. The percentage of women giving birth in
health facilities rose substantially, leading to a significant reduction of maternal and child mortality rates.
Today, Burundi's child and infant mortality rate is among the best in Africa as reflected in Figure 6,
especially given its income level. Significant efforts have been made to improve the capacity of general
practitioners and nurses through training. Despite the success of the RBF program, its financial
sustainability in the face of population pressure remains an issue as Burundi’s economic growth rate
remains only slightly ahead of the population growth rate. Assessment of the efficiency and effectiveness
of expenditures through regular Public Expenditure Tracking Survey (PETS) is also key to sustainability of
the programs.

53

Figure 1: Child Mortality and per Capita Income, by Country

Niger

Mali
Guinea

Liberia

Burundi

Malawi

Zambia

Nigeria
Benin

Lesotho

Ghana
Kenya

Moz.

Senegal

Ethiopia
Tanzania
Uganda
Madagascar
Rwanda

31. Several prevention and screening measures have been successfully instituted to help combat HIV/AIDS,
resulting in a substantial decrease in vulnerability to HIV/AIDS. The number of male circumcisions rose
from 539 in 2008 to 3,343 in 2010; the number of new HIV/AIDS cases put on anti-retroviral (ARV)
treatment rose from 2,880 in 2007 to 5,074 in 2010; and the percentage of HIV-infected pregnant women
who received a completed ARV treatment to reduce the risk of mother-to-child transmission rose from 6
percent in 2008 to 41 percent in 2011 (substantially exceeding the targeted result). IDA funding is highly
complementary to funding from other partners, including UNAIDS. National serological surveys suggest
that the national HIV/AIDS prevalence rate fell from 2.97 percent in 2007 to 1.4 percent in 2010.

54

32. In education, after the spectacular increase in primary school enrollments, due to the abolition of fees and
charges in 2005, the main challenge is to improve education quality, which is closely linked to insufficient
numbers of trained teachers and weak administrative capacity. Gross enrollments (including students
repeating a grade) grew from about 80 percent in 2005 to 134 percent in 2009. Remarkably, despite this
growth spurt, Burundi achieved gender parity at the primary level, thus meeting the related Millennium
Development Goal. In addition to the expansion in the number of teachers and classrooms, key quality
indicators such student-textbook ratios have also improved. Although the ambitious target of 1:1 studenttextbooks ratio has not yet been achieved, progress has been made towards reducing the ratios from 3:1 to
2:1. The short-term challenge for Burundi to join the Global Partnership for Education’s Fast Track
Initiative is being achieved. One obstacle to joining has been delays in the development of a medium-term
Education Sector Plan (ESP), supported by the education development partners. The ESP was delayed by a
decision in 2010 to re-structure the education system by making nine years of education (“Basic
Education”) mandatory, in line with the EAC region and the majority of Sub-Saharan African countries.
Government has now completed a revised ESP with technical assistance from the World Bank and other
development partners. During fiscal year 2012 the Bank’s contribution was specifically oriented towards
assisting the Government to update the education sector diagnostics, which has subsequently assisted the
Ministries to revise the ESP. The now-endorsed Plan reflects the resource parameters of the new nine-year
program.
Table 1: Performance Indicators in Health and Education
2000

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Health
Births attended by skilled health staff (%
33.5(a)
of total)
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live
176 (a)
births)
Infant mortality rate (under 1, per 1,000
120(a)
live births)
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled 1,200 1,100
estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Maternal mortality ratio (from survey
615 (a)
data, per 100,000 live births)
Person sick/injured during the last 4
weeks preceding surveys (%)
HIV/AIDS
Prevalence of HIV, total (% of
population aged 15-49)
Education
Primary completion rate (GOB, %)
Net school enrollment, primary (GOB,
%)
Pupil-teacher ratio, primary (GOB,
number)
Pupil-classroom ratio (GOB, number)
Girl-boy ratio (GOB, number)

60.0%(g)
96 (g)
59 (g)
970

499 (g)
29.9(e)

3.2(b)

26.8
44.0

970

23.4(f)

2.97(c)

36.1
69.8

38.5
72.4

49
76.3
0.86

40.7
82.6

1.4 (g)

46
84.6

48
89.7

51
96.1

55

51.9

49.4

86.3
0.91

82.7
0.97

75.6
0.99

Notes: (a) estimated from the MICS-2005 survey; (b) figure estimated from the 2002 survey; (c) HIV sero-prevalence survey of 2007;
(e)
estimated from CWIQ-2006 survey; (f) estimated from the 2009 baseline Bank-funded health survey; (f) estimated from the 2010
Demographic and Health Survey. Other data come from the World Development Indicators database. GOB stands for Government
of Burundi.
Source: Various sources assembled/calculated by World Bank staff.

55

C. Progress on the cross-cutting objective of strengthening governance
33. Strengthening governance and fighting corruption remain major challenges but overall progress has been
satisfactory. During the CAS period, the Bank provided technical assistance including through the Belgian
Partnership Trust Fund for Poverty reduction that supported the Government’s drafting and adoption of the
National Strategy on Good Governance and Anti-corruption which provides a framework and action plan
for addressing governance issues. The strategy was validated at a Cabinet-level seminar on governance
aimed at familiarizing both ministers and senior officials with the strategy and proposed implementation
measures. The strategy was approved by the Council of Ministers on October 20, 2011. Another important
step forward has been the formation of local committees to promote good governance at the commune
level. Led by the ministry charged with good governance and privatization, this initiative enjoys the strong
support of NGOs and CSOs such as the Anti-Corruption Brigade, the Burundi League of Humans Rights,
and the Anti-Corruption and Economic Malpractice Observatory (OLUCOME). There have also been
notable results on the ground, including arrests of officials in public enterprises such as “Société Sucrière
du Moso (SOSUMO)” and “Office des Transports en Commun (OTRACO).” However, some major cases
remain pending, such as the recovery of funds owed to the Government by the petroleum companies
identified by the petroleum sector audit in 2008. The client survey conducted in 2012 confirms that
corruption is viewed as a source of inequity and injustice by the majority of the population.
34. The Bank’s support through analytical work included: The Country Economic Memorandum (CEM,
FY10) that generated three Policy Notes on - (i) priority areas for economic growth; (ii) creating fiscal
space for productive investment and (iii) improving governance for development effectiveness. These
Notes informed discussions at the cabinet governance seminar held in March 2011. The World Bank
Institute (WBI) also contributed to the governance objective, by helping set up the Rapid Results Initiative
(RRI) program which trained 2,764 civil servants in 14 out of 25 ministries, leading to enhanced efficiency
and accountability in public expenditure.
35. The Government took complementary actions in the area of public financial management including: (i)
revision of the budget framework law, improving the transparency of public financial management; (ii)
establishment of regulatory and control agencies in the area of procurement, with revision of the
procurement code; and (iii) generalization of the financial management information system, improving the
allocation of resources, expenditure tracking, and personnel management, including payroll, leading to
appreciable savings. Following the recommendations of the 2008 Public Expenditure Management and
Financial Accountability Review (PEMFAR), a census of civil servants and military personnel conducted
in 2009 through the Bank’s PAGE project financial support led to the elimination of about 1800 ghost
workers. Unfortunately this database has to be updated since it was not used as the basis for the payroll
since payroll software was introduced with some delays. The introduction of the new software in payroll
management has already started showing positive results: data entry mistakes have been reduced, resulting
in savings of about US$18,000 in the wage bill of January 2011.
36. More capacity-building is needed to enhance the effectiveness of measures already underway. These
include: (i) building capacity in national audit (the Court of Public Accounts); (ii) further strengthening of
the agencies directly responsible for the inspection and policing of public expenditures, the state
inspectorate, under the authority of the Presidency (Inspection Générale de l’Etat-IGE) and the finance
ministry inspectorate (Inspection Générale des Finances–IGF); and (iii) developing enhanced internal audit
capacity in technical ministries. In addition, the national procurement commission still has work to do in
improving the standardized bidding documents and in upgrading related software, with “trickle-down”
training for staff at the sector and project levels. In infrastructure, governance has improved, with a
reduction in the number of informal payments on roads and at ports and better training of police and border
control officers. That said, a more comprehensive governance framework is still to be developed.
37. Despite these achievements governance challenges remain particularly with regard to strengthening the
justice system and the integrity of the courts, as these are essential to protecting the poor and encouraging

56

investment. Legal issues include inconsistencies in legislation, lack of transparency in legislative
processes, weak capacity to draft laws, and lack of participation of stakeholders. Judicial issues include:
weak governance and corruption in the judiciary, the need for reform of the Supreme Council of the
Magistracy, the small number of trained judges and lawyers, and the low salaries of judges and
prosecutors. Pressing institutional measures are: (i) improving ethics in public service; (ii) strengthening
internal and external controls; and (iii) a more robust investigative capacity, leading to more timely
prosecutions and more appropriate sanctions.
38. At the project level, a recent Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) concluded that performance
in financial management and procurement has been satisfactory. Burundi's portfolio has no “problem
projects”, compared to 28 percent for the Africa Region as a whole. However, there is work to be done in
capacity building at the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) level, with special attention to procurement.
III.

World Bank Group Performance

39. The Bank Group performance during the CAS period is rated as “Satisfactory”. The design of the strategy
was sound. The Bank provided strong implementation support, evidenced by the health of the portfolio,
the responsiveness of the program to the impact of the global crisis on Burundi and the successful
leveraging of other development partner support to scale up Bank-led interventions.
A. CAS Design
40. The CAS was aligned with the Government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (2006 – 2010) and benefited
from the application of the Bank’s extensive country experience in the choice of areas of engagement and
instruments, which contributed significantly to the achievement of CAS outcomes. The CASPR (2011)
affirmed the relevance of the Strategy and the CAS outcomes. The defined outcomes were realistic as
evidenced by the fact that progress ranged from good to substantial relative to each outcome. However,
the results framework could have been strengthened, as in some cases the indicators were not a good proxy
for the spectrum of activity that the Bank is undertaking in the relevant sector. For example, although the
Government made significant progress in reforms related to governance and public financial management,
these advances have not been captured in the results matrix. The indicator on PFM reform is too narrowly
defined, given the Bank’s numerous and diverse interventions in this area.
41. The Bank’s CAS program addressed Burundi’s vulnerability to external shocks through a multi-sector
approach, with a focus on empowering women. Agriculture projects aimed to increase food crops
productivity in order to make the country less susceptible to rising international food prices. The
operations also focused on making sure vulnerable groups are being effectively integrated into their
communities by supporting them in their own agriculture activities. These efforts were directly synched
with other projects that promote better and more equitable local service delivery together with projects that
focus on demobilization and socio-economic integration of ex-combatants. Further, the Bank’s program
supported short-term employment through public works–of which 17 percent of work-days directly
benefitted women (aimed at providing income and safety nets outside of agriculture). These efforts are
being complemented by transport projects with a focus on enhancing road maintenance that creates
permanent jobs (with a target of more than 30 percent of contracts allocated to women). The CAS and
CASPR had appropriately identified critical risks, some of which materialized and were well managed
through the Bank’s ability to respond to changing circumstances and adapt the program accordingly.
B. Implementing the strategy
42. The Bank implemented the program outlined in the CAS and made slight adjustments particularly in
response to client demands associated with the international financial, food and fuel crises.
Implementation of the CAS program has been satisfactory and has benefitted from the Bank’s regular

57

implementation support interventions and periodic reviews of the portfolio, including CPPRs conducted in
2008 and 2011, to assess portfolio quality. Systemic issues and implementation bottlenecks such as
financial management and procurement issues were identified and action plans were drawn up, with
milestones and target dates for remediation. As a result, portfolio performance is satisfactory. The low
turnover of Bank staff, particularly among field-based staff, has helped deepen the dialogue and is a key
contributor to the strong portfolio performance. Table 2 presents the key portfolio indicators.
Table 2: Key Portfolio Indicators
Indicators

FY09

FY10

FY11

Number of projects

10

12

11

11

Net commitment (US$ million)

337.4

394.4

371.8

371.8

Number of problem projects

1

2

0

0

% Commitment at risk

30.1

16.5

0

0

0

100

0

% Proactively

FY12*

Overage projects

0

0

0

0

Total undisbursed balance (US$ million)

235

224.2

196

183.1

Disbursement ratio

20.6

26.7

34.4

31.7

Source: World Bank. Note. (*) includes amount yet to be disbursed.
43. The Bank facilitated and also provided a substantial transfer of knowledge and advisory services. A major
contribution was the 2010 CEM which reviewed development over the past decade, identifying pervasive
and enduring constraints to economic growth, presenting a strategy for growth and poverty reduction
which serves as a solid basis for the FY2013-16 CAS. The Policy Note Series which was generated
thereby are at the center of policy dialogue in Burundi.
44. Leveraging partnerships and improving aid effectiveness were important factors under consideration
during the CAS implementation period. In 2009, the Bank chaired Burundi’s Consultative Group meeting,
reviewing progress on the first PRSP. The Bank has also chaired the development partners sector working
groups in Agriculture and HIV/AIDS, as well as co-chairing the Strategic Forum for donor coordination,
promoting dialogue on the coordination of development aid and fostering the harmonization of
development partner programs and projects with PRSP II priorities and objectives. IDA has taken the lead
in the demobilization and reintegration sector in support of the Government. In the health sector, IDA
financing supported the creation of a health fund for the purchase of quality health services, creating a
domestic health market. There are now 10 contributing partners, backstopping Government of Burundi
commitments through the budget and HIPC debt relief funds, with the balance met by IDA, the European
Commission, Belgium, Switzerland, the Global Fund for HIV/AIDS, the Global Alliance for Vaccines and
Immunization (GAVI), and others.
45. The Bank has developed solid working relations with civil society, the media and Parliament. During the
CAS period, the Bank meet quarterly with CSOs, discussing key issues in policy dialogue, progress in
analytical work, as well as in project design and implementation. Parliamentarians were briefed on the
World Bank project cycle and their role in ensuring efficient project implementation in their respective
constituencies. Also, journalists were trained in reporting on economic and governance issues.

58

46. The major risks identified by the CAS were well managed. Fiscal pressures were alleviated by prudent
macroeconomic management which enabled Government, with IDA support to respond rapidly and
effectively to the major exogenous risks posed by high energy prices, world food commodity prices and
the 2009 world financial crisis, through budget support, emergency operations, as a consequence of the
flexible program design. The reforms implemented in public finance management and procurement, with
robust policy support, contributed to mitigating weak governance and corruption, although there is
considerable work still to be done in strengthening public institutions through capacity building. The
socio-political climate has significantly improved. After the 2010 elections, continuity was maintained in
key policy posts. Ex-combatants have responded positively to re-integration programs supported by the
Bank and the flow of people and goods is unhampered across the national territory.
IV.

Conclusions and Lessons Learned

43. For the most part the Bank was able to achieve the CAS outcomes and thus was able to advance the CAS’
strategic objectives. Progress was registered in the overall implementation of the country development
program, and within the CAS period, the incidence of poverty declined slightly; economic growth trends
were positive but the base for economic growth continues to be fragile. With a few exceptions, the MDG
targets are not likely to be reached by 2015. While Government’s achievements in strengthening
governance and the fight against the corruption during the CAS period are notable and have begun to bear
fruit, more progress needs to be made in these areas. While the foundations of the governance, service
delivery, and investment climate were appropriate and remain so today, good delivery of the program led
to marginally better improvement in outcomes than was anticipated at the inception of the CAS. Going
forward, a number of key lessons learned from the experience of implementing this CAS should be taken
into consideration when designing the next CAS.
44. The key lessons learned are: the need for selectivity; avoidance of overly ambitious project goals; and
recognition of capacity constraints. The multiplicity of objectives - many complex with tight
implementation schedules - were overly optimistic and placed Government in new territory, beyond their
experience.
45. Project and program design must give more attention to capacity constraints. Human resources and skills
are constrained. There is a need for agricultural technicians, teachers, health workers, as well as crosscutting skills such as planning, programming and project preparation. Service delivery is vulnerable to the
continuing weakness of public administration, compounded by problems pertaining to the selection,
management, deployment of civil servants, and by low remuneration and a lack of career development
tracks. Effective deployment is a challenge for the geographically extensive services such as agriculture,
education and health. Capacity building remains a high priority, cross-cutting issue.
46. The focus on results and the flexibility in the use of instruments was effective and should be maintained.
The global financial, food and fuel prices crises impacted Burundi, demanding adjustments to the lending
program. The flexible, multi-sector design of the strategy allowed the Bank to respond quickly and
effectively to Government’s requests for assistance. Maintaining a strong focus on results was facilitated
by a results framework aligned with the country’s strategic priorities.
47. The Government should give priority to finalizing the overall regulatory framework for PPPs to finance
domestic investment in key sectors such as energy, port infrastructure, agriculture and mining, in light of
the fact that official aid and concessionary financing is likely to diminish in the face of the continuing
European debt crisis. Since the limiting of non-concessionary financing is unlikely to change, the
Government must turn increasingly to PPPs to finance domestic investment. The PPP regulatory
framework should emphasize fairness in profit-sharing between partners and transparency. Increased
integration of economic activity within the EAC is a priority since it promises synergy in the utilization of
resources such as lowered transport costs. Implementing the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
is a priority if mineral wealth is to play a bigger role in economic growth.

59

48. World-wide, financing SMEs is a major issue (OECD 2012 “report card” on SMEs). Burundi has made
setting up a business easier and is working on a tax regime which is business-friendly. Recommendation: It
will be important to address SME financing issues, working with the local banks.
49. In the social sectors, key priorities are sustainable financing and reducing demographic pressures which
threaten to overwhelm service delivery, making efforts to improve quality almost financially infeasible.
Without a significant injection of funds, quality will decline further as the severe demographic pressure
inexorably increases the number of children per class, with over-crowding making class management and
instruction difficult. It is urgent to tap the resource pool represented by the Global Partnership for
Education. Burundi must work to reduce population growth through better public information and the
provision of reproductive services in the context of RBF. The most recent demographic and health survey
(2012) reveals unmet demand for family planning.
50. Programmatic development policy operations supported the Government’s actions in a particular area over
a period of time which facilitate policy reforms by the Government that could otherwise have been
difficult to achieve without sustained engagement. These operations were a good instrument for
facilitating door coordination in critical areas where a number of development partners wished to engage
such as the economic growth enhancing initiatives and improving public financial management.
51. Governance and accountability remain a challenge. The Bank should continue its focus on PFM issues and
support the Government in reducing corruption, improving external and internal audit, and foster good
governance and accountability through the training of civil servants and by creating public demand for the
transparent delivery of public services.
.

60

Annex 1: CASCR Results Matrix
CAS Outcomes
Lending and Non-lending
& Results Indicators
Status and
Activities that Contributed to the
(from CAS PR)
Evaluation Summary
Outcome
CAS STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE I: PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE AND BROAD-BASED ECONOMIC
GROWTH
1.1 Increased productivity of food crops
and high-value export crops
PRASAB: Agriculture
Food crops
Rehabilitation and Sustainable Land
- Irrigated rice: from 4.0 tons/ha (2008) to - Achieved Irrigated rice:5
Management (FY05) and
> 5.0 tons/ha by 2012
tons/ha
Additional Financing (FY08)
- Cassava: from 10 tons/ha (2008) to at
PAGE: Economic Management
least 18 tons/ha by 2012
- Partially achieved Cassava:
Support (FY04)
12 tons/ha
- Milk: from 5 l/cow/day (2008) 8
PRODEMA: Agro-Pastoral
l/cow/day by 2012
Productivity and Markets
- Partially Achieved Milk: 6
- Palm oil: from 2.2 tons/ha (2008) to 3.0
Development Project (FY10)
l/cow/day
tons/ha of oil by 2012
Road Sector Development (FY04)
Export crops
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)
Achieved
Palm
oil:
3
tons/ha
- At least 30 (of 117) coffee washing
Lake Victoria-regional (FY11)
stations are sold to private investors by
2012
Ongoing/Planned AAA and TFs:
- Achieved 41 coffee washing
Coffee Sector Strategic
stations have been privatized
Environmental Assessment
by 2012
1.2 Improved business environment
- At least 70% of Government arrears to
PAGE: Economic Management
- Achieved All arrears to the
the private sector have been cleared by
Support (FY04)
private sector have been
2012
Financial and Private Sector
settled (by May 2011)
Development (FY10)
- Achieved Considerable
- Commercial court cases where the delays
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)
reduction in delays of court
in rendering judgment is over 60 days
cases to 10% of cases beyond Investment Climate Reform
reduced from 40% in 2008 to below 25%
Program (IFC/WB)
the 60 day deadline (by July
in 2012
2009)
1.3 Improved infrastructural services
with enhanced regional integration
Roads
- 51% of paved road network in good and
fair condition by 2012 (from 21% in
2008)
Water
- 363,200 people served with access to
improved water in Bujumbura (with
surroundings) in 2012, compared
to185,000 in 2008
Energy
- Unplanned power interruptions reduced
from 3,100 minutes of unplanned MV
interruptions/quarter in 2007 to 2,000 in
2012
ICT
- Annual volume of international Internet
traffic from 250 (Mbit/s simplex) in
2007 to500 in 2011

- Partially Achieved 320,000
people served with access to
improved water in Bujumbura

Road Sector Development (FY04)
and Additional Financing (FY11)
Multisectoral Water and Electricity
infrastructure (FY08)
Regional Communications
Infrastructure Project (RCIP)
(FY08)
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)

- Achieved 1,500 minutes in
2011

Tariff study on water and electricity
(FY11); Study on management of
public stand posts (FY12)

- Achieved 78% of paved
roads in good and fair
conditions

- Not available (no data for
2010)

61

CAS STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE II: IMPROVING ACCESS TO SOCIAL SERVICES AND
CONSOLIDATION OF SOCIAL STABILITY
2.1 Improved reintegration of excombatants and vulnerable
groups
- Achieved 90% of beneficiaries
Emergency Demobilization &
- 70% of beneficiaries (ex-combatants)
(ex-combatants) report being in Transitional Reintegration Project
report being in a similar economic
a similar economic situation to
(FY09)
situation to that of their peers in the
that of their peers in the
Public Works and Urban
community
community
Management (FY09)
Agriculture Rehabilitation and
- Achieved 2,000,575 in 2011
Sustainable Land Management
- 500,000 person-days short-term
(and 48,000 permanent jobs
(FY05) and Additional Financing
employment created through laborcreated by road maintenance)
(FY08)
intensive public works by 2012
Community and Social
(accumulative number)
- Achieved 120,000 returnees
Development (FY07)
and displaced persons have
Road Sector Development (FY04)
- 120,000 returnees and displaced
been effectively reinserted into
and Additional Financing (FY11)
persons have been effectively
their communities
reinserted into their communities
(from zero in 2005) by 2012
2.2 More efficient and transparent
public financial management
- Draft annual budget prepared on the
- Partially Achieved annual
PAGE: Economic Management
basis of new Budget law and
budget is prepared on the basis
Support (FY04)
presented to National Assembly 3
of the new budget law but delays PARSEB: Education Sector
months before beginning of the fiscal
in presenting the budget to the
Recon. (FY07)
year from 2009 onwards
National Assembly continue
Second Multi-Sector HIV/AIDS
(FY08)
Health Sector Development
Support (FY09)
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)
Public Works Additional
Financing (FY12)
2.3 Improved access to and quality of
basic social services and
decreased vulnerability to
PARSEB: Education Sector
HIV/AIDS
Education
- Partially achieved current rate
Recon. (FY07)
- Increase in the primary completion
is 51%
Second Multi-Sector HIV/AIDS
rate from 40% in 2006/7 to 65% in
(FY08)
2012
- Achieved Primary GER 134%
Health Sector Development
- Increase in primary gross enrollment
in 2009
Support (FY09)
rate (GER) from 80% in 2005/06 to
PRADEC: Community and Social
100% in 2010
- Achieved 49.1
Dev. (FY07)
Regional Great Lakes Initiative on
- Improvement in student teacher ratio
- Partially achieved 2:1
HIV/AIDS
from 57:1 (2006/07) to 50 ( 2012)
- Achieved parity reached in 2010 Multi-Sector Water and Electricity
- Textbooks per student in French &
Infrastructure (FY08)
Kirundi increase from 3:1 in 2006 to
1:1 in 2012
- Achieved 87% in 2009
- Reach parity in ratio of girls to boys
in primary (%)
Child and Maternal Health
- % of children covered by

- Achieved 64% in 2009
- Achieved 66% in 2010

62

DPT3/pentavalent 3 vaccine before
reaching age one from 63% in 2005 to
at least 80% over the CAS period
- % of assisted births increase from
37% in 2006 to at least 45% by 2012
- % of pregnant women with at least
three ante-natal care visits increase
from 20% to 40% by 2012
HIV/AIDS
- 20% of HIV-infected pregnant
women receive complete PMTCT
services by 2012 (6% in 2008)

- Achieved 41% in 2011

63

Annex 2: CASCR - Planned Lending Program and Actual Delivery

Fiscal
Year

2009

2010

2011

Original CAS Program

•
•
•
•

Economic Reform Support Grant II (DPO)
Health Sector Support
Second Public Works and Urban Management
Emergency Demobilization and Transitional
Reintegration Project
Subtotal
•
Economic Support Reform Grant III (DPO)
•
Agriculture (Agro-Pastoral Productivity and
Markets Development Project)
•
Public Enterprise and Financial Sector (Financial
& Private Sector Development Project)
•
(Regional) Lake Victoria Environment
Management
Subtotal
•
Economic Support Reform Grant IV (DPO)
•
Additional Financing: Roads
•
(Regional) Transport
•
(Regional) Hydropower (Rusumo Falls
Hydroelectric and Multipurpose Project)

Original IDA
Amount
(US$ million)

Status

30.0
25.0
45.0

Actual
Actual
Actual

National
30.0
25.0
45.0

10.0

Actual

10.0

110.0
25.0
43.0

Actual

110.0
25.0

Actual

43.0

Actual
Slipped to FY11

19.0

5.0
89.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0

Actual
Actual
Slipped
Slipped to FY12

16.0

Additional Planned
Emergency Electric Infrast. Project
Additional Financing-Financial and Private
Sector Dvpt Project
(Regional) Lake Victoria Env. Mgmt

2012

Subtotal
IDA 15 Subtotal
•
Economic Support Reform Grant V
•
Additional Financing: Second Public Works
•
(Regional) Hydropower (Rusumo Falls
Hydroelectric and Multipurpose Project)
Subtotal
TOTAL

Revised IDA Amount
(US$ million)

70.0
269.0
35.0
15.0
27.0

64

CRW
-----

--

--

---

---

----

----

--

15.4

Actual
Actual

-8.0

Actual

5.0
60.0
257.0
35.0
15.0
--

----40.0

15.4
15.4
----

50.0
307.0

40.0
40.0

-15.4

Actual (Dec. 2011)
Actual (May 2012)
Slipped to FY13

77.0
346.0

87.0
25.0
22.0

Regional
-----

Annex 3: CASCR - Planned Non- Lending Program and Actual Delivery
Fiscal Year
2009

Analytical and Advisory Activities by CAS Theme
Financial Sector Assessment Program (ESW)
Public Expenditure Financial Accountability – PEFA (ESW)
Poverty & PRSP TA BPRP (TA)
Legal and institutional framework for privatization (TA)
Option for pay reform (TA)
Petroleum Sector Technical Advice (TA)

2010
Country Economic Memorandum (Core ESW)
Debt Management Performance Assessment (ESW)
GAC Strategy Development (TA)
Quantitative Macro-Fiscal Framework (TA)
Review of Poverty Reduction and Transport Strategies (TA)
Investment Climate Reform Program (WB/IFC Advisory)
2011
Public Expenditure Review (ESW)
Coffee Sector Strategic Environmental Assessment (TA)
Investment Climate Reform Program (WB/IFC Advisory)
Development of Financial Sector (TA)
2012
Public Expenditure Review (ESW)
Trade Work (ESW)
Support for set-up of Distance Learning Center (TA)
Extending Medium Term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEF) Capacity
Building (TA)
Investment Climate Reform Program (WB/IFC Advisory)
Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism
(AML/CFT) Assessment (ESW)
TA - Technical Assistance
ESW - Economic and Sector Work

65

IBRD 33380

BURUNDI
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

MAIN ROADS

PROVINCE CAPITALS

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

NATIONAL CAPITAL

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

RIVERS

29°E

30°E

Lake
Kivu

31°E
To
Kigali

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

To
Gitarama

R WANDA

To
Cyangugu

Kagera

Lake
Rweru

Lake
Cohoha

KIRUNDO

Kirundo

CIBITOKE

MUYINGA

u
uv
uv

To
Rulenge

Muyinga

To
Nyakanura

Ngozi
Kayanza

Rusiba

Ruvuvu

Musada

Karuzi

BUBANZA
YA

Mwaro

RUYIGI
p un
gu

Mt. Heha
(2,670 m)

To
Kibondo

Rum

U

Cankuzo

Ruyiga

GITEGA

M

JU
B

Gitega

WA R O
M WA

Bukirasazi

TA NZA NIA

Matana

BURURI

Rumonge

4°S

Bururi

si

To
Kakonko

CANKUZO

vu
vu
Ru

L uvironza

V
AM

BU

DEM. REP.
OF CONGO

R

MU

RA

BUJUMBURA

M w eru

KARUZI
Muramvya

To
Uvira

3°S

Buhiga

AYA N Z A
AY
K AYA

Bubanza

Rus
izi

y

NGOZI

Cibitoke

3°S

an

R

K

ar

u

To
Butare

Mutangaro

R U TA N A
Rutana

Most distant
headwater of
the Nile River

4°S

Makamba

MAKAMBA

Lake
Tanganyika

Mabanda

Mu

BURUNDI

i

Nyanza-Lac

To
Kasulu

0

0

29°E

z
ara
r ag

10

20

10

30°E

30

20

40 Kilometers

30 Miles

31°E
SEPTEMBER 2004

