Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 67567-MN

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
MONGOLIA

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR THE PERIOD FY2013-2017

China, Mongolia and Korea Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region
International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific Region
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

Last Country Interim Strategy Note: May 21, 2009 (Report No. 48311-MN)
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS (as of April 2, 2012)
Currency Unit: Mongolian Tugrik (MNT)
US$1.00 = MNT 1,317
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
AMC
CAE
CGAP
CPI
CPPR
CPRT
CPS
CSO
DIME
DP
EBRD

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
Asset Management Company
Country Assistance Evaluation
Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
Consumer Price Index
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Country Portfolio and Results Monitoring Tool
Country Partnership Strategy
Civil Society Organization
Development Impact Evaluation Initiative
Democratic Party
European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
EGSPRS Economic Growth Support and Poverty
Reduction Strategy
EITI
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
ESW
Economic and Sector Work
EU
European Union
FM
Financial Management
FSAP
Financial Sector Assessment Program
FSL
Fiscal Stability Law
FY
Fiscal Year
GAFSP Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GEF
Global Environmental Facility
GIZ
German Society for International Cooperation
GNI
Gross National Income
GPF
Governance Partnership Facility
GPE
Global Partnership for Education
HDF
Human Development Fund
IAAC
Independent Authority Against Corruption
IBL
Integrated Budget Law
IBRD
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
ICT
Information and Communication Technology
ICR
Implementation Completion Report
IDA
International Development Association
IDF
Institutional Development Fund
IEG
Independent Evaluation Group
IFC
International Finance Corporation

Vice President
Director
Task Team Leader

IDA
Pamela Cox
Klaus Rohland
Coralie Gevers/Lasse Melgaard

IMF
ISN
JICA
JSDF
MCC
M&E
MDF
MDGs
MDTF
MIGA
MSME
MSTA

International Monetary Fund
Interim Strategy Note
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Japan Social Development Fund
Millennium Challenge Corporation
Monitoring and Evaluation
Microfinance Development Fund
Millennium Development Goals
Multi Donor Trust Fund
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Micro Small and Medium Enterprise
Mongolia Multi-sector Technical Assistance
Project
MTDS Medium Term Debt Management Strategy
NDIC
National Development and Innovation
Committee
NGO
Non Governmental Organization
NLP
National Livestock Program
NSO
National Statistical Office
OBI
Open Budget Index
OCR
Ordinary Capital Resources, ADB
ODA
Official Development Assistance
PFM
Public Financial Management
PPP
Public Private Partnership
PRI
Political Risk Insurance
RAMP Reserve Asset Management Program
READ Rural Education and Development Project
RETF
Recipient Executed Trust Fund
ROSC Reports on Observance of Standards and Codes
SDR
Special Drawing Rights
SIP
Small Investment Program
SLP
Sustainable Livelihoods Project
SME
Small- and Medium Enterprise
TA
Technical Assistance
UB
Ulaanbaataar
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
WBI
World Bank Institute
WHO
World Health Organization

IFC
Karin Finkelston
Sergio Pimenta
Hyun-Chan Cho/Tomoko Suzuki

MIGA
Izumi Kobayashi
Kevin Lu
Paul Barbour

FY2013-2017 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR MONGOLIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ i
I. Mongolia – A Country on the Verge of an Unprecedented Mineral-Led Transformation ................. 1
A. Managing Revenues and Investing Them For Today’s and Future Generations .......................... 1
B. A Unique Opportunity To Build on Past Development Progress and Address Remaining
Challenges .......................................................................................................................................... 3
C. Economic Context ......................................................................................................................... 7
D. Political, Institutional and Governance Context ............................................................................ 9
II. Lessons Learned From Past World Bank Group Engagement in Mongolia ................................... 12
III. The Government’s Development Priorities and How The World Bank Group Will Support Them
.............................................................................................................................................................. 15
A. Mongolia’s Medium-Term Priorities .......................................................................................... 15
B. Resources that the World Bank Group Can Provide To Support Mongolia’s Development
Priorities ........................................................................................................................................... 17
C. Strategic Areas That The World Bank Group Will Support And Expected Results ................... 20
IV. Implementation Modalities and Risks ........................................................................................... 26
A. Implementation and monitoring of the Country Partnership Strategy ........................................ 26
B. Managing Risks ........................................................................................................................... 27
V. Attachments .................................................................................................................................... 30
Mongolia: CPS FY2013-2017: Results Matrix ................................................................................ 30
Worldwide Governance Indicators for Mongolia (2010, 2005, 2000) ............................................. 37
Mongolia CAS and ISN Completion Report ................................................................................... 38
World Bank Group Financial Products for IBRD Clients................................................................ 73
Development Partners Matrix (Financial and Analytical Assistance) ............................................. 74
Standard CAS Annexes .................................................................................................................... 76
Map of Mongolia: IBRD No. 33449R1

iii

Boxes:
Box 1: Progress in Achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)…………………….4
Box 2: The Tale of A Mining-dependent Economy……………………………………………....8
Box 3: Client Survey……………………………………………………………………………..17
Box 4: Using WB Programs to Engage Other Development Partners and Generate Greater
Impact..…………………………………………………………………………………………..20
Tables:
Table 1: Mongolia: Medium Term Forecasts……………………………….……………………9
Table 2: Indicative CPS Program………………………………………………………………..21

iv

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Over the past 20 years, Mongolia has transformed itself from a socialist country to a vibrant multiparty democracy with a booming economy. Mongolia is at the threshold of a major transformation
driven by the exploitation of its vast mineral resources and the share of mining in GDP today stands
at 20 percent, twice the ratio of a decade ago. The economy grew by 17.3 percent in 2011, compared
to 6.4 percent GDP growth in 2010. GDP is expected to grow at a double digit rate over the course of
the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) period.
This economic growth has translated into some benefits for the people of Mongolia. Poverty has been
on a downward trend over the past decade. Most recently, it decreased from 39.2 percent in 2010 to
29.8 percent in 2011. Substantial progress has also been made in regard to several Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) at the national level, though significant regional disparities prevail.
To ensure sustainable and inclusive growth, Mongolia will need to strengthen institutional capacity
to manage public revenues efficiently and limit the effects of Dutch Disease; allocate its resources
effectively among spending, investing, and saving; reduce poverty; and offer equal opportunities to
all its citizens in urban and rural areas. It needs to do this in a manner which protects the environment
and intergenerational equity.
In 2008, Parliament approved the MDG-Based Comprehensive National Development Strategy of
Mongolia. The document sets a 14-year development path: the first phase (2007-2015) will focus on
achieving the MDGs and actively developing the country’s economy; the second phase (2016-2021)
will be dedicated to transitioning to a knowledge-based economy.
The World Bank Group’s CPS is aligned with Mongolia’s Comprehensive National Development
Strategy. It identifies three areas which the World Bank Group will support over the next five years
(FY13-FY17):


Enhance Mongolia’s Capacity to Manage the Mining Economy Sustainably and
Transparently. There are two outcomes: (i) supported the country in developing a
regulatory environment, institutional capacity, and infrastructure for world-class mining,
and (ii) supported the Government in designing and implementing policies and systems for
a more robust, equitable, and transparent management of public revenues and expenditures.



Build a Sustained and Diversified Basis for Economic Growth and Employment in Urban
and Rural Areas. There are two outcomes: (i) enhanced the investment climate and
financial intermediation, and (ii) created more opportunities in the rural economy for
enhanced livelihoods.



Address Vulnerabilities through Improved Access to Services and Better Service Delivery,
Safety Net Provision, and Improved Disaster Risk Management. There are three outcomes:
(i) worked with the Government on the design, adaptation, and implementation of a
comprehensive social protection system that supports the poor, (ii) supported better
delivery of basic services (education, health, justice, and infrastructure), and (iii) reduced
vulnerability of households exposed to natural hazards and pollution.

i

The CPS incorporates the lessons identified by the CAS/ISN Completion Report: (i) build in
flexibility to take account of transitions and emerging priorities, (ii) ensure alignment, focus on fewer
outcomes and ensure a clear results framework, (iii) design programs/projects to minimize
implementation challenges, (iv) take a programmatic approach to AAA, and (v) consider the longerterm role of the Bank in Mongolia and ensure flexibility of the Bank’s engagement as the country
graduates from IDA to IBRD.
The CPS period (FY13-17) spans across two IDA replenishment periods: IDA16 (FY12-14) and
IDA17 (FY15-17). The indicative IDA16 allocation for FY12-FY14 is SDR64.8 million. SDR22.7
million has already been firmly allocated for FY12 and IDA16 allocation for FY13-FY14 (SDR42.1
million) is indicative only. During this CPS period, Mongolia will start accessing IBRD resources. A
pipeline of projects that could potentially be financed with IBRD funds is being developed, and
initial ideas have been included in the lending program.
In delivering its program, the World Bank Group will continue to establish platforms for engagement
with Development Partners in areas of strategic relevance to its program. They contribute to
enhancing donor coordination and aid harmonization and reducing transaction cost. The Bank will
continue playing an active role in formal donor coordination forums by co-chairing meetings of the
Government and Development Partners.
As Presidential and Parliamentary elections will take place early on during the CPS period, the
World Bank Group will maintain flexibility in its program to adjust to new Government priorities. It
will also focus on helping the Government prepare for potential risks such as a slowdown in the
global economy, deterioration in governance, and shocks from natural disasters.

ii

I. MONGOLIA – A COUNTRY ON THE VERGE OF AN UNPRECEDENTED MINERAL-LED
TRANSFORMATION
A. MANAGING REVENUES AND INVESTING THEM FOR TODAY’S AND FUTURE GENERATIONS
1.
Mongolia has gone through 20 years of democratic transition and market-based economic
reforms. Since the end of socialist rule in early 1990, the people of Mongolia have made great strides
towards transforming the country into a stable multi-party democracy in which civil society is
playing an increasing role and openly calls for greater transparency and accountability. The classic
range of post-socialism economic reforms have also been adopted and implemented.
2.
It is now experiencing a rapid economic transformation that is generated by mineral
discoveries. The economy has traditionally been based on livestock herding. Starting in the past
decade, a boom in mining exploration confirmed the existence of large mineral deposits – notably
copper, uranium, coal, iron ore, and gold. Investments are turning these into world class mineral
projects: Oyu Tolgoi will become one of the five largest copper and gold mines in the world; the
Tavan Tolgoi mine, which the Government is currently negotiating with investors, will supply highquality coking coal for more than 100 years. The share of mining in GDP today stands at 20 percent,
twice the rate of a decade ago. In recent years, the mining sector has contributed around a third of
total government receipts, through royalty payments and direct and indirect taxes. In 2011, the export
share of minerals reached its highest level yet, 90 percent.
3.
In 2013, copper and gold output from Oyu Tolgoi will commence, instantly trebling
national output of these minerals and resulting in more than a quadrupling of GDP within a few
years. By 2016, the mining sector is expected to contribute more than half of the GDP. The export
share of minerals may hover around 95 percent. When other mines will be developed, notably Tavan
Tolgoi, the mining sector share of GDP and of exports will rise even further. The depth of
dependence will soon place Mongolia alongside the most highly dependent mineral-rich economies,
with Mongolia’s economy more alike with one of an oil-rich state.
4.
The mining boom carries with it all the well-known risks associated with mineraldependency. These range from the “Dutch Disease” – with its exposure to commodity price
volatility, an appreciating currency and inflation, and unemployment in the non-mining sector – to
the “natural resource curse”, with rising corruption, deepening inequality, and social disruptions or
even conflicts.
5.
Mongolia is on a cusp of a transformation and has the unique opportunity to overcome
many of the development challenges it has faced in the past and to take a path towards sustainable
and inclusive growth. How can it manage public revenues efficiently? How can it allocate its
resources effectively among spending, investing (in infrastructure and human development), and
saving? How can it reduce poverty and offer equal opportunities to all its citizens – be it in urban or
rural areas? How does it balance the needs of today’s generation with the aspirations of future
generations? How does it do so in a way that will respect the environment? Such decisions – and
more critically, their implementation – will require a higher level of institutional capacity more in
line with other middle-income countries.
6.
More specifically, mining rents will need to be efficiently and transparently captured by the
state as revenues. This will depend on the capacity of several public sector institutions, ranging from
the mining cadastre to tax administration. So far, Mongolia’s performance in these areas has been

1

satisfactory and it is working on further needed improvements. For one, fighting corruption will
require greater attention, if only for the sheer magnitude of the rents and resource flows involved.
7.
The mining revenues will need to be proactively and sustainably managed to avoid an
appreciating currency, inflation and credit risks. This implies adopting counter-cyclical fiscal
policies, and avoiding over-borrowing and over-spending. Mongolia has adopted a set of fiscal rules
which would achieve these goals under the Fiscal Stability Law (FSL) of 2010 and the Integrated
Budget Law (IBL) of 2011. Adhering to the spirit and letter of these laws will be critical for
Mongolia to limit the effects of Dutch Disease on the economy. A corollary is to apply the same
principles to the private sector, in particular the sectors likely to fall prey to the pro-cyclical trends of
a mining-dependent economy (e.g., banking sector, construction). Mongolia scores relatively poorly
in this area, based on past and current practice.
8.
The mining sector, its associated infrastructure, and the upstream and downstream
economic sectors will need to be supported in order for the current high growth to continue
without running into capacity constraints. Given the size of the necessary investments in
infrastructure and services, its effective delivery will depend in great part on the soundness of the
public expenditure management systems – planning, budgeting, procurement, private financing – and
the speed at which the Government can strengthen these systems.
9.
In the presence of a mining sector which will tend to command priority access to the
economy’s scarce resources (i.e., capital and skilled labor), the non-mining sectors will face the
formidable challenge of being the source of livelihood for a substantial part of the population.
Successful diversification, often elusive for mineral-dependent economies, will be one of the keys to
meeting the objectives of full employment and poverty reduction. Success will depend on providing
the type of infrastructure and policies that will reduce the cost of doing business across a range of
sectors and maximize the chances of successful innovation.
10.
It will also depend on improving education services so that a trained labor force can be
employed in the mining and non-mining sectors. While the expansion of the mining sector will
create many opportunities, it is highly unlikely that there will be a seamless shift of workers from the
low-skilled agricultural sector, which accounts for nearly 40 percent of total employment, into the
expanding ones (mining and private non-tradable sectors such as transportation, construction,
financial and retail). Indeed, there are already growing concerns that the ongoing mining boom is
fuelling inequality by placing a premium on skilled labor. Investments in quality social services can
be both growth- and equity-enhancing, but policy and institutional frameworks and delivery systems
which use incremental resources efficiently will be essential.
11.
As the economic benefits of growth will not be shared equally, the country will need to
develop its own approach towards inclusive growth for today’s and future generations. Concerns
about inequality are increasing rapidly, with growing demands for a wider and quicker redistribution
of mineral wealth. The impact on public policy is shown in the rising share of universal cash
handouts in government expenditures in recent years. While this approach may be satisfactory in the
short term, it is fiscally unsustainable and ineffective. It also raises an issue of inter-generational
equity: natural resources are depleted to support immediate consumption instead of being invested
for the benefit of future generations. It will be important to ensure that some of the mining revenues
are invested in human capital, sustainable social protection and population health in a way that
enhances equality of opportunity and avoids increased social segmentation. Recent reforms of the
social assistance system to replace the untargeted and inefficient cash transfers with a poverty
targeted benefit represent a positive step into this direction.
2

12.
The present social services system is characterized by structural weaknesses that
undermine equity in financing and delivery. Channeling huge incremental mineral revenues into
these systems risks exacerbating inequalities, and policy and structural changes are needed to ensure
that they are equitable, efficient, and of good quality. Reforming the pension system to create a more
equitable system across cohorts that takes into account the needs from the older population will be an
important part of the policy agenda. The socio-economic prospects of the transformation which is
currently taking place depend on how well the process is managed.
13.
In recent years, Mongolia has studied the experience of a range of mining-rich countries
to learn from their achievements and mistakes – including Chile, Canada, Botswana, Norway, and
Australia. As a result, policymakers are highly aware that turning the mining wealth into sustained
prosperity for all Mongolians will require a more developed policy and institutional framework that
can address multiple challenges.
B. A UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY TO BUILD ON PAST DEVELOPMENT PROGRESS AND ADDRESS
REMAINING CHALLENGES
14.
Mongolia is a country with a rich nomadic culture that faces a range of natural
constraints. It is the least densely populated country in the world with 2.75 million people inhabiting
a territory three times the size of France. About 1.2 million people live in the capital Ulaanbaatar and
the rest are spread across small urban centers and vast steppes where they herd cattle, sheep, goats,
horses, yaks and camels. It is the second largest landlocked country in the world, with two giant
neighbors that are strong economic locomotives. Living conditions – particularly in rural areas and in
poor urban areas – are harsh, and infrastructure services are limited at best. Wintertime temperatures
often dip below -30 degrees Celsius, growing and construction seasons are short, and natural
productivity is low with arable land constituting only 1 percent of the total area.
15.
The recent economic transformation has brought significant benefits to the population.
The GNI per capita went from US$480 in 2004 to US$1,890 in 2010. Progress has also been made in
regard to several Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) at the national level, though it masks
significant regional disparities (see Box 1 and At-A-Glance table in CAS Annex A2). The National
Statistical Office (NSO), which estimates poverty through nationwide household surveys, found that
poverty remained stagnant around 35 percent between 2002 and 2008, went up to 39.2 percent in
2010, and dropped to 29.8 percent in 2011. Poverty remains higher among the population in rural
areas (33.3 percent in 2011) than in urban centers (26.6 percent in 2011). It is worth noting that the
national poverty line between 2002, 2008, and 2010 was raised in real terms, but was kept constant
between 2010 and 20111. If the poverty line had been kept constant in real terms throughout the
period, one would have observed a significant reduction in poverty between 2002/2003 and
2008/2009. Improvements in standard of living can also be seen in other measures of wellbeing. For
example, the number of heads of livestock per households increased significantly during the same
period, in particular among the poorest households.
16.
Strong economic growth may translate into a further reduction in poverty. Yet, inequality
in opportunities and outcomes may rise as the economy increasingly relies on the mining sector.
Measured through the Gini coefficient, inequality in household per capita consumption increased
from 32.9 in 2003 to 35.8 in 2008. Emerging evidence of such divergence can be seen in the rapid
increase in salaries of skilled workers juxtaposed to a decline of real wages in the informal sector.
1

The change in the real poverty line up to 2010 allowed NSO to reflect changing preferences and consumption patterns in a
rapidly growing economy but with the consequence that these data are not comparable over time.

3

Appropriate social policies that promote equality of opportunity in access to basic services, targeted
and sustainable social welfare programs to improve secondary income distribution, and other labor
and social protection policies would mitigate further increase in inequality.
Box 1: Progress in achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
Mongolia has made significant progress towards achieving a number of MDGs, but is off track on meeting
certain key goals. It has achieved targets for child mortality (MDG 4), and has high primary education enrolment
(MDG 2). It has made strong progress on maternal health (MDG 5), though it will have to further accelerate
efforts to achieve the goal by 2015 and will need to reverse the downward trend in women’s political
empowerment.
Mongolia has made mixed progress towards MDG 7 on Ensuring Environmental Sustainability. Access to safe
drinking water has increased but the proportion of the population using improved sanitation facilities has not
changed from 1995 levels. And while progress has been made in integrating sustainable development policies and
programs – including an increase in protected water sources – these successes have also been accompanied by
worsening environmental degradation in some areas, including increased urban air pollution and desertification.

17.
School enrolment rates are high for girls and boys at all levels, but significant disparities
in educational outcome by location and overall system quality remain a concern. The result of the
2008 national assessment showed that sampled Grade 5 students on average scored below 41 percent
correct in reading and 32 percent correct in mathematics. The challenge of improving the quality of
basic education is compounded by the fact that many children who begin Grade 1 are not ready for
school. Currently, 24 percent of those aged 2-5 do not have access to early childhood education due
to lack of kindergarten facilities – the vast majority of them from disadvantaged communities.
Overall, developing a skills base to support the development of a middle-income country will require
sustained reform across all levels of the education and training system, including in partnership with
the private sector where appropriate.
18.
Despite good achievements in health relative to Mongolia’s income level, the health system
can be improved. Mongolia has reached several of the health-related MDGs. However, health care
utilization and outcomes are increasingly characterized by large inequalities, both geographic and
socioeconomic. There are wide disparities across the country in maternal mortality and child health.
Adult mortality rates are on the rise, driven by a rising incidence of non-communicable diseases. The
availability and quality of social services in rural areas is hard to maintain and will take on new
dimensions with the proposed decentralization of primary health care. Underlying are systemic
problems with health services financing and delivery. Social health insurance lacks a long-term
strategy for achieving universal coverage. A strategic priority in the health sector is to reorient the
system towards a greater reliance on primary care. This will require capacity and systems to monitor
quality, and promote greater coordination of care across levels of the health system.
19.
Much has been achieved in improving gender equality in education and health. Education
gaps have been reversed at all levels of education and girls now account for more than half of the
students in tertiary education. Fertility rates stand today at 2. Maternal mortality was reduced from
130 per 100,000 live births in 1990 to 65 in 2009. However, violence against women remains
alarmingly high with almost 20 percent of women surveyed by the National Statistical Office in 2009

4

reporting to have been subjected to physical violence by a husband or partner 2. The gender gap in life
expectancy is also widening due to a worrying increase in adult male mortality.
20.
There are persistent inequalities in economic opportunities for women. Although labor
force participation remains adequate at 56 percent in 2010, average remuneration is lower for
women. According to a recent analysis by the World Bank, women tend to retire early and are
completely absent in some economic sectors: they continue to be over-represented in unpaid or lowpaid jobs and under-represented in lucrative sectors such as transport. Under current policies, women
are allowed to retire five years earlier than men, although women live on average seven years longer.
21.
There has been a marked decline in women’s opportunities to express their political voice,
but Parliament has recently been taking action in support of women’s participation. The
proportion of women elected to the State Great Khural gradually fell from 23 percent in 1990 to 4
percent today. However, 2011 also saw the passage of two important legislations. A Gender Equality
Law was developed with broad consultations and was adopted by Parliament in 2011. The Parliament
also recently prescribed a 20 percent quota for women’s participation on party lists starting with the
2012 parliamentary elections.
22.
The rapid mining-driven economic growth also has a significant environmental footprint
that is unsustainable. Much of the country’s growth is derived and will continue to be generated
from its natural capital (around 58 percent of country’s wealth consist of minerals, forest resources,
cropland and pastureland). Some 80 percent of the land area is grassland, representing the largest
remaining contiguous area of common grazing in the world, with large herds of migratory gazelles
and the world’s largest population of wild ass. In the past two decades, a combination of human
actions and natural causes has led to a significant decline in grassland quality: 70 percent of
Mongolia’s grasslands are affected by desertification, and the forest area has decreased by 25
percent. Human actions include changes in conventional livestock husbandry leading to overgrazing,
and poor management of mining activities.
23.
Major issues are emerging in water resources management, with growing competition for
water use for mining, livestock, conservation flows and human consumption. Water resources are
rapidly declining and the quality is believed to be deteriorating quickly. The on-going and planned
mining developments in southern Mongolia will require significant quantities of groundwater. The
impact of abstracting up to 350,000 cubic meters of groundwater per day on local communities and
herders are as yet unknown. Their livelihood depends on groundwater from wells and springs.
24.
Mongolia is highly vulnerable to climate risks because of its geographic location, extreme
weather and fragile ecosystems. Climate risks in the country pose serious burdens on its
development with an array of interrelated consequences for every sector of the society. They can
affect peoples’ living standards both short and longer term. According to Mongolia’s National Action
Program on Climate Change, the future climate scenarios project: (i) increased air temperature (2.13 Celsius and 3.1-5 Celsius by mid and end century respectively), the rate of increase is 2-3 times
higher than the global average; (ii) increased precipitation in some areas; and (iii) reduction of water
resources and arable land as potential evapo-transpiration increases would be 6-10 times higher than
precipitation increases. Melting of permafrost, which covers more than 60 percent of the territory of
Mongolia, will have adverse impacts on agriculture, water resources and infrastructure development.
Agriculture and livestock, which are already heavily exposed to climate risks (such as dzuds 2

“Gender Based Violence in Mongolia – overview of studies and preventive actions”, 2010/11, UNICEF, UNDP and UNFPA
jointly with the National Committee on Gender (NCGE) and Center for Excellence in Social Work.

5

extremely harsh winters in which livestock is unable to find fodder under the snow cover), will
continue to remain vulnerable, and large shocks will affect Mongolia’s society and overall economy.
25.
Agriculture employs about 40 percent of the workforce, but contributes less than 15
percent of GDP. Livestock constitutes 63 percent of the assets of rural households. Still, almost half
of the herders live on incomes below the national poverty line. The majority of herders have fewer
than 100 heads of livestock, which is considered too few to provide sufficient income to support a
household. The effects of dzuds –– and consequent high levels of livestock mortality -- have had a
major impact on rural poverty. A series of dzuds between 1999 and 2002 were unprecedented but
have been surpassed by events in 2009/10, as a result of which close to 10 million of the country’s
estimated 44 million livestock perished. While there is no scientific evidence that climate change is
leading to more frequent or severe dzuds, there are fears that such events will become more frequent
and/or severe while the country is also getting warmer and drier. The devastating loss of livestock as
a result of these climate events has prompted a large number of herders to move to urban areas in
search of employment.
26.
In addition to having to contend with climatic risks, the development of the livestock sector
is limited by its lack of integration into global supply chains, and lack of higher value-added
production. Herders are increasingly exposed to shocks in international commodity, specifically
cashmere, prices. Cashmere, considered a luxury good, is particularly volatile and sensitive to
economic turndowns in consumer markets. In addition, livestock sector management is not meeting
international standards of production that would enable it to export on a large scale to international
markets. Furthermore, Mongolia’s livestock sector is vulnerable to infectious diseases which could
be better controlled. Diseases such as foot and mouth and brucellosis are prevalent despite substantial
but not prioritized public spending on disease prevention. Over the longer term, the risk remains that
“Dutch Disease” may erode the competitiveness of the agricultural sector as it would be unable to
raise its prices in response to rising domestic input prices.
27.
Mongolia’s rapid urbanization adds pressure to urban services, particularly in
Ulaanbaatar and small cities close to mining sites. An increasing share of the population has moved
to urban centers in search of better economic opportunities and social services. Ulaanbaatar has seen
its population doubled to 1.2 million3 in just two decades and it is expected to reach 1.9 million by
20304. Most of Ulaanbaatar’s in-migrants settle in unplanned peri-urban “ger areas”. These informal
settlements currently comprise 60 percent of the city’s residents and 90 percent of its administrative
area. Until recently they were viewed as temporary and did not benefit from the city’s development
planning or investments. Most urban infrastructure was constructed in the 1970s, and utility services,
such as water supply, heating, and electricity, have reached capacity limits. As a result, residents in
ger areas suffer from limited or no access to public services. Over 95 percent of roads are unpaved.
They become impassible due to rain or ice and in the summer, rising dust also contributes to air
pollution. Ger area residents suffer from higher rates of unemployment and rely more heavily on the
informal sector for their livelihoods.
28.
The urban environment, in particular air quality, is fast deteriorating causing significant
health problems. To heat their homes in winter and cook, nearly 85 percent of urban residents rely
on wood- or coal-burning stoves that are highly polluting. On a cold winter day, the concentration of
particulate matters in Ulaanbaatar’s ger areas can be up to 35 times higher than the WHO standards,
leading to a high incidence of respiratory diseases, especially for children, and cardiovascular
3
4

According to 2010 Population and Housing Census, the population of UB city is 1.16 million.
JICA, the Study on City Master Plan and Urban Development Program for Ulaanbaatar City. (2007).

6

diseases. A recent World Bank study5, undertaken with the cooperation of the Ministry of Health,
estimated that 1,600 people die prematurely every year due to high air pollution. In winter,
Ulaanbaatar is not only the coldest capital in the world; it is also the most polluted.
29.
An increasing number of people are exposed to natural disasters in urban areas. Poorly
maintained storm water management facilities, low quality housing in hilly areas, degradation of land
water retention capacity, and desertification in watershed areas have meant that Ulaanbaatar is
becoming increasingly prone to flash floods. In addition, Ulaanbaatar is also situated in one of the
most seismically active parts of the world, experiencing 30 to 50 quakes above 5.0 on the Richter
magnitude scale on an annual basis. The Government has prioritized the protection of the population
against natural disasters, and it recently approved policies and strategies to improve the legal
environment for disaster management. Nevertheless, flash floods in 2009 and the 2010 dzud showed
how much further work is still required to reduce people’s vulnerability to disasters.
30.
Finally, connecting people, services, and businesses across the vast land is a challenge.
While there are nearly 50,000 km of roads throughout the country, 90 percent are earthen or gravel.
Of the paved network that is more than 10 years old, less than 30 percent are considered to be in
good condition. The main transport artery for goods is the Trans-Mongolian Railway that links to
China and Russia. The biggest task is for Mongolia to build a transport and energy infrastructure to
support the extraction, processing, and exportation of minerals. A World Bank study estimated the
investment needs at US$5 billion in Southern Mongolia only. On the positive side, Mongolia has
been able to facilitate the development of a telecommunications network across the country. Today,
all soums are covered by cellular phone services and they are increasingly accessing the internet. In
2008, 67 percent of the population owned cell phones and today’s numbers will be significantly
higher. Mobile telephony is opening a range of possibilities for delivering better and faster services –
such as banking, weather information, or other government services – to the most remote parts of the
country.
C. ECONOMIC CONTEXT
31.
The economy grew by 17.3 percent in 2011, compared to 6.4 percent GDP growth in 2010,
and well above the average 9 percent seen during the previous mining boom in 2004-08. The fastest
growing sector was wholesale and retail trade, which expanded by 43 percent during 2011 and
contributed 4 percentage points to overall growth in 2011. Meanwhile, mining and manufacturing
expanded by 8.7 percent and 16 percent during 2011. Agricultural output, which had contracted
sharply during 2010 due to a dzud, was flat in 2011.
32.
Inflation pressures continue to build, reflecting expansionary fiscal policy. Consumer price
increases also remained in double digits during 2011, reflecting the effects of an expansionary fiscal
policy stance in an already booming economy.
33.
Government spending in 2011 was 56 percent higher than the previous year, and the 2012
budget seeks to ramp up spending further by 32 percent. The increased spending reflects preelection year pressures and efforts to make good on earlier political promises for large cash handouts
and increases in infrastructure spending. Revenues in 2011 were 43 percent higher than in 2010
thanks to growing receipts from royalties and dividends. As a result, the 2011 overall deficit
amounted to only 3.6 percent, albeit a deterioration from the balanced budget achieved in 2010.
Since 2011, the budget has been based on estimates of structural (i.e., long-term) mineral revenues as
5

World Bank, Air Quality Analysis of Ulaanbaatar: Improving Air Quality to Reduce Health Impacts, 2011.

7

required by the Fiscal Stability Law, with the difference between actual revenues and structural
revenues (around 2 percent of GDP) saved in a Fiscal Stability Fund. By this measure, the 2011
structural deficit (structural revenues less actual expenditures) stood at 5.8 percent. The structural
deficit budget is forecast at 3 percent of GDP for 2012.
34.
To control inflation, monetary and fiscal policies need to work in tandem. The Bank of
Mongolia raised the benchmark rate three times and the banking sector reserve requirement ratio to
11 percent. In order to contain inflation, it is important to pace government spending to avoid a
wage-price spiral if higher inflation expectations become entrenched.
35.
Recent history is a reminder that Mongolia’s economy can go through boom-and-bust
cycles. For instance, between 2004 and 2008 the economy grew at 9.1 percent on average annually,
but growth plummeted to minus 1.3 percent in 2009 when global commodity prices collapsed. It had
dire consequences for the Mongolian economy, including its banking sector. (See Box 2)
Box 2: The tale of a mining-dependent economy – the 2008 bust and the adoption of the Fiscal
Stability Law
The macroeconomic situation deteriorated sharply during the latter half of 2008 due to plummeting global
copper prices and the global economic downturn. The fiscal shock was large, causing the overall
government balance to shift from a surplus of 2.9 percent of GDP in 2007 to a 5.4 percent deficit in 2009.
Similarly, the external balance swung from a surplus into a deficit as export proceeds fell by one quarter in
2009. Inflation, which had peaked at 34 percent (year-on-year) in August 2008 due to large increases in
domestic spending, loose monetary policy, and a de facto fixed exchange rate, turned negative for a brief
period in the latter half of 2009 as the economy contracted sharply. Economic growth, which had been
averaging 9.1 percent per year, came to a grinding halt and real GDP declined by 1.3 percent in 2009. The
bust was compounded by the international economic crisis and a harsh winter “dzud” in 2009-2010.
The banking sector was particularly hard hit by the economic slowdown as the significant vulnerabilities
accumulated during the prior period of economic boom were exposed. The unhedged foreign currency, and
heavy credit concentrations in construction and mining sectors, resulted in dramatic deterioration of loan
quality and erosion in banks' capital positions. In parallel, the abrupt drying up of external funding combined
with chronic maturity mismatches led to pressures on liquidity. With the system's non-performing loans
reaching 20 percent, the credit mechanism came to a virtual standstill and public confidence in the banks
eroded rapidly. Two medium sized banks had to be put into bankruptcy in late 2008–2009 following a run
by depositors. Only the introduction of a blanket deposit guarantee by the authorities, as well as the rapid
economic turnaround, helped prevent the continued deposit outflow and more bank failures.
The Government reacted by adopting a strong legal foundation for a sound macroeconomic and fiscal
framework. Three complementary fiscal rules form the basis of the Fiscal Stability Law (FSL) which passed
with overwhelming majority in Parliament in June 2010. Under this law, the budget framework adopts a
structural balance and saves the mineral revenues, which are the result of mineral prices higher than the
long-term price projections, in a stabilization fund, following the example of Chile. The fiscal rules put strict
limits on the structural fiscal deficit, public expenditure increases, and public debt. However, the essence of
the FSL kicks in only in 2013, when a structural fiscal deficit of no more than 2 percent of GDP needs to be
adhered to. If implemented fully, the FSL will go a long way to minimize strong currency appreciation and
excessive public spending and borrowing.
The combination of strong policy action, supported by balance of payments and budget support from key
development partners, together with a rebound in the copper price and the successful negotiation of the Oyu
Tolgoi mining project, successfully stabilized the economic situation. The country successfully concluded
an 18-month Stand-By Program with the IMF in October 2010.

8

36.
Mongolia’s economy is expected to grow at a double-digit rate over the CPS period. As
significant investments are required to extract Mongolia’s mineral resources and transport them to
markets, large multiplier effects on related sectors, particularly infrastructure, transport and utilities
are expected. (see Table 1) For example, an estimated US$5 billion is needed in the Southern
Mongolia region by 2015 for investment in railways, electricity, towns, and water, a substantial
financial injection into the economy. 6
Table 1 - Mongolia: Medium Term Forecasts
2009

2010

2011

2012f

2013f

2014f

2015f

2016f

Real GDP (% yoy change)

-1.3

6.4

17.3

15.2

20.5

15.7

9.0

15.5

CPI (% yoy change, eop)

1.9

14.3

11.1

12.0

7.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Copper Prices (2005=100)*

140.5

205.0

250.3

241.5

241.5

241.5

241.5

241.5

Government expenditures (as % of GDP)

35.2

36.6

44.2

39.1*

31.5

28.0

32.4

35.1

Government revenues (as % of GDP)

30.2

36.6

40.6

38.1*

32.1

31.2

33.5

34.9

Government balance (% of GDP)

-5.0

0

-3.6

-1.0*

0.5

3.2

1.1

-0.2

Structural govt balance

-6.8

-2.8

-6.3

-6.5

-2.0

1.8

-0.1

-0.5

Current account balance (% of GDP)

-9.0

-14.3

-35.0

-13.6

1.9

6.0

12.0

12.2

Foreign exchange reserves, net (US$m)

1,145

2,091

2,274

4,127

4,452

4,601

5,399

6,136

(In months of next years’ imports of goods
and services)

3.7

4.3

5.1

5.6

8.8

8.8

8.8

8.8

Sources: NSO, IMF, World Bank. * 2012 estimates are from the 2012 budget.

37.
Looking ahead, Mongolia is better equipped today to face a potential international
financial crisis. It has adopted a fiscal framework scheduled for full implementation starting in 2013.
Although it has not implemented a complete banking sector reform, the Bank of Mongolia is better
positioned to exert its supervisory role over banks. Finally, the Social Welfare Reform Law ensures
that basic social protection will be provided to the poorest.
D. POLITICAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND GOVERNANCE CONTEXT
38.
Since the end of socialist rule in early 1990, Mongolia has built a multi-party democracy.
Two leading political parties, the Mongolian People’s Party (MPP, previously known as the
Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party) and the Democratic Party (DP) have ruled in alternation –
at times at a rapid pace. Transition from one Government to the other was for the most part peaceful
but the Parliamentary elections in June 2008 were marred by claims of voting fraud. The next
parliamentary elections are scheduled for June 2012 and the presidential election will take place in
2013.
39.
The political landscape is characterized by open and free public debate. Parliament actively
and openly debates new laws. The opposition is vocal and able to get its views heard. The President
of Mongolia has increased the involvement of civil society organizations and citizens’ groups by
6

World Bank (2009)

9

organizing regular Citizens’ Halls to debate matters of importance for the country. Civil society
would gain further influence if it had the capacity to organize itself into a powerful force for change
and accountability. There is an abundance of media outlets (i.e., written press, TV channels)
representing different affiliations and opinions, often highly influenced by the interests of the media
owners. Journalists can attend and report on Parliament’s meetings and parliamentary decisions are
all posted on the internet within a short period of time. Most recently, the country passed a milestone
by enacting a Law on the Right to Information.
40.
As Mongolia becomes a middle-income country, it faces a range of complex institutional
challenges. (i) a scaling up of existing institutions particularly in public expenditure management to
manage the mineral wealth and invest in the considerable infrastructure to develop and benefit from
the new mines; (ii) the development of a new set of institutions that would enable it to access
international markets and develop a range of financing products; and (iii) structural reforms of
service delivery systems to ensure an efficient institutional base for effective deployment of
incremental public resources.
41.
Public sector institutions have already gone through a first phase of transformation during
the market-based reforms but they will need to evolve further. While budget execution and treasury
management have improved significantly at the central level and are undertaken by competent staff,
Mongolia still has to tackle a series of limitations: unpredictable budgets, little long term planning,
poor public investment management, insufficient capacity in line ministries to forecast needs,
relatively low civil servant salaries at the senior level, and the difficulty to attract people to public
sector positions in the countryside.
42.
The country recently decided to decentralize core services. This is bringing decision-making
closer to the people, but also raises a range of implementation issues in the short and medium term.
Decentralization offers a host of opportunities for greater civic participation in priority setting and
oversight of services and can significantly improve governance and transparency. Yet,
decentralization of social services also requires common national standards and systems, and
effective equalization of basic services across the country. Getting the decentralization process right
is instrumental to staving off discontent on the part of rural and poorer urban populations and
ensuring that equality of opportunity to basic services is assured. Global experience suggests that the
risks in achieving an effective decentralization are substantial and offer many lessons for Mongolia
to avoid pitfalls in its own reforms.
43.
Mongolia fares better than many comparator countries in setting up the regulatory and
institutional framework for greater transparency. In 2006, it adopted a new Anti-Corruption Law
and established an Independent Authority Against Corruption (IAAC) that is still in nascent stage.
Mongolia adhered to the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) in 2005 and became
EITI compliant in the span of five years. All civil servants and elected officials have to file Income &
Assets Disclosure forms annually. Thanks to work undertaken in the past few years to improve
public financial management – in particular on the quality and quantity of public budget information
– Mongolia stands out for its remarkable progress on the Open Budget Index (OBI): between 2006
and 2010, the OBI increased from 18 to 60, placing Mongolia second behind South Korea in East
Asia. Per the revised Public Procurement Law, civil society groups are mandated to participate in
public procurement, specifically in bid evaluation and ex-post monitoring of government contracts.
44.
Many difficulties remain concerning corruption, conflicts of interest and political
fragmentation. Patronage links within a small population are embedded in political parties, regional
networks, and business conglomerates. For example, many financial institutions have significant
10

shares in non-financial companies and vice-versa which has led to distortions in the allocation of
credit. Such problems have led to the recent adoption of a law on Conflicts of Interest that will
require (i) agencies to adopt and enforce a code of ethics and (ii) public servants to register private
interests with the IAAC starting from July 2012. In addition, channels for citizen accountability in
service delivery have been piloted but still remain to be institutionalized as part of the broader
governance framework.
45.
The mining boom is increasing opportunities for greater corruption and could drive
policymaking towards more populism and patronage. As mandated by the Anti-Corruption Law, the
IAAC developed a Corruption Index based on qualitative and quantitative indicators, including
households, experts, and businesses perceptions of corruption, as well as agency self-assessments.
The perceptions survey revealed that 13 percent of respondents claimed to have paid a bribe to a
public official in the preceding 12 months. Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions
Index ranks Mongolia 120 out of the 183 countries measured. The Worldwide Governance Indicators
reflect a deterioration of all indicators over the past decade, except in regulatory quality (see
Attachment 3). According to Transparency International’s 2010 Global Corruption Barometer, 73
percent of the population surveyed in Mongolia reported that corruption had increased in the
previous three years; only 7 percent thought that corruption had decreased. They perceived political
parties, Parliament, the judiciary, and police as the most corrupt. Half of the respondents considered
the Government’s actions in the fight against corruption to be ineffective.
46.
Significant vulnerabilities and opportunities for corruption exist across Mongolia’s
government agencies. To date, many government agencies lack proper resources, including specific
routines for internal checks, internal and external auditing, and efficient processes that limit
corruption. Poor performance in the public management system is also caused by the absence of
effective performance measuring systems.
47.
Despite greater efforts at transparency, the country is struggling to establish a culture of
accountability. While an adequate policy framework is in place, there appears to be a gap between
enacted rules and actual practices. In part with Bank support, Mongolia has successfully
implemented “first generation” public financial management (PFM) reforms – including the
establishment of a consistent legal framework and effective systems for budget execution, monitoring
and reporting. Public revenues from mining will increase exponentially over the next few years. A
stronger sense of transparency and accountability at the national, local and corporate levels will be
vital to secure the transformation of non-renewable mineral resources into renewable assets.
48.
Although outspoken, media and civil society have a limited capacity to serve as a check on
Government. As of early 2010, there were 3,840 media practitioners in 383 media outlets throughout
Mongolia with 1,709 journalists and contributors. This large number notwithstanding, most media is
controlled by the business-political elite and rigorous investigative journalism is scarce and often
under pressure. Similarly, the capacities of civil society organizations to report, track and follow up
on corruption and mismanagement are limited.
49.
Mongolia is facing typical circumstances of countries with small populations and these
need to be better reflected when addressing governance and anti-corruption issues. Small countries
are exposed to a higher vulnerability to corruption since the small size of the population translates
into a close interface between the public and private sectors. People are related, are friends, have
gone to school together. This closeness influences government operations and actions. On the other
hand, in a small knit community it is also difficult to hide corruption and other mechanisms can come
in to control unethical behavior. Further efforts to curb corruption need to build on these particular
11

challenges especially by promoting government transparency and accountability, allowing for
controlled flexibility in hiring and other public-private engagements, and by creating a better
understanding of the cost and societal impact of corruption.
II. LESSONS LEARNED FROM PAST WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT IN MONGOLIA
50.
Today, IDA net commitments in Mongolia stand at US$220 million, compared to US$136.6
million in FY05, and are provided through 14 projects. The IDA net commitments include grants
and credits. The majority of the projects support infrastructure development, economic governance
and institutional strengthening of the mining sector. A Country Portfolio Performance Review
(CPPR) in 2011concluded that the portfolio is well aligned with government priorities.
51.
Mongolia has also benefited from considerable trust fund support that is closely aligned
with the country’s priorities. Contributions from donors increased to US$74.5 million in FY11, up
from US$23.55 million in FY05. A total of 42.5 percent of the donor resources in the active trust
fund portfolio have been provided as co-financing of IDA operations.
52.
IFC’s committed investment portfolio in Mongolia currently stands at US$131.2 million.
This includes equity, loans, convertible loans, and trade finance lines. In FY11, IFC achieved a
record-high level of investment committing US$83 million in seven projects. It also secured
important donor funding to provide advisory services in Mongolia, allowing it to increase
significantly its programs. Currently, its three advisory services programs focus on (i) Investment
Climate (Business Inspections Reform); (ii) Corporate Governance; and (iii) Access to Finance (trade
finance, leasing, credit information, mobile banking). IFC, in close coordination with the Bank, is
also exploring advisory services to support the Government of Mongolia’s effort to form PublicPrivate Partnerships, mainly in the infrastructure sector.
53.
Past engagement in Mongolia was guided by the Mongolia Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS) FY05-FY08 and the Interim Strategy Note (ISN) 2009-2010. These were discussed by the
World Bank Executive Directors in April 2004 and May 2009 respectively. Both strategies were fully
aligned with government strategies, including the Economic Growth Support and Poverty Reduction
strategy (EGSPRS) as well as the subsequent Government Action Plan (2008-2012) and the National
Development Strategy (2008-2021).
54.
The CAS FY05-FY08 was built around the five main pillars of the Government’s
Economic Growth Support and Poverty Reduction Strategy. These were (1) ensuring macroeconomic stability and public sector effectiveness; (2) supporting production and exports and
improving the environment for private sector-led development; (3) enhancing regional and rural
development and environmentally sustainable development; (4) fostering sustainable human
development, and (5) promoting good governance, and implementing and monitoring the strategy.
Within these pillars, the CAS was organized around three main objectives, namely (i) consolidating
the transition; (ii) reducing vulnerabilities, and (iii) strengthening the alignment of policies and
resources around results. A results framework was designed around these objectives in clusters of
key results areas and 20 outcomes. The progress towards the achievements of these outcomes was to
be monitored through multiple indicators and milestones.
55.
The CAS implementation was rapidly affected by two external events. First, a period of
political uncertainty followed the 2004 elections and the ensuing Governments did not have a
program of reforms that could be supported through a series of budget-support operations as earlier
planned. Second, the CAS had not foreseen the speed at which the mining boom would occur and the
12

range of new development challenges that it brought about. The team thus re-adjusted its approach to
consolidating the transition and reducing vulnerabilities and initiated a series of mining-specific
work. This work was later reflected in the ISN 2009-2010.
56.
The ISN 2009-2010 was formulated with a view to supporting the Government’s efforts to
restore economic stability in the aftermath of the economic crisis that affected the country during
the latter half of 2008 and 2009. The ISN outlined Bank Group support in the following areas: (i)
improving macro and fiscal sustainability in a mineral-based economy; (ii) protecting the poor and
vulnerable; and (iii) encouraging transparent and prudent mining investment and a more competitive
and stable medium-term business investment climate. A results framework included these goals and
related outcomes and milestones.
57.
Under the CAS and ISN, the Bank Group’s analytical and advisory activities (AAA)
provided substantial support to operations, and informed the Government’s reform path and
response to the economic crisis. The Bank is generally considered by the Government, development
partners, and other national stakeholders to have strong comparative advantage in analytical and
policy work, including bringing in global innovations and best practice. Examples of the analytical
and policy work undertaken in recent years include the Mining Sector Review (2006), the Country
Economic Memorandum (2007), Public Expenditure and Financial Management Review (2008),
ROSC Accounting and Auditing Review (2008), Livestock Sector Study (2009), South Gobi
Infrastructure and Environment (2009), Civil Service Reform (2009), Public Investment
Management Review (2010), Banking Restructuring Program (2010), and Poverty Assessment
Policy Notes (2010). The Bank also produces regular Economic Updates that are well received by
stakeholders. IFC significantly increased its advisory services in Mongolia to help develop the
business and investment climate and support financial markets.
58.
Strong alignment of IFC and the Bank’s strategic priorities created critical synergies. IFC
and the Bank maintained a strong working relationship in both investment and advisory services in
the areas of mining and infrastructure, financial markets, agriculture, corporate governance and
SMEs. For example, during the CAS and ISN periods, IFC made a number of investments and
provided advisory services supporting banking consolidation, including a variety of new investment
products and advisory work to improve risk management and spread best practice lending and
environmental and social standards, which complemented the Bank’s program following the 2008
banking crisis. IFC’s approach to mining and infrastructure sector is also fully aligned with the
Bank’s strategic priorities.
59.
The CAS and ISN Completion Report (Attachment 4) rated the performance of the CAS as
moderately unsatisfactory and the ISN as satisfactory. The overall rating of both the CAS and the
ISN was moderately satisfactory.
60.
From an implementation perspective, the portfolio performance has been satisfactory. The
disbursement ratio for FY11 was 29.3 percent, above the regional average of 22.4 percent. There is
one problem project that is being restructured. All 13 projects which exited the portfolio in the past
decade have been rated moderately satisfactory or satisfactory by IEG.
61.
The CAS and ISN completion report identified the following key lessons with implications
for the design and implementation of the FY2013-FY2017 CPS:

13



Build in flexibility to take account of transitions and emerging priorities. Alignment of the
country strategy with national priorities and development plans is integral, but flexibility to
accommodate emerging and unforeseen developments must be incorporated.



Ensure alignment, focus on fewer outcomes and ensure a clear results framework. The results
agenda should: (i) be aligned with selected national development priorities, (ii) take into account
activities of development partners, (iii) engage in areas with strong client demand where the
Bank Group has a comparative advantage; (iv) be simple and only have a few selected outcomes
and clearly monitorable indicators; and (v) link directly with proposed activities.



Design programs/projects to minimize implementation challenges. Given capacity constraints,
simplification of project designs should be a priority, though this should not prevent the Bank to
work with the Government on pioneering innovative approaches. Greater reliance on country
systems should be explored in conjunction with capacity strengthening.



Take a programmatic approach to AAA. The Bank should consider multi-year programmatic
ESW and TA programs in key areas (e.g., public expenditures, governance, service delivery and
decentralization) while continuing with responsive policy notes and advisory pieces.



Consider the longer-term role of the Bank in Mongolia. Ensure flexibility of Bank’s
engagement as the country graduates from IDA to IBRD and while continuing to provide strong
analytical and advisory services, focus resources on “piloting” new approaches and improving
the implementation capacity of the Government. Mongolia will become less reliant on ODA, and
some donors may reorient their support to other low-income countries, affecting the ability to
mobilize Trust Fund resources.

62.
In preparation for this FY2013-2017 Country Partnership Strategy, the World Bank team
also undertook specific reviews of its portfolio from three perspectives: overall performance,
integration of gender, and furthering of governance objectives. The World Bank Institute has also
undertaken a case study on the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in supporting Mongolia’s mining
transformation as part of its learning series on Governance and Extractive Industries.
63.
The Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) undertaken in 2011 provided a range
of recommendations to improve portfolio performance further. Among others, the CPPR
recommended more disciplined supervision reporting and recording, better integration of nonblended trust funds in the overall portfolio, and pointed to the opportunity cost associated with the
prevailing pattern of extending projects beyond their original closing date. The review also pointed to
the need to systematically ensure the involvement of safeguard specialists in the operations in the
country.
64.
The portfolio of lending and advisory work was also analyzed as to the integration of
gender considerations in key Bank projects and policy recommendations. Specifically, the review
assessed four aspects:





Overall adequacy of the attention to gender issues;
The identification of gender issues during preparation of projects and AAA;
The inclusion of specific measures to ensure gender inclusion in program benefits during
implementation or in analytical work; and,
The adoption of mechanisms to monitor gender impacts.

14

Key findings were that the Bank could achieve much greater impact through better mainstreaming of
gender considerations, particularly in key sectors such as mining, rural livelihood, urban
infrastructure, and social protection. While the Bank recently undertook analytical work specific to
gender (e.g., women and the labor market) and systematically monitors the benefits for women in
certain projects (e.g., Enhanced Access to Justice, microfinance component of the Sustainable
Livelihood Program), it could do so more consistently. The Bank should consider at the concept
stage of each project or analytical work if there are gender dimensions that could be addressed and
monitor these throughout implementation. In addition, the review flagged that the World Bank could
take a more active role in disseminating the recently approved Law on Gender Equality.
65.
Finally, the Bank reviewed how it could strengthen its engagement in governance and
anti-corruption. Mongolia is one of the C-GAP pilot countries that benefits from support from the
Governance Partnership Facility in the East Asia and Pacific region. The Bank has helped advance a
series of institutional reforms under the CAS and ISN, working closely with the IAAC, the Ministry
of Finance, Parliamentarians, CSOs and media. GPF grant funding proved critical to the Bank
undertaking outreach and advocacy for reform. Going forward, Bank support will be required not
only to advance the design of reforms but also to strengthen their implementation.
III. THE GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES AND HOW THE WORLD BANK GROUP WILL
SUPPORT THEM
A. MONGOLIA’S MEDIUM-TERM PRIORITIES
66.
Over the past few years, the Government has developed and adopted a series of strategic
documents outlining its development goals. In 2008, the Government defined the Millennium
Development Goals-Based Comprehensive National Development Strategy of Mongolia which was
approved by Parliament. The document sets a 14-year development path “aimed at promoting human
development in Mongolia, in a humane, civil, and democratic society, and developing intensely the
country’s economy, society, science, technology, culture and civilization in strict compliance with
global and regional development trends.” The objective is “to protect and strengthen Mongolia’s
sovereignty, and develop it into a middle-income country through achieving its MDGs attaching high
priority to promoting private sector-led dynamic economic growth, human development including
education, healthcare, as well as sustainable development of science, technology and environment,
strengthening intellectual development and human capacity; creating knowledge-based economy
sustained by high technology, which respects environmentally friendly production and services;
fostering a democratic system of governance, which serves its citizens, protects human rights and
freedoms, and is free from corruption and red tape.” The Strategy covers two phases: the first phase
(2007-20015) will focus on achieving the MDGs and actively developing the country’s economy; the
second phase (2016-2021) will be dedicated to transitioning to a knowledge-based economy.
67.
Progress towards the Millennium Development Goals is being assessed regularly by the
Government, with the support of the United Nations Development Program. The most recent report
“Third National Report on the Millennium Development Goals Implementation” was released in
2011. The report is forthcoming in its assessment of progress and attempts to provide policy
recommendations to accelerate progress, in particular regarding the three MDGs identified as lagging
by National Statistical Office data – i.e., poverty7, gender equality, and environment.
7

When adjusting the national poverty line to new consumption patterns over time, it appears that the poverty level
between 2002 and 2008 as measured by the NSO remained stable.

15

68.
Although the Comprehensive National Development Strategy sets a broad framework, it
does not spell out a specific action plan. Some sectors – such as health, agriculture, and environment
– have come up with strategies that are more specific. However, the Government often lacks the
capacity to translate those strategies into concrete action plans with clear allocation of
accountabilities around which ministries, agencies at the national and local level, private sector, civil
society and development partners can plan and coordinate actions.
69.
The lack of a national actionable plan does not prevent the Government – and
policymakers in general – to give a sense of the directions in which they would like the country to
head. Based on public statements and policy decisions, key objectives can be described as follows:


to be a world-class mineral-led economy. There is a shared conviction that mineral
resources present a unique opportunity for Mongolia to rapidly become a middle-income
country. There is also a shared understanding that for the mining wealth to materialize, an
appropriate regulatory framework – covering not only mining financial aspects but also labor,
social and environmental dimensions – needs to be in place, infrastructure to facilitate the
mining exploitation is to be planned and built, and a labor force has to be trained.



to diversify the economy by building on the non-mineral economic basis (e.g., agriculture,
tourism). As of now, the Government has adopted different schemes that rely mostly on
subsidies of various forms for specific industries (e.g., Small and Medium Enterprises fund,
cashmere and meat bonds, national livestock program).



to share the mining wealth among the Mongolian population. There are strong expectations
among the population that the benefits extracted from the land will be shared among all.
During the 2008 elections, political parties committed to distribute the equivalent of
US$1,500 per person during their government tenure. The Government is now making good
on its promise by channeling mining royalties, dividends and prepayments into a Human
Development Fund (HDF) and distributing them in the form of (i) a universal cash transfer of
about US$16 per person per month, (ii) stipends, and other universal benefits; and (iii) a
scheme to distribute shares of Erdenes MGL, the state-owned enterprise which regroups all
strategic mining assets. While well intentioned, the HDF approach is fiscally unsustainable,
accounting for around 10 percent of total public spending. It would be more efficient to use
mining revenues to reduce poverty if it was targeted at the poorest families. Therefore, as part
of the preparation for the 2012 elections, political parties have committed to refrain from
making cash promises and to discontinue universal HDF cash payments from July 2012
onwards. In its place, Parliament adopted in January 2012 a social welfare reform that is
based on a redistribution system that targets the poorest. The national debate is now about
making growth inclusive.



to continue strengthening the country’s democratic tradition by involving civil society
and local communities in decision processes. The institutional framework in Mongolia allows
for the open involvement of civil society in public decisions and was further advanced by the
recently approved Integrated Budget Law.



to develop a modern financial capability in line with Mongolia’s middle-income status.
The country is equipping itself with financial instruments that would help it fund its
development needs in a more flexible way over time. In addition to requesting IBRD and
16

OCR status with the World Bank and Asian Development Bank, it recently established the
Mongolian Development Bank which will focus on financing infrastructure projects. The
Government is issuing domestic treasury bonds and is considering issuing foreigndenominated bonds. Finally, as part of an ambitious strategy to develop domestic capital
markets, the Government has signed a partnership agreement with the London Stock
Exchange to build capacity at the Mongolian Stock Exchange.
70.
Based on a range of consultations undertaken with stakeholders (including an anonymous
client survey – see Box 3), these goals are broadly shared across the population. There is of course
diversity in the ordering of the priorities among groups – for example, some put greater emphasis on
the development of the rural economy while others focus more on developing infrastructure in
mining areas. Civil society in particular conveyed the need for the World Bank to continue
supporting the country in building institutions of accountability, not only in the mining sector but in
the broader economy.
Box 3: Client Survey
In June and July 2011, 538 stakeholders of the World Bank in Mongolia were invited to provide opinions on
the Bank’s assistance in a country survey. Stakeholders included Members of Parliament, officials from
government ministries and agencies, provincial officials, project staff, civil society organizations, NGOs,
private sector, media, trade unions, the judiciary and members of the academic community. The response rate
was 58 percent. The survey pointed to the following lessons:








Respondents valued the Bank’s policy and economic advice most, followed by its technical assistance;
Governance/government effectiveness were considered the key development priority in the country, and
private sector growth, mining, and basic infrastructure development were seen as critical elements to
poverty reduction and economic growth;
Respondents indicated that the Bank was most important in strengthening infrastructure development and
in encouraging greater transparency in governance, and believed that most focus should be on
government effectiveness and improving basic infrastructure, and to a lesser degree on private sector
growth and investment, education, poverty reduction, growth and improving natural resource
management. Nearly half of all respondents indicated that the Bank should be more involved in
Mongolia’s development strategies;
Respondents indicated that the Bank should work more closely with NGOs, the private sector, local
Government and academia;
A number of stakeholders believed there is not enough public disclosure of the Bank’s work; and,
The survey also indicated a perceived decline in the Bank’s efficiency and speed with which funds are
disbursed, as well as more cumbersome procurement requirements.

Across all respondents, the Bank’s overall effectiveness and the perception of an institution that plays a
relevant role in Mongolia’s development received a mean rating of 7 on a 10 point scale.

B. RESOURCES THAT THE WORLD BANK GROUP CAN PROVIDE TO SUPPORT MONGOLIA’S
DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
71.
This Country Partnership Strategy lays the foundation for Mongolia’s access to IBRD
resources. In the span of six years, Mongolia’s GNI per capita has nearly quadrupled from US$480
in 2004 to US$1,890 in 2010, a level well above the 2010 cut-off mark set for low-income of
US$1,005 per capita. In light of its economic advancement, the Mongolian Government has
requested the World Bank to change the country’s status from “IDA-only” to “Blend” enabling
access to resources on a non-concessional basis as well as concessional resources. While balancing
17

the number of positive developments that have taken place in the past two years in Mongolia with the
risks associated with the development of a mineral-rich economy, the World Bank has decided to
declare Mongolia creditworthy for IBRD lending.
72.
A key element for consideration when deciding on IBRD’s exposure to Mongolia is the
country’s management of its public debt and how it is expected to evolve in coming years. The
establishment of the Fiscal Stability Fund and the issuance of government guarantees to the
Development Bank imply a need to gradually expand the focus from the public debt, to the risk
exposure of the overall balance sheet of the Government, i.e., monitoring and managing risks related
to direct and contingent assets and liabilities, and to exogenous shocks. Both the World Bank and the
IMF are committed to continue providing guidance and share experiences with the Mongolian
Government in this critical area and the authorities are receptive to such work.
73.
Mongolia will benefit from a full IDA allocation under IDA16 (FY12-FY14) as a blend
country. The CPS period (FY13-17) spans across two IDA replenishment periods of IDA16 (FY1214) and IDA17 (FY15-17), The indicative IDA16 allocation for the FY12-FY14 period is SDR64.8
million8. Out of this IDA16 allocation, SDR22.7 million has been firmly allocated for FY12. The
IDA16 allocation for FY13-FY14 (SDR42.1 million) is indicative only, and the actual allocation will
depend on: (i) total IDA resources available, (ii) the country’s performance rating; (iii) the
performance and assistance terms of other IDA borrowers; (iv) the terms of IDA's assistance to
country (credit and blend terms for Mongolia) and; (v) the number of IDA-eligible countries. As
Mongolia will now be a “Blend” country, the borrowing terms that will apply to IDA resources are
the following: a 25-year maturity, a 5-year grace period, and a 1.25 percent interest charge.
74.
The Blend status not only increases resources to Mongolia, it also expands the types of
financial products and services. In addition to a full IDA allocation for the period of FY12-FY14,
Mongolia will gradually start accessing IBRD resources that would be used for investment
operations. At this stage, a pipeline of projects that could potentially be financed with IBRD funds is
being developed. Initial ideas have been included in the lending program. Once the IBRD lending
program is firmed up, it would be presented as part of the CPS Progress Report or with the first
IBRD-funded operation, whichever comes first.
75.
IFC can play a critical role in assisting Mongolia to address its private sector development
needs on multiple fronts. IFC offers three lines of services: Investment Services, Advisory Services,
and through its Asset Management Company (AMC). IFC’s investment services provide a broad
suite of financial products including loans, equity, trade finance, structured finance, risk management
products and syndicated loans in all sectors and enable companies to manage risk and broaden their
access to foreign and domestic capital markets. IFC advisory services offer advice in a broad range of
topics aimed at private sector development, from helping the Government implement reforms to
improve their business environment, to promoting sustainable business practices at firm level,
advancing good corporate governance practices, building the capacity of small firms and small-scale
farmers, advancing women in business, promoting higher environmental and social standards, and
engaging the private sector in climate-change solutions. IFC also promotes access to finance both
through investment services and advisory services. IFC’s AMC, a wholly owned subsidiary of IFC,
was created to channel the resources held by sovereign funds, pension funds and other institutional
investors to investment opportunities in developing countries. In this process, IFC expands its
development reach by “crowding in” commercial investors by demonstrating the financial benefits
and growth opportunities as well as the development impact of investing in these markets. IFC is
8

Equivalent to about US$101million as of February 2012.

18

exploring future investment opportunities in the financial markets, manufacturing, and agriculture
sectors, and is committed to enhancing its program during the new CPS period.
76.
In addition to IFC’s investment programs, IFC has significantly increased its advisory
services with over US$1.5 million projects funded by IFC, two donors (Japan and Netherlands) and
clients to develop the investment climate and support financial markets. In April 2011, existing
advisory programs received an additional US$2.5 million from Japan, bringing the total funding to
nearly US$ 4 million.
77.
Mongolia is a strategic priority for the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
and it is exploring opportunities related to the mining sector. MIGA's other strategic priorities are
South-South transactions, complex infrastructure projects, and supporting financial sector institutions
to enhance access to finance. MIGA's focus in Mongolia will be to support sustainable development
of the mining sector, associated industries and also enhance financing for infrastructure.
78.
MIGA can provide support and incentives for foreign investors looking at entering the
Mongolian market. Through its Political Risk Insurance (PRI) product, MIGA offers reassurance for
investors concerned about political interventions or disruptions which might affect their returns.
MIGA’s main covers offer protection against Transfer or Convertibility Restriction, Expropriation
and Breach of Contract risk, War and Civil Disturbance risks. With uncertainty in the political,
economic or regulatory environment, these guarantees offer protection for investors unsure about
counterparty risk with the Government or about how more conventional political disruptions and
civil disturbances might cause physical damage or disrupt their operations. In the Mongolian context,
MIGA’s guarantee product could support the mining sector through supporting investors, and
buffering the reform of the sector to encourage new exploration and socially sustainable
development. The reassurance offered by MIGA guarantees would potentially be particularly useful
for investors uncertain about further Government interventions and policy changes in the sector.
79.
More recently, MIGA has launched a new cover, guaranteeing the Non-Honoring of a
Sovereign Financial Obligation, a coverage which provides credit enhancement in transactions
involving sovereign and sub-sovereign obligors. Again, this may fill a local need, as the primary
beneficiaries here would be commercial lenders that provide loans to public sector entities for
infrastructure and other productive investments. Finally, MIGA offers a more streamlined product
under its Small Investment Program (SIP) where it offers the standard basic covers to smaller
investors entering a foreign market.
80.
In addition to providing resources, the World Bank Group’s programs can be platforms for
engaging with other Development Partners on strategic priorities. At US$74.5 million, the
Recipient Executed Trust Fund (RETF) portfolio is equivalent to more than one third of Mongolia’s
IDA portfolio. In fact, half of the RETFs co-finance IDA projects, successfully leveraging resources
from donors for the benefit of the client. The World Bank will continue its practice of establishing
platforms for engagement with Development Partners in areas which the Bank has determined as
strategic for its program and in which it has established a comparative advantage through its
analytical work. An example of such approach is the ongoing rural program (see Box 4). Such
approach has the benefits of further enhancing donor coordination and aid harmonization, reducing
the transaction cost of receiving overseas development assistance on the part of the Government, and
increasing the impact of the work of the Bank.

19

Box 4: Using WB programs to engage other Development Partners and generate greater impact
The Sustainable Livelihoods Program (SLP) was launched in 2002 to address poverty and vulnerability, primarily
in rural areas, by developing mechanisms to support the livelihoods of rural citizens. This is a long term
objective, to be achieved through a three phased Adaptable Program Loan, during which the approaches would be
piloted, then scaled up and ultimately embedded in policy and institutions, with capacity and tools in place for
sustainability. In addition, a separate project, the Index-based Livestock Insurance Project (IBLIP), was spun out
of SLP to provide an innovative and market-based tool for rural risk management. The core financing for the
program has come from IDA with, to date, a total of US$63 million for SLP (first and second phases) and US$18
million for IBLIP (including Additional Financing). However, trust fund support has been equally important.
Trust Funds amounting to US$25 million – from Japan (PHRD and JSDF), FIRST, Swiss Development
Cooperation, European Union, and Korea – have supported the initial (often innovative) design work, have
financed the costs of high caliber international technical assistance, have supported the capacity of local
institutions and the improved focus on results, including M&E systems and impact assessment. Development
Partners have increasingly recognized the Government’s preference to use the Bank’s rural portfolio (SLP and
IBLIP) as a platform for support to rural Mongolia and have aligned around the themes of promoting innovation,
supporting community based approaches to local development, and creating opportunities for sustainable
livelihoods. In some cases, such as for the European Union, the support is its largest single commitment in
Mongolia. The TF support has therefore helped partners increase their visibility in the country while enabling
IDA to leverage additional funds to push forward innovation and capacity building and ultimately increase the
impact of IDA resources.

81.
Finally, the World Bank Group will continue to support the economic development of
Mongolia through a range of Analytical and Advisory Activities. As Mongolia becomes a middleincome country that can rely more and more on its own resources to finance its development, the
World Bank’s key contribution to Mongolia’s development will increasingly take the form of
knowledge, in-depth analyses, experience sharing with other countries, and the facilitation of training
activities. Such activities will be organized around programmatic areas that are aligned with the
development priorities of the country. They will take the form of core economic and sector work,
just-in-time policy notes, technical assistance, and South-South exchanges. The World Bank Group
will continue to invest in reaching out to policymakers in Government, Parliament, private sector
companies, academia, civil society and media while developing these products.
C. STRATEGIC AREAS THAT THE WORLD BANK GROUP WILL SUPPORT AND EXPECTED RESULTS
82.
The strategic areas that the World Bank Group will support reflect the country’s
development challenges and government priorities, and builds on the priorities outlined in the ISN
2009-2010. Extensive consultations with key stakeholders reveal a strong desire for the World Bank
Group’s program to continue along the lines outlined in the Interim Strategy Note 2009-2010. The
World Bank Group will continue to support the country’s efforts to transform its economy into a
world-class mining economy, to support economic development in urban and rural areas, and to
address vulnerabilities. But there will also be an increased emphasis on economic diversification,
decentralization, and equitable access to social protection and basic delivery so that growth is more
inclusive. The widened focus in the program will not translate automatically into additional projects
but rather will be achieved by adapting ongoing projects (e.g., Multi-Sector TA), designing planned
projects to the new needs (e.g., SLP3), and by providing analytical support depending on the Bank
Group’s comparative advantages.
83.
The proposed activities are well aligned and complementary to the priorities and projects of
other Development Partners. (See Attachment 6). Development Partners’ ongoing commitments to
Mongolia stand at US$3.2 billion. The largest ODA contributors are: JICA, the People’s Republic of
20

China, ADB, the Millennium Challenge Corporation, and the World Bank. JICA invests heavily in
infrastructure (particularly urban) and education; PRC has ramped up its support in the areas of
transport, housing development, manufacturing and agricultural processing; ADB focuses on energy,
transport, water and other municipal services, education, and health. MCC has selected five areas for
engagement, the most important ones being land rights, transport corridors, vocational education, air
pollution, and health. In areas where there is joint interest, efforts are made to focus on different subsets. For example, in the education sector, ADB is the lead donor and strongly supports
improvements in secondary and tertiary education; MCC, GIZ, EU, and UNDP focus on technical
and vocational training; JICA, UNICEF and the World Bank support early childhood education and
primary education. In the area of gender, the World Bank participates in the in-country UN Gender
Thematic Group; UNDP, UNICEF and UNFPA have a comparative advantage in advancing
women’s political representation and fighting against gender-based violence, while the World Bank
will work more on the gender dimensions in economic development (e.g., labor restrictions, pension
reform). The Bank plays an important overall donor coordination role through its co-chairing with
the Government of the annual Meeting of the Government of Mongolia with Development Partners.
Table 2: Indicative CPS program
Ongoing Projects
Energy Sector (FY01)
Economic Capacity TA (FY03)
Ulaanbaatar Services Improvement (FY04)
Index-Based Livestock Insurance (FY05)
Governance Assistance (FY06)
Information and Comm. Infrastructure Devt. (FY06)
Rural Education and Development READ (FY06)
Sustainable Livelihoods II (FY07)
Renewable Energy for Rural Access (FY07)
Renewable Energy for Rural Access-GEF(FY07)
Mining Sector Institutional Strengthening (FY08)
Enhanced Justice Sector Services (FY08)
MONSTAT (FY09)
Multi-Sector TA (FY10)
Mining Infrastructure Investment Support (FY11)
Major Ongoing Trust Funds (RETFs)
EC TF: Sustainable Livelihoods 2
Education for All – Fast Track Initiative
EITI Grant (outreach)
GPE: Global Partnership for Education
Korea TF: Index-Based Livestock Insurance
Korea TF: MONSTAT
Korea TF: Multi-sector TA
MN-FS: Renewable Energy for Rural Access
PHRD TF: Sustainable Livelihoods 2

CPS
Pillar
2
1
3
3
1
2
3
3
2
2
1
3
1
1
1
CPS
Pillar
2,3
3
1
3
2,3
1
1,2,3
2,3
1,2,3

US$
M
42.0
7.5
18.0
17.8
14.0
8.0
5.0
44.0
3.5
3.5
9.3
5.0
2.0
12.0
25.0
US$
M
14.00
29.40
0.25
10.00
0.70
1.40
0.50
6.00
3.90

Indicative Financing Program
Ulaanbaatar Clean Air Project (FY12)
E-Government Project (FY13)
Sustainable Livelihoods 3 Project (FY13)
Third Ulaanbaatar Services Improvement Project (FY13)
SME Access to Finance Project (FY14) (IDA-IBRD)
E-Health Project (FY14)
AF – Mining Sector Institutional Strengthening (FY15)
AF – MONSTAT (FY15)
Transmission Line Project (FY15) (IBRD)
District Heating Project (FY15) (IBRD)
Social Protection Administration Project (FY16)
Index-Based Livestock 2 Project (FY16)
---------Note: AF = Additional Financing
Items in italics are indicative IBRD financing
Key Ongoing and Indicative Nonlending Program
Reserves Assets Management Program (TA)
Financial Sector Assessment Program (ESW)
Programmatic Social Protection (ESW)
Programmatic Agricultural Policy Review (ESW)
Programmatic Financial Sector Monitoring (ESW)
Programmatic Mining Sector (TA)
Programm. Municipal Financing for Ulaanbaatar (ESW)
Programmatic Poverty Analysis (ESW)
Debt Management Strategy (TA)
Programmatic Economic Policy/Qtrly Updates (ESW)
Finan. Literacy and Consumer Protection Assessmnt (TA)
Poverty and Inequality Study (ESW)
Gender Action Plan (ESW)
Programmatic Accountability/Service Delivery (ESW)
[Admin. Courts/Executive Accountability (ESW)]
Procurement Assessment (TA)
Disaster Preparedness (TA)

CPS
Pillar
3
1
1,2,3
1,3
2
3
1
1
3
3
3
2,3

US$
M
15
15
>30
20
15
15
IDA
IDA
50
50
IDA
IDA

1
2
3
2
2
1
1
3
1
1
2
3
3
3
3
1
3

FY
Cont
12
12-13
12-13
12-13
12-13
12-13
12-13
12-13
12-14
13
13
13
13-14
14
14
14

Major Indicative/Planned Trust Funds
AusAid TF: Groundwater Mgmt in South Gobi
1
6.00
AusAid TF: Mining and the Environment
1
Tbd
FIRST Initiative: Financial Sector Stability
2
0.20
GAFSP: Livestock-Based Livelihoods Improvement 2
11.00
GFAHI MDTF: Avian and Human Influenza 2
2
2.50
JSDF: Primary Educ. Vulnerable Rural Children
3
2.60
SDC (Swiss): Participatory Planning/Decentralizatn
3
0.60
Notes:
Pillar 1: Enhance Mongolia’s Capacity to Manage the Mining Economy sustainably and transparently
Pillar 2: Build a Sustained and Diversified Basis for Economic Growth and Employment in Urban and Rural Areas
Pillar 3: Address Vulnerabilities through Improved Access to Services and Better Service Delivery, Safety Net Provision, and Improved Disaster
Risk Management.

21

84.
In designing and implementing projects and providing advice, particular attention will be
paid to enhancing the capacity of institutions so that they can manage more effectively and
transparently. In particular, the Bank will support Mongolia’s anti-corruption efforts through
specific project work and by mainstreaming good governance and anti-corruption mechanisms in
Bank operations. As it is feasible, the Bank will seek to support enhancements in lead agency
operations (i.e., enhancing agency structures and operations for greater transparency and
accountability) in various sectors the Bank is working with (i.e., Mining, Environment, Health,
Justice, etc.). The Bank will seek to support the Government’s efforts to create stronger government
institutions and to engage a broader stakeholder group to develop more effective citizen engagement
to generally develop greater government and societal resilience to corruption.
PILLAR 1: ENHANCE MONGOLIA’S CAPACITY TO MANAGE THE MINING
ECONOMY SUSTAINABLY AND TRANSPARENTLY
85.
Through its ongoing program and new activities, the World Bank Group will support the
Government, private business and civil society (i) in developing a world-class mining environment
that takes into account social and environmental considerations, and (ii) in strengthening its
management of public revenues and expenditures. In doing so, the World Bank Group will aim to
bring greater transparency and accountability to the entire mining value chain through better policies
and institutional capacity building. The programs of the World Bank, IFC, and MIGA will be tightly
coordinated.
86.
Outcome 1.1 – Support the country in developing a regulatory environment,
institutional capacity, and infrastructure for world-class mining.
 Improve regulatory environment and strengthened environmental management capacity.
Building on the work undertaken so far, the World Bank Group will rely on the ongoing Mining
Sector Institutional Strengthening Technical Assistance Program (MSISTAP) to provide advice and
technical assistance, which will include a focus on environmental and social safeguards.
 Possible “good practice” investments by IFC and MIGA. IFC is leading an international
consortium together with EBRD for a debt financing of US$3.6 billion for the Oyu Tolgoi copper
mine development. MIGA has been asked to provide a guarantee for the participating commercial
banks.
 Better planning of critical infrastructure in support of the mining sector and neighboring
communities. The Mining Infrastructure Investment Support project (MINIS) supports the
preparation of regional infrastructure investment plans that examine infrastructure needs
comprehensively. Some of these projects may be developed as Public Private Partnerships with the
support from the various WBG institutions (IBRD, IFC, and MIGA).
 An institutional set-up for greater transparency and accountability. Mongolia’s reporting
systems will be further enhanced with World Bank support. EITI Mongolia will continue to improve
the scope and quality of the revenue data, look into legislating mining revenue transparency, and
expand outreach among civil society, Parliamentarians, and the population. The World Bank will
continue to use GPF resources to generate greater demand for good governance in the sector.

22

87.
Outcome 1.2 – Support the Government in designing and implementing policies and
systems for a more robust, equitable and transparent management of public revenues and
expenditures
 Continued implementation of fiscal, economic and monetary management policies that aim to
mitigate the impact of Dutch Disease. The World Bank will focus on supporting the Government in
implementing the Fiscal Stability Law and the Integrated Budget Law through the ongoing MultiSector Technical Assistance Credit and through analytical and advisory services. Through the
Reserve Asset Management Program (RAMP), the World Bank is also making available to the Bank
of Mongolia a structured program of training opportunities and tools to enhance its management of
reserve assets.
 Improved implementation of planning, budgeting, procurement, expenditure management,
financial reporting, auditing, assets and liabilities management policies through continued technical
assistance and advice. Building on past and ongoing efforts (ECTAC, GAP, and MSTA projects) to
improve the planning and budgeting capacity of the Government, the World Bank will work closely
with the National Development and Innovation Committee (NDIC) and the Ministry of Finance to
improve its capacity in assessing and planning public investments.
 Roll-out of the decentralization plan for a more participatory and equitable budget that
reflects local needs and priorities. Regulations will be developed with MSTA support and
implementation and capacity building will be supported through the third Sustainable Livelihoods
Program. This will be undertaken in partnership with the Swiss Development Cooperation and in
coordination with other Development Partners.
 More transparent and citizen-oriented public management through better data and eGovernment. NSO has been implementing successfully a statistical capacity building project
(MONSTAT). The World Bank will also explore the possibility of developing an e-Government
project, closely synergized with an Open Data Initiative. This would be in line with Mongolia’s
commitment to participate in the Open Government Partnership.
PILLAR 2: BUILD A SUSTAINED AND DIVERSIFIED BASIS FOR ECONOMIC
GROWTH AND EMPLOYMENT IN URBAN AND RURAL AREAS
88.
The World Bank Group will support the Government’s efforts to diversify the economy and
generate employment by (i) enhancing its overall competitiveness and (ii) strengthening the
competitiveness of the agricultural sector.
89.

Outcome 2.1 – Enhance the investment climate and financial intermediation

 An improved investment climate. IFC will continue to build on its business inspections
project to raise the competitiveness of Mongolian firms, especially SMEs, by making business
inspections more efficient, effective and transparent.
 A deeper, more efficient and stable financial system. The Bank will employ a range of
analytical and lending instruments to support the authorities in: (i) identifying, monitoring and
addressing the existing and new vulnerabilities in order to make the sector more resilient to possible
future shocks; (ii) improving access to credit for the MSME sector and general population, including
in rural and remote areas, and strengthening financial literacy and consumer protection; and (iii)
23

expanding the range and quality of financial products provided by non-bank financial institutions,
including the development of the domestic capital market. IFC will continue to support the financial
markets in Mongolia by introducing more complex and innovative financial products, working
closely with Khan Bank and XacBank, in which IFC is a shareholder.
 Better corporate governance through the deepening of accounting, reporting and auditing
reforms. Through its FIRST initiative and the MSTA technical assistance, the World Bank will assist
entity-level implementation of internationally recognized financial reporting standards and internal
control systems in major public-interest entities, and facilitate the introduction of simplified and
effective financial management practices in small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
90.

Outcome 2.2 – Create more opportunities in the rural economy for enhanced livelihoods

 A more productive, healthier and sustainable livestock sector. The Bank will provide
investment and analytical activities including implementation of the Livestock-based Livelihoods
Improvement Project, financed by the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) and
evaluated for its impact with DIME support. The World Bank will also undertake a follow-up project
to the successful ongoing AHI project.
 Higher quality and higher value agribusiness through a combination of IFC investments and
business advisory. IFC’s recent investment in Suu JSC’s dairy company will help to expand its
network of raw milk herders from 2,500 to 4,000. IFC will continue to assist agribusiness modernize
production equipments, raise food safety standards, develop supply chains and address working
capital needs. Complementing the World Bank’s work on animal health, IFC is also assisting the
Government in the drafting of a Food Security Law to bring food safety inspections to international
standards.
 Greater outreach and innovation in microfinance products in rural areas. The Bank has had a
long and successful engagement in microfinance development in rural areas since the establishment
of the Microfinance Development Fund (MDF) under the Sustainable Livelihoods Program. The
Bank will continue to support the increased access to financial services in rural economies, through
continued support for the MDF (under the Sustainable Livelihoods Program 3), including support for
new financial products (such as loan guarantee funds to address collateral shortfalls) and for the use
of ICT for rural finance.
PILLAR 3: ADDRESS VULNERABILITIES THROUGH IMPROVED ACCESS TO
SERVICES AND BETTER SERVICE DELIVERY, SAFETY NET PROVISION AND
IMPROVED DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT
91.
In addition to promoting employment creation through economic diversification, the country
is trying to reduce poverty and vulnerability by: (i) decentralizing more authority to local
Governments and urban districts, including the delivery of health, education and social welfare
services; (ii) implementing the reformed social assistance system that supports first and foremost
poor people and possibly reforming health insurance as well as the pension system to promote more
equitable, efficient and sustainable social insurance programs; (iii) improving living conditions for
the people of ger areas through infrastructure investments, housing expansion, and better service
delivery; and, (iv) acting on several sources of vulnerabilities that have traditionally affected
Mongolia: climate risks in rural areas, disaster risks in urban areas
24

92.
Outcome 3.1 – Work with the Government on the design, adoption and implementation
of a comprehensive social protection system that supports the poor
 A better understanding of poverty and inequality, including its gender dimensions. The
World Bank will continue its cooperation with NSO and will support them in their analysis and
dissemination of poverty data.. Following the recent series of policy notes on poverty, it will enhance
analysis of inequality and policy responses such as safety net reform, as well as strengthen the focus
on labor market and employment dynamics as structural change deepens. In those analyses, the
World Bank will look specifically at the gender dimension of poverty and inequality. It will also
disseminate a series of policy notes around “women and the labor markets” and “women and
mining”.
 A successfully implemented poverty-targeted safety net. The World Bank will continue to
provide support to the Government as it moves towards a more targeted and transparent system,
under the social protection component of the Multi-Sector Technical Assistance (MSTA) project and
technical assistance financed by a Korean Trust Fund. The Bank will also explore a possible Social
Protection Administration Implementation support operation once the MSTA support winds down.
93.
Outcome 3.2 –Support better delivery of basic services (education, health, justice, and
infrastructure)
 More responsive and accountable local service delivery through a strengthening of
participatory processes. Under the Sustainable Livelihoods Program, participatory methods have
demonstrated the effectiveness of community engagement to plan and deliver local development
projects. This approach is being adopted as government policy and the Bank will continue to support
the Government at all levels and communities to operationalize the emerging policy framework.
 Expanded opportunities for early childhood education and more efficient systems for health
services. With funding support from the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), the World Bank
will support the Government’s efforts to increase the provision and quality of early childhood. An Ehealth project – developed in partnership by the Ministry of Health, Korea and the World Bank –
would help improve access to secondary and tertiary level clinical services through strengthening of
the referral process between hospitals. It will work closely with other development partners already
involved in the sector such as ADB.
 Better infrastructure planning and prioritization of investments in poor neighborhoods of
Ulaanbaatar. Ulaanbaatar Services Improvement Project 3 (USIP3) will aim to support the
prioritization of infrastructure investments in ger areas through an integrated district level planning
system and targeted investments in selected areas. The World Bank will also explore with the
Government how it can encourage affordable and energy-efficient housing development.
 Greater consistency in judicial decisions and greater predictability of the judicial system.
Issues relate to lacking capacities of judges and prosecutors, increasing allegations of corruption, lack
of access to justice in rural areas, and limited public trust in the justice sector. In addition, lack of
access to relevant information is at the core of ineffective management and opacity of operations.
The Bank provides support to strengthen these areas through the ongoing Enhanced Justice Sector
Services Project.
25

94.
Outcome 3.3 -- Reduce vulnerability of households exposed to natural hazards and
pollution
 Cleaner air in Ulaanbaatar. A platform for cooperation among several development partners
(e.g., ADB, EBRD, GIZ, MCC) has been developed to assist the Government’s coordinated efforts to
improve air quality in Ulaanbaatar. The Clean Air Project provides financing for a combination of
short-term and medium-term measures. The project may also lay the foundation for a World Bank
investment in the expansion of the electricity transmission system or a modernization of district
heating during this CPS period, possibly with IBRD resources.

A comprehensive approach to risk management in the livestock sector. The Bank will build
on the ongoing SLP – where the Pastoral Risk Management component supports herders and local
authorities to better plan and prepare for winter – and the Index-based Livestock Insurance Project
(IBLIP) which provides a tool for herders to protect themselves from asset loss.
 A city better prepared to manage disaster risk. Technical assistance funded by GFDRR will
be provided to improve the disaster preparedness of the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar. Based on
assessment of hazards and vulnerability, a disaster risk management plan for Ulaanbaatar city will be
developed in close coordination with JICA. JICA will focus on earthquake risks, while the Bank
team will look into flood risks in the city.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES AND RISKS
A. IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING OF THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
95.
The Bank will work towards greater use of country systems in the CPS period. This will be
pursued by moving towards full financial management of projects within the Government’s Public
Financial Management systems, and by moving towards managing project funds through the
Government’s Treasury Single Account System. The use of the Treasury Single Account System and
the Government Financial Management Information System will be rolled out to all Bank-financed
projects by the end of the CPS. Furthermore, projects will eventually be audited as part of the overall
audit of the government accounts by the Mongolia National Audit Office.
96.
The Bank will strengthen the implementation of the portfolio and increase the focus on
results. The quality of portfolio implementation continues to be satisfactory, as evidenced by the
review of ICRs by IEG, yet there is scope for improvement, particularly as it relates to timely project
completion. Institutional capacity strengthening at national and sub-national level will remain a core
area of focus during the CPS period. At the initiative of the Ministry of Finance, emphasis will be
placed on grouping Project Implementation Units around key sectors so that they are better aligned
with Ministries and can implement multiple donor-funded projects.
97.
The Bank will invest in measuring the impact of Bank-funded projects and in sharing
lessons. During the CPS period, the World Bank will undertake impact evaluations of projects that
are considered innovative and have potential lessons for Mongolia as well as other countries.
Specifically, it will evaluate the ongoing Rural Education and Development (READ) project, the
ongoing Index-Based Livestock Insurance Project, and the new Livestock-based Livelihoods
Improvement Project.
26

98.
The Bank will also pay greater attention in ensuring that projects that will be developed
during this CPS period are gender-informed. In line with the IDA16 commitments, projects and
analytical products that may have an impact on gender – such as the Sustainable Livelihoods
Program, the Ulaanbaatar Services Improvement Project, and the Social and Environmental
Assessment of mining – will take such impact into consideration starting from the design stage and
will integrate gender-differentiated results in their monitoring and reporting system. Such work has
already been initiated for several of the projects under preparation.
99.
The CPS Results Framework will be the key instrument for monitoring progress of the
Bank’s program of support. The framework is embedded in the first phase of the MDG-based
Comprehensive National Development Strategy of Mongolia (2007-2015), and narrows down the
range of outcomes to those that the Bank can demonstrably influence over the CPS period. Use of
the Country Portfolio and Results Monitoring Tool (CPRT), a web-based system for monitoring CPS
progress, will be explored. The Bank will also conduct regular Country Program Portfolio Reviews
(CPPR).
100. The Bank will strengthen the Government’s ability to manage donor financed development
projects. The Bank will support the Government’s decision to establish result-oriented Monitoring
and Evaluation (M&E) systems with a focus on effective and efficient delivery of intended results of
development projects, strengthening M&E capacity and enhance the quality and accessibility of
information for decision makers and stakeholders. In the shorter term, this will increase the
Government’s ability to monitor the implementation of ODA projects, in the long run it will be an
important instrument to design and manage investment programs supported by the Government's
own budget.
101. Mongolia will have access to incremental resources and will be eligible for IBRD
financing with the presentation of this CPS to the World Bank Board of Executive Directors. The
Bank Treasury will provide training to government officials early in the CPS period to ensure that
Mongolia can take full advantage of the range of IBRD financing instruments.
102. The Bank will prepare a CPS Progress Report in FY14 to evaluate progress towards the
outcomes outlined in this CPS and make adjustments as required. The Progress Report will
consider any changes required to respond to the policies of the incoming Government. Any changes
to the program will be reflected in the project results framework. In particular, the Progress Report
will include a firm IBRD lending program for the remainder of the CPS period.
103. The World Bank Group will also invest in greater outreach. The World Bank is upgrading
its website and is committed to disclose all documents, in line with its Access to Information policy.
It will continue to make use of the GPF resources to facilitate dissemination and encourage dialogue
around key policy documents prepared with World Bank support.
B. MANAGING RISKS
104. The World Bank Group may need to address several risks during the implementation
period of the CPS. They range from an unstable global economy with uncertain future prospects,
domestic macroeconomic stability and management, to political uncertainty as both Parliamentary
and Presidential elections will take place during the CPS period. Natural disasters such as the
increased frequency of severe dzuds pose particular risks to the rural parts of the population who
remain especially vulnerable to climate risk and variability.

27

105. Slowdown in the global economy. Mongolia’s economic outlook is dependent on global
macroeconomic factors, in particular commodity prices. Should China’s economy be significantly
affected by a global economic downturn, it would have major consequences for Mongolia. Dialogue
with the Government on macroeconomic fundamentals, in close consultation with the IMF, will
remain a key priority during the next CPS period. Regular monitoring and analysis of the
macroeconomic and financial indicators, including debt sustainability analysis and banking
supervision, will be continued in the next CPS period.
106. Medium term prospects are bright, but in the near term the country remains at risk of
repeating the boom-bust cycle of the past decade. Public sector spending remains strongly procyclical. The Bank of Mongolia has been quick to raise policy rates and reserve requirements. Its
efforts to control rising inflation could be more than offset if extraordinarily large fiscal injections for
2012 materialize as currently considered. Lack of management of public debt could be destabilizing
as the country is exploring new avenues to raise significant resources to finance the pressing
infrastructure needs. The establishment of the Fiscal Stability Fund and the issuance of government
guarantees to the Development Bank, among others, shift the focus from public debt to the risk
exposure of the overall balance sheet of the Government. The World Bank will continue to work with
the Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Mongolia and the National Development and Innovation
Committee to strengthen its capacity, making available its Medium Term Debt Management Strategy
(MTDS) toolkit.
107. Other external risks include climate change, weather variability and its impact on
international prices for agricultural goods. Dzuds, droughts and unexpected temperature
fluctuations are likely to increase as climate variability becomes more pronounced. The Bank will
work closely with the authorities to reduce vulnerabilities of herders and increase the resilience of
ecosystems, both through investment operations and AAA work.
108. Rising inequality and social perceptions. Global experience suggests that the risks of further
increases in inequality are real and may create social tensions if left unmanaged. The Bank will work
with the Government and other partners, first to understand the dynamics and drivers of inequality,
and also to support public programs to promote greater equality of opportunity and mitigate the
possible negative distributional effects of the resource-driven growth model.
109. Political risk in Mongolia, in particular the commitment to sustaining the reform agenda,
is driven by upcoming elections. Parliamentary elections are scheduled for June 2012 and the
Presidential election will take place in 2013. Broad consultations undertaken in preparation of this
CPS point to general support for its key strategic objectives across the aisles of Parliament. Some
differences among political parties and stakeholders in resolving trade-offs between some of these
objectives exist, of course. Thus a different order of priorities may emerge depending on the outcome
of the 2012 elections. The World Bank Group will inform the choices of the current and future
Governments through good and timely analytical and advisory work. But it will have to remain
flexible in its approach as highlighted by the experience with the CAS 2004-2008.
110. The inflow of large amounts of financing for the mining sector poses the risk of increased
corruption, including in World Bank-funded projects. The World Bank will continue to advocate
for better governance and to work closely with the Independent Authority Against Corruption. From
an operational perspective, it will use its projects to promote greater transparency and accountability.
In particular, it will organize a preventive training workshop on corruption and ethics for all staff
from the Project Implementation Units and from key Ministries, with the strong support of the
Ministry of Finance.
28

111. The World Bank Group may also expose itself to potential reputational risk by getting
associated with the Oyu Tolgoi copper mine project development. The Oyu Tolgoi management and
the sponsor are set on making the mine development exemplary and sustainable from a technical,
social, and environmental perspective. However, due to its sheer size, the complex nature of mining
development and the economic impact to the country, the Oyu Tolgoi carries a significant importance
and may attract strong public attention and criticism. The World Bank Group’s overall strategy is to
have a close coordination among the various institutions involved (Bank, IFC, MIGA) so that the
Group takes a balanced and comprehensive approach towards the mining sector which should help
manage risks better.
112. Capacity of the Government in implementing an increasing number of projects may be
lagging. While there is a great desire to implement a series of investments, these projects are often
more complex in nature – from an institutional as well as financing perspectives – than past
investments. The World Bank Group will continue to invest resources in implementation support and
will undertake regular portfolio reviews jointly with the Ministry of Finance to identify and address
potential problems early on.
113. As the country demands more complex products from Development Partners, the World
Bank Group will need to focus on attracting and retaining competent staff. With the mining boom,
the local labor market is evolving rapidly and the WBG will need to be attentive to maintaining its
competitiveness.
114. Finally, the transition to non-concessional lending should also lead to a more active
involvement from the Ministry of Finance in determining the overall World Bank program, and
from other non-concessional financiers, in Mongolia. In many middle-income countries, the
Ministry of Finance is a key coordinating agency across Ministries and determines the activities for
which the country will borrow, based on its financing capacity and the development needs. The
WBG will work with the Ministry of Finance to enhance its coordinating and management function
for international development financing.

29

V. ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1
Mongolia: CPS FY2013-2017: Results Matrix9
Country Development
Goals

Issues and
CPS Outcomes
Milestones
WBG Program
Obstacles
Pillar 1: Enhance Mongolia’s Capacity to Manage the Mining Economy Sustainably and Transparently
Be a world-class mineral- Mining policy and Outcome 1.1 Supported the
Ongoing Financing:
 Completed consultative
led economy
regulatory
country in developing a
process to develop new
 Mining Sector Institutional
CNDS10 Goal: “Exploit
environment still
regulatory environment,
mineral law
Strengthening TA Project (FY08)
mineral deposits of
evolving with key
institutional capacity, and
 Prepared new mineral law
 Mining Infrastructure Investment
strategic importance,
tests ahead such as
infrastructure for worldand model mineral
Support Project (FY11)
generate and accumulate
new mineral law
class mining
investment agreement
 TF EITI (Extractive Industries
savings, ensure intensive
- Implementation
Indicator 1: Number of
appropriate for responsible
Transparency Initiative): Grant
and high economic growth, challenges for weak public/PPP mining-related
mining development
Indicative Financing:
and develop modern
and poorly
infrastructure assets ready for
 Enhanced corporate
 Additional Financing – Mining
processing industry.”
coordinated public
tender
governance of state-owned
Sector Institutional Strengthening
institutions
Baseline: 0 (FY12)
mining interests
Project (FY15)
CNDS Goal: “Protect
- Capacity
Target: At least 2 (FY17)
 Prepared regional
 IFC: Oyu Tolgoi Project Finance
nature and environment in
constraints on rate
Indicator 2: Number of
infrastructure investment
 MIGA Guarantee: Oyu Tolgoi
mining sector and maintain and pattern of
infrastructure feasibility
plans to holistically
 TF AusAid: Strengthen
the ecological balance.”
growth of the sector studies carried out financed by
support mineral
Groundwater Management in
(e.g., transport and
the WBG
development
Southern Gobi
Continue developing the
power bottlenecks
Baseline: 0 (2012)
 Sustained Responsible
 TF AusAid: Mining and the
mining sector in a
and suboptimal
Target: 8 (FY17)
Mining Initiative tripartite
Environment
sustainable and responsible solutions; local skill Indicator 3: Aimag-wide
dialogue
Key Ongoing and Indicative AAA:
way
shortages)
management and monitoring
 Enhanced government
 TA Programmatic Mining Sector
- Risk of mining
plans for groundwater use
capacity to assess and
(FY12-13)
sector commanding
prepared and in use
prepare investments in
priority access to
(cumulative)
infrastructure
scarce local capital
Baseline: 0 (2012)
 Pilot institutional structure
and skilled labor
Target: 2 aimags (FY17)
for groundwater
creating challenges
management established
for non-mining
and functioning with
sectors to provide
appropriate staffing
livelihoods
 Completed Strategic
9

The program for the second half of the CPS will be further defined during the mid-term review and presented in the CPS Progress Report.
CNDS: Comprehensive National Development Strategy of Mongolia: 2007-2015 (Phase 1)

10

30

Country Development
Goals

Share the mining wealth
Manage public revenues in
a transparent and
accountable way and invest
them effectively to enhance
today’s growth as well as
save for rainy days and
future generations

Issues and
Obstacles
- Unsustainable use
of natural resources,
especially
groundwater in
southern Mongolia
-Need to capture
mining rents
efficiently and
transparently by the
state as revenues,
and sustainably
managed to avoid
currency
appreciation,
inflation, and debt
buildup
- Growing
inequality and
demand for wider
and quicker
redistribution of
mineral wealth
-Scaling up existing
institutions,
particularly in
public expenditure
management
- The Human
Development Fund
approach fiscally
unsustainable
- Municipality of
Ulaanbaatar’s
budgeting formats
lack transparency

CPS Outcomes

Milestones

Outcome 1.2: Supported the
government in designing and
implementing policies and
systems for a more robust,
equitable, and transparent
management of public
revenues and expenditures
Indicator 1: Time over-runs in
public investment projects
(sample of road projects)
Baseline: 70% (2010)
Target: Less than 70%
(FY17)
Indicator 2: Percentage of
citizens satisfied with the
mechanisms and outcomes of
Community Initiative Fund
investment
Baseline: (FY12)
Outcomes: 85%
Mechanism: 86%
Target: (2013 end of SLP2)
Outcomes: Remains above
80%
Mechanism: Remains above
80%
Indicator 3: Local
Development Fund indicator
and target to be identified
during the preparation of the
Third Sustainable Livelihoods
Project

31










Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA)
focusing on the mining
sector including gender
dimensions
Implemented Fiscal
Stability Law: (i) structural
deficit of less than 2% of
GDP by 2013; (ii)
government expenditure
growth limited to nonmineral GDP growth by
2013; and (iii) Net Present
Value of debt to GDP ratio
of 40% by 2014
Improved EITI Mongolia’s
scope and the quality of
revenue data
Expanded EITI’s outreach
to civil society and
parliamentarians
Enhanced management of
reserves by Bank of
Mongolia through the
Reserves Advisory and
Management Program
(RAMP)
Improved NDIC’s capacity
in assessing and planning
public investments
Municipality of
Ulaanbaatar adopts an
improved budgeting
system

WBG Program

Ongoing Financing:
 Economic Capacity TA Project
(FY03)
 Governance Assistance Project
(FY06)
 MONSTAT Strengthening the
National Statistical System
Project (FY09)
 Multi-sector TA Project (FY10)
 TF EITI (Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative):
Implementation Support and Civil
Society Organization Outreach
 TF KTF (Korea): MONSTAT
 TF KTF (Korea): Multi-sector TA
Indicative Financing:
 E-Government Project (FY13)
 Third Ulaanbaatar Services
Improvement (District Planning)
Project (FY13)
 Sustainable Livelihoods 3 Project
(FY13)
 Additional Financing MONSTAT Strengthening the
National Statistical System
Project (FY15)
Key Ongoing and Indicative AAA:
 ESW Programmatic Economic
Policy (Quarterly Economic
Updates) (Continuous)
 TA Reserves Assets Management
Program (Continuous)

Country Development
Goals

Issues and
Obstacles

CPS Outcomes

Milestones

WBG Program


TA Debt Management Strategy
(FY12-13)
 ESW Programmatic Municipal
Financing for Ulaanbaatar (FY1213)
 TA Procurement Assessment
(FY14)
Pillar 2: Build a Sustained and Diversified Basis for Economic Growth and Employment in Urban and Rural Areas
Diversify the economy
- Threat of “Dutch
Outcome 2.1 Enhanced the
Ongoing Financing:
 Established movable
CNDS Goal: “Intensively
Disease”
investment climate and
collateral registry
 Multi-sector TA Project (FY10)
develop export-oriented,
- Continued
financial intermediation
 Adopted action plan for
 IFC Advisory Services: Corporate
private sector-led, high
appreciation of the
Indicator 1: Average number
consumer protection in the
Governance
technology-driven
Tugrik
of days to comply with
financial sector
 IFC Advisory Services: Inspection
manufacturing and
- Level of financial
business regulations
 Improved corporate
Services
services, with particular
intermediation low
Baseline: 12.6 (FY12)
governance of IFC bank
 TF KTF (Korea): Multi-sector TA
focus on information,
- Critical
Target: 10 (FY17)
investments
Indicative Financing:
communication
infrastructure gaps
 Implemented International
 Small and Medium Enterprise
development, transit
and poor
Financial Reporting
Access to Finance Project (FY14)
transportation, logistics,
management and
Standards in some of the
 TF FIRST (Financial Sector
financial mediation
delivery of public
public-interest entities
Reform and Strengthening)
services, deeper processing services
supported by IFC
Initiative: Improving Financial
of agricultural products,
Sector Stability
and create a sustainable,
 IFC
knowledge-based
Key Ongoing and Indicative AAA:
economy.”
 ESW: Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP)
CNDS Goal: “Enhance
Development Module (FY12)
banking and financial
 ESW Financial Sector Monitoring
system and services.”
and Policy Dialogue (FY12-13)
 TA Financial Literacy and
Consumer Protection Assessment
(FY13)
National Livestock
- Half of the herders Outcome 2.2 Created more
Ongoing Financing:
 Reviewed agricultural
Program (NLP) Goal: “To
live on an income
opportunities in the rural
price support and subsidy
 Index-Based Livestock Insurance
develop a livestock sector
below the national
economy for enhanced
policies
Project (FY05)
that is adaptable to climate poverty line
livelihoods
 Supported new financial
 Information and Communications
change and social
- Development of
Indicator 1: Number of loan
products including loan
Infrastructure Development

32

Country Development
Goals
development and create an
environment where the
sector is economically
viable and competitive in
the market economy; to
provide a safe and healthy
food supply to the
population; to deliver
quality raw materials to
processing industries; and
to increase exports.”

Issues and
Obstacles
livestock sector
limited by lack of
integration into
domestic and global
supply chains and
weak provision of
productivity
enhancing services
(animal health,
animal breeding and
nutrition)
- Herders are
increasingly
exposed to shocks
in international
commodity prices,
and specifically to
cashmere prices.
- Access to finance
in rural areas
limited by high
costs of borrowing

CPS Outcomes

Milestones

beneficiaries from the
Microfinance Development
Fund at soum level and below
Baseline: 29,133 (2008)
Target: 39,330 (2013)
Indicator 2: Household
income generated from
agricultural production and
processing in pilot soums
under the Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program
supported livestock project
Baseline and target to be
determined during project
preparation

Project (FY06)
Sustainable Livelihoods II Project

(FY07)
 Renewable Energy for Rural

Access Project plus GEF
Component (FY07)
 TF KTF (Korea): Index-Based
Livestock Insurance
 TF EC (European Commission):
Sustainable Livelihoods II
 TF MN-FS: Renewable Energy
for Rural Access
Address vulnerabilities
 TF PHRD (Policy and Human
affecting certain segments
Resources Development):
of the population
Sustainable Livelihoods II
 IFC Advisory Services: Food
Safety
Indicative Financing:
 Sustainable Livelihoods 3 Project
(FY13)
 TF GFAHI: Avian and Human
Influenza 2 Project
 TF GAFSP (Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program
(GAFSP): Livestock-Based
Livelihoods Improvement Project
 IFC Investments in agribusiness
 Index-Based Livestock 2 Project
(FY16)
Key Ongoing and Indicative AAA:
 ESW Programmatic Agricultural
Policy Review (FY12-13)
Pillar 3: Address Vulnerabilities through Improved Access to Services and Better Service Delivery, Safety Net Provision, and Improved Disaster Risk
Management
CNDS Goal: “Implement a - Half of the
Outcome 3.1 Worked with
 Analyzed and disseminated
social welfare policy
the government on the
Ongoing Financing:
poverty data
workers in the
primarily targeting low
design, adaptation, and
 Multi-sector TA Project (FY10)
 Disseminated policy notes
informal sector do

33

guarantee funds to address
collateral shortfalls
Increased use of ICT for
rural finance
Drafted Food Security Law

WBG Program


Country Development
Goals
income and vulnerable
groups.”
Address potentially
growing perceptions that
all are not afforded the
same opportunities –
between rural and urban
areas, between rich and
poor

CNDS Goal: “Achieve the
MDGs and provide for an
all-round development of
Mongolian people.”
CNDS Goal: “Strengthen
government institutions
and improve legal
environment to ensure
transparency and
accessibility of public
services.”

Issues and
Obstacles
not earn enough to
meet basic needs
- Fragmented
multiple social
welfare benefits are
not targeted and
nontransparent
- Unsustainable
universal cash
transfer system
-Risks of vulnerable
groups being further
marginalized
- Building
connectivity
between people,
services, and
businesses is a
challenge due to size
of country
- Significant
disparities in
educational and
health outcomes by
location and socioeconomic groups
- Substantial
challenges of
building efficient
and accountable
delivery systems for
social services in a
decentralizing
environment,
especially at local
levels
- Weak capacity of
the court systems

CPS Outcomes

Milestones

implementation of a
comprehensive social
protection system that
supports the poor
Indicator 1: Proportion of
poverty-targeted benefits
going to poor households
Baseline: 0% (FY12)
Target: >80% (2014)







Outcome 3.2 Supported
better delivery of basic
services (education, health,
justice, and infrastructure)
Indicator 1: Number of fixed
ECE facilities/ kindergartens
built under Bank-supported
projects
Baseline: 0 (2012)
Target: 37 (2014)
Indicator 2: Number of
children attending new mobile
ger kindergartens
Baseline: 0 (2012)
Target: 1,500 (FY17)
Indicator 3: Access to legal
information and advice across
all Ulaanbaatar districts and

34









WBG Program

on women and labor
markets, and women and
mining
Completed Gender Action
Plan
Assessed gender
dimensions of poverty and
inequality
Introduced a povertytargeted social assistance
benefit, a new targeting
mechanism, and more
integrated beneficiary
information management
Developed options for
pension reform that
balance fiscal and social
concerns (including gender

 KTF (Korea): Multi-sector TA
Indicative Financing:
 Social Protection Administration
Project (FY16)
Key Ongoing and Indicative AAA:
 ESW Social Protection (including
pension reform) (FY12-13)
 ESW Programmatic Poverty
Analysis (FY12-13)
 ESW Poverty and Inequality
Study (FY13)

Gender Action Plan (FY13)

Completed study on
accountability of service
delivery in a decentralizing
government focusing on
health and education
Improved Ulaanbaatar
municipality infrastructure
planning and investment
prioritization with
community participation
Identified key challenges
for efficient functioning of
Municipality of
Ulaanbaatar’s budgeting
system
Expenditures for key
services are reflected in the
municipal budget

Ongoing Financing:
 Ulaanbaatar Services
Improvement Project (FY04)
 Rural Education and Development
(READ) Project (FY06)
 Information and Communications
Infrastructure Development
Project (FY06)
 Sustainable Livelihoods II Project
(FY07)
 Renewable Energy for Rural
Access plus GEF Component
(FY07)
 Enhanced Justice Sector Services
Project (FY08)
 TF EC (European Commission):
Sustainable Livelihoods II
 TF EFA-FTI (Education for All

Country Development
Goals

CNDS Goal: “Create a
sustainable environment
for development by
promoting capacities and
measures on adaptation to
climate change, halting

Issues and
Obstacles
and lack of access to
justice in rural areas
- Lack of access to
judicial information
- Infrastructure
investments in ger
areas not fully
prioritized
- Rapid urbanization
putting pressure on
urban services

- Dzud events
remain a threat to
livelihoods
- Herders exposed to
climate-related risks
that can affect living

CPS Outcomes

Milestones

aimags
Baseline: No value related
information available; no
paralegals available; no
information in minority
languages available (2012)
Target: 60% of Ulaanbaatar
districts and aimag centers
distribute legal information in
central community locations;
paralegals providing advice in
60% of aimag centers, soums,
and horoos; 10 laws available
in minority languages (FY17)
Indicator 4: Number of people
in pilot ger areas with access
to an all-season road within a
500 meter range
Baseline: 25,000 (2012)
Target: 60,000 (FY17)
Indicator 5: Number of people
in pilot ger areas provided
with access to regular solid
waste collection
Baseline: 0 (2012)
Target: 69,000 (FY17)
Indicator 6: Number of subprojects identified through the
district planning process
launched
Baseline: 0 (2012)
Target: 8 (FY17)
Outcome 3.3 Reduced
vulnerability of households
exposed to natural hazards
and pollution
Indicator 1: Percentage of
herders participating in the

35









Utilized justice sector data
as part of a framework for
court administration,
budgeting, and planning
Applied IT solutions to
enhance access to justice
information including use
of websites and mobile
phones

Agreed on roadmap for
transitioning index based
livestock insurance
institutional structure
Explored ways to provide
universal coverage for

WBG Program
Fast-Track Initiative) Catalytic TF
TF MN-FS: Renewable Energy
for Rural Access
Indicative Financing:
 Third Ulaanbaatar Services
Improvement Project (FY13)
 Sustainable Livelihoods 3 Project
(FY13)
 E-Health Project (FY14)
 Transmission Line Project (FY15)
 District Heating Project (FY15)
 TF Multi-donor TF: Global
Partnership for Education
 TF JSDF (Social Development
Fund): Improving Primary
Education Outcomes for the Most
Vulnerable Children in Rural
Mongolia
 TF SDC (Swiss Development
Cooperation): Participatory
Planning/Decentralization Support
Key Ongoing and Indicative AAA:
 ESW Programmatic:
Accountability and Service
Delivery in a Decentralized
Environment (FY13-14)
 [Possible ESW Administrative
Courts and Executive
Accountability (FY14)]


Ongoing Financing:
 Index-Based Livestock Insurance
Project (FY05)
 Sustainable Livelihoods II Project
(FY07)
 TF KTF (Korea): Index-Based

Country Development
Goals
imbalances in the country’s
ecosystems and protecting
them.
Implement policies and
strategies to improve the
legal environment for
disaster management

Issues and
Obstacles
standards
- Severe winter air
pollution in
Ulaanbaatar
- Populations
vulnerable to
disaster risks
- Increasing number
of urban migrants
are exposed to
natural disasters,
including seismic
events

CPS Outcomes

Milestones

Livestock Risk Insurance
scheme
Baseline: 9.13% (FY12)
Target: 15% (2014)
Indicator 2: Coverage of
targeted households without
eligible stoves
Baseline: tbd based on
consultations with donors and
Ulaanbaatar City
Target: 60% of targeted
households (FY16)
Indicator 3: Number of people
in pilot ger areas protected
from inundation
Baseline: 0 (2012)
Target: 19,000 (FY17)









36

uninsurable catastrophic
losses to those herders not
already holding insurance
policies
Extended Livestock Early
Warning System and
linked to disaster
management agencies
Principal recommendations
and action plan developed
by the Ulaanbaatar Clean
Air Project for selected
medium-term abatement
measures approved by
relevant counterparts
Developed disaster risk
management plan for
Ulaanbaatar (earthquakes
and floods)
Developed hazard and
vulnerability database for
Ulaanbaatar

WBG Program
Livestock Insurance
TF PHRD (Policy and Human
Resource development):
Sustainable Livelihoods II
Indicative Financing:
 Ulaanbaatar Clean Air Project
(FY12)
 Sustainable Livelihoods 3 Project
(FY13)
 Transmission Lines Project
(FY15)
 District Heating Project (FY15)
 Index-Based Livestock 2 Project
(FY16)
Key Ongoing and Indicative AAA:
 TA GFDRR: Disaster
Preparedness (FY14)


Attachment 2
Worldwide Governance Indicators for Mongolia (2010, 2005, 2000)

37

Attachment 3

Mongolia CAS and ISN Completion Report
MONGOLIA
CAS AND ISN COMPLETION REPORT
FINAL - 3/19/2012
Date of CAS (FY05-FY08): April 5, 2004 (Report No. 28419-MOG)
Date of Interim Strategy Note (CY09-CY10): April 20, 2009 (Report No. 48311-MN)
Period Covered by the Completion Report: July 1, 2004 to June 30, 2011
Summary of Evaluation Ratings
Program Performance
The Completion Report combines a moderately unsatisfactory rating of the achievements of the
FY05-FY08 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), and a satisfactory rating of the Interim Strategy
Note (ISN) programs into an overall conservative rating of moderately satisfactory. Important
differences characterized the performances of the two strategies, with the ISN providing timely and
flexible support to Mongolia in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, drawing on important
lessons learned in the implementation of the CAS, which faced challenges adjusting to changing
political realities.
The CAS was strongly aligned with the Government’s growth and poverty reduction strategy
(Economic Growth Support and Poverty Reduction Strategy, EGSPRS), set an ambitious set of
outcomes at the time it was designed, and defined a results framework against which progress would
be monitored. The CAS also envisaged launching a PRSC series that would support the reform
process in the country and underpin much of the work of the Bank. However, the reform agenda as
identified in the CAS was not implemented as other priorities emerged following the 2004 general
elections, including the growth of the mining sector and expansion of public expenditures boosted by
high mineral prices. The Bank found that the CAS had relied too heavily on the PRSC as the choice
of instrument, as also reflected in the various indicators identified in the results matrix. When
circumstances prevented these from going forward, the Bank embarked on a re-alignment of its
program with the development of new projects (e.g., Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI), Mining Technical Assistance, the Governance Assistance Project, etc.) and a strengthened
focus on governance, supported by an extensive political economy analysis of the country and in
particular its mineral resources sector.
While the program performance of the CAS in light of the above is rated as moderately satisfactory,
much of the work undertaken during this period was instrumental in setting the stage for considerably
more flexible and aligned Bank support during the ISN 2009-2010. The formulation of the ISN took
place at a critical time, with the onset of the global financial crisis in 2008, plummeting copper
prices, and a domestic macro-fiscal crisis, and attention focused on adopting a sustainable fiscal
management framework, including a prudent assessment of revenues and more targeted and better
planned expenditures. Support was provided in the form of technical assistance (funded through
projects as well as the Governance Partnership Facility, GPF) as well as budget support (including
allocation from the IDA Crisis Window). This re-alignment of the program meant that some projects
under preparation were dropped. The Bank also mobilized the support of other donors in the country,
38

building consensus around a coordinated platform of assistance to Mongolia. Moreover, it ensured
the support of the new coalition government, which was keen to take decisive action to address the
impact of the crisis. The comparative success of the ISN was enabled in part through lessons learned
in the implementation of the CAS, but is also the result of a design that was more flexible and
nuanced, providing vital support to the country at a turbulent time. For this reason, the rating of the
ISN is satisfactory.
CAS and ISN outcomes and milestones in key areas were fully or partially achieved (supported by
Bank instruments), such as the enactment of fiscal regulations, stronger public financial management,
improved mining sector management and governance, reduction of vulnerabilities, and expansion of
mobile telephony and internet coverage and access. In addition, the Bank was able to introduce
community participatory processes in several of its activities to enhance their effectiveness and
transparency.
Bank’s Performance
The Bank’s performance in supporting the delivery of the Mongolia CAS and ISN results is
considered to be moderately satisfactory. After a period of adjustment following the 2004 elections,
the Bank was able to adjust nimbly to changing circumstances and deliver a substantive portion of
the envisaged CAS program (albeit with some delays, adjustments, and the addition of some new
operations) that exceeded the IDA commitment targets. Through activities that were already under
way, including adjustments to ongoing and planned operations and technical assistance (TA), the
Bank responded rapidly to the authorities’ request for support during the crisis including two key
budget support operations which provided the cornerstone of the interim strategy. The Bank
continued to support the program with relevant AAA and TA, and helped mobilize Trust Funds (e.g.,
education, environment, governance) aligned to the objectives of the CAS. The completed and
ongoing operations are all rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory for outcomes, development
objectives, and implementation progress by the Implementation Completion and Results (ICR)
reviews, Implementation Status and Results (ISR) reports, and Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)
evaluations. Nevertheless, weaknesses in the design of the strategy, in part exposed when it became
apparent that the envisaged PRSC series could not move ahead, are a key factor in the moderately
unsatisfactory rating.
During the CAS and ISN periods, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) made a number of
investments in Mongolia totaling US$152 million and provided advisory services in key areas to
complement the Bank’s strategy by promoting the private sector development. IEG’s evaluation on
one of the IFC investments conducted in FY10 was rated “Mostly Successful”.
I.

Introduction

1.
The Bank Group’s FY05-FY08 CAS for Mongolia was discussed by the Board in April 2004,
just before parliamentary elections scheduled for June 2004. The CAS was aligned with selected
priorities of the EGSPRS (discussed by the Bank’s Board in September 2003 along with the Joint
Staff Assessment Note). Even though the risks of such timing were known, the Bank proceeded with
the formulation and presentation of the CAS as the commitment to the EGSPRS reform agenda was
expected to be maintained regardless of the election outcomes. In view of the broad consultations
undertaken by the Government, the possibility of weakening commitment to the EGSPRS was
assessed by the Bank’s Mongolia Country Team as a minor risk. Furthermore, the Bank’s Mongolia
program had operated without a CAS for the preceding three years: the previous CAS covered FY9939

FY01 and the next one was held back pending the finalization of the EGSPRS so that the Bank’s
strategy could be aligned.
2.
No single party won a clear majority in the June 2004 national election, leading to an
extended period of political change and a series of coalition governments. Some aspects of the
EGSPRS implementation lost momentum after the departure of its main supporters following the
change in government. While there was still overall commitment to the poverty reduction agenda
with broad ownership of the program, the frequent political changes led to a fragmented and shifting
development agenda as well as a shorter-term focus. The June 2008 elections gave the Mongolia
People’s Revolutionary Party (MPRP) a majority but perceptions of voter fraud triggered protests.
These turned violent, with five people killed. After these traumatic events, the MPRP formed a
coalition government with the Democratic Party to mend fences.
3.
With the end of the FY05-FY08 CAS coverage, and in response to the Government’s request
for immediate support in the face of the unexpected and severe economic downturn precipitated by
falling mineral prices and the global financial crisis, the Bank prepared an ISN in April 2009 for the
next 18 months through the end of CY201011. The ISN reflected the major initiatives, analysis, and
dialogue that were already underway (such as improvements in the mineral regulatory framework)
and emerging priorities (e.g., social protection in face of the crisis, and fiscal management). The
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) that was under preparation was postponed given the
uncertainties about the length and depth of the downturn. This Completion Report covers both the
FY05-FY08 CAS and the CY09-CY10 ISN.
II.

Progress towards Mongolia’s Long-term Development Outcomes

4.
The Mongolia EGSPRS (issued by the Government of Mongolia in June 2003) was viewed
as a comprehensive document which aimed to foster development and human welfare and reduce
poverty by accelerating private sector-led and broad-based equitable growth, and improving the
efficiency of public expenditures. The EGSPRS articulated key development challenges and priority
actions organized around five main pillars: (i) ensuring macroeconomic stability and public sector
effectiveness; (ii) supporting production and exports and improving the environment for privatesector-led development; (iii) enhancing regional and rural development and environmentally
sustainable development; (iv) fostering sustainable human development; and (v) promoting good
governance, and implementing and monitoring the strategy. The joint Bank-Fund staff assessment
noted its strengths as aligning national development goals – including the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) – with sector strategies and programs; shifting the poverty strategy from income
transfers and safety nets to growth and sustainable human development; and the potential to align
donors and stakeholders with the strategy. It also noted important areas for improvements: addressing
weaknesses in the underlying sectoral and thematic strategies; fitting programs in areas of agreement
with budgetary resources; and undertaking more diagnostic analysis.
5.
The 2004 coalition government, with the strong support of the President, adopted the
Government Action Plan (GAP, 2008-2012) and National Development Strategy (NDS, 2008-2021)
based on the MDGs. The ambitious NDS agenda emphasizes (i) achieving the MDGs (reducing
poverty, promoting gender equality, environmental sustainability, improving health and education
11

A draft CAS Progress Report was initiated in early 2007, but then shifted to preparation of a full four-year CPS at
the Government’s request. However, the draft CPS was delayed following an unexpected change in government in
late 2007, and again by the June 2008 parliamentary elections. (Source: Mongolia ISN, 2009, p.15, paragraph 51)

40

services, and strengthening human rights); (ii) developing an export-oriented, high-tech, knowledgebased economy; (iii) exploiting strategic minerals to build savings, growth, and modern processing
industry; (iv) developing regions and infrastructure to reduce urban-rural disparities; (v) halting
ecosystem imbalances; and (vi) consolidating political democracy and an accountable system free
from corruption and red tape. However, while the GAP, NDS, and socio-economic development
guidelines were fully integrated with the MDGs, they were not prioritized, costed and linked to
financing sources and a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF).
6.
Until 2008, the economy performed strongly, due in part to favorable weather and high
mineral prices for copper and gold. Rising global mineral prices sparked a boom in mineral
exploration and contributed to rapidly rising government revenues. With improved economic
performance, the poverty incidence declined to 35.2 percent in 2007-8 from 61.1 percent in 2002-3.
However, the macroeconomic situation deteriorated sharply during the latter half of 2008 with the
global economic downturn and plummeting global copper prices. Growth fell and inflation reached
34 percent (year-on-year) in August 2008 due to a combination of expansionary fiscal and monetary
policies and a de facto fixed exchange rate. The economy has since rebounded strongly from the
sharp drop in outputs in late 2008 and early 2009, largely as a result of policy actions taken by the
Government during the crisis. Estimates suggest real GDP grew by 6.1 percent (year-on-year) in
2010, after declining 1.3 percent in 2009. A balanced budget was achieved in 2010, reflecting
underlying improvements in the economy and the recovery in commodity prices. A recent major
achievement was the passage of the Fiscal Stability Law (2010) which greatly strengthens the
medium term fiscal framework.
7.
While the country has reached or will reach many of the MDGs at an aggregate level by
2015, there are strong disparities across the country. The EGSPRS aimed to reduce under-five
mortality by two-thirds from 87.5 per 1,000 births in 1995 to 29.2 by 2015. It also set the goal of
halting and reversing the spread of TB. Primary education enrolment rates were set to increase from
91 percent in 2000 to 100 percent by 2015. Mongolia has done well in extending access to basic
education and early childhood education. The gross enrollment ratio in primary education reached 99
percent in 2010, and 76 percent for early childhood education, well ahead of schedule. However,
learning achievement is low, particularly in rural areas. Under-five mortality (U5MR) fell to 23.8 in
2008, already below the target set for 2015, reflecting significant historical health sector investments.
However, there are large rural-urban disparities in the U5MR and infant mortality rates. Adult
mortality rates are on the rise and are linked to the rising incidence of non-communicable diseases.
Available data on access to curative health services, although incomplete, suggest that high levels of
out-of-pocket payments (about 90 percent spent on outpatient care and medicines) constitute a
significant financial burden to households. The Ministry of Environment and Tourism prepared a
Strategy on Environmental Policy Reform (2011- 2021) that covers a wide range of priority areas,
and will be supplemented by the development of a national environmental action plan.
III.

Program Performance

8.
The FY05-FY08 Mongolia CAS focused on five sets of development challenges: (i) ensuring
macroeconomic stability and public sector effectiveness; (ii) supporting production and exports and
improving the environment for private sector-led development; (iii) enhancing regional and rural
development and environmentally sustainable development; (iv) fostering sustainable human
development; and (v) promoting good governance and implementing and monitoring the strategy. In
response to these challenges, the World Bank Group’s support was organized along three main
objectives: 1) consolidating the transition; 2): reducing vulnerabilities; and, 3) strengthening the
41

alignment of policies and resources around results. A results framework was designed around these
objectives in clusters of key results areas and 20 outcomes. Progress towards achieving outcomes
was to be monitored through multiple indicators and milestones. (Attachment 1 provides details of
the overall status on the progress and achievement of the outcomes as well as the indicators and
milestones.)
IFC’s strategic priorities in Mongolia are to complement the World Bank Group’s strategy by
promoting the private sector development. Specifically, IFC’s support was focused on three key areas
through investments and advisory services to help Mongolia position itself for sustainable growth
and support job creation: (i) support stability and foster the development of financial markets; (ii)
contribute to the sustainable development of the mining sector and associated infrastructure sectors;
and (iii) support the development of industrial and agribusiness sectors with a particular focus on
small and medium enterprises. Crisis response, business and investment environment, climate change
mitigation and food security were important themes within these key strategic areas.
9.
The CAS program targeted systemic and institutional reforms viewed as important to
achieving overarching EGSPRS objectives. It focused on private sector-led growth, reform of the
public sector, and reducing household vulnerabilities and proposed annual, single-tranche Poverty
Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) to support the implementation of priority EGSPRS objectives.
The PRSCs were intended to (i) provide a framework for the Bank’s analytical work, dialogue and
lending and to leverage Bank resources with other donors around a medium-term reform program;
and (ii) be sequenced over the four-year CAS period based on readiness (e.g., PRSC I would focus
on public sector reform, PRSC II on private sector development, and PRSC III on the social sectors).
Selective lending operations and TA were also envisaged to build institutional capacity, implement
reforms (e.g., public expenditures, infrastructure), and to pilot new approaches (e.g., Sustainable
Livelihoods Project). During the course of CAS implementation, the program evolved to address
emerging priorities and circumstances. The ongoing portfolio and lending program were adjusted to
meet challenges, while some other operations, such as budget support credits, were deferred.
10.
The ISN (CY09-CY10) was presented to the Board against the backdrop of government
efforts to grapple with the economic crisis during the latter half of 2008. The Government was
focused on restoring economic stability moving away from the populist but unsustainable policies
pursued during the boom years. The ISN identified overcoming the natural resource curse as the most
significant medium-term development challenge. It also identified the need for policy adjustments to
address the economic crisis, protect vulnerable groups from the impact, stabilize and restore
confidence in the financial sector, as well as the need to urgently develop crisis management
capacity. The ISN embodied the Bank Group’s existing strategic policy directions and activities in
support of the Government’s actions to address the short and medium-term challenges. Accordingly,
the ISN proposed Bank Group support in the key strategic areas of (i) improving macro and fiscal
sustainability in a mineral-based economy; (ii) protecting the poor and vulnerable; and (iii)
encouraging transparent and prudent mining investments and a more competitive and stable mediumterm business investment climate. A results framework included these goals and related outcomes
and milestones (see Attachment 1 for recent status).
CAS Objective 1: Consolidating the Transition
11.
To deepen the transition to a market economy, the CAS focused on removing the remaining
barriers to effective public service delivery and private sector development. It prioritized support to
reforms geared towards building a more performance-oriented public sector. Specific reforms goals
42

included a better alignment of public expenditures with policies, an improved investment climate,
sustainable infrastructure investments, and increased sustainability of social sector financing.
12.
Strengthened systems and capacities to align public resources with policy priorities. The
objective of consolidating reforms for a more performance-based public sector was partially achieved
with the establishment of a functional Treasury Single Account (TSA) and Government Financial
Management Information System (GFMIS), as well as greater public access to budget information.
While the goal of aligning a comprehensive (including donor financed projects and recurring
investment costs) MTEF/EGSPRS priorities and costed sector plans was not achieved, progress was
made on aligning the public investment program with national and sectoral priorities. This included
requiring the completion of feasibility studies before an investment project enters the budget. These
institutional improvements were supported by policy triggers under the Development Policy Credits
(DPCs I and II) and are now included in the draft of the new integrated budget law, expected to be
passed by Parliament in 2011. The fully functional GFMIS is an important achievement for
Mongolia, particularly compared with the experience of such projects in other countries. On the
downside, the goal of establishing an incentive-based civil service has had limited achievements.
There has only been minor broadening of the salary range and the staffing mix is still not in line with
MTEF/EGSPRS objectives. Such civil service reforms have proven to be difficult to implement
effectively in many parts of the world and Mongolia is no exception. Bank-supported projects
contributed to the outcomes and AAA pieces were effectively used to bring greater realism to the
agenda.
13.
Improved policy, regulatory, financial environment for PSD. The establishment of a
sound enabling environment for the private sector, including deepening financial intermediation, was
partially achieved but was negatively impacted by the macroeconomic and financial downturn in
2008. While the Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) and Sources of Growth Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM) identified the major impediments to stronger private sector development, the
overall investment climate is still challenging (e.g., Mongolia’s declining relative ranking in the
Doing Business ratings), though progress was made in some selected sectors (e.g., mining and
agriculture). Both IDA and IFC teams closely coordinated their activities and collaborated in such
areas as corporate governance and Doing Business, and maintained a dialogue regarding the
development and the potential for private sector engagement in mining and other infrastructure
sectors. The national PSD strategy is still to be endorsed by the authorities, though many
recommendations of the background technical note are being implemented. The Private Sector
Development Credit II, Legal and Judicial Reform Project, and the Financial Capacity Development
Project supported the strengthening and effective implementation of reforms to facilitate PSD. Most
of the indicators and milestones for improving the financial environment for PSD were met, but the
severe banking crisis exposed acute vulnerabilities in the sector, arising in part from inconsistent
enforcement of sound supervisory practices. The two DPCs supported more consistent enforcement
of bank supervision, resulting in a bank-by-bank supervision action plan.
14.
Strengthened policy and institutional framework to support cost-effective and
sustainable infrastructure investments. Mongolia’s recent experience with the mineral price boombust cycle and resulting fiscal crisis exposed weaknesses in the public spending framework, the
Public Investment Program (PIP) process, and the role of short-term political economy incentives,
particularly related to infrastructure expenditures. However, corrective measures, including
legislative reforms, are being phased in to smooth future public revenue windfalls and expenditure
policies. These measures were linked to the development partner-supported reform program triggered
by the crisis of 2009. There was progress in improving the financial performance of the energy sector
43

and improving electricity access in rural areas. The Bank was actively engaged in energy through
projects and AAA such as Infrastructure Strategy and South Gobi Infrastructure and Environment.
To improve road infrastructure, the Transport Development Project (FY01-FY08) aimed to
strengthen the planning and asset management capacities of road sector entities. However, in light of
limited accomplishments, the World Bank opted for phasing out of the road sector. Meeting the CAS
outcome of increased ICT (Information and Communication Technology) access and coverage in
Mongolia has been particularly successful. With World Bank financed subsidies combined with
private sector subsidies from the Universal Service Obligation Fund (established with support from
the Global Partnership on Output Based Aid), all 335 soums have been provided with access to
reliable and affordable mobile voice services, with an additional 34 soum centers now equipped with
broadband internet access for public and private users. Schools are connected at discounted rates,
there is wider access to internet cafés, and a network of over 170 satellite public telephones serve
herders in remote areas beyond the reach of the mobile networks. The partnership with the private
sector to promote these services has been instrumental in contributing to the sustainability of the
outcome.
15.
Strengthened social service financing and institutional capacity. There was limited
progress in improving the financial sustainability and targeting of the pension and social insurance
program due to modest Government interest in advancing such reforms at that time. More recently,
there has been renewed interest in Bank technical assistance on various pension system reform areas.
The Bank has been providing advice to the Government on issues related to the Poverty Targeted
Benefit (PTB) scheme and the Social Welfare Law (SWL) as part of the key reform areas initiated
during the crisis and supported by two DPCs from the Bank’s side. In this context, the Bank supports
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in the implementation of the second phase of the Proxy Means
Testing (PMT) survey and through the social protection component in the Multi-Sectoral TA Project.
Other ministries (health and education) have also expressed interest in using PMT to target
beneficiaries. Progress was made on education sector outcomes to improve the delivery of
services by better linking needs with spending. The Bank facilitated the education outcomes
through: (1) the Education for All Fast Track Initiative (EFA FTI) Catalytic Fund grant that
supports the improvement of education access and quality, particularly for herders’ children; (2)
an IDA grant for the Rural Education and Development (READ) Project which provides
classroom libraries and teacher training to raise the literacy skills of students in Grades 1-5; (3)
and additional IDA financing to support the use of net-books to improve learning. The major
impact has been an improvement in the learning environment and facilities, which in turn has
laid the foundation for improvement in reading skills in rural schools. Although Mongolia
received an Education Program Development Fund (EPDF) grant to participate in the
international assessment of the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS)
and Program of International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS), the Ministry of Education,
Culture and Science (MECS) decided not to implement the full scale survey in 2011. Meanwhile,
Mongolia has applied for an EFA FTI Graduation Grant to finance the building of kindergartens.
For higher education, the accreditation system is being improved thanks to Bank analytical work
being implemented under an ADB education project. As part of CAS selectivity and in light of the
strong involvement by ADB in this sector, Bank support to the health sector was at the margin
through small grants. However, the client and partners value the Bank’s role in global best practices,
knowledge and innovation (e.g., AAA on output-based budgeting in the health sector funded by seed
grant from the Results Based Financing Trust Fund).
CAS Objective 2: Reducing Vulnerabilities
44

16.
As part of the CAS, the Bank set the objective of increasing support to efforts aimed at
reducing risks to vulnerable populations, particularly in rural areas, and to improve the delivery of
services. It would support innovative and pilot initiatives (such as livestock insurance), better natural
resource management, sustainable regional development and stronger municipal governance and
urban services including for ger areas.
17.
Strengthened risk management and growth to reduce rural vulnerability. Under this
results area, the twin CAS objectives were (i) strengthen systems that reduce risk and improve
service delivery to vulnerable populations, and; (ii) address the key sources of rural vulnerability by
expanding support. Both the Sustainable Livelihoods Project (SLP) and the highly innovative IndexBased Livestock Insurance Project (IBLIP) helped to address risk and vulnerability, with the latter
providing livestock insurance coverage to 14 percent of targeted herders, a rate higher than originally
envisaged. Based on its early success, IBLIP is now being expanded nationwide to protect herders
from the vulnerability of natural and environmental risks and to improve the country’s risk
management system. Almost 36,000 sub-loans, for a total of US$30.4 million, have been disbursed
by banks and non-bank financial institutions under the micro-finance component of the SLP,
benefitting almost 164,000 people directly or indirectly. The project has made major contribution to
decentralization in the country, first and foremost by piloting a model of community participation in
public investment at local level, with lessons from the project incorporated in the integrated budget
law. SLP is also helping more than 176,000 herder families improve their pastoral management
skills, emphasizing winter preparedness and a reduction in the vulnerability of livestock. The
targeting of community level infrastructure projects (e.g. renovation of school dormitories) also seem
to be succeeding with high satisfaction rates among beneficiaries.
18.
Strengthened environmental and natural resource management. The Bank supported
efforts to improve national and community level environmental governance and natural resource
management (NRM), which has obvious linkages to vulnerability. The Bank-administered
Netherlands-Mongolia Trust Fund for Environmental Reforms (NEMO 1 and 2) helped generate a
range of activities and analyses to advance environmental protection and the sustainability of NRM,
including through improvements in environmental laws and standards. Also under NEMO, the
Steppe Forward Programme produced the Mongolian Biodiversity Databank, and the legal
framework for NRM was revised. A series of studies were carried out to deepen the understanding of
environmental issues such as ground water resource and managing the mining impact on the
environment. Public consultations and access to information on Environmental Impact Assessments
(EIA) were actively promoted. The publication of all existing EIAs on the internet was further
supported by DPC2. The CAS outcome for piloting community-based NRM systems in selected
soums was indirectly supported through the Sustainable Livelihoods Projects.
19.
Improved municipal service delivery for Ulaanbaatar peri-urban residents. Progress was
made in improving service delivery to vulnerable groups in the peri-urban areas of the capital.
Provision of water supply and kiosk operations improved gradually, directly benefiting the lowincome ger households. Under the Bank-funded Second Ulaanbaatar Services Improvement Project,
about 280 water kiosks and 100 individual connections for water and sanitation have been made in
the ger area of Ulaanbaatar. As a result, the number of people per water kiosk has been nearly halved
to 892 with approximately 300,000 benefitting. The service performance of the Water Supply and
Sewerage Authority was improved by reducing unauthorized water and electricity consumption.
Operation costs were also reduced, while water and wastewater tariffs were increased over the past
three years. However, the water utility’s financial sustainability of has still not been achieved.
45

20.
Improved viability of initiatives to reduce rural-urban disparity. The CAS proposed to
inform the Government’s regional development strategies (which aimed to reduce disparities and
included large infrastructure investments) with analytical work, analysis of options, and the study of
cross-country experiences with such efforts. However, the post-2004 government had less interest in
regional development strategies, except in South Gobi where most of the mining boom is happening.
The Bank thus undertook a large piece of AAA, the Southern Mongolia Infrastructure Strategy which
looked at the institutions and investments needed to support the growth potential of Southern
Mongolia.
CAS Objective 3: Strengthening the Alignment of Policies and Resources Around Results
21.
In alignment with a key pillar of the EGSPRS, the CAS aimed to strengthen the national
institutional framework and capacities to design, implement, and monitor the country’s poverty
reduction strategies and programs in close coordination with other development partners. Supporting
the government efforts to formulate and implement the related sector strategies and building
consensus would be important as well as the coordination and harmonization of donor procedures.
After the EGSPRS was adopted, the country priorities evolved and the EGSPRS could no longer be
used as a platform for coordination and development effectiveness. The Bank adjusted to these new
realities and focused on enhancing donor coordination and ensuring results within the Bank-funded
activities.
22.
To support stronger aid coordination and harmonization, the Bank assisted the Government
in moving from the Consultative Group mechanism focused on pledging aid to the more operational
biannual Technical Meetings (TM) and Sector Working Groups (SWG). The TM mechanism was
particularly effective in coordinating support to the Government in addressing the 2008-2009
economic crisis. The World Bank played the coordinating role with the IMF, the ADB, JICA, and
USAID in mobilizing the budget support needed to support the Government’s action plan. The
combination of strong policy actions and adequate external resources played a major role in the
country’s ability to mount a quick turn-around, and laid the foundation for a significant improvement
in its medium to long-term development strategy. The Bank adjusted quickly to the crisis by
reallocating two-thirds of its IDA envelope to development policy lending, supported by existing or
restructured TA projects and just-in-time AAA. Donor coordination in sectors such as education
(e.g., sector-wide approach around the Fast Track Initiative) and mining has been useful.
23.
While some progress has been made on the harmonization agenda, leadership in coordinating
aid at all levels by the Government needs further strengthening. Official Development Assistance
(ODA) is now included in the budget (with the Bank setting good practice), but there are still issues
with lack of transparency and limited dissemination of aid-related statistics and information. The
Government is now moving towards partnership relations with the donors that are more in line with
its emerging middle-income country status, signaling its desire to rely more on its own resources
rather than on aid.
ISN Objectives
24.
Under the ISN, the Bank sought to support the authorities’ urgent response to the crisis and
associated reforms to improve medium-term economic management, with a particular focus on the
economy’s mineral dependence. The 2008 severe economic downturn gave an opportunity for the
Government to revisit its financing mechanisms and management of mineral resource revenues. The
46

Bank, through the Economic Capacity Building TA and the Governance Assistance Project as well as
policy dialogue, had already been actively working with the Government to strengthen pro-cyclical
fiscal management, investment planning, and the linkages among the various strategies and policy
documents such as the Government Action Plan (GAP), the Medium-Term Budget Framework
(MTBF), and the Socio-Economic Guidelines (SEG). While the crisis exposed substantial policy
weaknesses, it also provided the opportunity to correct these and initiate a series of significant
reforms in key areas. The ISN formalized this reform agenda and articulated the program for CY09CY10 under three strategic areas.
25.
ISN Strategic Area 1: Improve Macro and Fiscal Sustainability in a Mineral-Based
Economy. The crisis provided the opportunity to support major policy reforms which had been
stalled for a long time. These reforms were supported by an IMF-led stabilization package, with
budget support being provided by the ADB, Japan, Australia, the US, India, and the World Bank.
The 2010 Fiscal Stability Law (FSL) was the centerpiece of these reforms and its implementation is
currently being phased in. The 2011 budget available for current expenditures is already based on
smoothed-out mineral prices, with the balance being saved in a stabilization fund. However, the
structural balance rule that caps the deficit to a certain level of GDP will only start being applied in
2013. While the Bank, in order to avoid cross-conditionality, did not include passage of the FSL in
the DPCs, it supported the drafting of the legislation and organized an intense outreach program to
Parliament with the view of building consensus around the law. The Bank’s crucial role is widely
acknowledged. Similarly, improvements to the PIP were given important momentum during the
crisis and have now been included in the new integrated budget law. In the banking sector, the
supporting program met the original objectives of restoring confidence in the banking system,
although it did not fully address the problem of underlying financial sector vulnerabilities, which
continue to make the system prone to future crisis.
26.
ISN Strategic Area 2: Protect Poor and Vulnerable Groups. The ISN outcome of
retargeting social assistance to the poorest has gained traction with the development of a
methodology for Proxy-Means Testing (PMT) and the roll-out of the survey to build the national
beneficiary database. The official implementation of the PMT-based Poverty Targeted Benefit
scheme is pending the enactment of the Social Welfare Law. In the meantime, the universal Child
Money Program (CMP) has been replaced by universal cash transfers from the Human Development
Fund. The Sustainable Livelihoods Project, in particular through its Community Initiatives Fund
component, addresses the vulnerability of rural populations. It has supported the community-led
investment projects, including renovation of dormitories and schools, improved healthcare facilities,
improvements in local infrastructure (from public bath houses to street lighting), and increased
economic opportunities (e.g., through the construction of hay storage facilities and water points for
cattle). The Index-Based Livestock Insurance Program is already available in 15 aimags and
addresses pastoral and disaster risk management. Bank support for reducing vulnerabilities in urban
areas aimed to enhance municipal planning capacity and urban services with a focus on ger areas.
Key analytical and diagnostic pieces have already been completed and are informing policies and
providing clear cost-benefit choices. Additional financing for the Energy Project is improving the
reliability and financial sustainability of electricity distribution companies. The performance of these
outcomes is satisfactory as many of them are partially or fully achieved and each outcome addressed
the urgent needs of the Ulaanbaatar municipality.
27.
ISN Strategic Area 3: Encourage Transparent and Prudent Mining Investments and a
More Competitive and Stable Medium-term Business Investment Climate. The program has
been successful in pursuing objectives aimed at improving the management of the sector, although
47

the remaining challenges are substantial. The legislative framework for mining is evolving and
should soon reach a stable stage more consistent with international good practices. Establishing a
balanced and sustainable fiscal regime for the mining sector remains the greatest challenge.
Constantly changing provisions, with sometimes aggressive taxation, discourage investments in
exploration and development by reputable companies and encourage corruption and tax evasion by
less credible companies. The repeal of the windfall profits tax was well received but was then
somewhat replaced with a high royalty regime supported by government-fixed commodity prices.
Bank engagements that are making significant contributions include the Mining TA Project, the
DPCs, and the Governance Assistance Project. Ad hoc fiscal regime changes are a strong
disincentive for investment and should remain a major focus of future efforts for dialogue and
engagement. Since the opening of Oyu Tolgoi, one of the world’s largest copper mines, and Tavan
Tolgoi, a six billion ton coal resource, the Bank has focused on support to ensure that mining
revenues are translated into positive development outcomes. These efforts have included
strengthening governance across the mining value chain by promoting broader and more informed
public accountability. Key achievements included the EITI compliant designation received by
Mongolia in 2010 and improvements in the transparency of the mining cadastre. Understanding the
long term importance of Oyu Tolgoi as a critical growth source for the development of the country,
IFC, in close coordination with the Bank, has been working closely with the private developer and
partner banks with a goal to arrange a multi-billion US$ debt financing package for the sustainable
development of this world class mine project, as well as actively engaging in technical,
environmental and social due diligence and advisory services initiatives including community
development program.
28.
Throughout, the World Bank placed a strong emphasis on encouraging greater transparency
and accountability. Starting with an in-depth political economy analysis, the Bank aimed to foster
public dialogue around key development issues anchored in facts and informed by other countries’
experiences. It did so on both the supply and demand sides of governance, the latter thanks to the
support of the Governance Partnership Facility (GPF). For example, in addition to advancing greater
transparency in the allocation of mining licenses through the reform of the mining cadastre, the Bank
also initiated the establishment of an independent think tank and supported the training of Mongolian
journalists in economic and mining matters.
IV.

Bank’s Performance

29.
The Bank did well to adapt to the evolving circumstances soon after the 2004 CAS was
discussed. In September 2005, the Bank agreed with the new government to refine the CAS priorities
and deliverables. With the PRSC series stalled, the Bank reformulated its approach to focus on key
planned investment lending often modified to meet emerging challenges (e.g., Private Sector
Development Credit II, Rural Education Development), additional operations to meet new priorities
(e.g., Governance Assistance Project, Renewable Energy for Rural Access, Enhanced Justice Sector
Services), technical assistance (e.g., Mining Sector TA), and non-lending technical services aimed at
achieving the key development goals and outcomes that had been identified in the CAS. It was also
successful in raising grant resources to address the country’s needs, with resources for recipient
executed trust funds more than tripling from US$23.55 million in FY05 to US$74.5 million in FY11.
Moreover, the Bank mobilized resources from donors to co-finance a range of IDA operations,
facilitating strengthened donor collaboration and coordination at the sector level. Examples of this
include, among other, EU support for SLP2, its largest commitment in Mongolia, Swiss and Korean
support for IBLIP, Japanese support for project preparation and the Ulaanbaatar Services
Improvement Project, and support from the Netherlands for NEMO and the Renewable Energy
48

Project, etc.. As the 2008-2009 economic crisis deepened, the Bank Group deferred the approval of
the next CAS and instead adopted an 18-month ISN to support the Government’s urgent priorities.
The ISN incorporated major Bank initiatives that were already underway (e.g., the focus on the
mining sector) and framed the Bank’s program around key priority areas needed to stage a quick
recovery and form the basis for an improved medium-term policy agenda.
30.
Two DPC budget support operations provided the cornerstone of the interim strategy and
accounted for US$70 million of the indicative ISN FY09-FY11 IDA envelope of US$90 million
(actual IDA commitments over FY09-FY11 now stand at US$131 million). In addition, components
of several ongoing operations were reoriented to support the DPC policy areas. The DPCs were
designed to help the Government manage the economic downturn triggered by the collapse of copper
prices and helped meet urgent financing needs. The single-tranche DPC-1 supported reforms in the
areas of fiscal policy and management, social protection, the financial sector, and the mining sector.
Collaboration among key partners (e.g., IMF, ADB, Japan, US) was close and effective given the
urgency of the situation and the short time span for preparation. DPC-2 supports the significant
reforms that the Government has undertaken since the economic crisis in 2008 including sustaining
the economic recovery and developing a stable fiscal framework through improved fiscal policy and
management; designing a social protection system that supports the poorest people through economic
downturns; preparing a framework for a sounder financial sector; and maintaining an attractive
investment climate for mining. The ICR review rated DPC-1 as being satisfactory while the IEG
rating, which was provided one year after the approval of the DPC and before the passage of the
Fiscal Sustainability Law, was moderately satisfactory.
31.
Overall, the Bank has been able to make substantial progress in assisting the Government in
key areas selected for support under the CAS and the ISN (strengthening public financial
management and fiscal and public investment policies; addressing the needs of poor rural residents;
supporting infrastructure development, with particular success in the ICT sub-sector; improving the
alignment of resources with policies; and moving towards greater clarity of the mining sector policies
and safeguards. In some areas where the Bank did not have substantial IDA allocations, it was able to
leverage other resources, co-financing, and TFs, and also provide support through AAA and global
cross-country experience sharing. The approval of a GPF for Mongolia was a key pillar of the
increased outreach to stakeholders undertaken by the Bank to support the Government’s response to
the crisis and the increased appetite for demand-driven initiatives to improve accountability in public
service delivery. However, there was slower traction in other areas such as designing and launching
the MTEF, civil service reforms, social welfare reform, and restructuring of the banking sector.
32.
Lending Volumes. Over the FY05-FY08 (CAS) period, the Bank approved 10 projects
worth US$99.6 million (of which US$50.1 million as IDA credits, and US$49.6 million as grants).
Under the ISN, the Bank approved an additional US$130.7 million of IDA financing (Mongolia is
currently not eligible for IDA grants) during FY09-FY11 with the approval of seven projects,
including two DPCs for US$69.7 million. (See Attachment 2). During the FY05-FY08 CAS period,
IFC committed US$57.6 million of debt and equity financing in eight projects; during the ISN
period, IFC provided additional US$94.4 million in 14 projects. FY11 saw a record level of
commitments in a given FY with US$83.3 million and seven projects.
33.
IFC’s Performance. During the CAS and ISN periods IFC made a number of investments in
Mongolia, which were strongly aligned with the WBG and IFC strategy. In the financial markets
sector, IFC’s investments supported banking consolidation; increased banks’ lending volumes to
target underserved segments, and expandED product and service offerings in the market. These
49

investments also included institutional strengthening and advisory work to improve risk management
and spread best practice lending standards. IFC has successfully established trade finance lines with
five local banks. IFC’s involvement and advisory services support to Mongolia’s Credit Information
Bureau helped develop the country’s financial markets infrastructure. IFC is also enhancing the
investment activities in the real sector with a focus on local corporations with diversified portfolios,
which in FY08 led to a US$30 million investment in MCS Holdings LLC, one of Mongolia’s leading
private companies diversified across such sectors as food and beverage, cashmere, and real estate.
FY11 became a record year for IFC in Mongolia in terms of its investment activity (investments have
been made in seven projects worth US$83.3 million, including US$50.0 million for the construction
of the first Shangri-la hotel in Mongolia, US$20.0 million sub-debt in Khan Bank, US$7.0 million in
the first private equity fund specialized in SMEs, and US$2.0 million in Suu Dairy, the largest dairy
company in the country).
During the same period, IFC significantly increased its advisory services in Mongolia with over
US$4 million in projects funded jointly by IFC, the governments of Japan, Netherlands and clients,
to help develop the business and investment climate and support financial markets. There are three
ongoing advisory projects in Mongolia focused on Investment Climate (Business Inspections
Reform), Corporate Governance and Access to Finance (trade finance, leasing, credit information,
mobile banking). IFC, in close coordination with the Bank, is also exploring PPP advisory services
to the Government of Mongolia.
34.
Analytical and Advisory Activities. The CAS planned an ambitious AAA program for
Mongolia and placed strong emphasis on collaborative efforts, more effective implementation, policy
linkages, consensus-building, and dissemination. (See Attachment 3). Key AAA delivered to the
client include major reports on mining, cashmere, and the enabling environment for social
accountability; infrastructure strategies; assessments of poverty, the investment climate, and the
financial sector; public expenditure reviews; a report on public investment planning; and an extended
series of Netherlands-financed reports on Mongolia’s environment. ESW products focused mostly on
economic and public sector governance followed by infrastructure, rural development, finance, and
social sectors. Many of the completed tasks offered the Government and development partners the
much-needed basis to advance the policy and sector dialogues. The individual elements of the DPC
policy matrices, for example, were identified from, and supported by, previous analytical work,
including in the banking sector where the results from a recent Financial Sector Assessment Program
(FSAP) and other diagnostic work were extremely relevant and timely. The Multi-Sectoral TA
Project is addressing accounting and auditing weaknesses identified by the AAA Report on the
Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC). The Bank’s quarterly, and then, from April 2009,
monthly, Economic Updates played an important role in disseminating the rationale for, and progress
on, reform measures, along with updates on the impact of the crisis on the macroeconomic, financial
and corporate sectors. A QAG review of 11 tasks (over FY02-FY06) found that despite an
unfavorable political and institutional context, the Bank’s AAA program was satisfactory in its
strategic relevance, quality, and dissemination.
35.
Results Framework. The analysis of the challenges in the CAS underestimated the political
economy realities, and the proposed strategy was somewhat complex and ambitious. The strategy
was predicated on robust macroeconomic management, strong adherence to the poverty reduction
objectives of the EGSPRS, and continued commitment and implementation of the reform programs
including substantive institutional changes. Events were overtaken first by the uncertainties
subsequent to the 2004 election, and then by the windfall earnings from mineral exports and the
impact of the natural resource curse. They were further exacerbated by public expenditures and
50

policies which were dominated by short-term perspectives and “pork barrel” political economy
considerations. In retrospect, the design of the results framework was overly intricate with too many
outcomes, indicators and milestones (some of which were not amenable to clear monitoring).
Outcomes and indicators described in the text and text tables did not match the matrix and there were
overlaps among some of the outcomes. The ISN results matrix is relatively simpler and outcomes are
better aligned with proposed Bank Group instruments, including the planned DPC prior actions.
V.

Key Lessons and Recommendations

36.
The lessons and recommendations for the next Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) draw
upon the evaluation of the performance of the CAS and ISN, as well as feedback received from
various stakeholders. Most counterparts viewed the Bank’s comparative advantage as an effective
convener, especially in donor coordination, and as a major global institution guided by a strategic
focus on results and analytical strength with the ability to create significant and effective knowledge
products. However, some who worked with the Bank during the CAS period saw the EGSPRS as a
complex Bank-Fund instrument that was needed to facilitate the allocation of significant amounts of
concessional funds to Mongolia.
37.

Some key lessons and suggestions for the next CPS include:



Build in flexibility to take account of transitions and emerging priorities. While the alignment
and synchronization of the Bank’s country strategy with selected national priorities and
development plans are the correct approaches to ensure broad ownership and commitment,
efforts should be made to build in flexibility to accommodate government and electoral
transitions as well as emerging and unforeseen developments. Undertaking consultations of
proposed CPS priorities and instruments with wider segments of stakeholders, including
parliamentarians and political entities in the opposition, could also reduce risks. Maintaining
flexibility, alternative programming, and strong dialogue on strategic priorities across key
ministries, parliamentary committees, and civil society will be essential. This will be particularly
critical as the Mongolian economy is expected to grow rapidly over the next five years and its
needs may change rapidly too.



Focus on fewer outcomes and ensure a clear results framework. The last CAS had an ambitious
and complex results framework with multiple outcomes, indicators, and milestones. The next
CPS should have a results agenda which (i) is aligned with selected national development
priorities, (ii) takes account of the activities of development partners, (iii) engages in areas with
strong client demand where the Bank has a comparative advantage and track record of
performance in the country, but at the same time supports innovation by bringing in global
experience; (iv) is simple and has only a few selected outcomes and clearly monitorable
indicators and milestones; and (v) links directly with proposed instruments and activities. In fact,
the CPS results framework should adopt existing and proposed project-level outcomes and
indicators to the extent possible. Benchmarks and monitoring mechanisms should be set up as
early as possible.



The advancement of sound development policies – be it through investment lending, budget
support, and AAA – is the most sustainable impact of the Bank in Mongolia. Over the past seven
years, policies and innovations have been introduced successfully through investment lending
(e.g., ICT project, IBLIP) as well as budget support operations (e.g., the FSL through DPC-1).
51

These were supported by quality analytical work and had strong ownership within the
Government. The crucial importance of understanding the political economy context for policy
reforms also needs to be underscored.


Design programs/projects to minimize implementation challenges. Given capacity constraints,
simplification of project design should be a priority in Mongolia. This does not, however, imply
that projects should not be innovative. Mongolia has, in fact, proven that it can implement
innovative and technically complex projects with significant policy impact (e.g., IBLIP).
Furthermore, to reduce the implementation costs, greater reliance on country systems for
procurement processes and financial management could be explored in conjunction with capacity
strengthening as warranted. Repeater projects, programmatic lending (for example in urban
development, direct poverty support, Public Financial Management), and additional financing
operations can also reduce costs.



Take a programmatic approach to AAA. Given the longer-term nature of the engagement in
Mongolia and the fact that Mongolia will increasingly value the Bank for its knowledge
contributions, the Bank should consider multi-year programmatic ESW and TA programs in key
areas (e.g., public expenditures, governance, civil service reforms) while continuing with
responsive, just-in-time policy notes and advisory pieces, and systematic follow-through on AAA
findings and recommendations.



Consider longer-term role of the Bank in Mongolia. The role of the Bank in Mongolia will need
to adjust as the country graduates from IDA to IBRD status during the period of current CAS.
Mongolia will become less reliant on ODA, and some traditional donors may reorient their
support to other low income countries, which in turn may affect the ability of the Bank to
mobilize Trust Fund resources. This will require strategic selectivity and emphasis on areas
where the Bank has a comparative advantage.

52

CAS/ISN Completion Report Attachment 1
Summary of Mongolia CAS (FY05-FY08) and ISN (CY09-CY10) Programs Self Evaluation [3/14/2012]
Financing
(Lending and
Status and Evaluation Summary
Grants) and Nonlending Activities
that Contributed
to the Outcome12
CAS Objective 1: Consolidating the Transition
Results Area A: Strengthened systems and capacities to align public resources with policy priorities
Outcome 1: The
Financing:
Fiscal Accounting
Government effectively
TA (FY98-FY06;
targets and manages
ICR=S; IEG=MS);
expenditures to support
Economic Capacity
national development
Building TA
priorities
(FY03);
Outcome indicators:
Governance
Assistance Project
Comprehensive MTEF
Not achieved. Sector ceilings are currently not enforced and there is
(FY06)
aligned with EGSPRS
no comprehensive MTEF based on bottom-up sector priorities.
priorities and costed,
However, program classification was introduced in the chart of
Non-lending:
prioritized sector plans with accounts starting in 2009.
Public Expenditure
ceilings updated based on
and Financial
M&E feedback
Management
Review (FY08);
Strengthened financial
Achieved. Functional TSA and Government Financial Information
Public Expenditure
management and
System (GFMIS) have greatly improved expenditure payments and
Tracking Survey
procurement systems;
cash management.
(PETS) Education
100% of all public accounts
(FY07); Improving
included in TSA; deviations
Public Investment
between planned and actual
Planning and
spending decrease by 50%
Budgeting (FY10)
CAS Outcome/
Cluster of Outcomes
Outcome Indicators
(baseline and targets)

General public including
NGOs have access to all
budget and parliamentary

Key Lessons and Suggestions for the New CPS

The MTEF goal was not achieved because, as has been the
common experience in many countries, the reform was too
complex given the capacity on the ground. A less ambitious
approach, with embedded advisors providing technical
assistance to the Government on phased implementation,
should have been pursued.
GFMIS was funded through three projects: the Fiscal TA
(now closed), ECTAC, and GAP. It succeeded due to close
Bank supervision, and sound project management on the
ground.

Achieved. Mongolia’s score has improved from 18 (out of 100) in
2006 to 60 in 2010 in the International Budget Partnership’s Open
Budget Index (OBI) ranking. Mongolia is now ranked among the

12

For projects, years in parentheses refer to FY of approval, and if closed, also FY of completion. Implementation Completion and Results (ICR) and Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) ratings are
provided where available. S: Satisfactory; MS: Moderately Satisfactory. The most recent Implementation Status and Results (ISR) ratings of Development Outcome (DO) and Implementation Progress
(IP) for ongoing projects in the portfolio are provided in CAS Standard Annex B8. For AAA, the year in parentheses refers to the FY of delivery to the client.

53

documents on a timely
basis

countries that make significant fiscal and budget information public.

Intermediate indicators:
By 2006, MTEF includes
comprehensive, costed PIP
including donor financed
projects, recurrent
investment costs

PIP does not include donor-financed projects or recurrent investment
costs

GFMIS fully operational in
central agencies and at
aimag level; procurement
processes streamlined

GFMIS, operating across the country at the central, aimag, and soum
levels, has greatly improved payments and cash management.

Detailed functional and
economic allocation of
budget, at national /local
levels, available to public
within 6 months of
completion
Outcome 2: Improved
civil service capacities and
systems to manage for
development results

The frequency and volume of budget information published have
increased considerably, and now include the Executive Budget
Proposal, monthly and year-end budget execution reports, and audit
reports

Financing:
Economic Capacity
Building TA
(FY03);
Governance
Assistance Project
(FY06)

Outcome indicators:
Decompression of civil
servant salaries from about
2.74 in 2001 to about 5 in
2007; bonuses linked to
performance evaluation

Not achieved. Pay compression was 3.1 in 2008; bonuses are not
linked to performance evaluation. Salary raises in Mongolia have been
across-the-board and have not addressed pay compression. However,
civil service pay, on average, is not unattractive when benefits and job
security are factored in.

Staffing mix at sector levels
consistent with MTEF and
EGSPRS goals

Not observable. There is no functional MTEF that would guide
staffing mix at the sector level.

Intermediate indicators:
Adoption and
implementation of Civil
Service Reform Strategy
and action plan to

There has been no progress to rationalize the wage bill or to revise the
civil service pay scales. There was some progress in simplifying the
pay structure for teachers through merging of several allowances in
2007.

54

Non-lending:
Civil Service Policy
Note (FY09)
(Towards a High
Performing Civil
Service)

The relative lack of progress on civil service reform is not
surprising given the World Bank’s general experience (see
2008 IEG evaluation). The Bank was too ambitious in this
regard, with a large (US$0.9 million) QCBS contract with a
consulting firm to design a civil service reform strategy
which resulted in hundreds of pages of reports of variable
quality that could not be implemented. The Bank’s
approach to the HRMIS was also weak, with insufficient
upfront analytical work to understand the HR arrangements
in Mongolia and the challenges that developing such a
system would entail. Once the ESW report was completed
in 2009, and the challenges recognized, the approach was
changed and currently a much more modest HRMIS is
under development.

rationalize wage bill in line
with PRSCs; civil service
pay scales revised
Civil Service Council
capacity, authority
strengthened to manage
personnel planning,
deployment, control;
HRMIS in place

The Civil Service Law was amended in 2008 in line with some of the
recommendations of the Civil Service Reform Strategy. Notable
changes include increased autonomy of the Civil Service Council
giving it responsibility for determining the classification, ranking, and
grading of civil servants, and for annually benchmarking civil service
pay with private sector comparators; and giving it increased authority
in dispute resolution. Comprehensive HRMIS is not in place. The
bidding was cancelled three times and the scope of the project has been
reduced. Currently, a scaled-down HRMIS is under development.
Results Area B: Improved policy, regulatory financial environment for PSD
Outcome 3: Improved
enabling environment for
private sector-led growth
Outcome indicators:
Government, donor
resources aligned to
prioritized reform agenda to
support PSD, including
mining, livestock, other
sectors

Public, including
businesses, able to easily
access all laws, regulations,
policies, and their drafts;
citizens able to appeal
administrative decisions

Achieved. Investment Climate Assessment (2006) and Sources of
Growth Country Economic Report (2007) identified a set of concrete
recommendations aimed at promoting private sector activity and
greater integration with the global economy in a way that leads to job
creation, broad-based growth and poverty reduction. A number of
these recommendations have been since implemented by the
authorities, including streamlining of foreign trade procedures, and
reduction of tax burden. Work on simplification of the inspection
regime and corporate governance reform (including overhaul of the
company law) is currently underway. Lines of credit from the Bank
and other donors facilitated access to finance by private SMEs. In
addition, significant progress has been made in improving the
investment climate and business environment in specific sectors
including mining and agriculture.

Achieved. Access to legal and judicial information was improved by
creating a virtual legal information portal and allowing for more
efficient dissemination of laws and other legal information among
government ministries and agencies through the creation of the
electronic United Information Network (UIN) in the National Legal
Center (NLC). As a result, the NLC provided (i) legal and judicial
information to 30 government organizations, agencies and ministries;
and (ii) facilitated public access to this information via two websites
containing the laws of Mongolia, court decisions, decrees of ministries

55

Financing:
Legal and Judicial
Reform Project
(FY02-FY08;
ICR=S; IEG=S);
Enhanced Justice
Sector Services
Project (FY08);
Development Policy
Credit 1 (FY09FY10; ICR=S;
IEG=MS);
Development Policy
Credit 2 (FY10)
IFC:
Mongolia Corporate
Governance Project;
Reforming Business
Inspections Project
Non-lending:
Investment Climate
(FY06); CEM
Sources of Growth
(FY07); ROSC
Accounting and
Auditing Review
(FY08); Corporate
Governance ROSC
Assessment (FY09);

The WBG’s engagement has proven to be most effective
when policy advice and TA were complemented by an
investment loan (LJRP). The impact of analytical work
such as the ICA and Country Economic Report chapter has
been more limited, partly because it was not systemically
followed through by the Bank team due to the need to direct
limited internal resources to more urgent work in the
financial sector. Although interventions at the sectoral level
(e.g., mining and agriculture) have resulted in an improved
enabling environment in relevant industries, the overall
investment climate for private firms is still challenging, as
shown by Mongolia’s slipping in Doing Business rankings
in recent years. In particular, regulations for opening and
closing a business, trading across borders, and getting credit
result in costs to business that are higher than in most other
East Asian economies. Prompt and consistent enforcement
of regulations is also an issue. Going forward, it would be
advisable for the WBG to agree with the authorities and
other donors on a time-bound plan for dealing with the
identified impediments to private sector operations, and
allocate commensurate TA and lending resources in support
of the plan implementation. In view of the anticipated
mining boom, it is particularly important to focus on
enhancing competitiveness of private firms working in other
sectors in order to maintain a degree of economic
diversification.
There needs to substantial and sustained effort to maintain
and expand the web portals and the UIN and to publicize the
existence and utility of this database in order to ensure an
increase in the number of public users of these internet sites.

and government agencies, and court commentaries. The success of
these websites was illustrated by 2007 survey results which showed a
100% increase in public access to information about the courts system
through the internet, a year after the websites were fully activated. In
addition, the Bank supported the establishment of the newly created
administrative courts and the new Supreme Court Chamber for
administrative cases. These courts are functioning well and citizens
have ready access to the appellate level.

Trade Facilitation
and Integration
(FY10); Annual
Doing Business
Reports (regular);
PSD Technical Note
(2008)

The new CPS should build on the foundations created by the
LJRP and the follow-on Enhanced Justice Sector Services
Project (EJSSP), currently under implementation. The
EJSSP is supporting important interventions in the
development and implementation of comprehensive legal
education reform (strengthening of law professors,
development of standards of legal clinics, development of
student handouts), and a bilingual public information
strategy. While the ISN did not highlight the justice sector
as a focus area, the proposed CPS could link the ongoing
project to the cross-cutting theme of Building Capacity to
Manage the Crisis and Improve Governance in the MediumTerm. As the extractive industries grow, the need for
individuals and the business community to understand their
rights and how to access the justice system rises, and with it
the need to ensure that the system can respond.

Intermediate indicators:
Development/adoption of
PSD strategy which
includes clearly articulated
public policy agenda for
private sector growth

In 2008, the Bank prepared a PSD technical note at the request of the
Government with the aim to provide the authorities with the analytical
foundation for a country PSD strategy. Although many
recommendations from the above report have since been taken into
account by the authorities, the national PSD strategy was not adopted
formally due to the onset of the financial crisis in late 2008.

National legal information
center has full library and
database of laws and
regulations; administrative
courts staffed, trained, and
opened

The national legal information center was established, including a
comprehensive library of laws and regulations. The legal information
website was set up and is being maintained. Administrative courts
have been staffed and trained. The establishment of the NLC allowed
for the creation of a new legal institution in Mongolia capable of
providing the MOJHA, the judiciary and the legal profession with
research and training capacities. In combination with the UIN’s legal
and judicial databases, connected electronically to 30 government
ministries and units, and provision of access to the public at large
through on-site free computer use and library facilities, increased
efficiency and transparency in providing access to the full corpus of
Mongolian law and court decisions to end users were accomplished.

Outcome 4: Increased
banking sector stability
reduces risks, costs of
credit
Outcome indicators:
Enforcement of
strengthened financial
sector regulatory
framework: reduction in
NPLs from 8% of assets to
below 5% by 2007;
improved rating for
compliance with Basel
Core Principles for

Partially achieved. The NPLs decreased to 5.3%, but this
improvement masked significant vulnerabilities in the banking system
which became exposed in late 2008 when Mongolia felt the impact of
the global financial crisis. The weak credit risk management by banks
combined with the lax supervision regime resulted in NPLs reaching
25% in 2009, although the number has dropped to 10% by late 2010.
The assessment of Basel Core Principles conducted during the last
FSAP found that banking supervision is relatively well developed in
comparison to other countries at Mongolia’s stage of transition.

56

Increasing information sharing among agencies and
ensuring optimal public access and utilization of the new
justice system services would also depend on strong
capacity building efforts within the system and public
information strategies and campaigns by the court and
broader justice system.

Financing:
Financial Capacity
Development
Project (FY02FY09; ICR=MS;
IEG=MS)
Private Sector
Development Credit
2 (FY05); IndexBased Livestock
Insurance Project
(FY05);
Development Policy
Credit 1 (FY09FY10; ICR=S;
IEG=MS);

The severity of the 2008-2009 banking crisis in Mongolia
has shown that strengthening of the financial sector remains
a critical part of the development agenda. The main lesson
emerging from the Bank’s engagement in the financial
sector is that the AAA and TA tools are not sufficient for
dealing with deep-seated and politically sensitive issues.
While diagnostic work and TA are important, they need to
be complemented by policy-based lending that would
support implementation of lasting reforms in the sector. It
is important that the new CPS gives adequate attention to
the dual objectives of improving the scope and cost of

effective banking
supervision

However, the banking crisis has demonstrated that enforcement of
existing regulations needs to be improved.

Development Policy
Credit 2 (FY10)

Strengthened legal and
regulatory environment for
livestock insurance and
leasing industry

Achieved. The Insurance Law was revised in 2004 and enabled the
development and selling of index based insurance. The Bank is now
working with the Government on a separate index based livestock
insurance law (currently in draft). The Law on Financial Leasing was
enacted in 2006, making leasing activities much more attractive for
investors, both foreign and domestic. Mongolia also amended its tax
legislation to create favorable tax treatment for leasing and encourage
investment in fixed assets.

IFC:
IFC Leasing
Development
Project

Intermediate indicators:
Implementation of updated
medium-term financial
sector strategy;
strengthened legal and
regulatory framework as
specified in the PRSC
policy matrix, adoption of
AML/CFT Law

Separate strategies were developed in 2006-2007 for the banking sector
and non-bank financial institutions, but the implementation got sidetracked in 2008 due to the severe banking crisis. The PRSC operations
did not take place, but substantial improvements in legal and regulatory
framework were made during the crisis period. In 2006, Mongolia
passed an AML/CFT law (Law on Combating Money Laundering and
Terrorist Financing) and established a Financial Intelligence Unit.
Since then, Mongolia has made significant progress on the AML/CFT
agenda, including amending the criminal code, strengthening the
supervision of banks and further building the capacity of the FIU.

Adoption of Insurance Law

financial intermediation while making the system more
resilient to possible future shocks.

Non-lending:
Financial Sector
Mid-Term Review
(FY06);
Financial Sector
Assessment
Program (FSAP)
(FY08); Analysis of
the Banking Sector
Vulnerabilities
(FY09); Financial
Sector TA (FY08)

Following the series of revisions in 2004, there were no other
substantial changes in the Insurance Law
Results Area C: Strengthened policy and institutional framework to support cost effective and sustainable infrastructure investments
Partially achieved. Mongolia’s Public Investment Plan (PIP) remains
Lending:
The combination of AAA, TA, and the DPCs has been
Outcome 5: Well costed
poorly aligned to national and sector strategies, and contains a majority
Development Policy important for the progress achieved to date. The AAA
and prioritized PIP,
of projects that have not gone through a proper appraisal or sound
Credit 1 (FY09diagnostic work identified the deficiencies and the areas for
aligned with the MTEF,
costing. However, some institutional and organizational reforms are in
FY10; ICR=S;
reform. The ECTAC and GAP TA projects provided the
allocates resources across
process that, if implemented well, should improve the PIP. These
IEG=MS);
consultancy support and overseas training and study tours to
infrastructure sectors
reforms include: (i) the Fiscal Stability Law (passed in 2010) that
Development Policy try to implement some of the recommendations, and to
Intermediate indicators:
strengthens the MTFF and smoothes and limits public expenditure
Credit 2 (FY11);
expose Mongolian policy-makers to good international
growth (pro-cyclical expenditures are one of the reasons for a poor
Economic Capacity
examples. The overseas exposure was particularly
Integrated infrastructure
PIP); (ii) changes to the legal framework (currently in the draft stage)
Building TA
important for the passage of the FSL. The DPC
strategy supports
for planning and budgeting (the Integrated Budget Law and the Law on (FY03);
conditionality on removing projects without feasibility
prioritization of
Development Policy and Planning) that would strengthen the PIP; (iii)
Governance
studies not only helped improve the 2009 and 2010 PIPs,
investments and policy and
the establishment of the NDIC as the agency responsible for strategic
Assistance Project
but more importantly, gave prominence to this issue among
institutional reform agenda
planning and appraisal of large infrastructure projects, thereby
(FY06)
Mongolian parliamentarians.
elevating the priority of this area and partially addressing the capacity
gaps in the MoF; (iv) the preparation, by the NDIC, of draft project
Non-lending:
appraisal and project evaluation guidelines for projects to enter the PIP; Infrastructure
and (v) rationalization of the PIP in 2009 and 2010 to remove some
Strategy (FY07);
projects that did not have appropriate technical drawings or were not
South Gobi

57

well-costed.

Outcome 6: Improved
financial sustainability
and efficiency of energy
sector
Outcome indicators:
Inter-company arrears
settled; reduction in energy
quasi-fiscal activities from
1% of GDP in 2003

Not achieved. Despite periodic write-offs and decisions to reduce
interest rates of sovereign guaranteed loans, the inter-company arrears
keep increasing. As of the end of 2010, inter-company arrears between
energy companies were still high (receivables Tg 25.3b and liabilities
of Tg 29.3b). The receivables and liabilities in energy sector stand at 2
- 2.4% of GDP in 2010. Various reasons, including low tariffs, which
do not allow companies to fully recover operational expenses,
imperfect power market structure and financial structure, and
incomplete energy sector restructuring contribute to increasing arrears.

Rebalanced tariffs recover
full cost of providing
electricity, but maintain
access for poor and rural
groups

Not achieved. After several price adjustments since 2007, the retail
tariffs for electricity has reached US 6 cents per kWh.

Ulaanbaatar electricity
distribution losses is
reduced from 34% in 2003
to less than 20 % by 2007

Partially achieved. Ulaanbaatar electricity distribution losses were
reduced from 34% in 2003 to about 21% in 2010. Energy Project PIU
and Ulaanbaatar Electricity Distribution Network (UBEDN) estimated
that additional revenues of about Tg 7b were collected due to reduced
losses and increased collections. The UBEDN could not meet the
target fully because the influx of migrants from rural areas is
continuing and there are still areas with high non-commercial losses.

Public-Private partnerships
in place (including
financing arrangements) to
implement sector
investment program

Not observable. Because of the economic crisis and the shift of the
Bank program to emphasize Development Policy Credits (DPC), the
priorities have shifted from long-term to short-term activities (e.g.,
covering budget deficit).

Government, donors
resources aligned to energy

Achieved. The Bank financed the Renewable Energy for Rural
Electricity Access Project (REAP), and supported the Government’s

58

Infrastructure and
Environment
(FY09); Improving
Public Investment
Planning and
Budgeting (FY10)
Lending:
Energy Sector
Project (FY01);
Renewable Energy
for Rural Access
Project (REAP)
(FY07); GEF
Renewable Energy
for Rural Access
(FY07); Energy
Sector Additional
Financing (FY10)
Non-lending:
Infrastructure
Strategy (FY07);
Ulaanbaataar Air
Pollution
Discussion Note
(FY09); Rural
Energy Project TA
(FY08); Urban Heat
Pricing and
Regulation (FY09);
Improving Public
Investment Planning
and Budgeting
(FY10); Energy
Efficient Heating in
Poor Peri Urban
Areas of
Ulaanbaatar
(FY09); Mitigation
Sector Reform and
Tariff Adjustment
(FY10); South Gobi
Infrastructure and
Environment
(FY09)

With the implementation of REAP, the Government’s
“100,000 solar ger” program will be completed by the end
of 2011. There are still about 60,000 households in rural
areas without any electricity access. More analysis of key
constraints and options for improving access is needed. It
will be important to further promote the policy dialogue on
renewable energy and the regulatory framework. ESW on
infrastructure and financial performance (including tariffs)
of the sectors could further promote the policy dialogue and
the strengthening of regulatory capacity in energy and other
infrastructure sectors. The Bank should continue to support
these areas with other donors (e.g., USAID). Mongolia is
entering a crucial stage where the mining sector will drive
rapid economic development and significant financial
resources are needed to support mining infrastructure.
Within the Mongolia Mining Infrastructure Investment
Support Project (to be effective) more pre-investment as
well as feasibility studies for electricity generation can be
undertaken.
Donor coordination within the Ulaanbaatar Clean Air
Program (UB CAP) has proven to be very effective resulting
in the mobilization of substantial funding and the Bank
should scale up this approach.

strategy, including further
development of strategy for
access

“100,000 solar ger” program along with other donors (e.g., Japan,
China, and GEF). The proposed “UB Clean Air” program served as a
platform for coordination of donor activities for air pollution reduction
in Ulaanbaatar. Major donors included ADB, Millennium Challenge
Account (MCA), JICA, EBRD and GIZ.

Intermediate indicators:
Adoption of main elements
of financial restructuring of
energy enterprises
including account
receivables to less than 45
days by 2007

Account receivables for Ulaanbaatar Electricity Distribution network
has reached 42 days.

Transitional measures
articulated to mitigate
social impact to vulnerable
groups

The Energy Regulatory Authority (ERA) introduced lifeline tariffs for
low-income people.

Pre-investment work
completed to facilitate
private-public partnerships
in new heat and electricity
generation

There are several PPP projects, such as Power Plant #5 and Tavantolgoi
power plant. Though the Bank and IFC offered due diligence and
transaction advice for Power Plant #5 in Ulaanbaatar in 2008, the client
(at that time the Ministry of Fuel and Energy) did not take the advice.

Analysis completed of key
constraints and options for
improving access

No activities were planned or undertaken during the CAS period.
Within the REAP, there will be surveys on the current status of
electrification in rural areas, which will be implemented during summer
2011.

Outcome 7: Strengthened
institutional capacity to
manage the road network
to meet objectives of
equitable growth, service
delivery, and rural access

Lending:
Transport
Development
Project (FY01FY08; ICR=MS;
IEG=MS)

Outcome indicators:

Non-lending
Infrastructure
Strategy
(Foundation for
Sustainable
Development:
Rethinking the
Delivery of

Stronger linkage of
transport ODA with widely
agreed policy and
institutional reform agenda
and prioritized investment
program

Partially achieved. The Ministry of Roads, Transport, Construction
and Urban Development (MRTCUD) has prepared a five-year
investment plan for the road sector, which includes prioritized
investments. Most of the large projects are centered on supporting the
mining sector, which supports the Government’s stated policy.
However, the process for identifying priority road sector investments

59

A more robust prioritization process should be instituted
with greater consideration on economic rates of return when
considering new road investments. Mongolia’s road
engineering standards and materials requirements,
especially for pavement, are dated and in some cases
inadequate to accommodate the country’s harsh climatic
conditions. Adequate supervision and testing of materials
during construction is essential. One permanent road lab
and several basic mobile road labs are not sufficient.
Consideration should be given to creating additional mobile
road labs and stationing them on-site during large road
works projects, or to establishing small road labs in key
Aimag centers to alleviate the burden on the existing road
lab and ensure better coverage. Enhanced supervision of
works during construction would encourage the use of

outside of the mining sector is largely political. There is a focus on
new construction, rather than maintaining existing road assets (90
percent of budgets go to new construction). It is estimated that more
than 3,000 km of roads require reconstruction, and this large backlog of
rehabilitation and maintenance should have priority over the
construction of new roads.
Ministry of Infrastructure
implementing credible plan
for managing their roads
within fixed budget
constraint, including
reliable assessment of fixed
and recurrent costs of
Millennium Road; gravel
vs. paved roads; [increase
in number of km of roads in
good and fair condition]

Infrastructure
Services in
Mongolia) (FY07)

appropriate methods, equipment, and quality materials.
While axle load limits have been established for the country,
they are rarely enforced. Weigh-in motion traffic sensors
and heavy vehicle weigh bridges should be installed and
regulations enforced to deter overloading.

Partially achieved. The Road Supervision and Research Center
(RSRC) regularly carries out traffic counts and roughness
measurements and maintains the information in a database (both paper
and electronic versions). However, the information is not unified using
a common software. Traffic counts are taken every three months, but
the entire spectrum of measurements is only done every three years for
existing roads, and every five years for new roads. While input from
traffic counts and roughness measurements are considered when
preparing annual road maintenance plans, the approach is not
systematic based on need so much as it is based on condition surveys,
including visual surveys, which are typically carried out at the request
of MRTT. In addition, each Aimag receives a percentage of available
maintenance funds based on the length of paved roads in their
jurisdiction.

Intermediate indicators:
Updated roads sector
strategy in place with
investment criteria taking
recurrent costs into account

While criteria for building new roads have been defined, they are not
regularly applied. Also, most road maintenance activities are not
tendered competitively, but awarded to one of 18 state-owned
companies.

Three-year forward rolling
plan and budget of
investment and recurrent
costs in the road sector

The MRTCUD regularly provides three-year plans and updates them
periodically.

Maintenance management
system in place

There is a system for road maintenance in place. The RSRC regularly
carries out traffic counts (quarterly) and road roughness measurements
(annually). A lack of control on overloading contributes to the poor
quality of roads throughout the country. Although the Road Act
allowed for limits to be established, they are rarely enforced, and there
is little consideration given to the size, weight and loads imposed by
vehicles on the road network.
Achieved. The Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) was
established and operationalized to promote the expansion of access to
ICT services in rural and underserved areas and the financing of USOF
was secured by a law requiring all licensed telecommunications
operators to contribute 2% of their taxable income to the fund.

Outcome 8: Improved
regulatory environment
and financing mechanism
to promote expansion of
ICT infrastructure and

60

Financing:
Information and
Communications
Infrastructure
Development

The focus on creating a favorable policy and regulatory
environment for private sector investments and competition
was key for the dramatic improvement of service delivery.
The strong commitment of the Communications Regulatory

services

Outcome indicators:

Moreover, competition in the sector increased significantly (two
additional private mobile operators were licensed) and the transparency
and predictability of the regulatory process were improved (a
regulatory public consultation process was established in 2007; the
share of spectrum applications approved and assigned within 15
working days increased from 50% in 2005 to 75% in 2009; the share of
regulatory decisions published increased from 58% in 2005 to 100% in
2009) resulting in sustained investments in the sector (US$37.6m in
2005, US$93.2m in 2007, US$63.6m in 2008, and US$46.9m in 2009).

Universal access strategy
and service fund in place
(number of households with
access to a telephone
increases from 17% in 2002
to 30% )

Achieved. The World Bank supported the development and
implementation of the Government’s Universal Access Strategy and
Policy, which included the establishment of USOF to provide subsidies
for the expansion of ICT services into rural areas. The share of
households with access to a telephone increased beyond forecasts and
is significantly higher than 30%. There are over 1.9 million telephony
subscribers with about 600,000 household covered.

Increased private sector
participation in the
provision of ICT
infrastructure and services
with over 85% of ICT
services provided by
private sector

Achieved. The sector is dominated by privately owned companies.
Two additional private mobile operators were licensed resulting in four
private mobile operators competing in the mobile sector. The fixed line
operator (MTC) is 40% privately owned (54% owned by the
Government) but its market share is small and declining. The fully
Government owned ICNC is a wholesale operator providing services to
the other operators..

Project (FY06);
GPOBA funded
Rural ICT Pilot
Project; TF Project
Support (PHRD)
Non-lending:
Infrastructure
Strategy (FY07)

Commission was a major success factor. Furthermore,
skills transfer and ownership of the program by the
Government were critical, and consultations with operators
and stakeholders helped to bring them on board.
The Government and ICT operators have expressed to the
World Bank their appreciation for its support to this
program and have asked it to consider continuing its support
for this initiative. Next steps would be to assist initiatives to
improve the quality and reach of the mobile network
infrastructure, and to extend the broadband services to more
soum centers.
Going forward, The Bank should engage with the
Government on a new ICT and economic growth agenda
that includes broadband access, content and applications
relevant to Mongolia, building new economy skills for the
young population, developing a private sector led IT/ IT
enabled services industry in niche segments/markets, and
using broadband/mobile phones for the delivery of public
services especially in rural areas.

Intermediate indicators:
IT law approved that
provides for favorable legal
framework for IT sector;
government strategy for its
use of ICT developed.

No new ICT law was approved but there were several amendments to
the existing law and a package of ICT laws has been submitted to the
Parliament recently. Overall, the legal framework is fairly favorable.
The E-Mongolia National Program originally approved in 2005 was
updated in 2009.

Tariffs for local phone calls Telephony tariffs and interconnection rates have been restructured and,
increased; annualized
overall, the cost dropped significantly for users. The target for the local
charges for two MBP
call tariff lost relevance due to technological developments in the
circuits reduced;
sector.
interconnection charges
rationalized
Results Area D: Strengthened social service financing and institutional capacity
Not achieved. Social assistance continues to rely on the provision of
Outcome 9: Improved
categorical benefits. The Poverty-Targeted Benefit (PTB) envisaged
financial sustainability
under the new Social Welfare Law (SWL) could not be implemented as
and targeting of social
the SWL has not been passed by the Parliament. The fiscal costs of
protection systems

61

Non-lending:
Policy Note on
Pension Reform
(FY08)

Government commitment and interest are key to moving
forward the pension and social protection system reforms.

Outcome indicators:

social transfers as a share of GDP have been increasing over the
reporting period. Universal cash transfers from the Human
Development Fund (HDF) during 2010 (and planned for 2011) have
been the key reason behind rising fiscal costs of social transfers
recently. With respect to the pension system, the Bank’s recent
estimates indicate that holding replacement rates, retirement ages and
contribution rates constant, the fiscal costs of the pension system will
substantially increase over time. Significant policy changes would be
needed to ensure that fiscal costs are sustainable over time.

Long term projection shows
improved financial
sustainability of pension
system

Not achieved. The pension agenda has seen little progress over the
reporting period. However, in 2010 the Government expressed
renewed interest in the Bank’s support (technical assistance) in various
areas of pension system reforms. It was agreed that moving forward,
the Bank’s pension team will provide policy advice to the Government
on: (i) formulation of a Pensions Law revising existing parameters
including initiation of a process of modeling baseline projections and
reform options for the current social security scheme; (ii) design of a
savings program for the herders and informal sector; (iii) potential
expansion and restructuring of the old age income assistance program;
and (iv) determination of the objectives in the potential establishment
of a social security reserve fund. However, these recommendations
have not been reflected in the policy changes yet.

No major structural benefit
gaps exist between age
cohorts at the introduction
of the new program

Not achieved. Addressing the existing gap between pre-1960 and post1960 cohorts would require changes to the pension system. No
changes have taken place yet.

Regular IAS standard
audits of SSIGO show that
accounts are well
maintained, and that
internal control is
appropriately enforced

Not observable. The existing information indicates that SSIGO
accounts are well maintained. However, no rigorous assessment of this
was conducted.

LSMS data shows that
exclusion and inclusion
errors of social assistance
programs reduced

Not achieved. Social assistance programs have not been changed in
any significant way, and the Poverty-Targeted Benefit (PTB) has not
been introduced. Hence, the targeting performance remains unchanged.

Intermediate indicators:
Long term projection model
developed and maintained

The SSIGO staff has received the training from the World Bank on the
analysis of the pension system and making projections using PROST

62

The Bank’s team keeps engagement with the Government in
this area, and there has been recent renewed interest from
the Government in the policy discussions on the directions
for the pension system reform.

by the Ministry of Social
Welfare and Labor and
State Social Insurance
Government Organization
(SSIGO)

model. It is not entirely clear though to what extent SSIGO staff has a
capacity to undertake such an analysis independently without support
of the World Bank consultants.

Short term budgeting model
used in preparing program
budget and monitoring
expenditure

No information is available on the status of this indicator.

Action plan adopted that
improves financial
management of SSIGO;
SSIGO included under TSA

No information is available on the status of this indicator.

Analysis of household
survey data completed on
targeting efficiency
Outcome 10: Improved
sustainability and
allocation of health
financing

The analysis of targeting efficiency using the household survey data
was performed using ADEPT SP software. The results still need to be
reflected in a write-up.
Not evaluated given little WBG engagement during the CAS period.

Outcome indicators:
Public goods and primary
care increase from 15% to
30%

Increased spending on
provinces with greater
health needs (e.g., greater
than national standardized
mortality ratio)
Hospital spending
decreases from 85% to 70%
of total health spending
Increased availability of
essential drugs in rural
areas

63

The Bank was not a significant player in the health sector
during this CAS period. Bank contributions have been at
the margin through small grants. However, the Government
and partners view the Bank as important for bringing in
global best practice, knowledge and innovation to the sector.
The Bank’s knowledge products are highly valued.

Strengthened standards for
quality, conditions for
public financing of private
facilities enforced
Intermediate indicators:
National health accounts
include private out of
pocket spending, health
insurance, public budgets
Government strategy
clarifies responsibilities
between health insurance
and state budget,
coordinates payment
systems to encourage
primary care and improved
efficiency of hospital
sector; optimization process
for Ulaanbaatar hospitals
including new financing
mechanism
Strengthened system to
track availability and price
of essential drugs;
improved public
procurement, distribution of
drugs
Government strategy
includes role of private
sector in health

Outcome 11: Improved
education financing,
standards, and
monitoring
Outcome indicators:
MTEF for education

Partially achieved. Progress has been made in all subsectors of

64

Financing:
Rural Education and
Development
(READ) Project
(FY06); EPDF
Grant: Education for
All-Fast Track
Initiative

The Bank’s engagement in the education sector in Mongolia
has made a positive contribution. A programmatic approach
and budget to support longer-term engagement would be
more effective.

finalized and more efficient
financing norms, specially
for institutions of higher
education, are in place and
being used

education. The MTEF has been finalized, but the mechanism for
improving efficient financing norms still has room for improvement.
Higher education institutions are being consolidated to improve quality
and efficiency. This reform is still underway.

Increase in number of
accredited institutions

Partially achieved. Accreditation is being improved, but this may not
necessarily be reflected in the number of institutions accredited because
institutions are being consolidated or merged.

Modernized system
measures student
achievement, life skills and
disseminates results of
academic achievement

Partially achieved. The Education Evaluation Center which has been
responsible for handling university entrance examinations and student
assessment has undergone a leadership change. Its capacity can benefit
from further strengthening. The international assessment exercise in
the Third International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) and
Progress in International Literacy Study (PIRLS), in which Mongolia’s
participation was financed by an EPDF grant, has been terminated by a
ministerial decision. The survey was not conducted and the unused
funds will be returned.

Non-lending:
Public Expenditure
and Financial
Management
Review (FY08);
Civil Service Policy
Note (FY09); Policy
Note on Higher
Education (FY10);
Public Expenditure
Tracking Survey
(PETS) Education
(FY07)

As the 2012 elections draw near, decisions have been
increasingly driven by political considerations. Future grant
support should be Bank-executed to maintain a more neutral
position for assistance to education.

Intermediate indicators:
More efficient financing
norms for all levels of
education consistent with
MTEF policies and targets

Mongolia’s public spending on education has been equitable and propoor as a very large share goes to basic education, and higher education
is financed in large part by private expenditures. The State Training
Fund provides financial assistance to tertiary education students.
However, it could be further improved to ensure better targeting and
thereby help ensure access to more disadvantaged students.

Accreditation system
initiated; a full
accreditation process begun
for higher education
institutions

An accreditation system is already in place and has begun the process.
Its mandate goes beyond higher education and covers technical and
vocational education and training as well. However, it can be further
strengthened.

Improved M&E system in
place and piloted in limited
number of schools

M&E has been improved. However, due to personnel changes, it is
unclear whether the improvement has been institutionalized.

CAS Objective 2: Reducing Vulnerabilities
Results Area A: Strengthened risk management and growth to reduce rural vulnerability
Outcome 12:
Financing:
Sustainable
Strengthened systems,
Livelihoods Project
new mechanisms piloted,
1 (FY02-FY08;
to reduce rural risks
ICR=S; IEG=S);

65

The Pastoral Risk Management component activities have
been scaled up under SLP2. One of the key lessons is that
investment and capacity building under the project have not
changed herder behavior, particularly with respect to herd

Outcome indicators:
Dzud-related animal losses
in target aimags reduced by
33% compared to other
aimags by 2007

Not observable. This indicator was from the first phase of the
Sustainable Livelihoods Project, and as it was not a good indicator, it
was not included for the second phase, SLP2. Dzud conditions vary
widely among aimags and such comparisons are difficult to make and
are meaningless.

3-7% of targeted herders
covered by livestock
insurance by 2008

Achieved. By 2008, 14% of herders in the three pilot aimags bought
insurance.

Policy measures formulated
to assist herders through
fiscally responsible social
protection programs

Not achieved. Formal policy measures were not formulated, though
analytical work was conducted with respect to post dzud assistance for
herders (see outcome indicator below).

Intermediate indicators:
Integrated risk preparedness
strategy for livestock
production developed,
piloted, adopted in 8
selected aimags by 2006

The activities under the Pastoral Risk Management Component of
SLP1 were all completed, and herders in the pilot aimags were taking
more actions to prepare better for winter and mitigate risk. However, a
formal strategy was not adopted.

Legal framework
established under Insurance
Law, index-based insurance
system piloted, policies
sold commercially,
contingent financing
mechanism in place

The Insurance Law was revised in 2004 and enabled the selling of
index based insurance. Thus, a legal framework had been established.
The legal framework is being strengthened further and it has been
agreed with the Government that a separate index based livestock
insurance law is required and is in draft. The index based livestock
insurance system has been piloted; policies are sold commercially; and
contingent financing mechanisms are in place.

Policy analysis conducted
regarding options to cover
herders under social
protection programs

Under the TFESSD financed study, “Structuring Dzud Disaster
Preparation, Financing and Response to Increase Resilience of Herder
Households to Climatic Risk”, a study was made on how to introduce a
structured, transparent system for providing social transfers to herders
following severe dzud.

Sustainable
Livelihoods Project
2 (FY07); IndexBased Livestock
Insurance Project
(FY05); IBLIP
Additional
Financing (FY10)
Non-lending:
Livestock Sector
Study (FY09); Meat
Sector Policy Note
(FY10); Trust Fund
for Environmentally
& Socially
Sustainable
Development
(TFESSD) financed
study “Structuring
Dzud Disaster
Preparation,
Financing and
Response to
Increase Resilience
of Herder
Households to
Climatic Risk”
(FY11)

Financing:
Sustainable
Livelihoods Project
1 (FY02-FY08;
ICR=S; IEG=S);
Sustainable
Livelihoods Project

Outcome 13: Enhanced
environment for private
sector-led growth in rural
areas
Outcome indicators:

66

sizes and overgrazing. The mid-term review of the project
concluded that: “Ultimately, despite the positive impacts of
project activities, these have been ineffective in the face of
the prevailing incentive structure and market failure which
encourage herders to overstock and degrade pasture
resources.” Under SLP2, there is increasing focus on some
of the prevailing incentive issues in a common access
scenario. Options are being explored to pilot, for example,
pasture user fees. This remains a critical area for
engagement for the Bank, working closely with other
partners (e.g., Switzerland, UNDP).

The Bank is following up the analytical work with
investment operations including the Integrated Livestockbased Livelihoods Program, to be financed under the Global
Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP). There
may also be a request for IDA co-financing.

Policy interventions
identified to intensify and
diversify livestock
production and marketing
systems

Achieved. Several analytical pieces have been completed which have
examined these issues (Livestock Sector Study; Mongolia Country
Economic Memorandum). The Bank can take some credit for
influencing the National Livestock Program, endorsed by Parliament in
2010, which takes forward the policy agenda for livestock
intensification.

10% of target beneficiaries
in selected aimags have
access to microfinance
services by 2007

Achieved. The SLP1 ICR noted that about 15% of target population
were sub-borrowers from the Microfinance Development Fund (MDF).

Improved targeting of
community-level
infrastructure projects -75% of target community
members satisfied with
procedure for identification,
selection, and
implementation

Achieved. This indicator has been difficult to track, not least because
it tries to capture too much in one figure. The SLP1 ICR was
inconclusive: “Actual numeric value for this indicator is not available.
High satisfaction rates are provided by different studies for different
procedures”. No specific survey was carried out to assess the Local
Initiatives Fund (LIF) process from a range of community perspectives.
Monconsult (2006): 37% of respondents felt that selection processes
were transparent, open and fair; 72% of community members ranked
Household Livelihoods Support Councils’ (HLSC) performance as
average to excellent; 50% noted a slight or major change in community
participation, initiatives, and sense of self-responsibility. Community
scorecards in Household Livelihoods Support Program Office
(HLSPO) indicate a 93% satisfaction rate. This indicator is also
tracked in SLP2 with an improved system compared to SLP1. The
October 2010 mission found that satisfaction with the mechanism was
88% and satisfaction with outcomes was 77%.

Intermediate indicators:
Analytical work on rural
supply chains, livestock
sector

Undertaken.

Outreach of institutionally
and financially sustainable
micro-finance services to
targeted poor achieved in 8
aimags by 2006

Met.

Efficient, socially inclusive,
transparent mechanisms
established in 8 aimags to
execute investments in

Completed.

67

2 (FY07)
Non-lending:
Livestock Sector
Study (FY09); Meat
Sector Policy Note
(FY10); CEM
Sources of Growth
(FY07)

The improvement in access to rural financial services has
been quite dramatic, aided by the emergence of strong
micro-finance institutions. As the recent financial crisis
showed, however, the system is not robust, and more could
be done. Specific areas for potential engagements include
developing community based financial institutions (to
provide competition to banks, and also to serve the unbankable) and increased consumer education.

infrastructure and local
services by 2005
Results Area B: Strengthened environmental and natural resource management
Outcome 14:
Strengthened institutional
capacity for management
of environment and
natural resources

Financing:
TF NEMO 1 & 2;
Mining Sector TA
Project (FY08)

Outcome indicators:
Implementation of road
map to strengthen
legislative and institutional
framework to improve
management of
environment and natural
resources, with priority on
mining and forestry

Achieved. Under NEMO2, support continues to be provided to
improve environmental laws and standards to manage the country’s
natural resources by: (i) developing drafts to eliminate discrepancies
and duplications in laws relating to industry; (ii) renewing the laws and
regulations (rules, regulations, methods) on EIAs, and increasing the
accountability of IA (e.g., ecological agreements); and (iii) supporting
advocacy activities to help the passage of the drafts through Parliament.
The FAO provides on-going support to newly established forestry
brigades. Under NEMO2, the Ministry of Nature, Environment and
Tourism (MNET) is building upon FAO’s activities by developing
detailed training plans and implementing a professional and methodical
program of training sessions for a number (up to 10) of inter-soum
forest units. The intent is to improve awareness and strengthen the
understanding of the roles of the local units to better manage forests
under their jurisdictions. Support is also being provided for two local
environment and tourism departments at Dalanzadgad and Khovd
aimags to improve how they function and how they carry out their
duties and responsibilities.

Environmental
expenditures aligned with
environmental priorities

Partially achieved. Beginning in 2008, the MNET introduced
program- based budgeting. The Bank is helping to improve this
scheme through its AAA products such as the 2009 Study to Review
Environmental Expenditures. Currently, work is ongoing to improve
inter-sectoral coordination in environmental policy, as well as
collecting information on spending by the private sector to comply with
environmental guidelines.

Improved public
participation in EIA and
access to data and
information on environment
and natural resources
management

Achieved. The MNET has revised its law on EIAs and will submit it
to Parliament for ratification during the 2011 spring session. The Bank
also assisted in establishing an EIA database with some 2,500 records
which are publicly available on the internet (http://geodata.mnengic.mn/eia). The Guidelines for Conducting EIAs were revised in
2010 through a Decree issued by the MNET minister.

68

Non-lending:
South Gobi
Infrastructure and
Environment
(FY09);
Ulaanbaatar Air
Pollution
Discussion Note
(FY09)

A key lesson is the need for counterparts to take ownership
in developing and implementing proposed reforms.
Although implementation might take longer and require
more oversight and guidance, there is far greater potential
for reforms to be sustained.

Intermediate indicators:
Identification of the key
changes needed to
strengthen the institutional
and legislative framework
for environment and natural
resource management

The MNET conducted a review of environmental laws and regulations
in 2010 in an effort to identify needed revisions and amendments to
eliminate potential contradictions among different environmental laws.
During the review process, MNET identified a number of key changes.
Also, Mongolia has strengthened important policy documents
governing natural resources, including the National Water Program
(2010), National Plan for Combating Desertification, and National
Action Plan on Climate Change and Adaptation.

System developed within
public expenditure reforms
to track environmental/
natural resources revenues
and expenditures

System not developed.

Regulations formulated to
institutionalize public
consultation and
participation in EIA process
Outcome 15: Communitybased natural resource
management systems
piloted in three soums
that systematically
include participation of
local government and civil
society in natural
resource decisions and
monitoring

The proposed revised Law on EIAs has two important aspects: (i)
public consultation when EIAs are prepared; and (ii) public access to
information and the detailed EIAs. The draft law will be submitted to
Parliament during its 2011 spring session.
Achieved. Under SLP2, the Bank supports pasture/range management
and the development of community-based approaches which have been
piloted and scaled up. Under the dropped Forestry Project, it was
planned to support community based forest management, though
ultimately this was not supported by the Ministry of Finance.

Non-lending:
South Gobi
Infrastructure and
Environment
(FY09); NEMOfunded studies
(various)

Intermediate indicators:
Revised procedures for
public participation in
environment /natural
resource management
developed and disseminated
in targeted soums

Financing:
Sustainable
Livelihoods Project
2 (FY07); TF
NEMO 1 & 2

The guidelines for pasture management planning and implementation
were developed under SLP1 and the implementation is now supported
under SLP2. The guidelines are government policy, under the
supervision of the Land Agency.

69

These outcomes were directly supported under SLP2.

CAS/ISN Completion Report Attachment 2
Mongolia: CAS Completion Report
Planned IDA Financing Program and Actual Deliveries
CAS PLANS (April 5, 2004)
Project
TOTAL FY05-FY08
FY05 Program
PRSC-II
Index-Based Livestock Insurance Project
Private Sector Development
FY06 Program
PRSC-III
Social Sector TA
Infrastructure Project

FY07 Program
PRSC-IV
Second Sustainable Livelihoods Project
Judicial and Public Sector Reform TA

FY08 Program
PRSC-V
Infrastructure Project
Land Administration and Management Project
Forestry Project

Status of deliveries
IDA
US$M
88
19
10
5
4
26
10
3
13

20
9
8
3

23
9
8
3
3

INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE PLANS (April, 2009)
TOTAL FY09-FY11
90
FY09 Program
2
MONSTAT (Statistical Development)
2

FY10-FY11 Program
Development Policy Credit 1 (DPC-1)
Development Policy Credit 2 (DPC-2)
Other projects

Total CAS + ISN period

88
40
20
28

US$M
Credit
Grant
50.07
49.55
18.32
Dropped
Delivered (5/26/05)
Delivered as Private Sector Development Credit 2 (6/28/05)

7.75
10.57
0.00

Dropped
Delivered as Rural Education and Development (READ) Project (5/23/06)
Delivered as ICT Infrastrucutre Development Project (6/8/06)
Additional Actual Projects
Governance Assistance Project (5/23/06)
Dropped
Delivered (6/19/07)
Deferred to FY08
Additional Actual Projects
Renewable Energy for Rural Access Project (REAP) (12/9/06)
GEF Renewable Energy for Rural Access Project (12/9/06)

4.00
8.00

23.30

14.00
16.70

19.80

13.20

3.50
8.45

Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Additional Actual Projects
Enhanced Justice Sector Services Project (6/26/08)
Mining Sector TA Project (6/26/08)
Additional Financing for Rural Education and Development Project
COMPLETION REPORT (May, 2011)

3.35
5.10

1.65
4.20
1.00

40.00
88.70

Delivered in FY09
Delivered (10/18/10)
Multi-Sectoral TA Project (6/28/10)
Additional Actual Projects
Additional Financing for Index-Based Livestock Insurance (2/23/10)
Additional Financing for Energy Sector (3/25/10)
Mining Infrastructure Investment Support Project (5/10/11)

29.70
12.00

230.32

70

3.50
6.85

130.70
42.00
2.00

Delivered (6/12/09)
Additional Actual Projects
Development Policy Credit 1 (DPC) (6/25/09)

178

26.00

10.00
12.00
25.00
180.77

49.55

CAS/ISN Completion Report Attachment 3
Planned Nonlending Services and Actual Deliveries
CAS PLANS (April 5, 2004)
Activity

STATUS OF DELIVERIS

FY05 Program
Consultative Group Meeting
Econimc Monitor
Environment Monitor
Financial Sector Review
Integrated Infrastructure Strategy
Poverty Assessment
PSD Strategy (Investment Climate/Supply Chains)
Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
Regional Development Note
Social Sector Strategy

Delivered
Delivered regulalrly
Dropped
Delivered as Financial Sector Mid-term Review FY06
Delivered as Infrastructure Strategy FY07
Delivered FY06
Delivered as Investment Climate FY06
Delivered as PETS Education FY07
Delivered as Regional Development Policy Note FY06
Dropped
Additional deliveries
Enabling Environment for Social Accountability in Mongolia
Gender Assessment
Health Policy Note
Poverty-Focused Policy Notes
Support to the Association of Mayors

FY06 Program
CEM/DPR (Sources of Growth)
Civic Engagement Assessment
Consultative Group Meeting
CPAR/CFAA
Decentralization Study
Economic Monitor
Livestock Support Services Study
Social Monitor
Social Sector AAA

Delivered FY07
Delivered as Strengthening Parliament, Media & Civil Society FY11
Delivered as semi-annual Technical Meetings
Dropped
Dropped
Delivered regulalrly
Deferred
Dropped
Dropped
Additional deliveries
Dialogue and Support of Master Plan & Fast Track Initiative
Evaluation of Poverty-Targetted Program
Migrants Remittances to Mongolia
Mining Policy Dialogue/Regulatory Reforms
Review of the Environment & Social Policies in Mining
Secondary Cities Development Strategy
Judicial Reform Programme

FY07 Program
Consultative Group Meeting
Economic Monitor
Environment and Social Development AAA
Environment Monitor
ICT Strategy
Infrastructure AAA
Natural Resource Use Strategy
Public Expenditure Review/Integrated Fiduciary Assessment
Regional Trade Study
Social Sector AAA
FY08 Program
Consultative Group Meeting
Economic Monitor
Environment and Social Development AAA
Financial Sector Assessment
Human Development Assessment
Infrastructure AAA
Invetsment Climate/Private Sector Assessment
Social Monitor

Delivered as semi-annual Technical Meetings
Delivered regularly
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Delivered as Public Expenditure and Financial Management Review FY08
Deferred
Dropped
Delivered as semi-annual Technical Meetings
Delivered regularly
Dropped
Delivered as Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) FY07
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Additional deliveries
Financial Sector Technical Assistance
Rural Energy Project

71

Planned Nonlending Services and Actual Deliveries, continued
CAS PLANS (April 5, 2004)
Activity
INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE PLANS (April, 2009)
FY09-FY10 Program
Air Pollution Work
Analysis of Banking Sector Vulnerabilities
Civil Service Policy Note
Corporate Governance ROSC Assessment
Economic Monitor
Ger Area Development Strategy
Insolvency and Credit Rights ROSC
Livestock Sector Study
Mining Background Notes
Policy Notes on Pension Reforms
Poverty Assessment
Public Expenditure and Financial Managament Review
Southern Mongolia Infrastrucure Study
Technical Meetings
Trade Facilitation and Integration

STATUS OF DELIVERIS
COMPLETION REPORT (May, 2011)
Delivered as Ulaanbaatar Air Pollution Discussion Note FY09
Delivered as Banking Sector Vulnerabilities FY09
Delivered FY09
Delivered FY09
Delivered regularly
Delivered FY09
Delivered as ROSC Accounting and Auditing Review FY08
Delivered as Livestock Sector Study FY09
Delivered as Mining Sector Policy Dialogue FY06
Delivered FY08
Delivered as Poverty Assessment Policy Note FY10
Deferred
Delivered as South Gobi Infrastructure & Environment AAA
Delivered??
Delivered FY09
Additional deliveries
AML/CFT Capacity Building
Enhancing Policies and Practices for Ger Area Development
Health Results-Based Financing
Meat Sector Policy Note
Mitigation Sector Reform and Tariff Adjustment
Policy Note on Higher Education
Public Investment Planning

Note: Only AAA with actual delivery date to the client during the CAS-ISN period are included, thus excluding active and dropped activities.

72

Attachment 4

World Bank Group Financial Products for IBRD Clients
IBRD

FINANCING

ELIGIBITY

 IBRD Flexible Loan
 Local currency loans
 Subnational finance

 Credits
 Grants
 IBRD Flexible Loan for enclave
operations

Contingent Financing

 Deferred Drawdown Option (DDO)

 DDO for IDA Blend countries

RISK MANAGEMENT

 Partial risk guarantees (PRGs)
 Partial credit guarantees (PCGs)
 Policy based guarantees (PBG)

IFC

Low-income country governments

Financing

Credit Enhancement

ADVISORY

Middle-income country governments and sub-national
entities (with government guarantee)

IDA

 Partial risk guarantees
 IBRD PRGs/PCGs/PBGs for IDA
Blend countries
 IBRD PRGs for enclave operations

MIGA
Private sector clients









IFC A-Loan
Equity finance
IFC C-Loan
Subnational finance*
Local currency loans
IFC B-Loan (third parties)
Parallel loans (third parties)







Partial risk guarantees
Full/partial credit guarantees
Credit-linked guarantees
Trade finance guarantees
Mezzanine investments in
securitizations
Risk sharing facilities
Guaranteed offshore liquidity
facility
Currency swaps
Interest rate swaps
Interest rate caps and collars
Commodity price swaps
Swap guarantees
Carbon delivery guarantees




Hedging Products






Currency swaps
Interest rate swaps
Interest rate caps and collars
Commodity price swaps

 IBRD Hedging products for IDA
Blend countries








Disaster Risk
Financing






Weather hedges
Catastrophe Risk Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO)
Insurance pools
Catastrophe bonds

 Weather hedges
 Catastrophe bond
 Insurance pools

 Weather hedges

Client Advisory Services

 Asset management (central banks, sovereign wealth funds
and public pension funds)
 Asset-liability management
 Capital market access strategy and implementation
 Commodity risk management
 Public debt management
 Transaction processing, reporting and IT

 Asset management
 Commodity risk management
 Public debt management

 Access to finance
 Investment climate
 Environmental and social
sustainability
 Infrastructure advisory
 Corporate advice

73

 Political risk
insurance

• Investment
strategy related to
political risk
• Dispute resolution
• Environmental and
social sustainability

Attachment 5

Development Partners Matrix (Financial and Analytical Assistance)
Lead role in sector

Active Engagement

Planning new engagement by 2015

1.5 Tertiary Education

2. Health
2.1 Health policy & management
2.2 Basic health care
2.3 Basic health infrastructure
2.4 Nutrition
2.5 Immunization & infectious disease control
2.6 Health education
2.7 TB control

3. Population and reproductive health
3.1 Reproductive healthcare
3.2 Family planning
3.3 STD control, incl. HIV/AIDS

4. Water and sanitation
4.1 Water sector policy
4.2 Water supply
4.3 Wasterwater
4.4 Basic sanitation
4.5 River basins management

5. Government and Civil Society
5.1 Public sector policy and administrative management
5.2 Public finance management
5.3 Decentralization
5.4 Anti-corruption organizations and institutions
5.5 Legal and judicial development
5.6 Democratic participation & civil society
5.7 Elections
5.8 Media and access to information
5.9 Human rights
5.10 Gender

6. Other social and infrastructure services
6.1 Social protection/welfare policy
6.2 Employment policy
6.3 Housing policy & low-cost housing
6.4 Statistical capacity building

7. Transport
7.1 Road
7.2 Railway
7.3 Air transportation

8. Communications
8.1 Communications policy
8.2 ICT

9. Energy
9.1 Energy policy
9.2 Power generation
9.3 Power transmission & distribution
9.4 Renewable energy

74

AID
US
C
SD
C
MC
A id
Lux
ICA
KO

1.4 Vocational training

A
JI C
GIZ

Non formal educ

1.3 Secondary education

EC
d
sAi
up
Au
Gro
ank
dB

1.2 Primary education

Waiting for info

rl
Wo

1.1 Early childhood development

F
IM
RD
EB
B
AD

ILO
P
WF
O
WH
O
FA
V
UN T
A
BI T
HA
UN C R
H
UN
O
ESC
UN
FPA
UN
F
ICE
UN
DP
UN es
tat
dS
ite
om
d
Un
i ng
dK
ite
ds
Un erlan
th
Ne
any
rm
Ge
ada
Can

Sectors and subsectors
1. Education

Leaving sector by 2015

Development Partners Matrix (Financial and Analytical Assistance), continued
Lead role in sector

Active Engagement

Planning new engagement by 2015

10.3 Financial intermediaries
10.4 Microfinance
10.5 Capital markets development

11. Business development
11.1 Business support services & associations
11.2 Privatization
11.3 Public Private Partnerships
11.4 Corporate governance
11.5 Investment climate

12. Agriculture
12.1 Agricultural policy & management
12.2 Agricultural development
12.3 Food crop production
12.4 Livestock
12.5 Agricultural services (research, extensions, cooperatives)
12.6 Integrated rural development

13. Forestry
14. Fishing
15. Industry
15.1 Industrial policy
15.2 SME development
15.3 Agribusiness
15.4 Textile industry

16. Mining
16.1 Mineral policy and regulatory framework
16.2 Mining and environment

wages

16.5 Mining and economic management

17. Trade policy
17.1 Trade policy
17.2 Trade facilitation
17.3 Multilateral trade negotiations & agreements

18. Tourism
19. Multi-sector / Cross-cutting
19.1 Environmental policy & management
19.2 Biodiversity
19.3 Climate change adaptation
19.4 Climate change mitigation
19.5 Disaster risk management
19.6 Land management

20. Economic management
20.1 Macroeconomy
20.2 Fiscal management
20.3 Treasury management
20.4 Debt management
The following countries have bilateral programs: Australia, China Czech Republic, France, Russia, Turkey

75

AID
US
C
SD
C
MC
A id
Lux
ICA
KO

10.2 Central Bank

A
JI C
GIZ

EC
d
sAi
up
Au
Gro
ank
dB

10.1 Financial sector policy

16.4 Mining and transparency (EITI)

Waiting for info

rl
Wo
F
IM
RD
EB
B
AD

ILO
P
WF
O
WH
O
FA
V
UN T
A
BI T
HA
UN C R
H
UN
O
ESC
UN
FPA
UN
F
ICE
UN
DP
UN es
tat
dS
ite
om
d
Un
i ng
dK
ite
ds
Un erlan
th
Ne
any
rm
Ge
ada
Can

Sectors and subsectors
10. Banking and financial services

16.3 Mining and social policy

Leaving sector by 2015

Standard CAS Annexes
Annex A2: Mongolia At A Glance

Mongolia at a glance

2/27/12

Mongolia

East
Asia &
Pacific

Lower
middle
income

2.8
1,564
1.6
58

1,962
16,302
0.7
46

2,465
23,582
1.5
40

5.2
1,870
3,630

7,224
3,683
6,609

4,091
1,660
3,704

6.4
4.7

9.6
8.8

7.3
5.7

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

22
49
68
26
5

17
39
72
20
9

..
..
65
50
32

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

97
98
110
110

96
91
111
112

80
62
110
104

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

76
50

88
59

84
45

1980

1990

2000

2010

..

13

217

372

..
..
..

2
0
0

105
13
2

75
35
32

..
..

0.5
6

19.2
90

8.5
137

Key Development Indicators

Age distribution, 2010

(2010)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

15-19
0-4

10

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2004–2010)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
120
100
80
60

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2008):
Japan
United States
Korea, Rep.
Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

40

20
0
1990
Mongolia

1995

2000

2010

East Asia & Pacific

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per
15
10
5
0
-5
-10

Long-T erm Economic T rends
Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

-15

..
..

325.5
93.3

8.1
12.0

95

10.2
20.0

GDP

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

3.0
..

5.0
..

1,076.7
100

05

GDP per capita

1,357.1
128
1980–90 1990–2000
2000–10
(average annual growth %)

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

1.7
2,310

2.2
2,561

2.4
1,137

2.8
6,200

2.6
..

1.0
1.0

1.3
7.2
4.6
5.8
6.1
8.9

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

16.7
25.0
..
58.3

(% of GDP)
12.9
30.9
42.5
25.0
21.0
7.5
44.7
44.1

16.2
37.5
7.3
46.3

..
..
..
..

0.3
1.5
-6.6
-0.9

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

52.3
24.9
70.0

68.7
24.4
29.1

69.6
15.3
29.0

53.1
13.7
40.8

..
..
..

..
..
..

12.4
5.9
6.7

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

23.9
71.0
22.3

18.3
40.3
5.6

54.0
67.9
23.0

54.7
62.4
26.5

..
..

..
..

10.2
14.8

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2010 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2009.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

76

Mongolia
Balance of Payments and T rade

2000

2010

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2010
(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

536
615
-158

2,899
3,278
-475

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

-69
-6.0

-887
-14.3

12

277

191

2

Voice and
accountability
Political stability
Regulatory quality
Rule of law

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)
Reserves, including gold

Control of corruption
0
2010

Central Government Finance

25

2000

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

28.7
21.3
25.7

36.5
31.8
27.0

Overall surplus/deficit

-6.4

0.0

50

..
..

..
..

100

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T echnology and Infrastructure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

75

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

2000

2010

3.5

..

11

90

0.5

7.5

84
7.5
13.4

75
7.0
13.4

14,153
0.5

13,260
..

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

896
39
–

2,444
171
–

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

78.9
6.2

39.4
4.8

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

437
0

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

3.1

4.0

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

2.3

3.0

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

980

1,182

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

54
0

Composition of total external debt, 2009

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)

0 392
IDA,
Short-term, 72 IBRD,
Private, 152

W orld Bank Group portfolio
IMF, 182

Other multilateral, 677

US$ millions

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Tax rates
Access to/cost of financing
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2010

(US$ millions)

Bilateral, 668

Private Sector Development

2000

2000
–
–
–
2000
..
..
3.2
..

2010
13
3.2
11
2010
64.9
64.4
17.6
..

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

137
14
1

403
22
7

1
1
0

50
50
3

0

8

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2010 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

77

–
0

0
0
0
0

0
0

2/27/12

Millennium Development Goals

Mongolia

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Mongolia

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
..
..
..
10.8

1995
18.8
36.3
7.4
..

2000
15.5
61.1
7.5
11.6

2010
22.4
35.2
7.2
5.3

..
..
87
..

81
74
63
..

94
90
65
..

90
93
92
..

109
..
25

122
46
8

111
49
8

103
51
4

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

107
76
92

83
61
85

61
47
92

32
26
94

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

130
..
..

110
..
57

93
97
67

65
99
55

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

0.1
405
18

0.1
314
39

0.1
254
51

0.1
224
75

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

58
..
8.1
4.1
4.6
1.6

59
49
..
8.5
3.4
1.7

66
49
7.5
13.4
3.1
2.3

76
50
7.0
13.4
4.0
3.0

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

3.0
0.0
0.0
..

3.4
0.0
0.0
0.3

4.9
6.4
1.2
1.3

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)
Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

Education indicators (%)
125

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

100

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

100
75

75
50

50
25
25

0
2000

2005

2009
0
1990

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Mongolia

1995

2000

2009

East Asia & Pacific

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

78

2000

Fixed + mobile subscribers

2005

7.0
82.9
12.9
25.8

2009

Internet users

2/27/12

Standard CAS Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 2/27/2012
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)

2009

2010

2011

2012

14
3.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20.1

14
4.3
7.1
2.6
7.1
2.6
31.4

13
4.8
7.7
2.5
7.7
2.5
29.6

14
5.6
7.1
2.3
7.1
2.3
23.6

Yes

No

Yes

No

Supervision Resources (total US$'000)

1101

1236

1425

1425 f

Average Supervision (US$'000/project)

73

82

89

89 f

Since FY80
17
271.4
5.9
3.6

FY08-12
5
66.7
0.0
0.0

Memorandum Item
Project Evaluated by IEG (Number)
Project Evaluated by IEG (Amount, US$ millions)
% of IEG Projects Rated U or HU (Number)
% of IEG Projects Rated U or HU (Amount)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
f. Projected for 2012.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

79

Standard CAS Annexes B3

Mongolia CPS: Indicative IDA/IBRD Financing Program
Fiscal
Year Project
FY12 Ulaanbaatar Clean Air Project

Pillar
1
2
3
x

US$M
IDA
IBRD
15

FY13
FY13
FY13

E-Government Project
Sustainable Livelihoods 3 Project
Third Ulaanbaatar Services Improvement Project

x
x
x

15
>30
20

FY14
FY14

SME Access to Finance Project
E-Health Project

FY15
FY15
FY15
FY15

AF - Mining Sector Institutional Strengthening Project
AF - MONSTAT
Transmission Line Project
District Heating Project

FY16
FY16

Social Protection Administration Project
Index-Based Livestock 2 Project

x

x
x

x

15
x

x
x

15
IDA
IDA

x
x

x

x
x

50
50
IDA
IDA

Notes:
Pillar 1: Enhance Mongolia’s Capacity to Manage the Mining Economy Sustainably and Transparently
Pillar 2: Build a Sustained and Diversified Basis for Economic Growth and Employment in Urban and Rural Areas
Pillar 3: Address Vulnerabilities through Improved Access to Services and Better Service
Delivery, Safety Net Provision, and Improved Disaster Risk Management
AF: Additional Financing
The program for the later part of the CPS will be further defined during the mid-term review and presented in the
CPS Progress Report

80

Standard CAS Annexes B4

Mongolia CPS: Key Ongoing and Indicative Nonlending Services

Activity
Reserves Assets Management Program
Financial Sector Assessment Program - Development Module
Programmatic Social Protection (including pension reform)
Programmatic Agricultural Policy Review
Programmatic Financial Sector Monitoring and Policy Dialogue
Programmatic Mining Sector Technical Assistance
Programmatic Municipal Financing for Ulaanbaatar
Programmatic Poverty Analysis
Debt Management Strategy
Programmatic Economic Policy (Quarterly Updates)

AAA
Type
TA
ESW
ESW
ESW
ESW
TA
ESW
ESW
TA
ESW

Fiscal
Year
Continuous
FY12
FY12-13
FY12-13
FY12-13
FY12-13
FY12-13
FY12-13
FY12-13
FY12-14

Pillar
1
2
3
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Financial Literacy and Consumer Protection Assessment
Poverty and Inequality Study
Gender Action Plan
Programmatic Accountability and Service Delivery

TA
ESW
ESW
ESW

FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13-14

x

[Administrative Courts and Executive Accountability]
Procurement Assessment
Disaster Preparedness (GFDRR)

ESW
TA
TA

FY14
FY14
FY14

x
x
x
x
x
x

Notes:
Pillar 1: Enhance Mongolia’s Capacity to Manage the Mining Economy Sustainably and Transparently
Pillar 2: Build a Sustained and Diversified Basis for Economic Growth and Employment in Urban and Rural Areas
Pillar 3: Address Vulnerabilities through Improved Access to Services and Better Service Delivery
Safety Net Provision, and Improved Disaster Risk Management
AAA: Analytical and Advisory Activities
ESW: Economic and Sector Work
TA: Nonlending Technical Assistance
The program for the later part of the CPS will be further defined during the mid-term review and presented in the CPS
Progress Report

81

Standard CAS Annex B5

Mongolia: Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2004-10

East
Asia &
Pacific

1.9
2.6
55.0
5.4

2.3
1.0
56.8
2.8

2.8
1.5
57.5
2.5

1,961.6
0.7
45.9
1.8

2,465.1
1.5
39.6
3.0

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

..
..
..

36.3
38.5
33.1

35.2
26.9
46.6

..
..
..

..
..
..

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)

..
..

460
46

1,870
231

3,683
131

1,660
140

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

..
..
..

33.2
7.4
40.8

33.0
7.2
40.5

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

3.7
..

4.0
..

2.2
3.3

1.7
3.8

98
..
..

81
79
82

90
91
90

93
93
94

85
87
83

..
..
..

59
82
28

76
97
49

88
96
81

84
92
79

18
80
..

85
88
11

94
95
5

91
93
9

74
72
32

59
57
61

61
59
64

68
64
72

72
70
74

65
63
67

86
122

61
83

26
32

20
24

50
69

320
273
..
..

251
211
110
..

300
144
65
99

160
107
89
89

247
177
300
56

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Lowermiddleincome

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

82

02/27/12

Standard CAS Annex B6

Mongolia: Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product a
Agriculture

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Estimate
2009

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2010

2013

100
22

100
20

100
20

100
21

100
20

100
16

100
..

100
..

100
..

Industry

36

43

42

34

33

38

..

..

..

Services

42

37

38

44

47

46

..

..

..

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

67
28
2
26

58
33
4
29

60
35
6
30

70
36
9
27

73
29
7
22

67
33
6
26

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

Exports (GNFS) b
Imports (GNFS)

59
64

59
53

60
58

54
67

50
58

55
62

..
..

..
..

..
..

Gross domestic savings

33

42

40

30

27

33

..

..

..

Gross national savings c

40

47

43

31

27

27

..

..

..

2523

3396

4235

5623

4584

6200

..

..

..

890

1110

1390

1770

1760

1880

..

..

..

8.6
21.6

10.2
15.3

8.9
1.9

-1.3
-9.1

6.4
18.5

..
..

..
..

..
..

8.6
21.1
23.0

7.1
16.8
19.9

-2.9
-4.6
-4.1

4.7
9.5
9.1

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 05 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
7.3
Gross Domestic Income
..

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 05 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
5.9
7.0
Total consumption
..
3.9
Private consumption
..
3.1
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS) b
Merchandise FOB

1481
1066

2030
1544

2525
1951

3029
2529

2300
1885

3395
2909

0
0

0
0

0
0

Imports (GNFS) b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

1566
1166
-86
225
88

1826
1408
203
211
372

2467
2003
57
212
172

3767
3156
-738
221
-690

2632
2074
-332
186
-342

3869
3089
-475
187
-887

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

185
72
75
-3
-210

191
52
52
0
-226

360
75
59
16
-318

838
213
38
176
-594

570
354
157
197
-27

1630
202
32
171
-72

0
..
133
..
..

0
0
81
-81
0

0
0
31
-31
0

Change in reserves d

-135

-389

-288

233

-556

-873

0

0

0

-3.4

6.0

1.3

-13.1

-7.2

-7.7

..

..

..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR05 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

83

Mongolia: Key Economic Indicators, continued

Indicator

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices) e
Current revenues
27.5
Current expenditures
19.7
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
7.8
Capital expenditure
5.4
Foreign financing
3.0
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR05 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU) f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

Estimate
2009

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2010

2013

33.7
24.4
9.3
6.3
1.8

37.9
27.6
10.3
7.7
0.9

33.1
26.9
6.2
10.8
0.6

30.2
27.1
3.1
8.3
4.8

36.5
27.0
9.5
9.6
0.2

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

37.5
34.6
101.5

38.1
34.8
-720.2

48.4
56.3
86.8

34.6
-5.5
55.2

43.7
26.9
-117.5

55.6
62.5
28.1

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

101.3

106.8

111.2

132.0

117.3

130.6

..

0.0

0.0

12.7
20.1

5.1
22.0

9.0
11.6

25.1
21.4

6.3
1.8

10.2
20.0

..
..

..
..

..
..

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

84

Standard CAS Annex B7

Mongolia: Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

2005

Actual
2006
2007

Estimated
2009

2008

2010

Projected
2012

2011

2013

1327

1440

1682

1833

2143

2444

2550

2556

2452

Net disbursements (US$m) a

69

61

131

34

176

0

0

0

0

Total debt service (TDS)

43

48

55

79

99

28

33

33

31

TDO/XGSb

81.6

67.8

63.2

58.9

87.7

68.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

TDO/GDP

52.6

42.4

39.7

32.6

46.7

39.4

..

..

..

TDS/XGS

2.6

2.3

2.1

2.5

4.0

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

94.5

93.6

88.4

85.7

81.1

73.2

75.3

78.3

82.9

disbursed (TDO) (US$m) a

(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)

Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

50.5

46.6

48.3

43.1

34.4

24.2

48.8

61.8

74.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m) d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m) d

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

277

301

331

338

392

403

416

432

444

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

85

Standard CAS Annex B8

Mongolia IFC Operations Portfolio
Mongolia
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 1/31/2012
(In USD Millions)

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

7/8/2004/08/09/11
2008
2011
0
2011
8/8/2007/10/11/12
2011
2011
2009

Agbank
Mcs group
Mof i
Mongolian mining
Newcom llc
Sef xacbank
Shangri-la ub
Suu jsc
Xacleasing

5.01
11.25
0
0
20
2
50
2
0.75

2.28
0
6.25
14.44
0
10.37
0
0
0

20
0
0
0
20
5
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

5.01
11.25
0
0
0
2
0
1
0.75

2.28
0
0.22
14.44
0
8.6
0
0
0

20
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

91.01

33.34

45

0

0

20.01

25.54

25

0

0

Total Portfolio:

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

86

Standard CAS Annex B8
Mongolia: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 2/27/2012
Closed Projects

19

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid

138.57
0.36
181.43
27.17
320.00
27.53

Total Undisbursed (Active)

78.18

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

78.18

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR

Project ID

Project Name

P077778
P040907
P101446
P084766
P098426
P088816
P092965
P118109
P113160
P099321
P096328
P096439
P074591
P119825
P108768
Overall Result

MN Economic Capacity Tech. Assistance
MN-Energy Sector
MN-Enhanced Justice Sec Services
MN-GEF-Renewable Energy for Rural Access
MN-Governance Assistance
MN-Index-Based Livestock Insurance
MN-Info & Com Infra Dev
MN-Mining Infrastructure Investment Supp
MN-MONSTAT
MN-Renewable Energy for Rural Access
MN-Rural Education and Development -READ
MN-Sustainable Livelihoods II
MN-UB SERVICES IMPROVMT 2
Mongolia Multi-Sector TA
Mongolia-Mining Sector Inst Strength TA

Supervision Rating
Developm
Implement
ent
ation
Fiscal Year
Objective
Progress
s

MS
S
MU
S
S
S
S
S
S
HS
S
S
S
S
S

MS
S
MU
HS
S
S
MS
S
S
HS
S
S
S
S
MS

87

2003
2001
2008
2007
2006
2005
2006
2011
2009
2007
2006
2007
2004
2010
2008

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

7.5
42
5

Cancel.

0.53
3.5

14
17.75
8
25
2
3.5
5
44
18
12
9.3
213.05

3.5

0.53

Undisb.

Orig.

0.49
8.42
2.27
0.82
2.65
11.82
1.42
22.30
1.67
0.30
0.31
11.52
0.16
10.69
4.15
79.00

-0.42
-8.28
2.32
1.22
1.84
0.94
0.73
0.15
-1.16
-1.79
-0.89
1.30
3.66
-5.55

Standard CAS Annex B8

Mongolia CPS: Major Trust Funds
Project
ID

TF No.

P096439 TF92715
P108776 TF58043
P126994 TF99918
P088816
P113160
P113160
P122953
P119825
P099321
P096439

TF94827
TF93575
TF94696
TF98487
TF99122
TF90858
TF90580

Effective
Date

Closing
Date

1

Active Recipient Executed Trust Funds
12/10/2008 6/30/2012 EC TF: Sustainable Livelihoods II
3/16/2007 12/31/2012 Education for All – Fast Track Initiative: Catalytic TF
9/26/2011 10/22/2012 Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Grant (outreach)
GPE: Global Partnership for Education
8/16/2010 3/31/2014 Korea TF: Index-Based Livestock Insurance
9/18/2009 4/30/2012 Korea TF: MONSTAT Strengthening National Statsistical System
9/18/2009 12/31/2014 Korea TF: MONSTAT Strengthening National Statsistical System
4/11/2011 12/31/2014 Korea TF: MONSTAT Strengthening National Statsistical System
4/13/2011 5/31/2012 Korea TF: Multi-sector TA
10/5/2007 6/30/2012 MN-FS Renewable Energy for Rural Access Project
2/4/2008
6/30/2012 PHRD TF: Sustainable Livelihoods II
Indicative Recipient Executed Trust Funds
AusAid TF: Groundwater Management in Southern Gobi
AusAid TF: Mining and the Environment
FIRST Initiative: Improving Financial Sector Stability
GAFSP: Livestock-Based Livelihoods Improvement
GFAHI MDTF: Avian and Human Influenza 2
JSDF: Primary Education Outcomes for the Most Vulnerable Children in Rural Mongolia
SDC (Swiss Development Cooperation): Participatory Planning/Decentralization Support

Notes:
Pillar 1: Enhance Mongolia’s Capacity to Manage the Mining Economy Sustainably and Transparently
Pillar 2: Build a Sustained and Diversified Basis for Economic Growth and Employment in Urban and Rural Areas
Pillar 3: Address Vulnerabilities and Growing Inequality through Improved Access to Services and Better Service
Delivery, Safety Net Provision, and Improved Disaster Risk Management

88

Pillar
2
3
x

x
x

x

x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x

14.00
29.40
0.25
10.00
0.70
0.40
0.70
0.65
0.50
6.00
3.90

x
x

6.00
tbd
0.20
11.00
2.50
2.60
0.60

x

x
x
x
x
x

Grant
US$M

x
x
x
x
x

85°E

95°E

90°E

100°E

115°E

110°E

105°E

120°E

RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Lake
Baikal
To
Biysk

50°N
Uvs
Nuur

vd

B A Y AN
A N-Ö LG I I

Jargalant
(Khovd)

HÖVSGÖL

Tesiyn

Hyargas
Nuur

Har
Us Nuur

Sele

Har Nuur

A

Dz
av
h

l

t

Tsagaan-Olom

Erdenet

ng

an

ay

Bulgan

n

M

a

ts

.

y

Bayankhongor

GOV
TA I
GO
V I -AL
- A L TAI

M

u

BAYANKHONGO
AYANKHONGOR
BAYANKHONGOR

n

t

TÖV

Zuunmod

To
Hailar

DORNOD

KHE NTI I
ULAANBAATAR

Erdenebulgan
(Tsetserleg)

Hulun
Nur

Bayan Uul
On

AR HA
ARH
ANG
NG A
AII

Esonbulag
(Altai)

o

DA R HAN -U
-UUL
UL
Darhan DAR

BU L G
BUL
GA
AN
N

Ha

KHOVD

nge

Ereentsav

SEL ENG E

OR HON
H ON

r
Ide

HAN
A
ZAVKH
AN
Uliastai

45°N

Sühbaatar

Mörön

on

UVS

Ho

Olgii

50°N

GAI

Achit
Nuur

Tavan Bogd Uul
(4,374 m )

To
Chita

To
Chita

Hatgal

Ö V Ö RK H A N

Ulaangom

To
Ulan-Ude

Hövsgöl
Nuur

n
ule
Ker

Kherlen
(Choibalsan)
Tamsagbulag

Öndörhaan

120°E

Baruun-Urt

GOVISÜMBER
GOVISÜMBER

SÜ KBAATAR
KBA ATAR
KBAATA

Choir

Arvaiheer
Hongor

Mandalgovi

DUN DG OV '
DUNDG

45°N

Sainshand

CHINA

DORNOGOV'
DOR
NOGOV'

a

i

n

Dalandzadgad

s

ÖMNÖGOV'
G

CHINA

i
o b

To
Jining

r t
s e
e
D

115°E

M ONG OL IA
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

MONGOLIA

PROVINCE (AIMAG) CAPITALS

40°N

To
Hami

NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

0

50

300 Kilometers

200

100

150

40°N

MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS

200 Miles

PROVINCE (AIMAG) BOUNDARIES
90°E

95°E

100°E

105°E

110°E

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

IBRD 33449R1

JANUARY 2009

0

100

