Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 67566-CN

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

AND
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR THE PERIOD FY2013 - FY2016
October 11, 2012

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
China, Mongolia, and Korea Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region
International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

Last Country Partnership Strategy: May 23, 2006 (Report No. 35435)
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS (as of September 1, 2012)
Currency Unit
US$1.00

=
=

Renminbi (RMB)
6.35 RMB

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
ASEAN
CBRC
CDB
CDM
CHEEF
CHUEE
CNAO
CO 2
CPS
DRC
EE
E&S
ESCO
ESW
EU
FDI
FM
FSAP
FY
FYP
GDP
GEF
GHG
GNI
HCFC
IBRD
ICR
IDA
IDF

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
China Banking Regulatory Commission
China Development Bank
Clean Development Mechanism
China Energy Efficiency Financing
Program (IBRD)
China Utility-Based Energy Efficiency
Finance Program (IFC)
China National Audit Office
Carbon Dioxide
Country Partnership Strategy
Development Research Center of the State
Council
Energy Efficiency
Environmental and Social
Energy Service Company
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Management
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Five-Year Plan
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environmental Facility
Greenhouse Gas
Gross National Income
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Implementation Completion Report
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund

Vice President
Director
Task Team Leader

IEG
IFC
IMF
M&E
MDGs
MIC
MIGA
MOF
MP
MSE
MSME
NCDs
NDRC
NGO
NPS
NRM
ODS
PFI
PMO
Pops
PPP
PPP
R&D
RMB
SME

Independent Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Monitoring and Evaluation
Millennium Development Goals
Middle-Income Country
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Finance
Montreal Protocol
Micro and Small Enterprise
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise
Non-Communicable Diseases
National Development Reform Commission
Non-Governmental Organization
Non-Point Source (Pollution)
Natural Resource Management
Ozone-Depleting Substances
Participating Financial Institution
Project Management Office
Persistent Organic Pollutants
Purchasing Power Parity
Public-Private Partnership
Research and Development
Renminbi (China's currency)
Small- and Medium-sized Enterprise
SO 2
Sulfur Dioxide
SOE
State-Owned Enterprise
SSKE
South-South Knowledge Exchange
TA
Technical Assistance
UN
United Nations
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund
us
United States
WBI
World Bank Institute
WHO
World Health Organization

IBRD

IFC

MIGA

Pamela Cox
Klaus RoMlland
Kathryn Funk

Karin Finkeilston
Sergio Pimenta
Hyun-Chan Cho /Paul
Rafael V. Dominguez

Izumi Kobayashi
Kevin Lu
Barbour

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

Table of Contents

Executive Summary .....................................................
i
I. Country Context and Challenges ..................
......................
1
A. Economic and Social Developments....................................
B. China's Medium-Term Challenges and Strategy
...............................
5
II. The World Bank Group Track Record and Lessons Learned ....................
9
III. The World Bank Group Strategy
...........................................
13
A. Framework for World Bank Group Engagement in China ...................
13
B. Reenergizing the Drivers of Growth-Demand Driven Knowledge Services........18
C. Strategic Theme One: Supporting Greener Growth
...........
............. 18
D. Strategic Theme Two: Promoting More Inclusive Development .....
......... 25
E. Cross-Cutting Theme: Advancing Mutually Beneficial Relations with the World.....29
F. Delivering the World Bank Group Program.
........................
.....
32
IV. Managing Risks
........................................
........... 34
Boxes

Box 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:
Box 4:
Box 5:
Box 6:
Box 7:
Box 8:

Poverty and Inequality in China
..........................................
China 2030......................................................8
Highlights of World Bank Group Assistance to China, 2005-2011 ......
.......
FY 2012 China Country Survey .......................................
Good Practices for a Gender-Sensitive Portfolio in China
....................
How IBRD Lending Works in China: Projects as Platforms for Knowledge Sharing
World Bank Group Support for Increasing Energy Efficiency in China ....
......
Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation in China.
..................
.....

2
10
12
14
20
24

Tables
Table 1: Key Targets in the 11th and 12th Five-Year Plans..........................4
Table 2: Indicative Themes of Analytical and Advisory Activities ...................
16
Annexes

Annex 1:
Annex 2:
Annex 3:
Annex 4:
Annex 5:

China Country Partnership Strategy Results Matrix.......................35
Gender and Development in China
.............................
..... 44
Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report...................
..... 46
Country Partnership Strategy Consultations
.................................. 88
Standard Country Assistance Strategy Annexes
..........
............... 89

Map of China: IBRD No. 33387

Acknowledgments
This Country Partnership Strategy is a product of the entire World Bank Group China Country Team. Team
Leaders were Kathryn Funk (IBRD) and Hyun-Chan Cho/Rafael Dominguez (IFC). The core CPS team
comprised Carter Brandon, Gailius Draugelis, Chorching Goh, Victoria Gyllerup, Ardo Hansson, Ede
jjasz-Vasquez, Yingnan Jia, Paul Kriss, Mark Lundell, Philip O'Keefe, Paul Procee, John Scales, Elaine
Sun, Jun Wang, and Min Zhao. Other key country team members who provided valuable advice and inputs
and/or participated in consultations include the following: Tijen Arn, Kofi Awanyo, Wendao Cao,
Jianqing Chen, Xin Chen, Yanni Chen (IFC), Sing Cho, Luc Christiaensen, Ying Fan, Ke Fang, Patricia
Fernandes, David I, Rabih Karaky, Phil Karp, Bich Hanh Le (IFC), Li Li, Xiaoyan Liang, Xiaofan Liu,
Guangqin Luo,Liping Jiang, Patrick Labaste, Jin Liu, Zhi Liu, Catherine Martin (IFC), Nick Marwell,
Andrew Mason, Miki Matsuura, Lasse Melgaard, Joyce Msuya, Gerald Ollivier, Ximing Peng, Alan
Piazza, Binyam Reja, Ulrich Schmitt, Tuo Shi, Yanqin Song, Chongwu Sun, Rob Taliercio, Alexei Volkov
(IFC), Dewen Wang, Ying Wang, Xiaodong Wang, Mara Warwick, Elizabeth M. White (IFC), Liping
Xiao, Jian Xie, Shuo Zhang, Ximing Zhang, Dong Yi, Rong Zhang (IFC), Wenlai Zhang, Yabei Zhang,
Luan Zhao, Min Zhao. Tianshu Chen provided indispensable assistance with translation and interpretation.

Executive Summary

China's economic and social development over the past three decades has been remarkable.
GDP growth averaging about 10 percent a year has lifted more than 600 million people out of
poverty. All Millennium Development Goals have been reached or are within reach. With a
population of 1.3 billion, China recently became the second largest economy.
Yet China remains a developing country and its market reforms are incomplete. In 2011,
China's gross national income per capita of $4,930 ranked 114th in the world; and over 170
million people live below the $1.25-a-day international poverty line. China is home to the
second largest number of poor in the world.
As recognized by China's 11th Five-Year Plan (FYP, 2005-20 10), the country's pattern of
growth, which has relied on industry and investment, has led to growing economic,
environmental, and social imbalances. Moreover, the country's traditional sources of growth
are likely to weaken. China's main challenge in the medium term is to navigate the uncertain
global economic environment while putting the economy on a more sustainable growth path.
This involves reinvigorating the underlying drivers of growth, shifting to a more consumerbased economy, addressing pollution and natural resource depletion, and reversing
inequalities of income and opportunity.
China's 12th FYP (2011-2015) forcefully addresses these issues. It highlights the
development of services and measures to address environmental and social imbalances,
setting targets to reduce pollution, to increase energy efficiency, to improve access to
education and healthcare, and to expand social protection. Its annual growth target of 7
percent signals the intention to focus on quality of life, rather than pace of growth.
The World Bank Group's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13-FY16 is aligned with
China's 12th FYP. It is also informed by the joint study, China 2030, prepared by the World
Bank and the Development Research Center of the State Council. To support China's goal of
a harmonious society, the Bank Group will focus on three main areas of engagement:
*

Supporting greener growth, by helping China shift to a more
path; enhancing urban environmental services; promoting
transport; promoting sustainable agriculture practices; piloting
resource management approaches; demonstrating pollution
strengthening mechanisms for managing climate change.

*

Promoting more inclusive development, by increasing access to quality health
services and social protection; strengthening skills development programs, including
for migrant workers; enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns; and
improving transport connectivity for more balanced regional development.

*

Advancing mutually beneficial relations with the world, by supporting China's
South-South cooperation and China's role as a global stakeholder.

sustainable energy
low-carbon urban
sustainable natural
management; and

The Bank Group's most valuable contribution in China remains its role in bringing and
applying ideas, innovation, and knowledge. The CPS emphasizes knowledge sharing and
1

cooperation through advice and analytical products and through public and private sector
investments at the provincial level that introduce and demonstrate new approaches. Nonlending services are expected to grow in importance over the CPS period, building on China
2030. IBRD lending over the CPS period is expected to remain stable at about US$1.5 billion
for 10-13 projects per year. IFC's investments are expected to remain strong at US$5001,000 million for about 25 projects per year. MIGA retains significant room for further
exposure in China and will use this available space to pursue projects aligned with its global
strategy. The World Bank Group - IBRD, IFC, and MIGA - will continue to collaborate to
maximize their impact.
Risks to the Bank Group's development effectiveness in China are deemed moderate, given
China's good capacity, strong ownership of the Bank Group program, and track record of
high performance.

11

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

1.

Over the past 32 years, China and the World Bank Group have forged a strong two-

way and evolving partnership. In the early years, the World Bank brought international experience
to help design economic reforms, improve project management, and address key bottlenecks to
growth. More recently, the Bank Group has helped address environmental challenges and other
development priorities. The Bank Group strategy will continue to evolve as China faces new
challenges in its transition from middle- to high-income status.

2.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for fiscal years (FYs) 2013-2016 is aligned
with the challenges and priorities outlined in China's 1 2 th Five-Year Plan. The CPS is also
informed by the recent joint study-China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative
Society (China 2030) prepared by the World Bank and the Development Research Center of the
State Council.' Consistent with China's priorities, the CPS focuses on three main themes: green
growth; inclusive development; and mutually beneficial relations with the world. Bank Group
support to China is designed to play a catalytic role through innovation and demonstration. In
addition, the Bank's Group's engagement with China contributes to the Bank's global knowledge
and helps China share its development experiences with the rest of the world.

I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND CHALLENGES

A. Economic and Social Developments
Developments over Three Decades
3.

Since initiating market reforms in 1979, China's economic performance has been

remarkable. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth has averaged about 10 percent a year; and per
capita gross national income (GNI) reached $4,930 in 2011 (in current dollars), categorizing China as
an upper-middle-income country. 2 Importantly, more than 600 million people were lifted out of
poverty as China's poverty rate fell from 84 percent in 1981 to 13 percent in 2008.3 China's rapid
growth has made it a significant presence on the global stage-it is the world's largest exporter and
the second largest importer and it emerged in 2011 as the world's second largest economy.
4.
Two historic transformations-market reform and urbanization-have driven China's
economic expansion. In a gradual and experimental way, China has shifted from a closed,
centralized, and command-based economy to a more open and market-based one. Rapid
urbanization-the largest peacetime movement of people in history has transformed China from a
rural, agricultural economy into an increasingly urban and economically diversified one. Thirty years
ago, 80 percent of China's population lived in rural areas and agriculture accounted for about onethird of GDP. Today, just over half the population lives in urban areas, while agriculture makes up
around one-tenth of GDP.

1 World Bank and Development Research Center of the State Council (2012): Conference version at
www.worldbank.org/cn, final version forthcoming.
2 World Development Indicators database. In 2005 purchasing power parity (PPP) terms, China's 2011 per capita
GNI was $8,430.
As measured by the percentage of people living on the equivalent of US$1.25 of less per day in 2005 PPP terms.

5.
China's social development has been equally impressive. All Millennium Development
Goals have been reached or are within reach. China has achieved nearly universal coverage and
gender parity in basic education and has rapidly expanded enrollment in senior high school and
tertiary education institutions. In addition, the state enterprise-based "iron rice bowl" social
protection system has been transformed into a market-compatible system with rapidly expanding
coverage. China has rebuilt its health delivery network, sharply reduced the burden of infectious
disease, and expanded coverage of health insurance to almost all rural and urban citizens. From 1998
to 2007, maternal mortality declined from 110 to 38 per 100,000 live births.
6.
Its remarkable economic success notwithstanding, China remains a developing country.
It ranked 114th in the world in 2011 in terms of GNI per capita.4 Over 170 million Chinese continue
to live below the $1.25-a-day per capita international poverty line (in 2005 PPP terms)-the second
largest number of poor in the world after India. Continuing to combat poverty and reducing income
inequality remain important challenges in China (see Box 1).

Box 1: Poverty and Inequality in China
China's remarkable growth has been accompanied by a parallel reduction in poverty and improvement in
human development indicators. More than 600 million people have moved out of poverty over the past 30 years:
the number of people living on the equivalent of US$1.25 or less (in 2005 PPP terms) was reduced from 835 million
in 1981 to 173 million in 2008-still a large number. Many more are "near poor"-just above the poverty line and
vulnerable to shocks that could cause them to fall back into poverty. Extreme poverty, in the sense of not being able
to meet the most elementary food and clothing needs, has been almost eliminated in China.
The Chinese government has accorded high priority to poverty reduction, implementing a series of clearly
articulated rural poverty alleviation strategies. The most recent is the Outline for Development-Oriented Poverty
Reduction for China's Rural Areas (2011-2020). In November 2011, the government adjusted the official rural
poverty line to be more in line with international standards, qualifying 100 million more people for a variety of
benefits that will bring more resources to poor regions.
The characteristics of poverty have changed, making poverty reduction increasingly difficult. The remaining
poor are more dispersed. Poverty is mainly a rural phenomenon and most severe in China's western regions, in
upland villages, among ethnic minorities, and in households with low levels of educational attainment. Relative to
the general population, the elderly and children are more likely to be poor, reflecting the high numbers of children in
poor households. There are growing concerns about social exclusion of migrant workers, who lack an urban resident
status and have limited access to basic social services.
China has high inequality of income, consumption, assets, and opportunity. Disparities have increased between
rural and urban areas and also within rural and urban areas. Although the rise in income inequality may have slowed
or paused, thanks in part to increased transfers of public resources to poor rural areas, other dimensions of
inequality-such as asset ownership, particularly housing-have continued to rise. Inequalities in incomes are
mirrored and exacerbated by large disparities in opportunities to access quality social services and social protection.
Using income and poverty as a lens, China can be viewed as three distinct regions. The first is the eastern
coastal region, home to 45 percent of the population, which has enjoyed rapid growth and poverty reduction owing
to its geographical location and early introduction of reforms. By contrast, the central and western regions, home to
55 percent of the population, have lagged behind. If these two lagging regions formed a separate economy, its GNI
per capita would be about half that of the coastal region.

4

World Development Indicators, The World Bank.
2

7.
There is growing recognition of the need to change the country's growth pattern. While
serving China well in many respects, rapid growth and accompanying structural change have
contributed to economic, environmental, and social imbalances. Spurred by high savings, cheap
finance, and export-oriented policies, China's growth has been capital intensive, industry led, energy
and resource intensive, and environmentally damaging. The priority accorded to industry has stunted
services development, while the emphasis on physical capital has constrained investment in the
quality of human capital, increasing inequality. Notwithstanding massive internal migration from
farms to cities, policies such as "hukou" (the household registration system) have constrained the
welfare benefits of labor mobility.5 The share of wages in national income has fallen steadily; the

share of capital has climbed.
Progress under the

1 1 th

Five-Year Plan (2006-2010) and Recent Developments

8.
Recognizing shortcomings in the pattern of growth, the 1 1 th Five-Year Plan (FYP)
emphasized environmental and social objectives. It sought to make domestic demand the main
driver of growth, with services as the leading sector. The 11 th FYP's objective was to better balance
economic growth with greater equality of opportunity and to improve basic services (especially
health, education, and social protection), resource conservation, energy efficiency, and environmental
protection. To meet these objectives, the 11 th FYP set out 15 main tasks and strategic priorities
supported by quantitative indicators (see selected targets and results in Table 1).
Despite the global financial crisis, growth during the 11th FYP period remained strong.
9.
It averaged 11.2 percent, far exceeding the target of 7.5 percent. Macroeconomic management was
broadly effective, keeping inflation at an average of 2.9 percent, the budget (broadly) balanced, and
public debt low. China implemented a large stimulus package in 2009-10 to cushion the effects of the
global economic crisis, expand social infrastructure, and stimulate green investments. Although the
stimulus would later contribute to overheating and heightened macroeconomic risks, including goods
and asset price inflation, indicators suggest that the authorities have so far been successful in
engineering a "soft landing" (see para. 11).
10.
Considerable progress was also made toward improving social protection and education
and health services, particularly in rural areas. The government demonstrated its intent to push
ahead with structural reforms by increasing renmimbi (RMB) exchange rate flexibility, introducing a
fuel tax, collecting dividends from state-owned enterprises, expanding social security coverage, and
increasing public investment in agriculture and rural areas. But the onset of the global financial crisis
and the focus on maintaining rapid growth in the midst of a global slowdown meant that other
reforms were given less priority. As a result, progress in rebalancing the economy was mixed. On the
one hand, the external trade surplus declined and the rise in income inequality appears to have
slowed. On the other, less progress was made in shifting the economic structure away from industry
and toward services, increasing energy efficiency, and improving key environmental indicators.
11.
China's economy has slowed since 2010 due to the phasing out of the 2009-10 stimulus
policies and a weaker global economic environment. Growth slowed from 10.4 percent in 2010 to
9.3 percent in 2011. While consumption has remained strong due to rapidly rising wages and solid
labor market fundamentals, weak external demand and slowing investment have exerted a drag on

Hukou is China's household registration system, which divides the population into rural (agricultural) and urban
(non-agricultural) residents and is used to determine many social entitlements. The hukou status of parents is
generally transferred to children.
5

3

growth. The previously booming property sector has also turned, with the majority of China's larger
cities reporting modest price reductions and sharply lower sales volumes.
12.
2012 will likely see a further deceleration in growth to around 7.7 percent. This is in part
because global growth will remain anemic and the real effective exchange rate may continue to
appreciate marginally; both factors will slow export growth and have an impact on investment. Risks
mainly reflect external factors, such as uncertainties in the eurozone, as well as domestic risks
associated with the residential property sector. Fortunately, China enjoys sufficient fiscal space to
permit a vigorous fiscal response should the global economy slow suddenly. This time, more of the
stimulus should be channeled through the fiscal rather than the monetary system and be directed at
furthering structural reforms in support of sustainable and inclusive growth over the medium term.
Table 1: Key Targets in the 11th and 12th Five-Year Plans
1 1 th

Target
2010

FYP

Actual
2010

12th FYP
Target
Type of
2015
Target"

Economic Growth and Structure
GDP growth rate (%, yearly)

7.5

Share of services in GDP (%)
Urbanization rate (%)
Science and Education
Nine-year compulsory education retention rate (%)
Senior secondary school gross enrollment rate

43.5
47.0

(%)

Ratio of research and development expenditures to GDP (%)
Innovation patents per 10,000 population
Resources and Environment
Reduction of water use per unit of industrial value added (%)2
Efficiency coefficient of irrigation water
Reduction in energy use per unit of GDP (%)2/

11.2

43.2 31
49.93

7.0
47.2

A

53.9

A
A

--

89.7

93.0

0

--

82.5

87.0

A

1.75
1.7

2.2
3.3

A
A

30.0
0.53
16.0

0
A

2.0

z20.0

36.7
0.50
19.1

Share of non-fossil energy in total energy consumption (%)

--

8.3

11.4

Reduction in CO 2 emissions per unit of GDP (%)2
Reduction in emissions of major environmental pollutants
Sulphur dioxide - SO 2 (0)2/
Chemical oxygen demand (%) 2 /

--

--

17.0

0
0

14.29
12.45

8.0
8.0

0
0

--

---

10
10
21.66

0

--

Ammonia nitrogen

(%)2

Nitrogen oxides - NOx

(%)2

Total forest cover (%)

Public Services and Quality ofLife
Registered urban unemployment rate (%)
Increase in urban employment in five years (million)
Urban residents covered by basic pension insurance (million)
Increase in population covered by basic health insurance (%)
Low-income housing units built (million)

Total population (billion)

--

0.50

--

10.0
10.0

--

20.0

20.36

5.0
45.0
223

4.1
57.71
257
--

--

--

3.0
36.0

1.341

<1.39
74.5

A

73.5

Sources: China's authorities, National Bureau of Statistics, and staff estimates.
1/ A =Anticipated; 0 =Obligatory
2/ Accumulated reduction in five years.
3/ Updated to reflect the latest statistics; 2015 targets revised by applying growth targets to latest statistics.

4

0

--

--

<5
45.0
357

0

A
A
0
0
0
0

<1.36

Average life expectancy

0

B. China's Medium-Term Challenges and Strategy
Challenges
13.
The Chinese economy faces constraints to sustained growth. First, China must navigate
the next five years, which will be risky as the global economy enters a new and volatile phase and
works its way through the after-effects of the global financial crisis. The policy challenge is to ensure
that the economy slows in a gradual fashion. In the longer term, China's traditional sources of growth
are likely to weaken. Most of the growth contribution from shifting resources from agriculture to
industry has already occurred. Also, going forward, the continued accumulation of capital will
inevitably contribute less to growth as the capital-labor ratio rises. Moreover, the labor force itself is
expected to decline. The population will age rapidly and the dependency ratio will rise, reducing
household savings. Aging will have profound economic and social implications that will affect
growth and the pattern of domestic consumption. Finally, total factor productivity growth a
measure of improvements in economic efficiency and technological progress has also declined over
time, in part because the economy has exhausted the immediate gains from first-generation policy
reforms and from absorbing imported technologies that were relatively easy to access and use.
14.
Given the anticipated structural slowdown, China needs to reinvigorate the underlying
drivers of growth to sustain growth over the medium term. China's private sector is playing an
increasingly important role in the economy-in 2010, private enterprises contributed an estimated 73
percent of gross industrial output and employed about 81 percent of the industrial labor force.6
However, state-owned enterprises still dominate key sectors of the economy. Breaking up
monopolies and pursuing policies that support competition and business development will be needed
to build a more vibrant private sector capable of sustaining broad and inclusive growth. China will
also need a flexible and dynamic labor market, a sound and more commercially oriented financial
system, and land policies to support more efficient land use. Continuing and deepening China's fiscal
reforms will be important for establishing a fiscal system capable of delivering increasing public
goods and services, including meeting new environmental and social challenges.
15.
Addressing the country's environmental deficit is an ongoing challenge. China is now the
world's largest energy consumer and green house gas emitter. Rapid growth has also led to natural
resource depletion and environmental pollution, the costs of which have approached 10 percent of
GDP.7 Air pollution has had severe public health impacts, especially given the growing numbers of
urban residents. More than half of China's water is polluted, over 300 million people use
contaminated water supplies, a third of China's waterways are below the government's own safety
standards, and about a fifth of China's farmland has been contaminated with heavy metals. 8 China's
future development and food security depends on reducing the environmental impact of its economy,
improving the sustainability of its land and water use, and reducing its future impact on the global
environment. The challenge going forward will be to convert these pressures into new sources of
growth by adopting a green growth model that taps into new global markets in green technologies
while it solves many of China's pressing environmental concerns.
16.
The risk of lower growth rates is exacerbated by China's high inequality in income,
consumption, and access to high-quality public services. Notwithstanding massive internal
migration from farms to cities, barriers to labor mobility-the household registration (or "hukou")
China Statistical Yearbook, 2011.
7 World Bank calculations, 2008 data.
Ministry of Environmental Protection, People's Republic of China. 2011 China State of the Environment Report.
5
6

system, the lack of portability of pension plans, weak labor market institutions, and inadequate job
market information have trapped tens of millions of farm families in low-paying, low-productivity
work. This, combined with factor and resource price policies that favored enterprise profits and
implicitly taxed household incomes, meant that the share of wages in national income fell steadily in
the first decade of this century and the share of capital climbed. Furthermore, the emphasis on
investment concentrated in urban areas has its counterpart in a lower share of investment in rural
areas-especially in health and education. The "opportunity gap" between urban and rural areas has
grown. Social tensions have ratcheted up, resulting in a growing number of public protests.
Unresolved, this could pose a threat to growth and stability in coming decades.
17.
Strengthening economic and environmental governance and rule of law is a crosscutting challenge. According to surveys in China, the public's trust in public services and the
judicial system is low, creating the potential for social frustration and underscoring the importance of
building an impartial and effective legal and justice system and improving equality of opportunity
and accessibility to high-quality social services. An essential element of reforms in these areas will
be greater consultation and participation of the public in decision making and oversight of service
delivery (including by the justice system), increased transparency in the operations of these branches
of government, and greater accountability to stakeholders and citizens.
China's

1 2 th

Five-Year Plan

18.
China's 1 2 th FYP (2011-2015) seeks to address the medium-term challenges outlined
above by continuing the thrust pioneered in the 1 1 th FYP. It highlights the development of
services and measures to address social, environmental, and external imbalances. It focuses on
improving the quality of life, rather than just the pace of growth, pays attention to balanced
development, and gives greater prominence to urbanization in inland regions and smaller cities. Its
growth target of 7 percent is set low on purpose to signal that the objective is the quality of growth
not growth alone. (Selected 12 th FYP targets are shown in Table 1.)
19.
The 1 2 th FYP stresses improvements in economic efficiency to underpin growth
sustainability. It calls for moving up the value chain in manufacturing while enhancing innovation
and promoting the development of seven new strategic industries, three of which are related to the
environment and energy efficiency-"energy efficiency and environment," ''new energy," and "new
energy vehicles." It sets a target for research and development spending to reach 2.2 percent of GDP;
emphasizes strengthening the creation, use, protection, and management of intellectual property
rights; focuses on updating research funding and venture capital; and pushes for greater
commercialization of research undertaken at government-sponsored universities and research
institutions. The 12 th FYP also stresses the need for higher education reform in science and
technology, and aims to increase the high school enrollment rate to 87 percent by 2015.
20.
Like its predecessor, the 1 2 th FYP emphasizes energy conservation and environmental
protection. It calls for non-fossil fuels to reach 11.4 percent of primary energy consumption (up
from 8.3 percent), energy use per unit of GDP to decline by 16 percent, carbon dioxide emissions per
unit of GDP to fall by 17 percent, major pollutants to decrease by between 8 and 10 percent, and
forest cover to rise to 21.66 percent, in line with China's Copenhagen commitment on forests. The
1 2 th FYP emphasizes climate change and details China's commitment to international cooperation
and the UN-led climate negotiation process.
21.
The 1 2 th FYP also urges inclusive and equitable development as core elements for
promoting a "harmonious society." To make sure all people benefit from development, the
government aims to improve access to high-quality public goods and services and expand the social
6

protection network to cover all people, urban and rural. The population covered by pension schemes
is targeted to increase by 100 million, the coverage rate of health care insurance is to be increased by
3 percentage points from an already very high level, and the level of financial protection from health
shocks is expected to be raised. These advances will be important as societal aging gathers pace
during the FYP period. The government has set a target to provide 36 million urban public
apartments by 2015. Some 45 million urban jobs are expected to be created, and the urban
unemployment rate is expected to remain below 5 percent. The 12 th FYP also anticipates that the
disposable income of households will grow faster than GDP, thus raising the share of labor income in
GDP after a period of decline and stagnation in the 2000s.
22.
The 1 2 th FYP's focus on inclusive development emphasizes the protection of women's
legal rights and the importance of ensuring women's access to basic services. It further highlights
the need to improve women's ability to contribute to economic development by promoting female
employment and entrepreneurship. (See Annex 2 for additional information on gender and
development in China.)
23.
The government also plans to deepen administrative reform and strengthen efforts to
combat corruption. To improve provision of basic public services, the 1 2 th FYP seeks to strengthen
accountability and public financial management and better define central and local government roles
and responsibilities. In addition to administrative reforms, the government aims to increase the
effectiveness of anti-corruption systems, including by improving transparency, reporting, and
enforcement.
China 2030
24.
Building on the 1 2th FYP, a recent report written jointly by the World Bank and
China's Development Research Center of the State Council (DRC) charts possible directions
for China's reforms to 2030. The report, China 2030, notes that China's successful development
strategy over the past three decades has made it an upper-middle-income economy today. But it
points out that the opportunities and challenges in the next two decades will be unlike those
encountered in the past. As a result, the growth model that helped it succeed in the past is unlikely to
work as successfully in the future.
25.
The joint team focused on how China could become a modern, harmonious, and
creative society. Anticipating global megatrends and examining China's opportunities, challenges,
and capabilities over the coming 20 years, the team proposed six strategic directions (see Box 2). At
its core, China 2030 proposes changing the role of government and its relationship to markets, the
private sector, and society at large. More importantly, it focuses on the "how," not just the "what,"
and provides a broader context within which to set the Bank's program in China.

7

Box 2: China 2030
In September 2010, China and the World Bank Group celebrated 30 years of close collaboration. Over the course
of those 30 years, China transitioned from a low-income country to an upper-middle-income country. To
commemorate this partnership, Chinese leaders endorsed a World Bank proposal to work jointly to identify and
analyze the challenges facing China as it moves from middle- to high-income status over the next 20 years.
The report identifies six strategic directions:
(i) Strengthen the foundations for a market-based economy-by redefining the role of government,
developing the private sector, promoting competition in output markets, and deepening reforms in the land,
labor, and financial markets. While providing relatively fewer "tangible" public goods and services directly,
the government will need to provide more "intangible" public goods and services like systems, rules, and
policies that increase production efficiency, promote competition, facilitate specialization, enhance the
efficiency of resource allocation, protect the environment, and reduce risks and uncertainties.
(ii) Accelerate the pace of innovation-by creating an open innovation system in which competitive pressures
encourage Chinese firms to engage in product and process innovation not only through their own research and
development (R&D) but also by participating in global research and development networks. Although China's
R&D investment as a share of GDP is high by international standards for a country at its per capita income
level, much needs to be done to ensure that this investment yields commercially viable innovations that will
help Chinese firms move up the value chain and compete effectively in the same product space as advanced
economies. The emphasis will need to be on: increasing the technical and cognitive skills of university
graduates and building a few world-class research universities with strong links to industry; fostering
"innovative cities" that bring together high-quality talent, knowledge networks, dynamic firms, and learning
institutions, and allow them to interact without restriction; and increasing the availability of patient risk capital
for private start-up firms.
(iii) "Go green"-greener development and increasing efficiency of resource use will not only improve the level of
well-being, it could potentially drive rapid, sustained growth as well. China does not want to replicate the
experience of advanced countries that became rich first and cleaned up later. Instead, China intends to grow
green by following a pattern of economic growth that boosts environmental protection and technological
progress, a strategy that could become an example to other developing countries and perhaps even advanced
economies. Achieving this will require a combination of incentives, regulations, standards, public investments
- all of which together will encourage new investments in low-pollution, and energy- and resource-efficient
industries and build international competitiveness in a global sunrise industry.
(iv) Expand opportunities for all-to access decent jobs, finance, social services, and portable social security to
reverse inequality, help households manage employment- and age-related risks, and enhance the household
welfare benefits of labor mobility. To achieve this will require: more and better quality public services to
underserved rural and migrant populations-from early childhood to tertiary education, from primary health
care to health for the aged; improving the efficiency and quality of core health and education services to
strengthen their contribution to economic transformation, ensure their sustainability, and enhance equality of
opportunity; restructuring the social security system to improve portability of social security instruments; and
participation by all segments of society-public and private, government and non-government, households and
enterprises-to share responsibilities in financing, delivering, and monitoring social services. Reforms in social
services and social security will need to be facilitated by phased reforms of the hukou system to reduce
disparities in social entitlements for migrants.
(v) Strengthen the fiscal system-by increasing the efficiency of the tax structure, improving government
financial management, and ensuring that local governments have adequate financing to meet heavy and rising
expenditure responsibilities. A key element of future fiscal strategy will be to keep the expenditure envelope
under control while reorienting expenditure composition toward new social and environmental challenges.
(vi) Seek mutually beneficial relations with the world-by becoming a proactive stakeholder in the global
economy, actively using multilateral frameworks, and shaping the global governance agenda of international
trade, global financial stability, climate change, food security, and the international aid architecture, among
others.

8

II. THE WORLD BANK GROUP TRACK RECORD

AND LESSONS LEARNED

26.
The 2006 CPS, coterminous with the 1 1 th FYP, aimed to support China's efforts to shift
its growth pattern. It emphasized the World Bank Group's role as a knowledge institution-many
Bank Group-financed projects introduced innovations or piloted new approaches, and the Bank
Group facilitated China's South-South cooperation (see Box 3: Highlights of World Bank Group
Assistance to China).
27.
The CPS Completion Report rated World Bank Group program performance as
satisfactory. The 2006 CPS organized World Bank Group (WBG) assistance around five thematic
pillars: (i) Integrating China into the world economy; (ii) Reducing poverty, inequality, and social
exclusion; (iii) Managing resource scarcity and environmental challenges; (iv) Financing sustained
and efficient growth; and (v) Improving public and market institutions. Out of 35 outcomes in the
2006 CPS results framework, 33 were partially or fully achieved. (See Annex 3 for the full CPS
Completion Report.)
28.
Portfolio performance is among the best of large IBRD borrowers. China is among the
top three countries in terms of number of active IBRD projects and net IBRD commitments: as of
September 2012, there were 74 IBRD-financed operations with a net commitment amount of US$10
billion. IBRD investment from FY07 to FY12 amounted to US$9.9 billion for 75 investment
operations, averaging about $1.65 billion per year; and about 96 percent of FY07-FY12 projects were
rated satisfactory or above. (See Annex 5 for selected indicators of portfolio performance.) In
addition to delivering results at the provincial and local levels, many IBRD-financed projects have
demonstrated approaches that can be scaled up elsewhere. According to a recent client survey,
piloting innovations is viewed as one of the Bank's greatest values to China (see Box 4).
29.
Trust fund resources have played an important role in leveraging IBRD impact,
especially for environmental objectives. As of the end of FY12, the trust fund portfolio comprised
94 grants with total commitments of US$1.8 billion. Carbon finance operations accounted for more
than 64 percent of commitments, and a large ozone depleting substance project (under the Montreal
Protocol) and 18 GEF-financed projects accounted for another 33 percent of commitments.
30.
The Bank's analytical and advisory activities (AAA) have responded to client needs,
underpinned investments, and set the course for the Bank's future engagement. Provincial-level
AAA, such as on rural-urban integration in Chongqing and Guangdong, generated high interest at
both provincial and national levels and influenced the lending pipeline. Policy dialogue and
analytical work at the national level influenced renewable energy policy, national recycling
legislation, and strategies for education, health, water resource management, and adapting agriculture
to climate change. The Bank supported China's South-South cooperation, especially with Africa,
through workshops and training. The Bank helped evaluate progress under the 1 1th FYP and provided
inputs to the 12 th FYP; and the Bank's Economic Updates have international readership. China 2030,
undertaken from 2010 to 2012, lays the framework for analytical engagement over the coming years.
31.
The IFC focused on climate change, balanced and inclusive rural-urban growth, and
sustainable South-South development. IFC's work on climate change aimed to demonstrate
market-based approaches to reduce the economy's energy intensity and increase efficient use of
water resources. To help balance rural-urban growth and reduce the gap between urban and
frontier/rural areas, IFC undertook investments and advisory work in micro, small, and medium
enterprise (MSME) finance, agribusiness, infrastructure, and food safety. IFC's support for SouthSouth cooperation included helping Chinese companies contribute sustainably to global economic
development, particularly in Africa, through enhancing the social, environmental and economic
9

impact of Chinese engagement and helping to mobilize Chinese resources. In the last six years, from
FY07 through FY12, IFC's investment commitments in China totaled US$3.6 billion (including over
US$850 in mobilization) in 116 projects. In FY12 alone, IFC committed 19 projects worth US$637
million, of which US$577 million for IFC's own account. Around two-thirds of FY12 investments
were in frontier regions of China, while almost half were supporting MSMEs and over one-third had
a positive impact on climate change. As of June 30, 2012, IFC's committed exposure in China had
reached US$2.4 billion, comprising over 100 client companies, with outstanding exposure at US$1.8
billion.
Box 3: Highlights of World Bank Group Assistance to China, 2005-2012
Piloting policies that address the causes of inequality: Analytical work and innovative pilots at the provincial
level have helped improve access to high-quality and affordable healthcare, and have also supported the roll-out and
integration of two new national health insurance programs. Analytical work and policy dialogue have informed
medium- and long-term strategies for educational reform, and projects have improved the quality of education in
western China and the quality of technical and vocational training, including for migrant workers.
Strengthening safety nets and social security: The Bank has continued its support for China's ongoing pension
reforms through a major report on the long-run pension system and complementary AAA on rural elderly welfare.
Engagement on the national dibao (minimum living allowance) social assistance system has also supported China's
efforts to support its most vulnerable citizens. AAA on labor markets and migration has increased the understanding
of labor market dynamics and informed policies to enhance the efficiency and equity of labor policies.
Catalyzing an integrated approach to water and environmental management. IBRD/GEF-financed investment
operations helped demonstrate integrated water and environmental management approaches that are being scaled up

within China and incorporated into national policy. These approaches are of global significance and have attracted
the attention of other water-scarce countries, creating opportunities for South-South learning. JFC has committed
several water sector projects, and MIGA has supported innovative public-private partnership arrangements for urban
water, wastewater, and solid waste management.
Increasing energy efficiency and renewable energy: The Bank financed China's first three energy service
companies (ESCOs), which help industries reduce energy consumption and improve efficiency. China now has one
of the largest ESCO markets in the world. JFC's China Utility-Based Energy Efficiency Finance Program facilitated
$1.4 billion in loans, eliminating 17.8 million tons of greenhouse gas emissions annually. GEF-supported projects
have also demonstrated model urban heat supply systems and consumption-based billing policies and piloted green

building developments. The China Renewable Energy Scale up Program Phase I financed studies whose
recommendations were adopted into policy and law, enabling China's impressive scale-up of renewable energy.
Supporting China's international environmental commitments: The Bank has helped advance China's global
environmental agenda, including phasing out persistent organic pollutants. Bank analytic work has helped underpin
China's greenhouse gas mitigation efforts and 1 2 th FYP climate change objectives. The Bank helped establish the
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) in China and has been an important intermediary as the market has grown;
IFC is exploring a co-investment partnership with the CDM.
Deepening financial markets: Bank Group support has helped introduce commercially sustainable micro and small
business financing, promoted further rural financial reforms through policy dialogue and TA, and assisted in the
continued strengthening of financial infrastructure (e.g., credit information and reporting). JFC helped introduce a
nation-wide credit reporting system. JFC's Secured Transactions Reform Program in China has helped farmers and
small businesses access more than US$3 trillion in financing by supporting the use of movable assets as collateral.
IBRD and JFC have also played a catalytic role in opening up the capital market and promoting local currency
financing through issuing Panda Bonds and Dim Sum Bonds.
Facilitating South-South knowledge exchange: The Bank Group organized events to share China's development
experience with other countries, especially in Africa, on a range of topics-special economic zones, agriculture and
poverty reduction, health, vocational training, watershed and land management, carbon finance, and transportation.
Responding to an emergency: Both IBRD and JFC responded quickly following the devastating May 2008 8.0
magnitude earthquake in Sichuan province, which left about 100,000 people dead or missing and over 10 million
people homeless.
10

32.
MIGA guarantees and technical assistance focused on infrastructure, national and
regional investment promotion, and South-South investment. MIGA supported foreign direct
investment (FDI) into China principally in the urban water, wastewater, and solid waste treatment
sector, including projects in the western part of China. Its current portfolio consists of five projects
totaling US$96 million in guarantee coverage. Given the improving investment climate, MIGA has
had three recent contract cancellations. MIGA has undertaken joint initiatives with IFC Advisory
Services to help the Ministry of Commerce and Sichuan province through its investment promotion
programs and benchmarking studies. MIGA has been active in cooperating with its partners and with
Chinese banks and companies to support Chinese outward investment.
Lessons Learned
33.
The FY13-16 CPS takes into consideration lessons identified in the CPS Completion Report
and during CPS consultations (see Annex 4). Key lessons include:
(i) Focusing on innovation and pilots at provincial and subprovincial levels is a good way
to leverage World Bank financing given China's development model. Since the 1980s,
China had deployed a pragmatic, learning-by-doing approach to development-reforms are
tested at the village or provincial level and then scaled up. Provincial authorities are
encouraged to experiment.
Box 4: FY 2012 China Country Survey
From December 2011 through March 2012, about 500 stakeholders of the World Bank Group throughout China
were invited to provide their opinions on the Bank Group's support to the country. About 200 stakeholders (40
percent) responded to the survey, which is about the same response rate as the previous country survey in FY
2006. The largest number of respondents came from local government and local project management offices (36
percent), followed by ministries (19 percent). Other respondents included academia and representatives of media,
NGOs, and financial institutions.
Survey Results

* Priorities for Bank Resources. Respondents across most stakeholder groups and geographic locations
indicated that the Bank should focus most of its resources on environmental improvement and poverty
reduction. Approximately a third of respondents reported that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus
its research and knowledge on environmental and natural resource management issues, with 20 percent
identifying social protection.
* Perceived Value of the Bank's Work. Respondents indicated that the Bank's greatest value to China was in
bringing new concepts and innovation, transferring international best practices, and piloting innovations to be
scaled up. In contrast, FY 2006 respondents rated financial resources as the most highly valued attribute of the
Bank.
* Effectiveness of the Bank. Views on the Bank's overall effectiveness remain high (7.8 on a 10 point scale with
1 being not very effective and 10 being very effective). Respondents from provinces outside of Beijing gave
higher ratings for the Bank's overall effectiveness in China than respondents from Beijing. Since the FY 2006
survey, ratings have increased in a number of areas, including alignment of the Bank's work with country
priorities, staff accessibility, the way the Bank promotes inclusion with non-governmental groups, capacity
building, and sharing knowledge about international best practices (identified as one of the Bank's greatest
values). More than half of respondents identified slow and complex processes as the Bank's greatest weakness.
* The Future Role of the World Bank in China. Respondents indicated that the Bank should play a significant
role in China's development in the next five years (8.2 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not a significant role
and 10 being very significant role). When asked how the Bank should make itself of greater value in the future,
nearly 40 percent of respondents said the Bank must improve the quality of its experts as related to China's
specific challenges. About 30 percent of respondents said the Bank must offer innovative knowledge products.
11

(ii) Given the increasing importance of knowledge cooperation, strengthen planning and
coordination of non-lending activities. AAA is too fragmented. Agreement with the
government on a multi-year AAA program that builds on China 2030 could increase
partnership and impact, provided there is flexibility to meet Just-in-time requests.
(iii)Strengthen dissemination. Given the Bank's focus on pilots and demonstrations,
documenting results and disseminating lessons are key to successful replication and scale up.
Most projects include monitoring and evaluation components and impact assessments.
However, there is room for improvement to better disseminate the results and maximize the
policy impact of innovative and demonstration projects and AAA findings. Recent efforts to
strengthen dissemination-such as the use of China's extensive distance learning network
and the development of "knowledge platforms" (see para. 41)-should be continued.
(iv) Continue efforts to improve efficiency and streamline processes. Counterparts continue to
identify cumbersome and lengthy processes as the Bank's main weakness (see Box 4 and
Annex 4). Although project preparation times have decreased, the Bank should continue to
seek ways to further shorten and facilitate project preparation and implementation.
(v) Strengthen efforts to mainstream gender in the lending and analytical work program.
Although the composition of the portfolio, which is dominated by infrastructure projects,
makes gender inclusion more difficult, recent efforts to gender-inform projects should be
sustained and applied more systematically (see Box 5).
(vi) Simplify the results framework and ensure realism. As typical of earlier results-based
country strategies, the 2006 CPS results framework was overly complex and ambitious, with
35 outcomes. Going forward, the new CPS should present a selective results framework
linked more realistically to what the Bank Group can influence.
Box 5: Good Practices for a Gender-Sensitive Portfolio in China
A 2010 review of gender-mainstreaming in the IBRD-financed portfolio found that the level of gender-informed
IBRD-financed projects in China is relatively low, reflecting the dominance of infrastructure in the portfolio.
However, the review identified several good practices that have potential to be scaled up:
* Consult with both men and women during project preparation to strengthen project design and
improve outcomes. Consultations with women during preparation of the Rural Health Project helped ensure

that the project design addressed barriers faced by women in accessing health services. Consultations with
men and women during preparation of several transport projects-the Liaoning Medium Cities Project, the
Hubei Yiba Highway Project, the Taiyun Urban Transport Project, and the Wuhan Urban Transport Projectresulted in an increased focus on public lighting and road safety.
* Undertake social analysis to identify gender imbalances that emerge during implementation. When
social analysis found that women were disproportionately affected by involuntary resettlement during

construction financed by the Hubei Yiba Highway Project, the Ningxia Highway Project, and the Wuhan
Urban Transport Project, new project activities were added targeting employment and livelihood
opportunities for women. Similarly, a new component was added to the Agriculture Technology Transfer
Project when a social assessment revealed a need to better support female farmers.

* Use gender-sensitive beneficiary participation during project implementation to increase benefits for
both men and women. Several rural development projects, including the Poor Rural Communities
Development Project, the Sustainable Development in Poor Rural Areas Project, the Pro-Poor Water Reform
Project, and the Western Provinces Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Project, used a
variety of tools to ensure that community planning processes captured both men's and women's priorities,
which often differed. The projects also set targets for women's participation in decision-making bodies, such
as project implementation committees or water user associations.

12

III.

THE WORLD BANK GROUP STRATEGY

34.
The Bank Group's FY2013-2016 CPS is aligned with the priorities of China's 12th-Five
Year Plan (2011-2015), which emphasizes quality of growth. It is also informed by the findings of
China 2030.
A. Framework for World Bank Group Engagement in China
35.
Knowledge sharing and cooperation are at the core of the Bank Group's strategy. The
Bank will transfer knowledge through investments at the provincial level that introduce new
approaches and through AAA at both provincial and national levels, while exploiting synergies
between investments and AAA. IFC will support advisory services and investments at provincial and
and national levels. Given China's emerging needs as an upper-middle-income country and building
on China 2030, knowledge cooperation between China and the World Bank Group is expected to
strengthen during the CPS period.
36.
CPS areas of engagement align with the main themes of the 1 2 th FYP. To support China's
goal of a harmonious society, the Bank Group will focus its financial resources, complemented by
AAA, on two strategic themes: supporting greener growth and promoting more inclusive
development. The Bank Group will also support the cross-cutting theme: advancing mutually
beneficial relations with the world. In addition, the Bank will provide client-driven knowledge
services that help underpin reforms needed to reenergize the drivers of growth. CPS areas of
engagement are shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: China CPS Themes and Outcomes
China as a Modern, Creative, and
Harmonious Society

Reenergizing the Drivers of Growth

(Client-driven knowledge services)
Strategic Theme 1:
Supporting Greener Growth

Strategic Theme 2:
Promoting More Inclusive

Outcomes:
1.1 Shifting to a sustainable energy path
1.2 Enhancing urban environmental services
1.3 Promoting low-carbon urban transport
1.4 Promoting sustainable agriculture practices
1.5 Demonstrating sustainable NRM approaches
Cross1.6 Demonstrating pollution management
1.7 Strengthening mechanisms for managing
climate change

OutcomesD
2.1 Increasing access to quality health services
and social protection programs
2.2 Strengthening skills development programs
2.3 Enhancing opportunities in rural areas and
small towns
Outcog
hmes:
2.4 Improving transport connectivity for more
balanced regional development

Advancing Mutually Beneficial Relations o pc
t n

oi
23 I p

13

t

yf

37.
The Bank Group will have an impact through demonstration projects, stand-alone
knowledge services, and the synergies between them. The Bank Group's program will focus on 11
outcomes, as shown in Figure 1. Given that Bank support is modest in comparison to China's own
resources, the Bank Group's program is designed to have an impact beyond its size by introducing
innovations and demonstrating new approaches that can be scaled up and through policy dialogue
and analytical inputs. The CPS Results Matrix (Annex 1) lays out the logical relationship between
Bank Group interventions (ongoing and planned), outputs, and outcomes, including milestones and
indicators to measure progress.
38.
Government counterparts have stressed the importance of several principles of
engagement:
Emphasize knowledge and innovation through both lending and non-lending activities.
The Bank Group's most valuable contribution in China remains its role in bringing and
applying ideas, innovation, and knowledge. In addition to stand-alone knowledge products,
China continues to value knowledge services embedded in lending, using projects as
platforms for innovation and knowledge sharing (see Box 6). Lending will be complemented
and leveraged with policy dialogue and analytical work. Joint or client-driven AAA will be
undertaken in areas where the Bank does not lend or where lending is limited.
Box 6: How IBRD Lending Works in China: Projects as Platforms for Knowledge Sharing
The Bank's program in China has several special characteristics:
* IBRD lending is demand driven from the provincial level and vetted against national priorities. Each year,
China's Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) solicit
project proposals from China's provinces. MOF and NDRC then vet the proposals, taking into consideration
quality, sectors, location, timing, and especially potential for innovation and demonstration. Each spring, MOF,
NDRC, and the World Bank agree on a three-year rolling lending program. This process results in a stable

lending program aligned with the country's development priorities.
* The Bank works directly with China's subnational governments. With a few exceptions, such as railway
projects, IBRD-financed projects are implemented by provinces and municipalities, which are responsible for
loan repayment. The demand from subnational governments for IBRD lending exceeds the lending envelope.

* The Chinese government values projects for the knowhow they bring. As emphasized during CPS
consultations, Chinese counterparts appreciate the technical innovation and hands-on learning from working
with Bank teams during project design and implementation. Small and medium-sized cities, which do not have
much international exposure, benefit in particular from good project management practices--procurement,
financial management, and social and environmental safeguard standards supported by Bank-financed projects.

* The Bank, in partnership with MOF and NDRC, organizes an annual Innovation Workshop to share
international experiences relevant to China. Government officials from agencies and provinces throughout
China participate in the two-day event, which provides a forum to discuss new ideas that influence the lending
pipeline. The June 2012 Innovation Workshop focused on small towns development and social development.

* In addition, Chinese officials appreciate Bank-financed projects for fostering inter-agency cooperation.
Solving increasingly complex development challenges at the provincial and municipal levels requires
cooperation among multiple agencies that typically work in silos. Bank-financed projects provide a framework
for inter-agency cooperation that would not exist otherwise.
* There is synergy between projects and AAA. In some cases, AAA has led to lending-such as the analytical
work on inequality in Guangdong, which led to the Guangdong Urban-Rural Social Security Integration and
Migrant Training Project (FY13). In other cases, lending has led to AAA; for example, the Bank's engagement
in the railway and urban transport sectors has led to analytical work on railway governance (Transport Paper
Series) and sustainable low-carbon city development. Lending helps establish trust and credibility conducive to
effective AAA.
14

*

Shift investments to interior and western provinces. IBRD, IFC, and MIGA programs will
continue to shift to lagging central and western regions and the northeast, the former
industrial base, a trend that will continue under the FY13-16 CPS. Some projects and AAA
will continue to take place in coastal regions because they are best suited for piloting
particularly innovative or complex reforms and investments.

*

Maintain flexibility given China's quickly evolving needs. The Bank Group's support for
China has evolved extensively over time as China's needs have changed. It will be important
for the Bank Group to remain nimble as China's needs continue to evolve.

Knowledge Services
39.
The Bank Group will continue to provide substantial non-lending support. AAA will
comprise standard due diligence work to inform the Bank's work program, IFC advisory services
(AS), WBI activities, support for South-South knowledge exchange (SSKE), and demand-driven
knowledge services, including just-in-time policy notes.

*

The Bank's standard due diligence will include economic and social monitoring (including
the flagship China Economic Update), biannual updates of the country gender action plan,
and analytical work that generates the sector knowledge required for innovative investment
proj ects.

*

IFC advisory services will focus on access to finance, climate change, and water
management, as well as on promoting better standards and sharing of experiences in SouthSouth cooperation between China and developing countries. In addition, IFC's appraisal of
potential investments will continue to assess the economic, financial, environmental, and
social sustainability of projects and look for opportunities to enhance inclusion and
development impact.

*

WBI activities will complement the two strategic themes of the CPS through capacity
development and learning activities as well as supporting mutual experience and knowledge
sharing between China and the rest of the world. Key thematic areas of focus will include
capacity development around health, climate change, and urban planning and development.

*

Bank support for SSKE is expected to increase. The Bank will leverage its sectoral
knowledge from operations and analytical work to help facilitate SSKE.

*

Demand-driven knowledge services will be carried out with Chinese partners or at their
request. Analytical work will be grouped into broader thematic engagement areas defined
jointly with clients. The Bank and DRC are developing a joint research program, building on
China 2030 and deploying the same model ofjoint collaboration.

Indicative AAA themes are shown in Table 2. (See Annex 5 for a list of recently completed AAA,
ongoing AAA, and AAA planned for FY14.)
40.
Given the increasing importance of knowledge services, the Bank and the government
are establishing a system to better plan and coordinate AAA. The Bank and the government will
agree annually on a multi-year AAA program designed to maximize relevance and impact while
leaving room for flexibility and just-in-time requests. IFC will also hold an annual consultation
process with the government to agree on advisory priorities for China.
15

41.

The Bank will strengthen dissemination of AAA and project findings. A new transport

sector knowledge platform provides a model for disseminating project experiences. In addition, the
Bank and government will work together to develop workshops and brochures on key topics to
enhance dissemination of innovative approaches. The Bank will continue to use China's distance
learning network, with more than 50 sites, to deliver distance learning courses based on AAA.

Table 2: Indicative Themes of Analytical and Advisory Activities
CPS Area of Engagement

AAA Themes

Reenergizing the Drivers of Growth

* Macro-fiscal policy, institutions, and management (national and

subnational)
* Structural reforms, including financial sector, labor and product
market, and enterprise reforms
* Product and process innovation
Strategic Theme 1:
Supporting Greener Growth

* Energy

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Strategic Theme 2:
Promoting More Inclusive Development

security through renewable energy and energy
efficiency
Urban design in transport, construction, and water supply and
sanitation with strong potential environmental benefits
Economics of climate change adaptation in water and
agriculture
Eco-compensation schemes for natural resource management
Land policy dialogue on tenure, markets, registration and
municipal development
Public-private partnerships for remediation and redevelopment
of urban brownfields
Pollution control standards, non point source water pollution,
and air quality
Climate change - CDM experiences and development of
national carbon markets; climate risk management and
adaptation

* Poverty monitoring and analysis
* Health reform, with a focus on hospital reform and coordination

of care across delivery tiers
* Social protection and labor market, including policies and
delivery systems to promote rural-urban integration
* Skills and early child development, with a focus on service
quality, labor-market relevance and equity of access
* Aging and development of aged care services
* Transport: railway reform
Cross-Cutting Theme:
* South-South knowledge exchange
Advancing Mutually Beneficial Relations * Global economic governance

with the World

16

Financial Resources - Knowledge through Investments
42.
IBRD. Over the CPS period, IBRD lending is expected to remain stable at about US$1.5
billion for 10-13 projects per year.9 A three-year rolling lending pipeline is agreed to and updated
annually between the World Bank, the Ministry of Finance (MOF), and the National Development
and Reform Commission (NDRC). During the most recent lending program discussion in April 2012,
the World Bank, MOF, and NDRC agreed on a lending pipeline of US$5.495 billion for 44
operations during FY13-15, including stand-by operations (see Annex 5). The lending program will
be adjusted as needed and formally reviewed on an annual basis. In 2014 or earlier if needed, the
Bank will prepare a CPS Progress Report, which will include the agreed-upon lending program for
FY15-16.
43.
IFC and MIGA. IFC's strategic priority areas in China-climate change, balanced and
inclusive rural and urban growth, and sustainable South-South development-are well aligned with
the CPS themes. IFC investments are expected to remain strong at US$500-1,000 million for about
25 projects per year for its own account; and IFC expects to mobilize an additional US$200-300
million per year. An estimated US$100-200 million per year will support South-South development.
MIGA retains significant room for further exposure in China and will use this available space to
pursue projects aligned with its global strategy, including complex infrastructure projects and SouthSouth transactions.
44.
Trust funds and carbon finance. Trust funds and carbon finance remain significant in size
(US$1.8 billion in commitments as of end-June 2012) and integral to the Bank's operations in China,
especially in the environmental sector, although cofinancing trust funds from bilateral donors have
declined over the last five years. More than 90 percent of China's trust fund portfolio comprises the
Global Environmental Facility (GEF), the Montreal Protocol (MP) (for ozone-depleting substances),
and carbon finance. Although China is developing few new climate finance projects under the Clean
Development Mechanism due to a lack of international buyers, the Bank will continue to support
carbon finance through the development of domestic markets (see Outcome 1.7). During the FY1316 CPS, the Bank will continue to support China under the GEF and MP:

*

Global Environmental Facility. GEF engagement in China covers all thematic areas of
GEF-climate change, biodiversity, persistent organic pollutants (POPs), and international
waters. About two-thirds of GEF commitments in China address climate change, reflecting
its importance for China and the world. The Bank helped China secure about $115 million
under GEF-IV (FY07-10), and commitments under GEF-V (FY 1-FY14) are expected to
total about US$125-135 million with an increasing share going to climate change and POPs
projects. GEF will also continue to support IFC's China Utility-Based Energy Efficiency
Finance Program. (See Annex 5 for ongoing and pipeline GEF projects.)

*

Montreal Protocol program. China has by far the largest MP program in the world,
reflecting China's status as the largest producer, consumer, and exporter of ozone depleting
substances. Under the previous CPS, the first phase of MP funding (about US$440 million)

phased out hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) in China in 2010. During the FY13-16 CPS, MP

9 The

proposed lending envelope of about US$1.5 billion per year is sustainable in the medium term, keeping the
IBRD exposure below the US$16.5 billion limit for China set within the context of the Single Borrower Limit
Framework, assuming modest (+/- 10%) fluctuations in disbursements and exchange rates. Given the sensitivity of
exposure projections to these assumptions, IBRD continues to monitor exposure developments.
17

program funds, which may total about $225 million, will focus on phasing-out the next
generation of hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs).
B. Reenergizing the Drivers of Growth-Demand Driven Knowledge Services
45.
As the growth benefits of urbanization and industrialization wane, China's longer-term
challenge is to reenergize and reorient the drivers of growth. These efforts will require a focus on
sustaining productivity growth by recognizing the ongoing shift from low-cost production to higher
value products based on innovation. In turn, this will require reforms that exert competitive pressure
on firms to enhance the pace of innovation both through their own research and development as well
as by engaging in global networks. Such competition will come from completing reforms in product
markets as well as in land, labor, and financial markets. These reforms will need to be complemented
by changes in the fiscal system at the national and sub-national levels. The World Bank Group can
support this structural reform agenda in several ways including by:

*

*
*

*

Supporting fiscal reforms through advisory and analytical work on reforming sub-national
inter-governmental fiscal relations, building up a mid-term fiscal framework at both national
and sub-national levels, improving fiscal transparency and debt management, and introducing
accrual based public finance accounting and performance budgeting.
Assisting with reforms of the state-owned enterprise sector through a mix of advisory
services and technical assistance.
Helping to broaden land, labor and financial market reforms through advisory and
analytical work in selected areas. Building on its knowledge accumulated through previous
engagement, the Bank will continue to support financial sector reform, ranging from financial
stability and crisis preparedness, financial inclusion, and reforming and developing non-bank
financial institutions.
Advising on ways to increase the pace of innovation both at the firm level as well as on the
enabling environment.
C. Strategic Theme One: Supporting Greener Growth

46.
China faces some of the world's most difficult environmental challenges due to its
energy-intensive and resource-intensive growth pattern and binding natural resource
constraints. China has 22 percent of the world's population, but only 6.4 percent of the world's land
area, 7.2 percent of the world's farmland, and 5.8 percent of the world's annual water resources. The
value of environmental depletion and degradation (i.e., environmental externalities) in China's
economy are among the highest of any country. Given the magnitude of China's environmental
impacts, global environmental problems cannot be solved without China's engagement.
47.
Green development can address China's environmental degradation and resource
depletion and also become a new driver for growth. As shown in China 2030, the reforms
underlying green growth can reverse current environmental trends that are both domestically and
globally unsustainable. Green growth combines removing future threats to growth in the form of
resource and pollution constraints with raising the overall rate of growth by increasing efficiency and
accelerating the shift of capital and labor towards sectors with higher total factor productivity growth.
48.
The Bank Group has steadily expanded its focus on environmental sustainability across
its work program. Over 70 percent of the IBRD/GEF portfolio in China has environmental
objectives; and IFC and MIGA continue to help clients identify and address environmental
considerations in their operations and primary supply chains. Over 30 percent of IFC's investment
commitments in China are climate positive, while all IFC investment operations require clients to
18

adhere to environmental standards, including resource efficiency and pollution abatement. The
WBG's "green growth" portfolio can be mapped to seven different CPS outcomes spanning six
different sectors-energy, urban, transport, agriculture, natural resources, and environment-as well
as climate change.
Outcome 1.1: Shifting to a Sustainable Energy Path
49.
China's energy sector faces three main challenges: energy security, environmental
sustainability, and sector efficiency. China is dependent on fossil fuels, with coal accounting for
about 70 percent of primary energy consumption. As a result, 85 percent of CO 2 emissions come
from energy. Although China has the world's largest renewable energy capacity, only 8.8 percent of
energy comes from renewable sources. Shifting to a greener energy supply will benefit China and the
world. To do so, China needs to scale up renewable energy in a cost effective manner, and leapfrog
to the next generation of green energy technologies. The 11th FYP set a target to reduce energy
intensity by 20 percent, which was nearly attained (19.1 percent reduction). The 12 th FYP aims to
reduce energy intensity by a further 16 percent. It sets a target, for the first time, to reduce carbon
intensity by 17 percent, intended to contribute to an overarching goal of reducing carbon intensity in
the economy by 40 to 45 percent from 2005 to 2020. Since the late 1990s, the World Bank Group has
focused on renewable energy and on energy efficiency, where IBRD and IFC programs are
complementary (see Box 7). The Bank Group will continue to support China's efforts to build a
secure, sustainable, and cost-efficient energy sector by:
*

*

*

*

*

*

Enabling efficient and sustainable scale-up of commercial renewable energy
development through investments and advisory services that address how to reduce
incremental costs, improve efficiency, and promote smooth grid integration into the power
systems.
Accelerating energy conservation and investment in energy efficiency through investment
and advisory services at national and local levels that enhance the quality of administrative
measures and encourage greater reliance on the market to deliver energy efficiency.
Piloting innovative investments and policies supporting sustainable energy solutions for
low carbon city development and promoting adoption of cleaner and more efficient
household energy solutions, including in rural areas where solid fuels are widely used.
Helping China extend its Green Building Policy through complementary support from
both IBRD and IFC. Buildings are a large and growing contributor to emissions; and 50
percent of the world's new buildings are expected to be built in China by 2030.
Supporting development and implementation of clean energy policies that encourage
development and deployment of innovative technologies, such as carbon capture and
sequestration and smart grids, and encourage greater use of gas.
Using IFC investment and advisory services to demonstrate market-based approaches
to reducing energy intensity and environmental impact through use of renewable energy,
energy efficient equipment, and natural gas by commercial and industrial users.

19

Box 7: World Bank Group Support for Increasing Energy Efficiency in China
Achieving China's ambitious goal of reducing energy intensity requires significant investments as well as TA and
capacity building for both the public and private sector. To optimize support, IBRD and JFC work together to
leverage and complement each other's programs and instruments.
Complementary TA. IBRD's TA focuses on strengthening government policies and building capacity at national
and provincial levels. For example, the IBRD-financed China Energy Efficiency Financing (CHEEF) program
included a component to help develop NDRC's energy efficiency program. Also, the GEF-financed China
Provincial Energy Efficiency Scale-Up Project provides TA for provincial energy efficiency programs. JFC focuses
its TA on market players. For example, JFC's China Energy Efficiency Finance (CHUEE) program conducted
market studies and provided training and marketing support to its energy efficiency partners, such as commercial
banks, energy service companies, and energy efficiency equipment suppliers.
Complementary activities to help scale up energy efficiency (EE) lending in the banking sector. Under IBRD's
CHEEF program, the government lends to participating financial institutions, who on-lend to industrial enterprises
and energy service companies for EE investments. This credit line arrangement allows banks to familiarize
themselves with and eventually mainstream EE lending. JFC's CHUEE program provides credit risk guarantees to
partner banks for EE project lending. By lowering the risk of lending, the program encourages banks to develop new
EE financing products. IBRD's CHEEF program focuses on medium- and large-sized industrial enterprises, while
JFC's CHUEE program focuses on the SME market.
IBRD and IFC are working together to address new challenges. IBRD and JFC are designing a Green Buildings
program that will exploit each institution's comparative advantage. IBRD can help improve the regulatory
environment and support local governments in developing pilot projects; while JFC can provide private sector-based
tools to examine the business opportunities and share in the project risks.
Outcome 1.2: Enhancing Urban Environmental Services

50.

China's cities are growing at a rate and scale never seen before in human history.

About 380 million people have moved from rural to urban areas over the last two decades; and more
than 200 million people more are expected to migrate by 2025. While urbanization will drive growth
and raise living standards, it also brings tremendous environmental and service delivery challenges.
Smaller cities in particular are struggling to keep pace with demand, especially for sewerage and
waste disposal services. China's city governments are interested in drawing on the experience of
other countries and adopting innovative service delivery technologies that mitigate pollution and
conserve energy and natural resources. The World Bank's urban portfolio provides models of good
urban practices throughout China. Going forward, a key challenge for the World Bank will be to
increasingly work with smaller cities, which have lower capacity and fewer resources, but which are
important for inducing a more equitable and balanced growth process. The World Bank can continue

to help during the CPS period by:
*

Expanding safe water supply in more than 50 small towns and cities, while improving
quality and efficiency.

*

Improving sanitation, solid waste and other basic urban services in selected second-tier
cities, while reducing pollution. WBI will help develop related urban-specific capacity
development and knowledge sharing platforms.

*

*

Supporting private-sector investments in water and sanitation projects, through IFC
investments and MIGA guarantees. IFC is focusing on improving municipal and industrial
water efficiency and water quality, working with water-intensive sectors and firms, especially
in water-scarce areas of the country.
Addressing environmental management, including piloting the cutting edge technologies
to address environmental challenges in large cities and helping to establish "eco cities" that
will be models for cities in China and the world.
20

*

*

Demonstrating ways to integrate cultural heritage conservation and sustainable local
economic development, emphasizing that "conserving the past is a foundation for the
future."
Helping cities build resilience to natural disasters, especially floods; and "building back
better" in the wake of the devastating Wenchuan earthquake in May 2008.

Outcome 1.3 Promoting Low-Carbon Urban Transport
51.
Rapid motorization of China's cities is creating challenges from the local to global
levels. These include: traffic congestion, road accidents, air pollution, farmland conversion, high fuel
consumption, and greenhouse gas emissions. Recognizing the need to improve urban transport
sustainability in order to address these challenges and reach the national CO 2 target, the 12 th FYP
gives priority to urban public transport development. The World Bank is supporting urban transport
improvements in about 30 of China's 700 cities, creating a critical mass of model projects. In large
cities, there is demand for innovations and best international practice to meet their unprecedented
urban transport problems. In many smaller cities, where there is weak institutional capacity, the Bank
can help strengthen urban transport planning, financing, and management to set the stage for
sustainable, low-carbon urban transport development. The World Bank Group can continue to
support China in promoting low-carbon urban transport by:
*

*

*
*
*

Accelerating the shift to public transport and improving transport efficiency through
city-specific transport investments, giving priority to large cities in the central and western
regions. Projects will be complemented by TA in critical areas, such as integrated transport
and land use planning.
Piloting institutional and technological innovations that have potential for scale up in
cities throughout China, such as public transport integration, transit-oriented development,
travel demand management, and sustainable municipal financing mechanisms.
Helping to establish a national policy framework that promotes efficient and lowcarbon urban transport, drawing on the experience of demonstration projects in pilot cities.
Helping to promote urban transport safety, by demonstrating road safety and traffic
management measures.
Establishing a knowledge platform to disseminate best practices, including an e-learning
module, through AAA and WBI support.

Outcome 1.4: Promoting Sustainable Agriculture Practices
52.
China's agricultural reforms have been successful in producing an inexpensive and
abundant food supply, but the country faces new supply constraints and demand dynamics.
Supply is struggling to keep up with demand, as evidenced by two bouts of double digit food price
inflation over the past three years. Supply constraints include water scarcity, longstanding and
intensifying competition for land, and environmental pressures from livestock waste and overuse of
chemical pesticides and fertilizers. These are compounded by rising rural wages and climate
variability. On the demand side, a dietary shift to a more protein rich diet (meat, dairy) is increasing
demand for feed cereals. Together, these supply and demand dynamics have resulted in a steady
increase of feed cereal imports, challenging China's ambitions of 95 percent grain self sufficiency.
Concerns about food safety further hamper potential for expanding production of high value crops
both for domestic and international markets. As articulated in the 12th FYP, maintaining sustainable
food self-sufficiency, raising farmers' incomes, and constructing the "New Socialist Countryside" are
top government priorities. The World Bank Group can help by:
21

*

*

*

*

*

*

Demonstrating sustainable agricultural and livestock practices that improve farm
productivity and generate local and global environmental benefits, including better ways
to integrate biogas in farming and cooking, improved livestock waste management, and
piloting a carbon credit trading process for household-based greenhouse gas emissions.
Helping to expand agricultural production by improving the productivity of water
through support to water conserving technologies, irrigation systems, water user associations
and water markets. These integrated interventions being piloted in China have been
recognized as globally innovative and are being scaled up.
Developing and testing innovative models for agriculture technology transfer and
application, in order to increase farm income, especially for poor farmers, in high-value
agriculture markets, with a potential for scaling up.
Testing new approaches to ensuring agricultural product quality and safety by piloting a
certification process at the provincial level, with the potential to transfer lessons to other
regions and segments of the food supply chain.
Expanding China's ability to adapt to climate change in the agricultural sector through
research and demonstration of sustainable and climate-resilient agricultural production and
risk management systems.
Using IFC investments in agribusiness to improve productivity through better
environmental practices, such as biomass treatment of animal waste, more efficient use of
land and water resources, and improved waste water treatment.

Outcome 1.5: Demonstrating Sustainable Natural Resource Management Approaches
53.
China's rapid economic growth has put pressure on its scarce natural resources. Water
scarcity is worsening due to overexploitation and water pollution. Chinese policy makers and society
are now giving sustainable natural resource management high priority; and income and living
standards have reached a level where China can afford and is also willing to shift some of its policies.
The shift to sustainable natural resource management began in the 1 0 th FYP, was clearly articulated
in the 1 1 th FYP, and is emphasized further in the 1 2 th FYP. While China's policies have changed
from traditional natural resource management to ecological management, implementation of
ecological management is lagging. The World Bank Group can support China in this area by:
*

*

*

*

Demonstrating ways to better manage ecosystems and conserve biodiversity. Given
China's widely degraded ecosystems, improved management includes promoting ecological
forestry approaches that maximize ecosystem health, soil and water conservation, carbon
sequestration, and climate resilience; exploring market-based schemes to promote
conservation investments in fragile ecosystems such as grasslands and watersheds; and using
concessional funding to promote globally important biodiversity.
Implementing approaches of integrated water resources management at the river basin
level, addressing multiple uses: water scarcity, flooding, pollution, water demands,
economic instruments, and institutional aspects; and building on the recent China Country
Water Resources Partnership Strategy prepared jointly by the World Bank and the Chinese
government.
Demonstrating innovative ways to manage wetlands and lakes, including through the
increased use of wetlands to filter urban and industrial run-off before excess nutrients cause
eutrophication in lakes, rivers, and bays (including the Bohai and South China Seas).
Supporting natural resource property rights and markets in ways that encourage
sustainable use, such as clarifying land use rights in rural and per-urban land use markets,
forest tenure rights, and water rights.
22

*

Demonstrating, including through support from IFC and MIGA, that resource
efficiency makes good business sense, by supporting innovative investment projects,
developing demonstration case studies and knowledge products, and raising awareness
among banks and industrial users.

Outcome 1.6: Demonstrating Pollution Management Measures
54.
China has severe pollution problems that have high economic and public health
impacts. The cost of air pollution is estimated at 6.5 percent of GDP, the cost of water pollution at
2.1 percent of GDP, and soil degradation at 1.1 percent. 10 According to World Health Organization
(WHO) estimates, in 2008 there were 470,000 premature deaths due to ambient air pollution and an
even higher number, 549,000 deaths, due to indoor air pollution. Although air pollution levels have
been improving in recent years, the cost of illnesses from pollution has climbed as the population
ages and the urban populations grows. China has made great strides in controlling urban and
industrial water pollution. Non-point source pollution-from small towns, SMEs, and the rural
sector-is now China's greatest water pollution challenge. The government is committed to reverse
these trends. The World Bank Group can support China in a range of areas, including:
*

*

*

*

*
*

Supporting efforts to reduce urban air pollution, working at both the national level
(providing TA related to standards, monitoring, and regional strategies) and the municipal
level (supporting detailed action plans and investments designed to reduce pollution from the
worst sources).
Supporting efforts to reduce hazardous waste, by continuing to support the reduction of
persistent organic pollutants (POPs)-the byproducts of industrial production and the world's
most toxic chemicals-from the regulatory level to emissions control and urban site cleanup.
Accelerating the phase-out of ozone-depleting substances (ODS), by remaining a strong
partner in achieving the accelerated phase-out of the HCFC family of chemicals (China is the
world's largest producer, consumer, and exporter of chemicals associated with ODS).
Supporting the reduction of non-point source (NPS) pollution across rural China. In
addition to the strategies related to water pollution addressed in Outcomes 1.2 (urban), 1.4
(agriculture), and 1.5 (wetlands and lakes), the Bank can support efforts to minimize NPS
pollution through regulatory and technical approaches.
Continuing to support China's efforts to improve environmental governance, including
through public disclosure of environmental information.
Working with IFC's private sector clients on pollution abatement by assessing the risk
and potential impacts of their operations, recommending actions to mitigate them, and
tracking performance through regular Performance Standards monitoring. IFC will continue
to support clean technologies and companies engaged in pollution measurement and
management.

Outcome 1.7: Strengthening Institutional and Financial Mechanisms for Climate Change
Climate change is a cross-cutting issue embedded in much of Bank Group support to
55.
China. About half of the World Bank project pipeline will have climate benefits, including in the
energy, urban, transport, waste management, agriculture, and forestry sectors (see Box 8). In
addition, the Bank Group will provide targeted support to help China strengthen institutional, policy,
and financial mechanisms to address the climate challenge, including:

10World Bank calculations (2008 data).

23

Box 8: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation in China
Climate change mitigation in China is urgent for both China and the world. China's rapidly growing coaldependent economy has made it the world's largest emitter of CO 2Climate change adaption is also an important issue for China. With its long coastline and vast expenses of arid
and semi-arid land, China is vulnerable to the adverse impact of climate change, which could intensify water
shortages in northern China, increase the incidence of extreme temperature events and consequent flooding and
droughts, and reduce the yields of major crops.
The Chinese government is taking steps to address climate change. China is embarking on an ambitious national
climate change action plan, which includes national and provincial caps on energy and carbon intensity and piloting
of domestic emissions trading systems for CO 2 in several provinces and large cities. China is likely to adopt absolute
caps on coal use and/or carbon emissions in the next few years. In addition, it is increasingly serious about both low
carbon ("green") development at the policy and investment levels, and climate adaptation, primarily in the water and
agricultural sectors. Finally, China is highly motivated to raise its profile as a proactive and innovative partner to
developing countries in achieving carbon mitigation, and is increasingly doing so through demonstration projects
and expanded South-South cooperation.
China has the World Bank's largest climate change investment program. It provides cross-cutting support for
climate change mitigation and adaption, and the portfolio's emphasis on climate change continues to strengthen.
About half of IBRD/GEF projects financed during this CPS are expected to have positive climate change aspects.
World Bank Group support includes:
* IBRD: The IBRD portfolio supports climate change mitigation in energy, transport, agriculture, and forestry-the
Bank's largest IBRD-financed climate change portfolio.
* Carbon Finance: Under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), carbon finance commitments in China over
the past five years totaled $1.25 billion, by far the largest CDM program in the Bank. CDM projects are
distributed across a range of carbon emission reducing sectors-renewable energy (32 percent), energy efficiency
(32 percent), landfill and coalbed methane (16 percent); industrial gases (10 percent), and reforestation (10
percent). Although international purchases of China's certified emissions reductions have declined, the World
Bank will continue to support China in developing new carbon finance mechanisms for possible future projects,
including in the energy and agriculture sectors.
* GEF: GEF provides a successful platform to test innovations at both the national and sub-national levels. Over 60
percent of the Bank's GEF commitments in China address climate change. These operations are fully blended
with IBRD loans, helping to promote innovation, policy dialogue, and capacity building.
* Analytical support: The World Bank is providing TA in several areas. The Bank is helping to model a major
rebalancing of the economy towards green growth, including a fiscally neutral introduction of carbon taxes
generating 5 percent or more of all public revenues. Also, through the Program for Market Readiness, the Bank is
supporting the creation of domestic trading platforms, including standards, registration, and "MRV" (measurable,
reportable, and verifiable) protocols. The Bank is supporting the multi-billion dollar "China CDM Fund" in
developing its early investments in climate finance in China. The Bank supported the NDRC's Climate Change
Department in presenting "China Day" at the November-December 2011 Climate Change Conference (COP 17)
in Durban, South Africa.

* IFC is supporting energy efficiency, renewable energy, clean technology, green buildings, and forestry activities,
all contributing to carbon emission reductions. IFC also supports climate adaptation, such as water use efficiency.
IFC and MIGA are supporting green finance and the Equator Principles in the banking sector (see Box 9).

*

*

Supporting the establishment of carbon trading pilot schemes across China, through the
Partnership for Market Readiness and related trust funds. China has ambitious plans to
implement seven carbon pilot trading schemes by 2013, to be merged into a national scheme
by 2016. The World Bank will function as both a provider of TA and convener of interested
partners and stakeholders.
Exploring innovative climate finance instruments, through TA, investments, and
knowledge exchange supported by WBI's Climate Change Unit. The Bank Group, including
24

*

*

IFC and the carbon finance unit, is an active partner in exploring new ways to use
concessional and market-rate, public sector and private sector, and international and domestic
sources of finance for climate-related investments.
Improving knowledge on the economics of climate change, through TA and analytical
work, including analyzing the costs and benefits of strategies to adapt to projected climate
impacts; promoting access to new technologies to address both mitigation and adaptation
challenges; and mainstreaming low-cost adaptation measures in sectoral investments across
the rural, urban, transport, and energy sectors.
Assisting IFC's private sector clients enhance their environmental and social
sustainability by identifying potential opportunities and delivering approaches that are good
for both the company and the environment as part of IFC's due diligence and by applying the
revised IFC Performance Standards in place since January 2012. IFC will also continue to
help drive sustainability through financial markets using standards such as the Equator
Principles and the Green Credit Guidelines, which show banks how to incorporate
sustainability, including climate change dimensions, into both domestic and overseas lending.
D. Strategic Theme Two: Promoting More Inclusive Development

56.
Addressing the inequalities that have emerged during the reform period is a key social
challenge as China seeks to build a harmonious society. The 11th and 12th FYPs recognize the
emerging limitations of the current growth model and place greater emphasis on addressing
inequality and enhancing the basic security of the population. The disparities are both spatial
(between urban and rural areas; between coastal and inland provinces), and between different social
groups (most notably migrants and local urban residents). Some inequalities are unintended
consequences of market reforms and past failures to deal appropriately with the public goods nature
of investments in human development and with inter-regional disparities. Others, however, are direct
products of policies that institutionalize inequality of opportunity (such as the hukou system) or do
not provide an effective framework for addressing disparities (such as the inter-governmental fiscal
system). The government seeks to overcome such disparities with a stronger emphasis on integration
between urban and rural areas, both in terms of facilitating physical mobility of people and economic
activity, and in terms of policies that harmonize social entitlements and build a deeper and more
equal human capital base and social protection system.
57.
Reforms to enhance equality of opportunity in China are also likely to facilitate its
shifting growth model. In addition to enhancing equity, investments in human capital and a
healthier and more secure population will enhance consumption and contribute to rebalancing. They
will also ensure that China has the quality of workers to navigate the decline in the labor force and
move up the value chain in production. However, in order to translate increased investments in
people into improved social and economic outcomes, there will also need to be ongoing structural
reforms of its health, education and social security systems to increase efficiency of public spending.
58.
The Bank Group will help promote more inclusive development by geographically
focusing on lagging regions and small towns and by supporting policies and demonstration
projects that address inequalities. In the human development sectors health care, social
protection, and skills development-the Bank will continue to emphasize subnational engagement,
focusing on implementation challenges at the local level, with mutual leveraging of lending and
AAA activities, as seen in Yunnan and Guangdong provinces. Also, the Bank will continue to
provide cross-sectoral support for rural and small town development and engage in transport projects
that help balance development. These activities can be mapped to the four outcomes below.

25

Outcome 2.1: Increasing Access to Quality Health Services and Social Protection Programs
59.
Deepening health sector reform is one of China's biggest social challenges. In China, the
urgency of health reform is exacerbated by rapid aging of the population and the increase in noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), which already account for over 80 percent of the disease burden and
will rise as urbanization progresses. Yet, the health care delivery system remains oriented towards
curative care and its payment and incentive systems do not promote cost-effective or healthpromoting practices. A critical challenge is reorienting China's health delivery system away from
reliance on hospital care and building a revitalized primary health care system well coordinated with
higher levels of care. China has initiated a health system reform that seeks to address a number of the
efficiency and equity challenges of the system, and the Bank will continue to play a role through both
lending and AAA in supporting health system innovations to drive structural change. IFC will
continue to work with the private sector to expand quality health service, especially to middle- and
lower-income families.
60.
As China deepens its social protection reforms, integrating policies and program
administration will become more pressing needs. While the building blocks of a modern social
protection system are largely in place, they remain fragmented in policy and administration terms.
The Bank has had a long-term engagement on pension and social protection reforms in China and
will continue to support second-generation reforms of system integration and the government's
development of aged care services. In health and social protection, the Bank Group will support:
*

*

*

*

*

*

Piloting and evaluating health care innovations that will further the government's
ongoing health system reform agenda, including helping poor rural residents improve
access to health services and reduce their financial risk, improving the quality, efficiency and
coordination of service delivery, and increasing the focus on preventive and primary care.
Investments will continue to be monitored for their gender impacts. Demonstration projects
will be complemented by analytical and policy work drawing on lessons of good practice in
China and globally.
Piloting reforms in pension and health insurance administration to promote social
equity and labor mobility, through integrated management of social insurance programs and
portability of entitlements across jurisdictions.
Sustaining policy advisory and evaluation work on social protection. The Bank will also
support the authorities in evaluating the outcomes of new pension programs for the rural and
urban informal sectors, and continue its work on social assistance to support the government's
efforts to strengthen the safety net for the poorest and most vulnerable citizens.
Helping China face the challenge of an aging population. China will face growing needs
for aged care services, and exploring international good practice and its own emerging
experiences with public-private-community partnerships can help develop new policy and
practices. More broadly, AAA on the impacts of aging on China's economy and society can
support government as it elaborates the policy framework for managing rapid aging.
Through IFC interventions, enhancing private sector provision of quality and
comprehensive healthcare through networks of local and regional hospitals and through
outpatient clinics accessible to the underserved.
Increasing availability of affordable quality medicines through IFC support for private
sector investments in the pharmaceutical sector.

26

Outcome 2.2: Strengthening Skills Development Programs-Including for Migrants
61.
To move up the value chain and become a high-income country, China is seeking to
develop a workforce with the competencies needed for a more complex and dynamic economy.
As enrollment rates at all levels of education rise, it will be important to ensure quality and provide
the core competencies that employers demand. China's National Plan for Medium- and Long-Term
Education and Development lays out a vision for China's education system, including promoting
equality of access at all levels of the system, enhancing educational quality, and promoting
innovation and greater diversity in the education system. The World Bank can provide assistance by:
*

*

*

*

Piloting reforms and investments that improve the quality and relevance of technical
and vocational education (including modular, competency-based curricula, deepening ties
with industry, and promoting life-long learning) and supporting systems to evaluate quality
and guide future reforms. The policy lessons emerging from project engagements will be
supplemented through ongoing analytical work on technical and vocational training, and
exploration of the wider skills challenges in higher education.
Piloting activities that help rural workers transition to urban areas and improve their
incomes and working conditions, including through strengthened worker protections, better
access to skills development and employment services, and reforms to the hukou system to
further remove barriers to labor mobility. Project support will continue to be informed by
analytical work on labor markets and hukou, building on ongoing AAA and China 2030.
Supporting the government's planned expansion and quality enhancement of early
child education and related early child development programs such as nutritional
interventions by piloting and evaluating different models of provision and supporting
financing reforms to ensure that rural, migrant, and poor children have the same early start as
others.
Supporting, through IFC, quality private education institutions and technical and
vocational education and training institutions that have the potential to reach underserved
markets.

Outcome 2.3: Enhancing Opportunities in Rural Areas and Small Towns
62.
Although rural development has been a long standing priority in China, continuing
efforts are needed to address obstacles to rural economic growth and rural income generation.
Many of China's remaining poor live in the upland areas of western and central provinces, where
they face low agricultural productivity and limited access to higher value markets. Improving access
to roads, water supply, and electricity will help increase rural incomes and spur overall rural
development. Promoting non-farm economic activities is an effective means to increase rural
incomes. Small towns can become economic hubs that help people transition out of agriculture and
boost the rural economy. In addition, rural finance reform should be advanced to improve access to
financial services in rural areas, and strengthened land acquisition and compensation policies will
improve land tenure security. The World Bank Group can help by:
*

*

Piloting new ways to boost rural incomes and reduce poverty under the umbrella of the
Development-Oriented Poverty Reduction for China's Rural Areas Strategy (2011-2020),
building on 20 years of collaboration between the government and the Bank in poverty
reduction.
Enhancing secondary town development by helping local governments design integrated
rural-urban development plans, financing small town infrastructure, including water supply
27

*

*

*
*
*

and sanitation, and undertaking analysis on the financial viability of small towns in light of
existing intergovernmental fiscal arrangements.
Providing analytical support to help the government strengthen land tenure security for
rural households and advance land policy reforms to reduce involuntary land transactions
and improve compensation procedures and standards and appeals mechanisms.
Promoting greater financial inclusion. The Bank, building on its experience of promoting
commercially sustainable micro and small enterprise (MSE) lending, will explore ways to
help establish a platform for microfinance knowledge sharing. IFC will continue to promote
MSE lending through investment in financial institutions and support to improve financial
infrastructure, such as credit reporting institutions and secured transactions.
Promoting "inclusive innovation" (innovation that addresses the needs of the poor) as a
tool to help increase productivity and reduce disparities.
Assisting in building capacity to implement China's rural roads program, connecting
villages to urban centers.
Catalyzing private sector investment in lagging regions through support from IFC and
MIGA.

Outcome 2.4: Improving Transport Connectivity for More Balanced Regional Development
63.
Improving inter-urban transport connectivity remains a high priority for sustainable
economic development and for reducing rural-urban and regional disparities. The growth in
freight and passenger flows, in excess of 8.6 percent per annum over the past three decades, is
expected to continue. For passengers, it is coupled with growing needs for differentiated levels of
services as demonstrated by the rapid growth in air transport, road transport, and, more recently, high
speed rail transport. For freight, it is coupled with a need to realign the transport system to support
the economic shift towards domestic consumption and services, as well as the regional rebalancing
towards western and interior provinces. Meeting mobility needs will require additional infrastructure
capacity, broadened service diversity, as well as targeted interventions to ensure vulnerable
populations are provided with suitable access. Meeting such needs sustainably will call for a strong
emphasis on transport modes with lower resource footprint like rail or river transport, as well as
effective multimodal integration and a close integration between the urban and inter-urban networks.
The rapid development of the expressway, highway, airports, and high speed rail system will create a
step change in connectivity. It will support wider economic opportunities for China's citizens, by
shortening economic distance between Chinese cities, leading to greater concentration of economic
activity, with better access to job opportunities and trading centers. These networks will also be
crucial to spreading the opportunities for and benefits from development from the richer coastal areas
of China to poorer inland regions and to giving those areas efficient access to the eastern cities and
ports and widening the pool of firms, labor, service and products within their reach. The World Bank
can help by:
*

*
*

Supporting the development and operation of sustainable and safe intercity transport
solutions meeting future mobility needs, by participating in projects connecting urban
centers, particularly in western and central provinces, with an emphasis on integration and
lower carbon options.
Demonstrating the application of intermodal integration concepts through selected
projects, leading to an optimal use of each mode.
Increasing the development impact of expressways on local communities, by
strengthening planning that ensures effective interface between expressways and the local
road network, and improving safety and asset management of the expressway system.
28

*

Piloting innovations that reduce the environmental impact of roads and expressways,
such as an environmental compliance framework for contractors and a safeguards compliance
monitoring system.
E. Cross-Cutting Theme: Advancing Mutually Beneficial Relations with the World

64.
China is playing an increasingly important role in the world economy, and is expanding
its role in international cooperation. Over the last five years, China has added US$4.6 trillion to
global nominal GDP. It is the world's largest exporter and second largest manufacturer. Moreover,
China is increasing its role and influence in international organizations and institutions. It will be the
third largest shareholder in the World Bank upon completion of the capital increase approved in
2010, and is becoming an active member and shareholder of other multilateral development
institutions, as well as an active and influential member of international and regional groupings such
as the G-20 and ASEAN+3. Although China's official aid flows to other countries are relatively
small, China is a significant source for concessional lending, export credits, and FDI to countries in
Africa, Asia, and Latin America and is becoming the most important source of financing in sectors
such as infrastructure. China started contributing to IDA in IDA15 (2007) and increased its
contribution and engagement in IDA16. Other countries increasingly look to China as a source of
knowledge and experience given its record of growth and poverty reduction.
65.
While China's growing role creates numerous opportunities and benefits, it also creates
new challenges and responsibilities. These include calls for China to assume greater responsibility
in addressing global challenges such as climate change. Some have expressed concerns about
China's exchange rate policy, capital account restrictions, and foreign exchange reserves. Consistent
with China's economic importance, the government is facilitating a gradual increase in the
international use of the RMB and taking measures to relax capital controls. In the field of
international development assistance, China is being called upon to harmonize its economic
cooperation programs and approaches with those of traditional partners, and to increase its
contributions to multilateral assistance funds and channels.
66.
Supporting China's growing global role is an increasingly important aspect of the Bank
Group's engagement and strategy, drawing from knowledge and relationships built through
lending and AAA. The Bank Group's engagement in development issues throughout China positions
the Bank Group to facilitate China's South-South cooperation and to support China as a global
stakeholder. Given that China is now a contributor to IDA, the IDA replenishment process also offers
China an opportunity to deepen its engagement in the global development policy dialogue.
Supporting China's South-South Cooperation
67.
China is increasingly engaging in South-South knowledge exchange (SSKE), both as a
key dimension of its own development cooperation policy and in response to requests from other
developing countries. Chinese ministries, specialized agencies, think tanks, and other institutions in
virtually all sectors are being called upon to provide technical assistance or training to other
developing countries. As a result, there is a growing need for Chinese institutions to effectively and
objectively document China's own experiences (both successes and failures) and to develop capacity
to share these experiences and help adapt them to the needs of other countries. The Bank Group can
help by:
*

Working together with Chinese knowledge institutions to analyze and document key
policies, programs, and institutions that are of greatest interest to other countries; and to
disseminate China's experience through SSKE.
29

*

*

*
*

Enhancing the capacity of Chinese institutions engaged in SSKE, including the
International Poverty Reduction Center and Asia Pacific Finance and Development Center;
and help Chinese researchers and academic institutions foster linkages with counterparts in
other countries.
Facilitating links between networks of Chinese practitioners and related practitioner
networks in other countries in fields such as urban planning, climate change, health,
agricultural research, environmental protection, accounting, auditing and financial reporting,
and assisting China in sharing its experience in global public goods areas such as alternative
energy and carbon finance.
Helping to ensure that China's SSKE activities involve "mutual learning."
Facilitating China's own access to international knowledge and experience, both through
project assistance and through practitioner exchange, particularly with other middle-income
countries (MICs).

68.
The Bank Group can play a role in enhancing the development impact of China's
international economic engagement and cooperation. China, like a number of other MICs, is both
a provider and recipient of aid. Moreover, Chinese firms both private and state-owned are rapidly
increasing the level and scope of their activities in other developing countries, both through trade and
outward FDI. A good deal of this engagement takes place in the context of China's economic
cooperation, involving an integrated package of aid, trade, and investment. As Chinese firms become
increasingly active in international markets, particularly in developing countries, they are beginning
to encounter challenges and difficulties in areas such as environmental and labor standards and
understanding of local business practices. The Bank Group can help by:
*

*

*

*

*

*

Sharing global experience in adopting and implementing standards for outward
investment, such as the Equator principles, through policy dialogue and AAA in the context
of IFC support for South-South investment (see Box 9 on China's Green Credit Policy)."
Through IFC and MIGA, assisting Chinese enterprises to invest sustainably in
developing countries, and to establish links with local supply chains in order to increase
opportunities for local value added and technology transfer.
Continuing exchanges on international development cooperation to facilitate China's
participation in international development partnership networks, and jointly organizing
workshops on international development cooperation.
Providing Chinese financial institutions, through IFC, the opportunity to participate in
financing projects outside China, such as China Development Bank's and China EXIM
Bank's participation in the financing of the Vodafone project in Ghana.
Exploring opportunities for project-level cooperation in third countries under various
tripartite/trilateral and multipartite frameworks1 2 and based on specific demand from
recipient countries. Bank Group instruments include Bank lending for joint or
complementary projects, and IFC/MIGA support for enterprise investments.
Developing innovative RMB-denominated trade assets financing schemes that will help
accelerate trade finance, stimulate the development of an RMB trade risk sharing market, and
mobilize South-South trade financing from Chinese banks, such as China's EXIM Bank.

" The Equator Principles, launched by private banks in June 2003 and based on IFC Performance Standards, are
voluntary standards for determining, assessing, and managing environmental and social risk in project financing.
12 China's

White Papers on Economic Cooperation with Africa (December 2010) and Foreign Aid (April 2011) both

signal the Government's interest in increasing its collaboration with multilateral institutions within the context of its
international cooperation.
30

*

Facilitating deeper Chinese engagement on IDA policies and global development
priorities through the IDA replenishment process.

Supporting China as a Global Stakeholder
69.
As China's global role increases, so does the importance of China's positions within
global economic governance institutions and China's policies influencing global public goods.
China has benefitted tremendously from globalization and from the rules and norms of institutions of
global economic governance, most notably the multilateral trading system. China has been a strong
advocate for greater voice by developing countries within institutions like the World Bank, and for
an enhanced role for the G-20. Other countries will now be looking to China to use its increased
influence in ways that promote common interests. In addition, China's policies and behavior are
important in influencing a number of global public goods, most notably climate change. Given the
size of China's population and of its economy, reducing global carbon emissions requires China's
active engagement. China's people and economy stand to benefit from positive action to preserve
global public goods. The Bank can support China in its role as a global stakeholder by:

*

Continuing to engage in dialogue on China's global economic governance role and
undertaking analytical work that helps China assess policy options for further liberalization,
such as in the services sector.

*

Undertaking analysis that encourages China to play a productive role in proposing
solutions and developing consensus on climate change and other global public goods.
The Bank will also continue to help China identify and implement initiatives to reduce
carbon emissions and to promote environmental sustainability.

Box 9: China's Green Credit Policy
Since 2007, when China launched its Green Credit Policy, IFC has advised Chinese banks on the Equator Principles
and has supported Chinese government agencies in adapting international environmental and social (E&S) standards
to China's context.
In 2008, the China Industrial Bank, an IFC investee bank, adopted the Equator Principles, becoming the first
Equator Bank in China and in emerging markets in Asia. IFC supported the Industrial Bank in this endeavor by
providing TA and training and sharing knowledge through IFC's network of Equator Principles Financial
Institutions.
IFC has also promoted international E&S standards through joint deals with China Development Bank (CDB) and
the China EXIM Bank. In May 2011, IFC facilitated participation of the CDB and China EXIM Bank in an IFC
syndication in Ghana. Similarly, in May 2011, IFC invested in the China-ASEAN Investment Cooperation Fund
(sponsored by China EXIM Bank), which applies E&S policies similar to IFC's Performance Standards.
In February 2012, the China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC) launched Green Credit Guidelines with IFC
support. These guidelines require banks to develop and implement strategies for E&S risk management and E&S
friendly investment and to reduce their own environmental footprint. They also encourage banks to adopt
international E&S standards in their overseas investment engagements.
China's experience in developing green credit policies is being shared with other countries through South-South
exchanges facilitated by IFC. Vietnam, for example, is now replicating China's experience
IFC will continue to support Chinese agencies and banks in sharing their experience and further building their
capacity to implement Equator Principles and Green Credit Guidelines, including in their overseas engagements. In
related work, the World Bank is supporting South-South exchanges with China's Ministry of Environmental
Protection on investment-related environmental assessment and social safeguard policies.

31

F. Delivering the World Bank Group Program
70.
The Bank Group will maintain a decentralized and high-capacity Beijing Country
Office. The Bank office currently comprises about 120 staff. WBI's Regional Coordinator is based in
Beijing. Since 1992, IFC has maintained an office in Beijing co-located with the Bank office. In July
2000, a joint IFC/World Bank regional office for private sector development was established in Hong
Kong SAR, China. In 2002, IFC opened an office in Chengdu, Sichuan Province, to provide advisory
and investment services primarily to SMEs in the western region of China. MIGA has established an
Asia hub office in Singapore as well as a presence in Beijing, co-located with IFC.
71.
The Bank Group will continue to work closely with national partners and, where
possible and relevant, with international partners. The Bank Group places great importance on
partnering with local agencies, research institutes, and universities. Bilateral donors have shifted their
focus mainly to global public goods and South-South cooperation, providing opportunities for
collaboration in those areas. The Bank will collaborate with UN agencies where possible, such as
with WHO on NCDs and UNICEF on early childhood development and education. Like the World
Bank, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) lends about US$1.44 billion per year to China, mainly
for infrastructure and the environment. The World Bank and ADB collaborate and exchange
information at the program level. The ADB's country partnership strategy for 2012-2015 focuses on
three pillars: inclusive growth; environmentally sustainable growth; and regional cooperation and
integration.
72.
The CPS Results Framework presents the results chain for the Bank Group's program
of support (see Annex 1). CPS outcome indicators will be monitored over the CPS period. Most
milestones are expected to be completed by the CPS Progress Report in 2014. Results during this
CPS period will come from existing operations and quicker-disbursing operations included in this
CPS; many of the new operations to be undertaken during this CPS will not be completed by the end
of the CPS (FY16).
73.
The Government of China and the Bank will meet regularly to review project
preparation and implementation and address weaknesses. For example, during their most recent
lending program discussions, MOF, NDRC, and the World Bank agreed to work together to
strengthen project monitoring and evaluation and planning of AAA. MOF also requested increased
project management training, especially procurement and financial management, and better
communication between task teams and local authorities.
74.
Trust funds are fully integrated in the CPS and will be managed accordingly. Trust
fund-financed activities are implemented in accordance with the same fiduciary requirements as
IBRD-financed operations; and analytical work and policy notes funded by trust funds undergo the
same rigorous review as Bank budget-funded analytical work.
75.
Continued strong support will be provided to ensure compliance with Bank fiduciary
and safeguard policies. This will be challenging given the large geographic span of the portfolio and
given that many new projects are being implemented in secondary and smaller cities unfamiliar with
World Bank procedures. The Bank's procurement team will continue to provide procurement training
to project management office (PMO) staff, implementing agencies, and tendering companies. The
Bank's financial management team will continue to conduct training for counterparts, including
PMOs, auditors, and finance bureaus.
76.
The Bank will also continue to support greater use of country systems. The World Bank
and the ADB are working together to help harmonize procurement legislation and prepare model
32

bidding documents. Financial management is already harmonized with some of the government's
own systems: project financial management is undertaken in accordance with Circular 13 issued by
the Ministry of Finance for all donor funds; and the China National Audit Office (CNAO) Foreign
Funds Application Audit Department conducts audits of projects. CNAO is also increasing its focus
on performance audits and assessment of sustainable development. The results of the project
financial and performance audits are now made available to the public. Additionally, the Bank is
facilitating South-South cooperation in accounting, auditing, and financial reporting to benefit other
countries in the region.
77.
The Bank Group will further strengthen gender's integration into its work, building on
good practices and lessons learned from the previous CPS period (see para. 33(v) and Box 5). During
project preparation, the Bank's social development team will review project design to analyze
opportunities to mainstream good practices. Particular attention will be paid to ensuring that
operations in the areas where the Bank will be most strongly engaged environment, energy,
transport, and urban development-are gender informed. 13 A China Country Gender Action Plan will
be updated every two years to assess the gender dimensions of the portfolio and make
recommendations. In addition to gender mainstreaming, participatory design elements and use of
enhanced complaints handling mechanisms will be considered and discussed with government
counterparts. IFC will continue to deepen its work on gender in both its investment and advisory
work, with a focus on supporting women-owned businesses and facilitating better targeting of
women clients in the banking sector.
78.
The Bank Group will prepare a CPS Progress Report in 2014, or earlier if needed, to
evaluate progress toward CPS outcomes and adjust the strategy and program.

" An operation is defined as "gender informed" if: (i) The project documents explicitly refer to analysis and/or
consultation on gender related issues, and/or; (ii) The project include action(s) that is expected to narrow gender
disparities, including through specific actions to address the distinct needs of women/girl (men/boys) and/or to have
positive impact(s) on gender equality, and/or; (iii) the project documents explicitly refer to mechanisms for
monitoring and evaluatinggender impacts, and facilitate gender disaggregated analysis.

33

IV. MANAGING RISKS

79.
Risks to the Bank Group's development effectiveness in China are moderate given
China's good capacity, strong ownership of the Bank Group program, and track record of high
performance.
80.
As any open economy, China faces risk related to the global economy, which is likely to
remain uncertain and volatile for some time. Unlike many counties, however, China's fiscal and
debt position allows it the space to respond with stimulus measures that could substitute domestic
demand for external demand. There is a risk that stimulus measures would postpone tackling, or even
exacerbate, long-term structural weaknesses that will affect growth down the line. Short-term
stimulus measures should be designed to support medium- and long-term structural reforms by
increasing expenditures for health, education, pensions, and the environment and decreasing them for
infrastructure and enterprises. In the medium-term, policies to rebalance growth from investment and
exports towards consumption will enable the economy to better withstand external demand shocks.
81.
Domestic economic policy risks need to be managed. The uncertain trajectory of the
ongoing (and necessary) adjustment in China's property sector constitutes a significant near-term risk
given the sector's importance for the overall economy. Risks associated with the recent extensive offbudget borrowing by China's local governments could also spill over into fiscal and financial
pressures, and need to be managed. However, public debt sustainability is not a major issue of
concern, because total debt stocks remain well below those in many other countries and the economy
continues to grow relatively rapidly. Also, the authorities have launched a "local financing platform"
audit system to increase transparency and control of fiscal debt.
82.
Several trends may increase social tensions, which, if unresolved, present risks to
growth and stability. One source is China's relatively wide economic and social disparities,
exacerbated by barriers to labor mobility and policies that favor enterprise profits and implicitly tax
household incomes. Social risks are also expected to grow as the rising ranks of the middle class and
higher education levels increase the demand for better social governance and greater opportunities
for participation in public policy debate and implementation. This can already be seen in the
increasing public discussion about the quality of growth. The government is taking measures to
address income disparities and shift the focus from quantity to quality of growth.
83.
Vested interests could thwart the efforts of China's government in implementing
structural reforms. Unlike in 1978, significant vested interests have accumulated behind the
industry-led, export-oriented, energy- and resource-intensive pattern of production. Not only do they
impose costs on downstream production, they have also become lobbies opposing reforms.
84.
At the project level, risks are moderate, but more attention to capacity building will be
needed. The shift to central and western provinces and smaller cities means that counterparts will be
less experienced and may require more support during preparation and implementation.
85.
The CPS is also subject to Bank-related risks. Going forward, the Bank may need to be
even quicker to adjust to the fast pace and scope of China's development and needs. The main risk to
the Bank Group's development effectiveness is its own ability to nimbly deliver innovation and
cutting-edge knowledge.

34

ANNEXES

Annex 1: China Countr Partnership Strate

Results Matrix

China CPS Results Matrix

Indicators

Milestones

Bank Group Interventions (indicative)

STRATEGIC THEME 1. SUPPORTING GREENER GROWTH
1.1 SHIFTING TO A SUSTAINABLE ENERGY PATH

1.1.1blannua
Assoiateenergyngsaving

fromEfiinc
- Policies promoting smoother grid integration developed by mid 2014

1.1.1 Associated annual energy savings from
energy efficiency investments (million tons of
coal equivalent)
Baseline: 2.22 (2011)

-

Renewable energy quota system established by mid 2014
Distributed generation piloted by mid 2014

Target: 8.94 (2015)

1.1.2 GHG emissions expected to be avoided
(metric tons/year)
Baseline: 0
Target: 20 million (lFCQ

E)iacig12
Shandong EE, Urumqi District Heating,
Shanxi Coal Bed
Methane Development, Liaoning Medium Cities Infra. III
GEF: Heat Reform & Bldg EE, Sino-Singapore Tianjin
Eco-City, Provincial EE, EE Promotion in Ind, Thermal

Energy Efficiency (EE)
- Innovative pilots for promoting adoption of energy efficiency in at
least three provinces promoted by 2015
- Energy savings verification system developed by 2015
- EE standards and guidelines for green field investments developed by
mid 2014

Power Efficiency, EE Financing (EE Phase Ill with Exim
Bank), Technology Needs Assessment, Green Freight
Demonstration CF: Xiaogushan Hydropower, Nanjing
Steel Factory Gas Recovery, Inner Mongolia Huitengxile
Wind Farm, Hubei Guangrun Hydropower, Shandong
Manure Biogas, Baotou Iron & Steel EE Proj, Yingkou

- 6 Fis and 3 Hangzhou banks have stronger capacities to offer EE/RE
products by 2015 (WB/FC)

Economic Dev Zone Heating, Dashiqiao Central Heating
IFC: China Wind Power, Zhongda Hydro, Yanjin, CHUEE

-

Green Building Codes for commercial and residential buildings
developed by 2015 (IFC)

Low Carbon Cities
- Innovative pilots for promoting renewable and cleaner energy and
energy efficiency including in Shanghai and Tianjin launched by 2013

SME B1,Nature Elements Renewable Energy and Clean
Tech Fund; C&G Environmental Protection Holdings;
CHUEE 1 B1,CHUEE SME B1,CHUEE I BOB, CHUEE 11
SPDB, CHUEE 11 B1, Sunpreme Silicon; Microvast,
Shuoren, CHUEE SME BRCB
Pipeline: IBRD: Beijing EE and Emission Reduction

New Technologies
- Gas utilization applications demonstrated by 2015
- Schemes to promote access to clean household energy developed by

(FY15), Hebe New Energy Development in Rural Areas

2015

- Knowledge on feasibility of CCS deployment gained bd,
-

Demon (FY13), Shandong RE (FY13), Shanghai Building
EE and Low Carbon District (FY13), Concentrated Solar
Power (FY14), Shanxi Coal-bed Methane Utilization
(FY15) GEF: China RE Scale up

Urban Scale Building

EE and RE, Green Energy Schemes for Low-Carbon City

Technology needs assessment completed

in Shanghai,IFC IS : CHUEE SME SPDB, Sino Green Fund,
EAP ALOE Ill Fund
AAA: Carbon Capture & Sequestration, Tech Economic Evaluation of Incentives for Wind, Green
Energy Schemes for Low Carbon City in Shanghai, Smart

Grid Development, EE in Public Institutions, Provincial
Dnemgyonservation Practitioner's Forum, Defining and

35

Chn

CPS

Reut

Matrix

Measuring Low Carbon Cities, Clean Stove Initiative;

Heat Regulation Phase II; Electricity Regulation to
Integrate Climate Change Considerations; Issues and
Options in Monitoring, Verification and Reporting in
Energy Efficiency; IFC: CHUEE I IB AS, CHUEE SME lB
AS, CHUEE I BOB AS, CHUEE II SPDB AS, CHUEE II IB AS,

Performance Standards for the Banking Sector

1.2.1 People with access to improved water

Water supply

On-going: IBRD: Liuzhou Environment Management II,

supply in more than 50 targeted small towns

- Increased water production capacity, rehabilitation and expansion of

Nanning Urban Environment,

and cities:
Baseline: 2.6 million (2011) Target: 6.8
million (2015) (WB)
Baseline: 4.6 million (2010)
Target 5.0
million (2014) (IFC)

distribution networks in 38 Henan and 68 Jiangsu towns by 2014
- Bengbu Municipality (population 3.5 million) has increased water
reliability (90 days of emergency water supply) by mid 2014
- 3 banks improve lending process for water efficiency and water
quality improvement projects and lend $100 million by mid 2014 (IFC)

Development,
Bengbu
Integrated
Environment
Improvement, Chongqing Small Cities, Chongqing
Urban-Rural
Integration,
Guangdong/PRD
Urban
Environment 1+ 2, Yunnan Urban Environment, Han
River Urban Environment, Henan Towns Water, Hunan

- 20 industrial facilities or 3 industrial zones reduce 20% of water
consumption, or increase the alternatives of fresh water by 20%, or
decrease 20% of total pollutants from wastewater discharge by mid
2014 (IFC)

Urban Development, Jiangsu Water and Wastewater
Project, Liaoning Med Cities Infrastructure 1+2+3,
Shandong Environment 2, Shanghai Urban APL 2+3,
Tianjin Urban Development 2, Sichuan Urban

- Increased water supply capacities by 25 million m3 per year (IFC)

Development,
Fuzhou Nantai Island Peri-Urban
Development, Xining Flood and Watershed Mgmt,

1.2.2 Targeted towns and cities with at least

Wastewater collection, disposal and treatment

Wenchuan

70%

- Five new wastewater treatment plants in seven second-tier cities in

Cultural and Natural Heritage, Gansu Cultural & Natural

Heritage, Shandong Confucius & Mencius Culture,
Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure Improvement
IFC: Epure BOT/Sound Global Ltd; Asia Environment

1.2.3 People with access to improved
wastewater management services (number)

Hubei by 2014
- Wastewater treatment plan with installed capacity of 100,000 m3 day
in Tianjin meeting class 1B discharge standards by mid 2014
- 200,000 m3/day additional WWTP capacity in four cities in Liaoning by
mid 2014

Baseline: 586,000 (2011) Target: 2.2 million
(2015)

- 240,000 m3/day additional WWTP capacity in Jiangnan WWTP in
Nanning by 2015

Recycling Demonstration (FY13), Jiangxi Small Towns
Infrastructure Development Demonstration
(FY13),
Shaanxi Yan'an Water Supply (FY13), Liaoning Coastal

1.2.4 Solid waste collected and transferred to

Solid waste collection and disposal

Economic Belt Infrastructure and Environment (FY13),

sanitary landfills in eight targeted cities (%)
Baseline: 0% Target: 80% (2015)

- Land fill capacity constructed : Liaoning 2,170 tons/day by 2012;
Yunnan 470 tons/day by mid 2014

Guangxi Laibin Water and Environment Management
(FY14) Chongqing Small Towns Water Resources

- 446 mu dump sites closed (Hubei seven cities)
- New program piloting household-based waste source separation

Integrated Management (FY15) Shaanxi Small Towns
Infrastructure (FY15) Qinghai Xining Integrated

of

municipal

wastewater

treated

annually
Baseline: 0 Target: 25 (2015)

launched in Ningbo by 2015
Earthquake restoration in Sichuan and Gansu
- Reconstruction and appropriate expansion of infrastructure services in
16 counties in Sichuan and 7 counties in Gansu with 100% of facilities

36

Earthquake

Sichuan Small Towns

Recovery Project, Guizhou

Pipeline: IBRD: Ningbo Domestic Waste Collection &

Environment Management (FY15), Guilin Integrated
Environment Management (FY15) IFC: United Water,
Aqualyng, CHUEE Water, CEI Water
AAA: IFC AS on Water efficiency finance; CHUEE Water

Chn

CPS

Reut

MatrixS

built to applicable government standards for flood and seismic
hazards

1.3.1 Demonstration corridors successfully
meeting public transport ridership, peak hour
travel time and road safety targets
Baseline: 0
Target: 26 corridors in 22 cities (2015)

Public Transport
- National sustainable urban transport framework and associated
technical guidelines developed and issued by mid 2014 (GEF)
- 30 cities use updated technical guidelines in designing 5 year master
plan updates by 2015 (GEF)
- Improved service on thirteen demonstration bus routes in Xian and
five high demand demonstration corridors in Wuhan by 2014
- Bus terminals, bus depots and stops, maintenance facilities
constructed in four cities in Anhui by 2015
- Demonstration bus priority scheme developed and bus infrastructure
constructed in Taiyuan by 2014

On-going: IBRD: Wuhan Second Urban Transport, Xi'an
Sustainable Urban Transport, Anhui Medium Cities
Urban Transport, Liaoning Medium Cities Guiyang
Transport, Kunming Urban Rail, Taiyuan Urban
Transport,
Fuzhou
Nantai
Island
Peri-Urban
DevelopmentSecond Tianjin Urban Development and
Environment, Sichuan Small Towns Development, Hubei
Xiangyang
Urban
Transport,
Shanxi Changzhi
Sustainable Urban Transport, Xinjiang Yining Urban
Transport GEF: Urban Transport Partnership, City
Cluster Eco-Transport, Green Freight Demonstration

Urban Transport Efficiency
- Road improvements on major urban traffic routes (>100 kms) in six
cities in Liaoning, four cities in Anhui, Xian, Wuhan and Taiyuan by mid
2014
- Roads constructed (36.6 km) and rehabilitated (7.6 km) in 6 small
Model Development Towns demonstrating sustainable infrastructure
service provision in Sichuan by 2014
- Creation of a Ming Walled City bicycle route in Xian by mid 2014

Pipeline: IBRD: Zhengzhou Urban Rail (FY14), Yunnan
Honghe Prefecture Urban Transport (FY14), Qinghai
Xining Urban Transport (FY14), Jiangxi NanChang Urban
Rail (FY14), , Jiaozuo Safe and Green Transport
Development in Transforming Economy (FY15) GEF:
Large-City Congestion and Carbon Reduction

Urban Transport Safety
- Road safety measures implemented on targeted corridors in Wuhan
by mid 2014
- Traffic management measures including Area Traffic control system
and road safety program implemented in Xi'an
- Traffic safety and management program implemented on main
transport corridors in Taiyuan city by 2014

1.4.1 Households and farms adopting targeted
innovative sustainable practices (number)
Baseline: 0 (2011)
Target: 450,000 (2015)

AS

Agriculture Technology
- Pilot the establishment of 30,000 biogas digesters leading to an
estimated annual reduction in C02 emissions of 60,000 tons (EFP)
- 30,000 farm technician training days in proved livestock production
and waste management methods by mid 2014 (HELP)
- Effective livestock waste management technologies demonstrated on
large and medium scale farms in Shanghai rural areas by 2014

37

AAA: China Urban Transport Knowledge Management
Platform TA Program (FY12-14); Rail Financial Futures
Analysis; Support Chinese Participation in 2011 WBSingapore Infrastructure Finance Summit; Transport
System Safety; Low-carbon Eco-city Financing Models
and Low-carbon Industry Development; Urban
Transport Programmatic Knowledge Management
Platform;

Ongoing: IBRD: Eco-Farming, Henan Ecological
Livestock, Jilin Food Safety, Xinjiang Turpan Water
Conservation, Changjiang/Pearl River Watershed
Rehabilitation, Sichuan Wudu Irrigation GEF: Shanghai
Agricultural and Non-point Pollution Reduction,
Mainstreaming Climate Change Adaptation in
Agriculture, Huai River Basin Marine Pollution

1.4.2
io

v

sta

AreS

prcie
en
Ihv
demaosae (ha)ou
1.4.2 Area where innovative sustainable
practices have been demonstrated (ha)

where
-

Use of organic fertilizer and scientific application of agricultural
chemicals demonstrated in Shanghai rural areas by 2014

Reduction, Liaoningnereton
Bohai Sea Pollution,
idiaie Shandong
Environment 11CF: Shandong Poultry Manure Biogas,
Hubei eco-farming biogas, IFC: Deqingyuan Egg;

Baseline: 0 (2011)

Irrigation

Muyuan Pig, North Andre Juice, JY Organic, Hwagain,

Target: 100,000 ha (2015)

- 24 kms of irrigation canals rehabilitated in the Turpan Basin (XTWCP)
and area with improved irrigation technologies increase in target

Xiwang Sugar, Jiuda Salt, Koyo Fertilizer

areas from 0 to 8,000 ha by mid 2014 (CPRWRP)

- 12 Farmer Drainage and Irrigation Associations functioning as per
requirements by 2013 and appropriate incentives for water saving

technologies and behaviors piloted (HRBFMR)
- Female membership for Water User's Associations and Producer

Pipeline:

IBRD:

Integrated

Modern

Agriculture

Development (FY13), Guangdong Non-Point Pollution
Control

(-FY14),

GEF:

Climate

Smart

Agriculture,

Guangdong Non-Point Pollution Control CF: Hebei
large-farm biogas program, Shandong Household biogas

Pig rss
in 2012 to
program
IFC: Northts
Nature Andreag
Forestry, Muyuan
China
~ 12 ~th ~eruitofidutiuice,
~~ Groups
~ ~ in targeted
~ ~ areas
~ in~Sichuan
~ yWudu
~ 0,n~increases
~teefOrganic,-ffcen
~from
~ 0 ~~~~Mya
o
atrusdinaHwagain,riato
Pig,
JYddclns
2014
Forest ~~~~~~~40 by mid frstadig60
ilin riiuda
3
~~iwn
Sugar,
Salt Koyo Fertilizerftndn

Food Safety
- 30 technical standards for safe agricultural practice developed and
adapted to local conditions in Jilin by mid 2014 (JFSP)

o0.3

AAA: Mainstreaming Water User Associations (IDF),
Economics of Adaptation to Climate Change in Water
and Agriculture Sectors; Food Safety Engagement; Risk
Assessment of China's Agriculture Product Quality and

Safety;

Ecosystem Management and Restoration

1.5.1 Targeted forest and range-land area
rehabilitated and restored through successful
demonstration
of
sustainable
forest
management models (ha)

IBRD:

Guangxi

Integrated

Forestry

Mixed forest structures built with at least three tree species in IFDP

Dvlpment, Integrated Forestry DvIpment, Shandong

-

project sites by 2013 and 38 different types of local tree and shrubs
species in the Shandong project area by mid 2014 (SEAFP)
27 different planting models introduced in five provinces to establish

Ecological
Afforestation,
Changjiang/Pear
River
Watershed Rehab, Sustainable Development in Poor
Rural Areas, Guangxi Watershed Mngment, Xinjiang

new multi-function forest plantations by mid 2014 (IFD)

Turpan Water Conservation, Huai River Basin Flood

8 different afforestation models for degraded mountainous area
introduced in Shandong province by mid 2014 (SEAP)
Guangxi provincial forest strategy formulated by 2012 (GIFD)
Technical and methodological approaches related to credible carbon

Mgmnt, Xining
Flood
and Watershed
Mgmt,
Bayannaoer Water
Reclamation & Environment,
Changjiang/Pearl River Watershed Rehab Zhejiang
Qiantang River Basin Small T, Jiangxi Shihutang

sequestration piloted in Guangxi by mid 2014
Shelter Belt Plantation contracts in place to protect farmland and
infrastructure in Ningxia by mid 2014 (NDCP)
Management Effectiveness Score in Lake Aibi National Wetland
Reserve increased by 10% and in five targeted nature reserves in
Guangxi from score 43 (2006) to 70 by mid 2014

Navigation
and
Hydropower,
Hunan
Urban
Development, Ningxia Desertification Control, Second
Water Conservation GEF: Sustainable Management and
Biodiversity Cons. Lake Aibi Basin, Guangxi Integrated
Forestry Dev and Conservation CF: Reforestation on
Degraded Land in Guangxi, Facilitating Reforestation

Baseline: 0 (2011)
Target: 400,p000 ha (2015)

On-going:

-

-

-

-

IFC: Hwagain Paper, Nature flooring

1.5.2 Targeted watershed area treated to
reduce soil erosion
Baseline (2010): 0 Target (2015): 1,800 kM

Water Resources Management
Waterways strengthened for improved flood protection and reduced
soil erosion (85 km - Xining area; 61.4 km - Xiang River; 757 kms -Huai
S River basin) by 2014

38

Pipeline: IBRD: Hunan Forest Restoration and
Development (FY13), Shaanxi Yan'an Water Supply
(FY13), Jiangxi Jingdezhen Wuxikou Integrated Water

Chn

1.5.3

Groundwater

overdraft reduced

in

Turpan basin (million in3 )
Baseline: 0 (2011)Target:3.75 (2015)

CPS

Reut

Matrix

- Three dams constructed in Turpan Basin (17 out of 29 contracts

Scheme (FY14), Anhui Ma'anshan Cihu River Basin

completed by mid 2014) (XTWCP)
- 4389 Ha of crop fields protected against 10 year flood in the Jiangxi

Environment (FY13),
Guangxi Laibin Water &
Environment Management (FY14), Huainan Coal Mining

Gan river area by mid 2014

Subsidence Area Rehabilitation (FY15), Chongqing Small
Towns Water Resources Integrated Management (FY15)

1.5.4 People protected from flooding (number)
Baseline: 0 (2011) Target: 10 million (2015)

GEF: Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conservation in
Northeast China IFC: Nature Flooring II, Stora Enso II
AAA:

NE

Forest

Reform,

Land

policy

dialogue,

Transboundary rivers; Trial Conservation of Cultural
Heritage Assets in Shandong Province; State Forest

Reform;

Air / Water

On-going: IBRD: Shandong Flue Gas Desulfurization,

1.6.1 Successful demonstration of clean
up/pollution
reduction
measures
(e.g.

- Action plans for addressing air pollution issues completed for at least
4 of the most polluted cities by mid 2014

Bayannaoer Water
Improvement Xian

adoption of BAT in municipal incinerators and

- Motor Vehicle Emission Control Plan for Xian by mid 2014 (XUTP)

Urumqi District Heating, Liaoning Third Medium Cities

- Demonstration of wetland for pollution reduction (66.5 ha) in
pulpandpapr mlls)Shagha rual aeasby 014CF:
Shanghai rural areas by 2014

HFC-23

Reclamation & Environment
Sustainable Urban Transport,

Destruction

co-purchase,

GEF:

PCB

Management & Disposal, Dioxins Reduction from the

Baseline: 0 Target: 7(2015)

Pulp and Paper Industry, Shanghai Agricultural and
POPs
- All temporary PCB storage sites in Zhejiang identified, the low

Non-point
pollution
reduction,
Green
Freight
Demonstration, MP: ODS IV Phaseout, IFC: Universtar

contaminated waste cleaned up and the highly contaminated waste
disposed of by mid 2014 (PCB management project)

- Best available techniques (BAT)/best environmental practices adopted
in three selected municipal solid waste incinerators (GEF MSWP) and
in four selected non-wood pulp mills by 2015 (GEF Pulp)

Pipeline:

IBRD: Ningbo Domestic Waste Collection &

Recycling Demonstration (FY13), Guangdong Non-point
Source Agricultural Pollution Clean-up (FY14), Huainan
Coal Mining Subsidence Area Rehabilitation (FY15) GEF:
Municipal Solid Waste POPs, POPs Contaminated Sites
MP: HCFC Phaseout Project

ODS

- Completion of the ODS phaseout plan for the pharmaceutical aerosol
sector by mid 2014
- Demonstration projects to phase out HCFCs completed by mid 2014
- Production and consumption of HCFCs in the PU Foam Sector freeze at
the baseline level by 2013 as per the Montreal Protocol

39

AAA: Brownfields/Land remediation, Air Quality Action
Planning, Non-Point Source Water Pollution

1.7.1 Assessments of key technologies in
identified mitigation and adaptation sectors
completed
Baseline: 0 Target: 20 (2015)

- Overview of climate technologies in the selected sectors/provinces
and identification of a shortlist of key climate technologies for ten
sectors/provinces by 2014
- New concepts for market instruments, both for domestic schemes and
new international off-setting mechanisms piloted in 6 schemes by
2013

On-going : IBRD: Sustainable Development in Poor
Rural Areas, Carbon Asset Development Fund
Pipeline: GEF: Climate Technology Needs Assessment,
Monitoring, Verification and Reporting in Energy
Efficiency

- Improved knowledge on the costs and benefits of early adaptation to
climate change

AAA: Partnership for Market Readiness, China's CDM

- New methodology for Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC)
technology developed and approved by the Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM) Executive Board and one investor-ready

Experience and Lessons Learned

programmatic program completed

- Pilot indicators for sustainable land management, climate change
vulnerability and adaptation formulated for consideration in national
poverty monitoring by 2013 (SDPRAP)
- 40% of pilot villages in Henan, Shaanxi and Chongqing have

successfully completed village assessments and resource mapping and
identified adaptation needs by 2013 (SDPRAP)

STRATEGIC THEME 2. PROMOTING MORE INCLUSIVE DEVELOPMENT
2.1 INCREASING ACCESS TO Q1IAILITY
VH-EAL TI- SERVICES AND SCIrAL DDOTECTION DROGRAIMSI

2.1.1 Additional population with access to
primary health care services at community
level in targeted service areas
Baseline:0 (2010) Target: 280,000(2015)
2.1.2 Inpatients in project hospitals referred to

upper level hospitals, disaggregated by gender
Baseline: 8% Target: 6% (2016)

2.1.3 Public Health System scorecard rating
for targeted counties
Baseline: 61.78 (2008)

- At least 50% of targeted counties implementing the healthy village
standards by mid 2014 (RHP)
- At least 8 counties have implemented the successful models on
comprehensive county hospital reform by mid 2014 (RHP)
- At least half of project hospitals have standard cost accounting system

On-going: IBRD: Rural Health, Chongqing Urban-Rural
Integration, Chongqing Rural-Urban Integration II
(county health services) TF: Avian Influenza IFC: Aier
Medical, BUFH, Chindex, Healthway, Wanjie Hospital,
Fosun Pharma lntnl, Weigao, BioChina, Q&M, APMG

producing quarterly departmental unit cost data by 2016 (CURIP II)

- 320 standardized community-level health care facilities put into
operation in targeted service areas in Chongqing by mid 2014 (CURIP)

- Provincial approval by Guangdong of MIS architecture and technical
specifications by 2014

Target: >80 (2013)

Pipeline: IBRD: Guangdong Urban-Rural Social Security
Integration and Migrant Workers' Training (FY13) IFC:

Asia Pacific Medical Group (APMG)

AAA: Health Programmatic AAA; Social Protection and

Labor Market Programmatic MAA; HMIS IDF; Demand
Analysis of Old Age Health Services in Both Demand and
Supply Sides; Developing and Improving China's

2.1.4 Share of prefectures in Guangdong
exchanging social insurance beneficiary data
through integrated provincial MIS
Baseline: 0% (2013) Target: 60% (2016)

Pension System; Early Child Development; Health and
Medicine System Reform; Improving China's Social
Assistance System;

40

2.2.1 Graduates who pass skill certification

-

Strengthened linkages between targeted institutes and industry

On-going:

through advisory boards, partnerships and contract arrangements by

Education and Training, Rural Migrant Skills Dev. and

2015
Curricula and training materials in targeted training institutions in
Chongqing, Liaoning, Shandong, Guangdong and Yunnan upgraded to

Employment, Chongqing Urban-Rural
Integration,
Liaoning and Shandong Technical and Vocational
Education, Sustainable Development in Poor Rural

-

increase the quality and relevance by 2015
More than 50% of students in targeted institutions in Guangdong,

Areas, Yunnan Technical and Vocational Education and
Training IFC: Ambow Education Holding Ltd

-

Shandong, Liaoning, Yunnan enrolled in modular, competency-based
curriculum by 2015
At least 60% of students in targeted institutions in Guangdong,

Pipeline: IBRD: Guangdong Urban-Rural Social Security
Integration and Migrant Workers' Training (FY13),

58% (2010)

Shandong, Liaoning, Yunnan assessed with outcomes-based systems

Industry based Poverty Alleviation (FY15), Economic

Target: LN: 82%; SD:88.2%; GD: 56%; YN: 75%
(2015)

by 2015
Migrant Worker Service Centers established in Chongqing by mid
2014 (SDPRAP)

Reform Promotion and Capacity Strengthening (FY15)

exams in targeted institutions (%)
Baseline: LN: 90%; SD:93.5%; GD: 70%; YN:
84% (2010)
Target: LN: 96%; SD:98%; GD: 85%; YN: 93%

-

(2015)
2.2.2 Graduates finding initial employment
within 6 months of graduation (%)
Baseline: LN:72%; SD 73.4%; GD: 34%; YN:

-

IBRD:

Guangdong Tech

& Vocational

2.2.3 Migrant trainees successfully completing
targeted vocational training programs in

AAA: Programmatic Skills TVET AAA, Korean TF, Social
Protection and Labor Market Programmatic AAA; Skills
Development in Four Economic Sectors in Yunnan

project schools (%)

Province

Baseline: 84% (2011) Target: 96% (2014)

2.3.1 People with access to safe water supply
and sanitation in targeted rural areas

Rural Water and Sanitation
- 100 villages in Ningbo with wastewater treatment infrastructure by

Baseline: 40,392 Anhui, Chongqing, Guangxi

mid 2014 (NNCDP)

On-going:
IBRD:
Ningbo
New
Development, Chongqing Urban-Rural
Sustainable

Development in Poor

Countryside
Integration,

Rural Areas,

W.

(2011); 378,000 (Shaanxi, Sichuan) (2011)

- 80% of people in targeted communities and schools have adopted

Region Rural Water & Sanitation, Fujian Highway Sector

Target: (i) Anhui, Chongqing, Guangxi 150,000 (2014), (ii) Shaanxi - 326,716 (2012),
Sichuan - 258,000 (2012)

safe hygiene and sanitation behaviors by mid 2014 (RRWSP)
- All financed water supply schemes operating sustainably after one
year

Investment, Guiyang Transport, Ningxia Highway
project, Integrated Rural Economic Development of
Demonstration Towns and Counties, IFC : Xiwang Sugar;

North Andre Juice, Epure BOT Il--Water, CEF IV--FM,

2.3.2 People in targeted rural areas with
access to an all season road

Rural Transport

Nature

- Rehabilitation of about 5000 km of rural roads under Fujian's Rural
Roads Improvement Program by 2015
- 500 kms of new village roads or paths connecting households to

Earthquake restoration; Fullerton Credit, Beichuan VTB,
CHUEE SME B, CHUEE SME SPDB, ZhongAn Credit,
Shenzen VTB., MC China, CFPA MFI,

Baseline: 950,000 (Ningxia, Fujian, Guiyang)

(2010)
Target: (i) Ningxia - 240,000 (ii) Fujian
1,250,000 (iii) Guiyang 110,000 (2015)

-

-

each other in AnhuD,Chongqing, Guangxi by 2014 (EFP)
241 villages connected by project roads and 348 villages serviced by
project rural bus stations in Guiyang
9 local roads (about 100 ki) in the poorest counties in Ningxia
improved by mid 2014

Financial Inclusion (IFC)
-

Micro Finance Clients (IFC)

Baseline: 0

Target: 7 million (2016)

Fund

in

frontier,

CGCCD-

village roads and 315 km of village roads connecting natural villages to

-

2.3.3 Increase access to financial services for

Elements-CC

-

Pipeline: IBRD: Guiyang Rural Road (FY14), Anhu,
Yellow Mountain New Countryside Demonstration
Project (FY14), Anhui Xuancheng Infrastructure for
Industrial Relocation from Coastal Area (FY14), Zhejiang
Rural Area Wastewater Management (FY15), Industry
based Poverty Alleviation (FY15), Economic Reform
Promotion and Capacity Strengthening (FY15), Guizhou

PRGC is developed into a competitive rural guarantee company

Rural Development (FY15) IFC: Chifeng MFR, Renzhou

serving micro, small, and rural clients by 2014

VTB,

Successfully transformed CFPA into a professionally managed

Guarantee; Xinjiang MCC

41

Harbin Bank VTB, CYCCB,

CGCCD

Rsf;

Puhui

microfinance institution by 2014

AAA: Improving Public Expenditure in Rural China (IDF),

- A full range of financial services developed for small and micro
enterprises in rural areas for client MFIs by 2014
Poverty Alleviation Approaches

2.3.4 People benefitting from improved access
to services and income generating activities by
2015
Baseline: 0

-

Target: 715,298 people in 25

More innovative ways of providing poverty reduction assistance to
the poorest communities and households in Henan, Shaanxi and
Chongqing piloted through CDD and participatory approaches (with

Sustainable Financing Mechanism for Small Town
Infrastructure Development, The Mortgage of the Right
to Contract for Management in Rural Areas, Housing
Policies, Urban Planning and Integration in China;

Inclusive Finance Academy in China (IFA); Innovation
Model of Affordable Housing Investment and Financing;
Promoting Inclusive Innovation in China; Financial
protection and Financial Literacy in China;

60%Consumer

counties in Henan, Chongqing and Shaanxi

770paa

t

vil

cmltn mutyea

development plans by mid 2014) (SDPRAP)IFC:
-

Sub-national Public Finance and Debt Management;

Harbin Bank VTB AS, Network China Foundation for

Women participating in village committees in targeted areas increase

Poverty

from 0P%in 2011 to 25% by mid 2014 (SDPRAP)

Beichuan VTB AS, Renzhou VTB AS Accion AS Binhai

Alleviation

Microfinance

Transformation,

Rural Commercial Bank (BRCB) , Sichuan CCB, CHUEE
AS.

2.4.1 Reduction in transit times on railway

Railways

On-going:

sections connecting less developed regions

-

355 km high-speed passenger rail line between Shijiazhuang (Hebei)

Guangzhou Railway, ShiZheng Railway ,Jilin-Hunchun

and Zhengzhou (Henan) completed by 2015
254 km Liupanshui-Zhanyi section of the Guiyang-Kunming railway
line upgraded to increase capacity and reduce travel times by 2012
400 km high-speed passenger and freight line between Sanyanqiao Litang West completed by 2014
75% of civil works on new shorter and more direct railway line linking

Railway, NanGuang Railway, Anhui Highway Rehab &
Improvement, Hubei Yiba Highway, Fujian Highway
Sector Investment, Ningxia Highway, Anhui Shaying
River Channel Improvement, Jiangxi Shihutang Navi &
Hydropower, Zhangjiakou-Hohhot High Speed Railway
GEF: Guangdong Green Freight Demonstration IFC:

(iv) Guizhou - Yunnan: 47% (105 min)

northwestern China (Guiyang) with the Pearl River Delta completed

Minsheng

(2012)
(v) Shijiazhuang -Zhengzhou:
min) (2013)

by mid 2014
40% of civil works on new 360 km passenger-dedicated rail line
between Tumen and Jilin completed by mid 2014

with more developed (%, min)
(i) Tumen -Jilin: 68% (315 min) (2015)
(ii) Sanyanqiao - Litang West: 72% (450
min)(2015)
(iii) Guiyang - Guangzhou: 78% (1170 min)
(2016)

61% (120

-

-

2.4.2 Increase in railway capacity (train

Waterways

pairs/day)

-

(i) Tumen -Jilin: 162% (2015)
(ii) Sanyanqiao - Litang West: 185%

(2015)

-

(iii) Guiyang - Guangzhou: 400% (2016)

(iv) Guizhou

-

Pipeline:
IBRD: Harbin-Jiamusi Railway (FY13),
Yinchuan-Xi'an Railway (FY14), Fujian Meizhou Bay
Waterways (FY13), Jiangxi Shangrao Sanqingshan
Airport Development (FY13), Fujian Fishing Ports

Demonstration Project (FY14), Yunnan Highway Assets

Nanchang- Ganzhou corridor increase from 27% in 2007 to 95% by
mid 2014

Management
(FY15),
Henan
JiaoZuo
Green
Transportation and Road Safety Improvement (FY15),

205.6 kms of Class IV channel are upgraded along Anhui Shaying

Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Infrastructure (FY15),

River by 2015

Hubei

Xiaogan

Logistic

Infrastructure

(FY15),

Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation
System (FY15)

Roads

-

waterways
(i) Gan River

Green Freight Technology Rebates and Performance Based Incentive
schemes to improve energy and economic efficiency of fleet in
Guangdong demonstrated by mid 2014

Baseline: 85 million ton (2007)

-

Expressway connecting the two major industrial areas that are the

Target: 131.6 million ton (2013)
(ii) Shaying river (passing Yingshang Lock)

-

backbone of Ningxia's economy constructed by 201
195.2 km Yong'an- Wuping Expressway (Fujian province) completed

Baseline: 0.D17 million ton (2009)
Target: 3.07 million ton (201)

National Railway, Guizhou-

Navigable time per year for 1000 ton vessels on 38 km channel on

Yunnan: 61% (2012)

2.4.3 Annual volume of cargo along targeted

IBRD: 3rd

by mid 2014
-

Pilot provincial road contract maintenance approaches in Fujian and

42

AAA: Modeling Regional Economic Benefits of Railway
Projects;

2.4.4 Travel time reduction on targeted road

corridors
(i) Yongan (Fujian) - Wuping (Guangdong
border): 67% (2013)
(ii) Qingtongxia -Guyaozi (Ningxia):60%

(2015)

Anhui by mid 2014

-

890 km key national and provincial roads rehabilitated and

-

maintained and 320 km improved in Anhui by mid 2014
Innovative environmental compliance framework with incentive
system developed and implemented in the Yiba Hiqhway project

(Hubei)

(iii) Yichang - Badong (Hubei):42% (2015)

43

Annex 2: Gender and Development in China
1. To inform the FY13-FY16 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), the World Bank conducted two
pieces of background analysis: a literature review of gender in key sub-sectors; and a review of good
practices in mainstreaming gender in the lending portfolio during the previous CPS period. The Bank
also drew upon analysis in the East Asia and Pacific (EAP) Companion to the 2012 World
Development Report on Gender Equality and Development.
2. Over the last two decades, China has made remarkable progress in reducing gender
disparities. An appropriate legal and organizational framework is in place for protecting women and
implementing China's strategy-the Program for the Development of Chinese Women (20112020).14 The 12th Five Year Plan includes a significant gender dimension to its focus on inclusive
development, focusing on ensuring that women are able to benefit from development gains. It
emphasizes the protection of women's legal rights and the importance of ensuring women's access to
basic services. It further highlights the need to improve women's ability to contribute to economic
development by promoting female employment and entrepreneurship.
3. China has improved women's access to health and education. From 1990 to 2008, there was
a dramatic decline in maternal mortality from 110 to 38 (per 100,000 live births). On the other hand,
non-communicable diseases have increased. This is partly linked to the incidence of tobacco use
among men at 59.5 percent in 2008 (compared to 3.7 percent among women). Gender parity has been
achieved in education at primary and secondary levels, with the share of female students now slightly
higher than that of male students.
4. Rates of female labor force participation have remained high in China at 75 percent in
2008. Economic reforms in recent decades have increased the range of opportunities for men and
women in paid employment. However, rates of female employment have stagnated behind those of
men over the last 10 years. Once in the labor force, women earn approximately 70 percent of men's
wages for similar work and tend to have less secure employment and longer periods of
unemployment. Access to child-care has become increasingly important for women's labor force
participation (particularly for migrant women), following child-care reform. Large numbers of
female migrants to urban areas, often migrating alone given the restrictive migrant registration
system, face multiple disadvantages, such as segregated jobs, lower wages, and poor working
conditions. The mandatory age of retirement for women at 55 (60 for men), means that men and
women have significant differences in retirement prospects in urban areas. Few female migrant
workers participate in pension, unemployment, or workplace injury insurance schemes, or receive
maternity insurance.
5. Women from ethnic minority communities and remote rural areas remain particularly
vulnerable, and lag behind in terms of access to basic services and economic opportunities.
Women remain less likely to own land in spite of an enabling legal framework. Values and norms
regarding the transmission of rights to land to women (in the case of inheritance for example) can

The legal framework includes: the Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Rights and
Interests of Women; the recently revised Marriage Law, providing protection against domestic violence; and recent
amendments to land laws to confer women equal rights to land titling. Organizations include: the National Working
Committee on Women and Children and All China Women's Federation.
14

44

create difficulties in enforcing legislation. The amount of land per capita for female headed
households was 70 percent that in male headed households (2008). In the six regions where
minorities are concentrated the school enrollment rate is largely lower than the national average. The
average dropout rate in these same provinces is about three times the national average. In addition,
urban labor force participation also fell faster among minority women than among Han women
between 1990 and 2000, which is consistent with a widening gap in income and occupational
attainment between Han and ethnic minorities.
6. China has a high proportion of women parliamentarians (21 percent) compared to other
countries in the East Asia and Pacific Region. The proportion of women in local government in
urban areas is double that at 48 percent. The promotion of the village self-government system has
helped expand opportunities for women in village governance. In critical areas such as environmental
policy, energy, and transport, which are central to the current World Bank Group portfolio in China,
national programs are not systematically informed by an understanding of the different needs and use
of resources by both women and men. The significant gender gaps in employment in these areas and
women's weaker voice in the governance of these sectors may also hinder their ability to help
determine options and sector priorities.

45

Annex 3: Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report
CHINA: CPS (2006-2010) COMPLETION REPORT
Date of CPS: May 23, 2006 (Report No. 35435- CN)
Date of Progress Report: Board discussion January 22, 2009 - Report No. 46896-CN
Period Covered by the CPS Completion Report: July 2006 to December 2011
Summary of Evaluation Ratings
ProgramPerformance
China has made significant progress in the areas of the 1 1 th Five Year Plan identified as Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) engagement pillars, and the World Bank Group (WBG) has supported
these advancements. Based on WBG's country team assessments and consultations with the
authorities and stakeholders, WBG program performance is rated in the aggregate as satisfactory.1 5
All 35 outcomes identified in the CPS have been achieved or partially achieved. Bank support has
made a significant impact on the lending side through innovation, demonstration, and scale-up, and
on the AAA front through intensified knowledge engagements, many of which leveraged and
complemented operations. IFC's China program was focused on relevant CPS outcomes and is rated
satisfactory. IFC contributed to relevant CPS outcome areas where it has a comparative advantage.
The development outcomes of IFC investment services operations improved consistently during the
CPS period, surpassing IFC average in FY11 while advisory services engagements were marked by
far reaching operations in access to finance and climate change initiatives. Of IFC advisory services
engagements completed during the reporting period, 74 percent led to significant results, including
more than US$4.9 trillion in financing facilitated through credit reporting and secured transactions
systems, and 17.8 million tons of GHG emissions avoided annually. 16
WBG Performance
The Bank's performance in strategy design and program implementation is rated as satisfactory. The
CPS strategy was appropriate to country priorities and goals, as evidenced by close alignment with
the 11 th Five Year Plan and strong country ownership. The program proposed in the 2006-2010 CPS
was realized as envisaged with only minor shifts to meet exceptional circumstances (e.g., postearthquake reconstruction support) and shifting emphasis within the program (e.g., intensification of
support for China's global engagement). IBRD portfolio performance compares favorably with other
large Bank borrowers. The portfolio was well managed and performance was solid. Trust funds have
been used effectively, especially in the areas of environment, climate change, and global
engagement. IFC's performance is also rated as satisfactory. The program sought to align investment
and advisory services to deliver greater reach and development results. IFC quickly responded to
changes in the country context and has started to streamline its focus towards high impact initiatives
in frontier regions/rural growth, climate change, and South-South investments. Steady improvement

" This completion report also covers program activities in 2011. The new CPS will provide a framework for WBG
engagement from FY13-FY16.
16 About 17.8 million tons of avoided GHG emissions achieved directly through the CHUEE
guarantee program and
an additional 41 million tons avoided indirectly through partner financial institutions.
46

in development outcome tracking system (DOTS) indicators can be linked partly to the quality of
project supervision during the period, which was satisfactory in 96 percent of projects evaluated
between 2006 and 2010. For those operations reporting on additionality, over 90 percent achieved or
partially achieved the expected additionality. From FY06 to end-201 1, IFC's China program reached
historical highs with more than US$3 billion in over 100 projects, representing 60% of total
investment volume since its first investments in 1985.
On the basis of the rating of the Bank and IFC, the overall performance of the World Bank Group is
rated as satisfactory.
I.

Introduction

This Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report (CPSCR) assesses the effectiveness of the
2006-2010 CPS for China. The CPS was aligned with the Government of China's 11 th Five Year
Plan (FYP). The CPSCR also evaluates program activities in 2011, because the new CPS covers
WBG engagement from FY13-FY16. This evaluation draws on findings of the mid-term CPS
Progress Report as well as consultations with clients and stakeholders in the capital and the
provinces.
II.

Progress on China's Long-Term Development Goals

In 2006, when the CPS was prepared, China had been achieving impressive growth for three decades
(annual GDP growth of about 9 percent since 1978 when reforms started). The number of poor had
declined significantly with over 500 million people coming out of poverty. The country had shifted
from a centrally planned to a market model, and China had become the world's fourth largest
economy and the third largest trading nation. Yet, it remained a developing country with per capita
GDP of about US$1,740 and about 135 million people living on less than US$1/day. Maintaining the
pace of rapid growth was a key challenge along with resource demands, environmental impacts, and
rebalancing the pattern of development to avert or mitigate emerging inequalities. China's 1 1 th FYP
(2006-2010) aimed to address these and other challenges to build an inclusive harmonious society
with higher living standards for its citizens, and it made significant progress in implementing the
Plan.
III.

WBG Program Performance

With WBG financial investments accounting for less than 0.02 percent of China's overall Gross
Domestic Investment (GDI) over the CPS period, any attribution of the country's achievements to
WBG interventions needs to be approached with modesty. The WBG strategy revolved around
innovative interventions that leveraged its international expertise and cross-country experience.
Lending operations were built around cutting-edge knowledge-based pilots that could be replicated
on a national scale. They tested reforms to support institutional development, the transition to a
market economy, and sustainable resource management practices. The WBG's convening power
supported China's integration in the global economy, and its expertise facilitated two-way knowledge
transfer and a growing program of South-South exchange that allowed China to share its
development experiences with other countries. IFC's and MIGA's investments, guarantees, and
advisory services helped facilitate both domestic and Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), fostered
innovative transactions, and supported projects which utilize best practices to create demonstration
effects, with a particular focus on frontier and lagging regions
47

WBG assistance was organized around five thematic pillars (see below, and Attachment 1). The CPS
results framework offered a good starting point, but in retrospect the specific goals and anticipated
outcomes could have been better differentiated and fewer in number. Also, it would have been
helpful to focus more on milestones to gauge progress towards outcomes rather than outputs.
The mid-term review undertaken for the 2009 CPS Progress Report (CPSPR) found that the original
strategic priorities and objectives remained valid. It noted that progress was on track and in line with
China's advancements under its 1 1 th FYP goals. As mid-course adjustments, the review noted
intensified engagement in supporting China's integration into the global economy, greater emphasis
on energy efficiency objectives and climate change issues, and accelerated implementation of
integrated rural-urban development, particularly through the Guangdong and Chongqing pilot
initiatives. It formalized Bank support for disaster risk management, and for earthquake
reconstruction in the wake of the tragic May 2008 Wenchuan earthquake.
Since the 2009 Progress Report, progress under the CPS pillars has continued to be strong. The
preparation by the World Bank and the Development Research Center (DRC) of the State Council of
the joint China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative, High-Income Society, was a
particularly important collaboration initiated in September 2010 and launched at a conference in
February 2012.
Pillar 1: Integrating China into the world economy
Outcome Status: China has emerged as an increasingly influential player in the global economy with
a growing role in international economic institutions and South-South exchange. It has increased its
engagement with regional development banks and has shifted its role in IDA to that of a contributor.
There is high and growing demand from other countries for investment, trade, and knowledgesharing with China and the country has become a significant source of financing and investment in
infrastructure, particularly in Africa.
WBG Support: The WBG has facilitated engagement through a number of activities, particularly
experience-sharing with other developing countries, most notably in Africa. It has contributed to
institutional strengthening through its advisory support (e.g., on trade, debt management, SouthSouth), while MIGA and IFC have provided support for enhancing the quality of China's
investments and related knowledge sharing, especially in financial and non-financial risk mitigation
and standard setting (e.g., environment and social, and corporate governance). The WBG maintained
a productive dialogue with relevant Chinese institutions on issues of development cooperation and
aid effectiveness both directly and through the China-DAC Study Group. Moreover, Chinese
ministries and agencies have been assisted in documenting and sharing development experience on
issues such as industrial zones, health, water, and poverty reduction. WBI has been particularly
active in supporting experience sharing and in building the capacity of key Chinese South-South
cooperation institutions, most notably the International Poverty Reduction Center in China (IPRCC)
and the Asia Pacific Finance and Development Center (AFDC). The Bank has worked well as a
trusted partner and facilitator in disseminating knowledge about China's development experience
with the world, as well as supporting China's integration with the global economy. A Department for
International Development (DFID)-financed trust fund provided support for a number of important
studies and activities aimed at improving information exchange and knowledge sharing.
Bank reports (such as the Quarterly Economic Reports and the book China: New Trade Issues in the
Post-WTO Accession Era) have helped generate accurate information on China's economic and social
48

development, its impacts on the world economy, and how it is managing a resource-scarce economy.
The Bank collaborated more closely with Chinese research partners to gain from their local
knowledge and to build their analytical capacity. The Bank also worked with China on regional
initiatives including the Greater Mekong Sub-region, the Central Asia Regional Economic
Cooperation (CAREC) program, and management of the avian flu threat. Following IFC's advisory
services, knowledge sharing and exchanges between the Chinese and Vietnamese governments and
financial sectors have resulted in plans by the State Bank of Vietnam to develop environment and
social (E&S) risk management guidelines similar to China's Green Credit Policy. IFC is also
assisting the Chinese private sector in investing profitably and sustainably in other parts of the world.
In 2010, IFC made its first investment in a Chinese company operating in Sub-Saharan Africa CREJ Estates in Tanzania. In 2011, IFC co-invested with China EXIM Bank, China Investment
Corporation, BOCI and CCCC, to support infrastructure projects in ASEAN countries. China
Development Bank and China EXIM Bank became the first Chinese banks to participate in an IFCsyndicated parallel loan for a project in Africa: Ghana Vodafone.
Pillar 2: Reducing poverty, inequality, social exclusion
Outcome Status: China has continued to make progress in reducing poverty, building on the
dramatic reductions after 1980. Policy changes aiming to enhance equity and quality have been
introduced, including the abolition of the agricultural land tax, the nationwide introduction in 2008 of
free compulsory education, the expansion of student financial assistance to tertiary education, and the
adoption of ambitious 1 2 th FYP targets for universal early childhood education coverage. China's
health reforms represent a major achievement in health equity by providing basic near-universal
coverage through insurance mechanisms and a public health package. A means-tested cash transfer
program (Social Safety Net) was rolled out across rural China (dibao), and a major national initiative
to achieve comprehensive coverage of rural pensions is rapidly expanding, as well as a more recent
pension program for the urban informal sector. To improve the conditions of work for Chinese
workers and strengthen worker protection, the Labor Contract Law was enacted, and integrated ruralurban development models of social security and other entitlement programs are being piloted. In
November 2011, the government adjusted the official rural poverty line to be more in line with
international standards (a step strongly supported by the Bank), qualifying 100 million more people
for a variety of benefits that will bring more resources to poor regions. Despite progress during the
period of the 1 1 th FYP in reducing poverty (average rural per capita incomes exceeded 1 1 th FYP
targets) and slowing the rise of inequality, continuing to reduce poverty and reversing inequality
remain important challenges in China.
WBG Support: The Bank Group supported government efforts to improve social safety nets for the
rural and urban poor, including through key analytical and diagnostic pieces on the dibao program.
The From Poor Areas to Poor People study, the result of a multi-year analytical effort, provided a
comprehensive overview of poverty reduction progress, as well as recommendations to address key
challenges. In the education sector, policy notes (Education Sector Review and Early Childhood
Development and Education) were helpful in informing the medium- and long-term strategy for
educational reform and development, with the Government now emphasizing Early Childhood
Development and Education (ECDE) under the 1 2 th FYP, and policymakers increasingly focused on
the importance of addressing inequity in higher education. The Bank's ECDE AAA has also led to
requests for further collaboration on impact evaluation by the China Development and Reform
Foundation.

49

Bank assistance was welcomed in formulating the Human Development System reform strategy for
national and sub-national governments, including the health system reform master plan. AAA on
non-communicable diseases (NCD) prepared in coordination with the Chinese Ministry of Health
and the World Health Organization presented evidence on the economic and social consequences of
explosive increases in NCDs in China and proposed a range of policies and strategies to confront and
prevent them. Bank-supported AAA and the Rural Health Project contributed significantly to
building impact evaluation capacity for health system reform, for example, by mobilizing trust fund
resources to hold impact evaluation training workshops in partnership with the National
Development and Reform Commission (NDRC). The WBG also supported the formulation of a
monitoring and evaluation indicator framework, as well as data collection for the health system
reform mid-term evaluation. In addition, analytical and advisory work on the pension and elderly
care systems were sustained, with a major policy report on directions of pension reform, diagnostic
work on the situation of rural elderly, and initial work on aged care under social protection
programmatic AAA.
WBG financing (investments, TA, TFs) supported pilots of new mechanisms as well as capacity
building with social sector projects on poverty reduction, rural health, migrant training and
employment, and Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET). These activities helped
support continued poverty innovations by connecting small farmers to higher value chains through
bottom-up and top down approaches in agriculture. The WBG and provincial authorities have also
been developing models for integrated rural-urban development in both Chongqing and Guangdong.
The participatory approach and Community Driven Development (CDD) models have been advanced
through Bank-financed activities, including the Poor Rural Communities Development Project,
supported by the Bank and DFID, which extended the participatory approach to poor villages in 18
counties in western China and piloted the CDD model in 4 other counties in which village
committees approved and evaluated subprojects, allowing for community control of funds. The
follow-on Sustainable Development in Poor Rural Areas project continues to advance CDD
approaches in Henan Province, Shaanxi Province, and Chongqing Municipality, and incorporates
GEF co-financing to address potential climate-change risks and land degradation issues closely
linked with rural poverty. Poverty reduction efforts have also included a strong gender focus, with
projects identifying entry points for women's participation in community-based activities and
creating space for women's voices to be heard in community-based planning processes.
Bank-supported projects also financed upgrades of transport infrastructure and improved network
management and traffic safety. Rural roads were a particular focus of this effort, which also included
expressways, railroads, and waterways linking inland provinces to the dynamic coast so that
transportation benefits accrue to the poor. IFC was involved in supporting private enterprise growth
in both cities and rural areas all over China as the main source of sustainable job creation.
Overall WBG support has increasingly shifted to poorer lagging regions. As of end-FYI 1, about 86
percent of projects in terms of loan/grant amount are in the interior and western provinces. IFC has
also mobilized more and more resources to support the development of the frontier regions. In FY0609, only 30% of IFC's new projects were located in frontier regions, while the percentage rose to
more than 60% from FY10 to end-201 1.
Pillar 3: Managing resource scarcity and environmental challenges
Outcome Status: CPS Pillar 3 aimed to support China in creating a resource-efficient society
(including meeting the Government's goal of reducing energy intensity by 20 percent from 2005 to
50

2010), improving natural resource management to reduce degradation and depletion, and meeting
international environmental commitments. During the 1 1 th FYP, there has been a reversal of the
negative trends in energy intensity, air pollution (though only in some cities and some parameters),
water pollution (some waterways), as well as substantial progress on wastewater treatment, water
savings (in some basins), and better management of lands and forests. There are major government
efforts underway to enhance energy efficiency, develop renewable energy sources, and address
climate change issues. In 2008, the Industrial Bank of China, an IFC client, adopted the Equator
Principles (EPs), a voluntary environmental and social risk-management framework based on IFC
performance standards, becoming the first EP bank in China and the Asian emerging markets. In
addition, the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, one of the world's largest banks by market
value, runs a 12 category environmental and social risks system and applies the standards in its
overseas investment activities. China EXIM Bank is also using a performance standards-based
internal environmental and social risks review process. Despite China's achievements in these areas,
significant challenges remain. China is the largest emitter of Greenhouse Gas (GHG), and GDP
remains energy-intensive.
WBG Support: WBG activities with environment objectives have expanded steadily and comprise
more than 76 percent of new IBRD lending (81 percent including GEF) as of December 2011. There
is a growing pipeline of climate change mitigation actions. WBG support to climate mitigation
through its energy, transport, urban, forestry and agriculture sector interventions exceeds envisaged
CPS levels. In IFC, 100% of its investment operations are required to adhere to applicable
environmental and social performance standards, including resource efficiency and pollution
abatement. In addition, mitigating climate change is a key focus area for IFC, and IFC has
successfully partnered with three selected Chinese banks to introduce new energy efficiency
financing. IFC has also introduced market-based waste-to-energy, wind and hydropower, and water
treatment models.
WBG's support for the energy sector has focused on renewables, energy efficiency and low carbon
cities. One highlight of the WBG's support has been the China Renewable Energy Scale-Up Program
(CRESP). The first phase of the program contributed to scaling-up renewable energy by supporting
effective policy studies and the rapid growth and quality improvement of the domestic wind
manufacturing industry. IFC's China Utility-Based Energy Efficiency (CHUEE) Finance Program
also contributed by facilitating US$680 million in bank loans for US$1.4 billion in investments to
finance over 160 energy efficiency and renewable energy projects in steel, cement, glass, and other
key sectors, resulting in 17.8 million tons17 of GHG emissions avoided annually.
The WBG has been involved with the scaling up of water supply, wastewater management,
irrigation, and metropolitan service delivery, supported by AAA, GEF projects, and lending
resources. The WBG has assisted sustainable cultural and environmental heritage initiatives.
Environmental technical assistance has focused on developing the circular (recycling) economy,
green accounting, water conservation, forestry and related land tenure issues, as well as the urban
brown agenda. The Circular Economy study helped to shape the China Circular Economy Promotion
Law. It contributed to the formation and implementation of the 1 2th FYP objectives in pollution
reduction and resource-saving, and has encouraged a new generation of waste management projects.
AAA on improving water resource management in the context of worsening scarcity and on adapting
About 17 million tons of avoided GHG emissions achieved directly through the guarantee program and an
additional 41 million tons avoided indirectly through partner financial institutions.
17

51

agricultural production systems to climate change has provided the analytic basis for current and
upcoming lending in water resource conservation, irrigation, and agriculture. The Adapting
Agricultural Production System to Climate Change study used cutting-edge modeling to improve
understanding about the impact of climate change on China's northern plains, its historic breadbasket.
The study, together with a successful GEF-financed pilot project in agricultural adaptation to climate
change, is shaping upcoming Bank lending to help Chinese farmers adapt to climate change.
The WBG has also analyzed and provided recommendations on land policy and the economic cost of
pollution. The Green National Accounting Study contributed significantly to the Government's
efforts to value pollution costs by introducing an economic valuation methodology and establishing
green accounting systems. The Bank also supported the promotion of strategic environmental
assessment (SEA), shared international best practices, and promoted EIA in Bank operations. WBI's
support for enhancing urban planning capacity led to improvements in training course content and
delivery methods, and a better understanding of urban environmental issues (including the
publication of the China Urban Development Quarterly).
To support China in meeting its international environmental commitments, the WBG has engaged
through AAA, lending, carbon financing, new instruments (Carbon Investment Fund), climate
partnership strategies, global funds, demonstration projects, TA, and conferences. WBG support has
succeeded in forwarding China's global environmental agenda including stabilizing GHG emissions
and phasing out of persistent organic pollutants (POPs). The World Bank supported the National
Climate Change Program study adopted by the Government in 2007, which guides the direction of
China's GHG mitigation efforts and forms the basis for China's 12 th FYP climate change objectives.
Bank AAA work on the CDM under the previous CPS coupled with further policy dialogue and
major carbon investments, including the US$1.2 billion HFC23 emission reduction project, helped
confirm the viability of, and liquidity in, CDM markets worldwide. Further, the China CDM Fund
was established, a major innovation funded by a tax on CDM revenues that is now poised to invest in
climate mitigation investments across China. China now comprises 77 percent of the Bank's
substantial CDM portfolio China is also one of a handful of countries implementing the first
generation of projects under the Carbon Partnership Facility (CPF), which aims to scale up
investment in clean technology. Separately, the Bank is the largest implementing agency of GEF
funds in China, comprising about US$200 million in commitments during the CPS period. IFC
advisory products were undertaken to better understand the quality and sustainable performance of
private enterprise, carbon finance aggregation through financial institutions, and environmental and
social standards in specific industries, such as ICT.
The WBG has had limited success in piloting integrated urban planning, bulk water markets, and
liberalizing energy and water markets. The CPS could also have been more proactive in
incorporating greater WBG involvement for disaster preparedness and disaster risk management,
although the response to the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake was swift and appropriate. (This response
included two projects: one large IBRD-financed earthquake recovery loan, and a second quickresponse GEF-financed project that assessed the public health risk associated with potential
earthquake damage to hazardous waste facilities.) IFC focused its attention on the broad theme of
"private sector recovery," implementing several investment and advisory services projects over the

52

past three years.1 8 Total investments amounted to US$120 million with significant advisory service
components.

Pillar 4: Financing sustained and efficient growth
Outcome Status: China continues to make strides in transforming its financial sector to a modern,
market-based system. Considerable progress was made during the CPS period in strengthening the
financial regulatory agencies and institutions, and restructuring the financial markets. The series of
policy reform measures, including capital injections by the Government, partnerships with strategic
investors, and initial public offerings, as well as enforcement of prudential regulations by the China
Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC) have served to introduce modern corporate governance,
risk management and internal controls to the second-tier commercial banks. The rural financial
system has become more diverse and competitive, as the Rural Credit Cooperatives (RCCs) were
restructured and recapitalized and new rural financial institutions entered the market. However, the
financial sector reform agenda remains unfinished. According to the FSAP of 2011, the sector
remains depressed, unbalanced and costly to maintain, and the financial system is exposed to
potential risks of instability and inefficiency in resource allocation.
WBG Support: WBG engagements include lending and AAA for developing competitive rural
financial markets and housing finance (including the pilot for mortgage backed securitization),
assisting RCC reforms, promoting sustainable commercial micro and small lending, strengthening
corporate governance in state-owned banks, and studying options to improve the effectiveness of
state-ownership function in the financial sector. The WBG has also assisted in streamlining
regulations for corporate pension schemes and has facilitated the development of a strategic vision
for the capital markets. WBG analytic services have been delivered to macro-prudential authorities,
sub-national governments, and financial institutions. Engagement with the policy banks, notably
China Development Bank and Eximbank, has had a significant impact on knowledge and capacity
building, though international project-level collaboration has been less concrete. IFC investments in
national and local joint-stock banks, commercial banks (both city and rural), microfinance
companies, and TA on corporate governance, risk management, information management and
strategy development, and green energy financing have significantly contributed to the improved
development of the Chinese financial sector. The IBRD and IFC coordinated their efforts in the
financial sector within their respective mandates.
IFC is among the first foreign investors in supporting China's city commercial banks and rural
finance institutions. IFC partnered with them and with industry associations to improve corporate
governance, risk management, and commitment to expanding financing to SMEs, farmers,
manufacturers, and shop owners. IFC's work with Chinese banks included offering market-based
climate change financing solutions. Under the innovative China Utility-based Energy Efficiency
Finance program (CHUEE), IFC shoulders some of the financial risk by guaranteeing commercial
bank loans for energy efficiency projects and assisting in assessing and implementing energy
efficiency projects. IFC is now expanding the successful model of China-IFC cooperation across East
Asia, entering into similar partnerships with Vietnam, the Philippines, and Bangladesh and
facilitating South-to-South cooperation to build on China's expertise and experience.

1 IFC projects included: Koyo Fertilizer, Chengdu Small Enterprises Credit Guarantee Company (Chengdu CGC),
Beichuan Village and Township Bank (VTB), Renshou VTB, and Deyang City Commercial Bank.

53

IFC has been a key player in strengthening the financial sector with innovative investments and TA.
Some examples include: (i) helping to set up a nation-wide credit reporting system that covers 792
million individuals and 17.9 million legal entities, with cumulative number of inquires reaching 812
million by end-2010 and the system supporting lending of about US$1.4 trillion per year; (ii)
becoming one of China's largest rural finance investors with around 10 investments including the
first foreign-invested rural commercial bank, the first foreign-invested micro-credit company, the
first Sino-foreign joint venture village bank, and the first NGO transformation company; (iii) helping
to establish the movable-asset secured-financing industry in China, benefiting SMEs with cumulative
loans worth US$3.5 trillion secured by accounts receivable (one of the most important movable
assets) over a period of nearly four years; over US$1 trillion in these loans were specifically for
SMEs; and (iv) supporting the opening up of the capital market through issuing Panda Bond, Dim
Sum Bond, and signing RMB SWAP agreement with China Development Bank and China EXIM
Bank.
Going forward, partnership with key agencies at both the central and local government levels as well
as with key financial and non-financial institutions should continue. Synergies with the objectives of
Pillar 1 could have been stronger and this should be considered in the new CPS. To this end, given
the vast and growing demand for services such as MSME finance, innovative models such as the
proposed China Academy of Inclusive Finance, might play a key role in scaling up commercially
sustainable access to finance.
Pillar 5: Strengthening public and market institutions
Outcome Status: China continued to make good progress towards a market-based, sustainable
economy. The Government was committed to helping the private sector succeed and undertook
administrative reforms to advance the transition. The process of diversifying and corporatizing StateOwned Enterprises (SOE) through the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration
Commission (SASAC) is contributing to market-enhancing reforms. Competitive cultures are further
strengthened through Economic Value-Added (EVA)-based performance evaluations, and the reform
of SOE dividend policy. There are widespread initiatives to improve the investment climate.
WBG Support: The WBG's AAA and policy dialogue supported ongoing SOE reform efforts,
including reform of EVA performance evaluation; policy notes on disclosure and dividend policies;
the creation of SASAC; and a 120-city Investment Climate Assessment. Efforts by central and local
officials to strengthen the climate for investment and private sector activities also benefitted from
support by the Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) and MIGA, with a focus on the Central
and Western regions. The WBG contributed to the development of the Independent Power Provider
(IPP) strategy tested in the Western provinces and rolled out in the North-East. A Bank IDF grant
supports the Ministry of Finance Treasury Department's efforts to enhance the transparency,
efficiency, and effectiveness of budget execution for special purpose transfer payments. WBI's
training programs supported enhanced capacity and understanding in key areas of public finance
(budget and expenditure management, accountability, and fiscal decentralization). IFC Advisory
Services provided capacity building and best practices advice to officials at the Credit Information
System Bureau (CISB). IFC advised the government to draft and pass a new section of the Property
Law which paved the way for millions of SMEs to get banks loans by using movable assets as
collateral. IFC's work informed the development of the regulatory framework for China's credit
reporting system which has provided financial institutions in China with a fast and cost effective way
to search for the creditworthiness of credit applicants. IFC also supported the SOE
54

reorganization/privatization by investing at the project level as well as in asset management
companies.
IV.

WBG Performance

Lending: The CPS envisaged IBRD lending of about US$1.0-1.5 billion and 10-12 new projects per
year over the CPS period. The actual lending program realized CPS plans consistently (Attachment
2). The program also responded to urgent client needs (e.g., US$700 million emergency
reconstruction loan approved in the wake of the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake). Support to the
poorer/lagging regions was emphasized. Many projects piloted new models. Towards the end of the
CPS period, there was an increase in the use of additional financing.
Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA): AAA was identified throughout the CPS period based
on emerging needs and priorities (Attachment 3). The Quarterly Economic Reports have international
readership. A number of Bank staff and managers have added blogging and other web-based
knowledge dissemination to the China AAA menu, and Bank sectoral teams and WBI have
collaborated on design and delivery of distance learning courses based on China-specific and
regional analytical work. Provincial level work on rural-urban integration in Chongqing and
Guangdong provinces has generated interest among central and local authorities and stakeholders.
Education AAA had a significant impact on shaping the government's longer term strategy. Studies
on water resource management and adapting agricultural production to climate change (combined
with experience gained from GEF pilot programs) are shaping upcoming lending projects, while
Bank AAA helped shape the 2008 national recycling law. The WBG has also provided analytical and
advisory services in renewable energy for China, including reports on large-scale wind power,
biomass power generation, and policy notes on future directions in renewable energy and energy
efficiency for China's 12 th Five-Year-Plan (2011-2015). The non-communicable disease study has
identified priority areas for health sector engagement going forward. The WBG and the Chinese
authorities have also jointly undertaken a forward-looking analytical effort that looks at China's
development and growth path over the medium to longer term - China 2030: Building a Modern,
Harmonious, and Creative High Income Society. This compendium of work lays the framework for
the WBG-China analytical engagement over the coming years. While WBG non-lending services and
research findings have been valued, there is room for improvement in the dissemination process to
broaden impact, and strengthened partnerships with Chinese institutions, counterparts, academics,
and researchers can be also encouraged. A lesson for the WBG is to ensure better outreach and
dissemination for pilot initiatives (as was done in the case of rural and national pension policy).
IFC: IFC's program in China supported the WBG's five thematic pillars in the 2006-2010 CPS with
a focus on (i) climate change, (ii) balanced rural-urban growth, and (iii) sustainable South-South
development. IFC contributed to 14 of the 35 relevant CPS outcome areas identified in the CPSPR
and in five other CPS outcome areas with no expected IFC interventions at the outset. Development
outcomes of IFC investment operations consistently improved during the period, surpassing IFC's
average in FY11. Steady improvement in DOTS indicators can be linked to the quality of project
supervision during the period, which was satisfactory in 96 percent of projects evaluated between
2006 and 2010.
IFC's work on climate change aimed to demonstrate market-based approaches to reduce the
economy's energy intensity and increase efficient use of water resources, with a focus on energy
efficiency, renewable energy, water management, and green finance. IFC also focused on balanced
55

rural-urban growth by, among others, helping reduce the gap between living standards in urban and
frontier/rural areas, principally through investments and advisory work in micro and SME finance,
rural finance agribusiness, infrastructure, food safety, manufacturing, and healthcare. IFC's SouthSouth interventions included working with Chinese companies and banks to see that Chinese
investments abroad are done in accordance with international best practice in environmental and
social standards, which will make Chinese projects more sustainable and in the long run more
profitable. These initiatives mobilized Chinese resources and helped Chinese companies contribute
sustainably to global economic development.
IFC Advisory services operations were marked by success in access to finance initiatives, including
the multi-year Secured Transactions advisory. IFC has been deeply involved in providing Advisory
Services starting from 2002 and has undertaken up to 54 projects, 30 of which support enhancing
access to finance. IFC quickly responded to changes in the country context. Areas of financing have
shifted over time in line with country priorities and IFC has started to streamline its focus towards
high impact initiatives in rural growth, climate change, and China's global engagement.
MIGA: The CPS projected that MIGA guarantee coverage would remain at about US$50 million per
year. MIGA has been active in supporting FDI into China and its current portfolio consists of 10
projects totaling US$242 million in guarantee coverage. The vast majority of projects supported are
in the infrastructure sector (96 percent), with the remaining 4 percent in services and manufacturing.
MIGA (along with FIAS) cooperates with the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Commerce in
focusing on outward investments, (especially in Africa), and with Sinosure and Eximbank and other
partners in marketing co-insurance of Chinese outward investments. MIGA also provided TA in
supporting investment promotion and benchmarking studies.
Trust Funds: The WBG mobilized US$1.4 billion in trust funds during the period in support of the
five CPS pillars. These complementary resources helped maximize the impact of WBG operations
across China. Concessional grant financing available for China has declined over time and bilateral
TFs are being phased out; however, the WBG continues to administer a significant portfolio of trust
funded activities, many from global funds. Partnerships included DFID co-financing of the Poor
Rural Communities Development Project and support for studies and knowledge sharing as well as
TF financing from Italy, the European Commission, and Netherlands. However, in the course of the
CPS period, the donor landscape changed concurrently with China's economic growth and these
partners decreased their development assistance to the country. By end-FY 11, the China trust fund
portfolio comprised 96 projects with total commitments of US$2.1 billion, with Carbon Finance,
GEF, Montreal Protocol, IDF and bilateral TFs as the major funding sources. China is a key player in
delivering on the global environmental agenda and is increasingly accessing available funds.
Completed and ongoing GEF and Montreal Protocol projects, many with IBRD co-financing, include
projects in areas such as Ozone Depleting Substances Phase-out, Persistent Organic Pollutants
(POPs), global climate change (including GHG, energy conservation, renewable energy
development, and energy efficiency), biodiversity (e.g., natural reserve management, sustainable
forestry, water resource management), and land degradation. China has also received US$6.15
million from the Global Facility for Avian and Human Influenza Facility for the China HPAI and
Human Influenza Prevention and Control Capacity Building Project from 2007 to 2011. IDF grants
are important knowledge cooperation instruments which play a key role in improving capacity in
management, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation.

56

CPS Implementation: The CPS results framework was used to track implementation progress;
gauge outputs, outcomes, and results; and address emerging issues and needed adjustments. In
retrospect, while this framework offered a good starting point, it proved overly complex with too
many goals, outputs, and outcomes. Measureable indicators were not developed, and assessment of
achievements are based on self evaluations. Going forward, there should be more selectivity and
specificity, with outcomes and indicators well linked to the portfolio. Supporting the CPS strategic
objectives, the WBG program emphasized demonstration projects. Analytical work linked well with
the development of new project approaches. Innovative funding instruments were used to support
China in meeting its international environmental commitments, as well as blended project financing
mixing global funds with IBRD lending. During the CPS period, the WBG made strong efforts to
simplify and streamline processes, resulting in a substantial reduction in project preparation costs as
well as a modest increase in the numbers of repeater projects, APLs, and additional financing.
Portfolio performance is one of the strongest among the large IBRD borrowers. About 97 percent of
projects were rated satisfactory or above; only 3 percent of projects evaluated by IEG in the last five
years were rated unsatisfactory/highly unsatisfactory.
V.

Key Lessons and Recommendations

*

First, the Bank Group has supported China's efforts to reduce poverty among citizens living
below the poverty line. Despite unparalleled success in moving 600 million people out of poverty
over 30 years, poverty reduction remains a fundamental challenge in China. The WBG has
supported China in introducing economic reforms that have helped to bring sustained growth and
poverty reduction, and in developing approaches to reduce inequality. Particular attention was
paid to the Western and Central provinces. Of 70 active IBRD-financed projects (February 2012),
more than 80 percent are in the poorer interior and western provinces. More than 60% of IFC's
new projects were located in frontier regions from 2009 to 2011.9

*

Second, the majority of the WBG-supported activities feature environmental objectives, many
with global implications, including a cross-cutting focus on climate change. China is essential
to global efforts to improve environmental management and address global warming. Over 80
percent of ongoing and planned Bank-financed projects include environmental objectives.

*

Third, the developing world can benefit from WBG engagement with China. China is
increasingly playing an important and influential role in the world economy and its policy
decisions have a global impact. China has a strong interest in learning more about international
experiences and best practices, a role which the WBG, as knowledge broker, is well suited to
play. There is also a growing demand from other nations to learn from China's experiences.
China is an increasingly important source of knowledge and is at the forefront of innovation in
key areas (for example, urbanization) that can help inform and motivate the development process
in other countries. WBG financing represents only a small share of China's financing and
investment needs; however, as a preeminent provider of knowledge products, best practice
experience and innovation expertise, WBG support has played a much larger role in China than
lending figures might indicate.

19 Excluding

transactions with repeat clients on Trade Finance, Rights Issue, CHUEE, and with investment funds.
57

General lessons from the CPS implementation include:
*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Build on the strength of the WBG by ensuring that engagements maximize the entities'
respective strengths. The greatest impact and results were achieved when the WBG entities
(IBRD, IFC, MIGA, and WBI) coordinated on common objectives and each unit emphasized its
complementary strengths.
Augment the Bank's role as knowledge broker and provider. Impacts have been greatest
when WBG financed operations were grounded on solid, high quality, and client-owned AAA,
and involved intensive engagement with local counterparts. Going forward, the WBG should
continue to maximize the impact of AAA findings by strengthening dissemination.
Continue WBG support for South-South exchanges but define goals and roles of the
respective partners more clearly. (WBG, the Government of China, Chinese institutions
(Eximbank, CDB, IPRCC) and third country partners and stakeholders).
Emphasize innovation through replicable pilots. China is at the forefront of many emerging
issues (e.g., rapid urbanization) that will offer lessons for other MICs. Future WBG-supported
programs should continue to be innovative, cutting-edge, bold experimental initiatives.
Calibrate WBG engagement in the social sectors to support China in addressing emerging
issues. These not only involve social equity, but are critical to achieving a more productive
economy and a sustainable growth strategy.
Continue to reduce the transaction costs of operational engagements. The WBG has
intensified training for counterparts, and enhanced its field presence in safeguards, procurement
and financial management. Several recent additional financing operations are proving an
effective vehicle to reduce transaction costs.
Integrating different financing sources can increase the magnitude and speed of the shift to
a sustainable energy path. Good examples of the value of integrated financing include the
CRESP program and Energy Conservation I & II which fully blended IBRD and GEF resources.
Under the programs grants from GEF and other donors are used to set up an enabling
environment, introduce international experience, provide technical assistance, and build capacity,
while IBRD funds are used to demonstrate innovative energy efficiency and renewable energy
investments.

58

CPS Outcom

Outcome 1.1:
Enhanced
Chinese
engagement in
global and
regional
economic
institutions

*

CPS Completion Report Attachment 1: Summary of China CPS (2006-2011) Programs Self Evaluation [04/16/20121
CPS Outpts
Status and Output Evaluation Summary
MajorKey
Lessons and Suggestions
Non-lending Activities that
Ke Lons Nd
S
Contributed to the Outcome
Pillar 1: Integrating China into the World Economy
Strengthened
Achieved.
Non-lending:
Country consultations
partner-agency
The Bank provided support to China on
China's Development Priorities (FY07);
indicate that the Bank's
research and
regional initiatives including the Greater
Competition Provisions in Regional
cross-country knowledge
analytical capacity
Mekong Sub-region, the Central Asia Regional
Trade Agreements: Lessons for China
and innovation capacities
supporting China's
Economic Cooperation (CAREC) program, and (FY09); Economic Quarterly (various
are highly valued by
participation in
management of the avian flu threat,
issues); China 2030 Study, Supporting
Chinese counterparts and
global and regional
The Bank worked closely with Chinese
Volume 5: Reaching "Win-Win"
clients at the central and
economic
research partners to gain from their local
Solutions with the Rest of the World
provincial levels. Such
institutions, incl.
knowledge and to build their analytical
(FY2); China Partnership with Africa
demand-driven
WTO
capacity. The Bank's engagement with the
(cont.); WBI Programs; Support to
engagements should
Development Research Center of the State
IPRCC and AFDC
continue.
Council to co-produce the China 2030 report
The WBG plays a
was especially significant.
valuable role as an
WBI has helped build the capacity of key
engagement facilitator,
and in presenting China's
Chinese South-South cooperation institutions,
most notably the Intemational Poverty
development story in
Reduction Center in China (IPRCC) and the
publications and reports.
Asia Pacific Finance and Development Center

(AFDC).
Outcome 1.2:
China meets

WTO

Continued analysis of
implications of Doha
and other trade

commitments
and participates
f*lly in Doha
Romnd

negotiations on
economy, inclwding
services, agrichlteral
sobsidies

*

Achieved.
*
The Bank has supported Chinese policy makers
and scholars through roundtables, policy notes,
and studies on the Doha Round, Free Trade
Agreements (FTAs), the services sector, and
the impact of liberalization on income
distribution and poverty.
China and Vietnam have engaged on post-

Non-lending:
Trade and Poverty Program (FY08);
WBI Programs

*

WBG knowledge and
capacity-building services
have been valuable in
supporting the
govemment on trade
policy.

WTO accession issues and_challenges.N

20

For the list of lending and non-lending activities under the CPS program, see Attachments 2 and 3, respectively. For projects, years in parentheses refer to FY of approval, and if

closed, also FY of completion. For AAA, the year in parentheses refers to the FY of completion. Implementation Completion and Results (ICR) and Independent Evaluation Group

(IEG) ratings are provided where available. HS: Highly Satisfactory; 5: Satisfactory; MS: Moderately Satisfactory; MU: Moderately Unsatisfactory. The most recent
Inplementation Status and Results (ISR) ratings of Development Outcome (DO) and Implementation Progress (IP) for ongoing projects in the portfolio are provided in CAS
Standard ATnex B8, which also lists IFC operations in China.

59

Outcome 1.3:
China
implements free
trade
agreement with
ASEAN
countries

See Output 1.2

Outcome 1.4:
Higher volume
and better
quality of
overseas
investment

*

TA to help GoC
understand and
consider subscribing
to OECD principles
for overseas
investment.

Achieved.
*
WBG delivered knowledge services and
capacity building support (Bank AAA on trade
impact analysis; training on trade-in-services;
development of WTO-compliant policies) in
support of the outcome.
*
IFC supported the China ASEAN Infrastructure
Fund (CAFIC), a fund that is expected to
deliver strong developmental impact as its
investment in key infrastructure sectors will (i)
accelerate economic growth especially in the
countries and regions where infrastructure
development has been further slowed down due
to the recent crisis, (ii) reduce inequality caused
by inadequate infrastructure access and (iii)
influence growth patterns to be more pro-poor.
*
China has signed 10 FTAs with 18 economies
and more are under negotiation.

Achieved.
*
WBG support has enhanced monitoring of debt
and capital flows under the State
Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE)
Initiative.
IFC has provided financial and advisory
support for China's outward investments.

*

*

*
*

MIGA and FIAS programs augmented Chinese

Lending:
IFC: China ASEAN Infrastructure
Fund (CAFIC) (FY11)
Non-lending:
Trade and Poverty Program (FY08);
Regional Trade Agreements (FY09);
Competition Provisions in Regional
Trade Agreements: Lessons for China
(FY09); Environment Provisions in
Regional Trade Agreements: Lessons
for China (FY09); Labor Mobility
Provisions in Regional Trade
Agreements: Lessons for China (FY09)

Lending:
IFC: China ASEAN Infrastructure
Fund (CAFIC) (FY11), VodafoneGhana (FY10), Commercial Building
project-Tanzania (FY10)
Non-lending:

MIGA/FIAS Conference on Survey of

investment, built capacity, and facilitated

Chinese Companies Investing

knowledge sharing.

Overseas; MOU between MIGA and

China EXIM (Export Import Bank of China)
and China Africa Development Fund (CADF)

SinoSure; Study on CSR attitudes and
behavior of Chinese firms investing in

have received advisory support on construction,

Africa

extractive industries, forest products, and
infrastructure.
IFC supported Chinese companies in financing
overseas investments.
IFC advised CBRC and Ministry of
Environment Protection to develop detailed
guidelines for the Green Credit Policy and to

IFC: CPDF Corporate Governance
Advisory (FYO2-08); E&S Standards
Advisory (FY11)

regulate outbound investment.
Outcome 1.5:
Higher and

correspondence

Achieved.
a
sBetter
*
China became a contributor to IDA.

60

Non-lending:
Support to IPRCC, AFDC; WBI

An integrated WBG
(Bank, IFC, MIGA)
approach has been key to
effective support.

better quality
China economic
assistance

between China's
*
The WBG has enhanced the dialogue on aid
economic assistance
effectiveness through the China-DAC
and other ODA
(Development Assistance Committee) Study
providers
Group and has initiated cooperation with China
*
Exim Bank coEXIM.
finances with IBRD
*
GoC contributes to
multilateral
development agencies
Pillar 2: Reducing Poverty, Inequality, and Social Exclusion
Outcome 2.1:
Community-level
Achieved:
Greater
programming and
Participatory approach and CDD models have
community
implementation
been advanced through Bank-financed
participation in
capacity-building
activities, including the Poor Rural
poverty
piloted in selected
Communities Development Project which
reduction
villages
developed and extended the participatory
programs
approach in 18 nationally designated poor
counties. The Sustainable Development in Poor

Lending:
Guangxi Urban Environment (FY99FY07, ICR=S; IEG=S); Poor Rural
Communities Development (FY05FY11, ICR=S); Sustainable
Development in Poor Rural Areas
(FY10)

Direct involvement of
senior government staff in
CDD programs has
provided the essential
element of ownership.
Limited ability for local
governments and the
communities to finance

Rural Areas project continues to advance CDD

Non-lending:

poverty-reduction projects

approaches.

Pro-Poor Rural Water Reform Project

makes downward flow of

Technical Assistance (FY04-FY09,
ICR=HS); Poverty Assessment (FY09);
From Poor Areas to Poor People:
China's Evolving Poverty Reduction
Agenda (FY09); Social Assistance in

funds on a grant basis
from the higher levels of
government important.
Effective and early
capacity building for

* Bank TA delivered to improve efficiency and
sustainability of water use associations,
including increasing community participation
in the formation of WrUAs to ensure pro-poor
focus and the inclusion of the poor, women and
disadvantaged groups.

Outcome 2.2:
Strengthened
social insurance
programs
(pension
systems, urban
and rural health

0

0

Options articulated
for national rural
pension policy
Options clarified for
expanding rural
health insurance
(NCMS) and Medical

Programs; Joint workshop held with
MOFCOM on international cooperation
(2011)

Achieved. China has exceeded CPS expectations.
Bank work on social security programs at both
national and sub-national levels (e.g., pensions,
health insurance) has identified needs, provided
valuable policy inputs, and highlighted issues
with earlier pilots. This work has supported the
government in initiating the national rural

*

Rural China: Tracking Poverty

project management is of

Through Rural Dibao (FY10); CDD
Conference (FY09)

major importance in CDD
proj ects.

Lending:
Basic Health 8 (FY98-FY7; ICR=S;
IEG=S); Rural Health (FY08)

Moving towards a
graduated health
insurance system will be
key to increasing the
equity of health service
provision going forward.
Piloting ways to

Non-lending:
Health Reform in China at a Crossroads
(FY07); Health Reform in Rural China:

insurance);

Assistance, with

pension scheme and urban residents' pension

Where Next? (FY08); Reforming

strengthen protection for

reformed and
expanded safety
nets program
(dibao)

fairer NCMS
financing
Options identified for
national rural safety

scheme, the Social Insurance Law,
incrementally reforming the urban pension
system, and rolling out a national rural dibao
program.

net policy framework

New Cooperative Medical Schemes (NCMS)
and Medical Assistance (MA) scaled up with
national coverage of NCMS at 95 percent.

China's Rural Health System (FY08);
China Health Policy Notes AAA
(FY10); Reducing Inequality for
Shared Growth in Guangdong Province
(FY09); The Well-Being of China's
Rural Elderly and Old Age Support
(FY10); ; Health Policy Notes (FY10);
Rural Health Reform (FY10); Social

the "near-poor" - those
not eligible for assistance
under the Medical
Assistance budget but
struggling on very low
incomes and often higher
levels of medical need -

*

These national programs benefitted from pilots
61

under Bank-supported Basic Health VIII
project. Innovative pilots under the Rural
Health project are focused on integrating the
MA and the NCMS.

Outcome 2.3:

Lending:

would help address
remaining equity
challenges.
Focusing increasingly on
integration of social
security and assistance
systems across rural and
urban areas and
promoting portability of
entitlements across
regions.
Access to education for

Bank AAA contributed to the emphasis on

Higher Education Reform (FY99 to

children of migrants in

issues such as equity of access in the 12th Five
Year Plan.

FY06; ICR-S; IEGS); Basic
Education in Western Areas (FY04-

urban areas, as well as
children of migrants left

Support to developing technical and vocational
education and training (TVET) programs. The

FY10; ICR-S; IEG-MS); Technical
and Vocational Education & Training

behind in rural areas, is a
key issue.

Ministry of Education (MOE) has vastly
expanded student loans and grants for higher

(FY09)

Demand-driven models of
skills development are

education and provides a stipend of RMB1,500
to eligible general secondary students and all
Technical and Vocational Education and
Training (TVET) students.
IFC activities expanded knowledge on how to
increase access through vocational education,
and to engage the private sector in its provision
1 1 th FYP saw scaling up to national level ofthe
government's "Two Exemptions (of
miscellaneous fees and textbook frees) and One
Subsidy (living subsidies for boarding

Non-lending:
Compulsory Education Finance Reform
Policy Notes (FY09); Education Sector
Review (FY09); Compulsory
Education for Migrant Children in
Guangdong (FY1 0); Policy Notes on
Higher Education (FY1 0); Rural
Compulsory Education Reform
(FY1 0); Early Childhood Development
(FY1 1); TVET chapters of Chongqing
and Guangdong regional economic

important to China's
efforts for industrial
upgrading.
Strengthening education
services for ethnic
minorities and improving
school infrastructure
should be a focus of
engagement in Western
areas.
Enhancing the focus on

students)" pilot program.

reports (FY10); China 2030 Study,

pre-primary education and

Due to the household registration system,

Supporting Volume 4: Equality of

early child development.

migrant children in urban areas still face
formidable barriers due to their rural resident
status and many still attend fee-charging,

Opportunity and Security for All
(FY12)

private schools.IF:MngmtDelo

et
Program (FY05); Market survey of the

Financing plan

Achieved.

Education

options prepared for

*

financing
supports more

free compulsory 9year education

equitable access
and higher

*

*

educational
attainment

Options identified for
higher education

*

financial aid

*

*

*

Assistance in Rural China: Addressing
Poverty Through Rural Dibao (FY10);
Non-Communicable Diseases (FY12);
SP and Labor Market Programmatic
AAA (FYI 1-12); China 2030 Study,
Supporting Volume 4: Equality of
Opportunity and Security for All
(FY12); also see Outcome 2.1.

*

*

private higher education sector (FY07);
Nursing Training (FY07);
Development of VET program-role of

private sector (FY06)
Outcome 2.4:
Health care

*

Options identified for
care-based payment

Achieved.
*
Bank provided policy guidance for the Human

62

Lending:
Basic Health 8 (FY98-FYO7; ICR-S;

*

Where appropriate,
coordinated healthcare

financing
structure
encourages
increased and
more
appropriate use
of health
service,
especially
among rural
poor

*

*

system
Options clarified for
shifting from supply
to demand subsidies
Options identified for
financing and
organizational
reform of public
health

*

*

Development System reform strategy for
national and sub-national governments,
including the health system reform master plan.
Basic Health and Rural Health pilots, Bank
AAA and policy recommendations, and impact
evaluation capacity building, have supported
progress in this outcome.
IFC-supported healthcare projects provide
access and affordability to multi-specialty
medical centers and clinics in multiple
locations, including frontier regions, as well as
affordable and quality medical products.
New Cooperative Medical Schemes (NCMS)
and Medical Assistance Fund (MAF) scaled up
with national coverage of NCMS at 95 percent.
These national programs benefitted from pilots
under Bank-supported Basic Health VIII

IEG-S); Rural Health (FY08);
Tuberculosis Control (FY02-FYI1;
ICR-S; IEG-S)

pilots integrating primary,
secondary and tertiary
health services should be
considered - such
approaches could be
effective in the
management of NCDs
and other relevant
conditions.
Challenges to increasing
the equity of rural health
service provision include:
(i) shifting the focus
towards improving the
health care quality of
health and finding
innovative ways of

Non-lending:
Health Reform in China at a Crossroads
(FY07); Health Reform in Rural China:
Where Next? (FY08); Reforming
Chinas Rural Health System (FY08);
Health Policy Notes (FY10); Rural
Pension & Social Protection (FY10);
Rural Health Reform (FY0); Social
Assistance in Rural China Tracking
Poverty Through Rural Dibao (FY0);
China 2030 Study, Supporting Volume
4: Equality of Opportunity and Security
for All (FY2)

project. Innovative pilots under the Rural
Health project are focused on integrating the
MAF and the NCMS.

broadening access; (ii)
IFC: Beijing United Family HospitalUFH-1 (FY06); Aier Eye Hospital
(FY07); Fosun Pharma (FY07); Weigo
(FY07); Chindex UFH-2 (FY08);
Healthway (FY10); Q&M Dental

moving away from a onesize-fits-all approach to
benefits under NCMS
The WBG could play a
role in presenting global

(FY1 1)

experience as China faces
the challenge of providing
health services for an
aging population and the

children of migrant
workers.
0 Enhancing focus on ruralurban integration of HI.

Outcome 2.5:
Improved

*

Better crop, animal
varieties introduced

agricultural

*

Achieved.
*
Bank support has focused on livestock

Lending:
Anning Valley Agricultural

*

Piloting new ways to
manage PPPs to

New farmers

development and crop improvements,

Development (FY99-FYO7; ICRS;

encourage agricultural

productivity

cooperatives law

ecological management of agricultural and

IEG-S); Smallholder Cattle

innovations, introducing

and incomes in

drafted

livestock production, supply chain

Development (FYOO-FYO6; ICRS;

competitive processes to

Public-private
partnership
approaches to

development, agro-processing, rural
infrastructure, food safety, farmers'
organizations, and a growing emphasis on

IEG-S); Guangzhong Irrigation (FY00FY06; ICR-HS; IEG-S); Water
Conservation (FYO1I-FYO6; ICR-HS;

funding innovative ideas,
and having public
services delivered by the

agricultural
technology piloted

water productivity for agriculture.
IFC-supported investments improved
livelihoods for 120,000 rural people in the rural
provinces of Sichuan and Yunnan.
IFC supported agribusiness projects reached

IEG-HS); Gansu and Xinjiang Pastoral
Development
W
Project (FY4-FY 10);
Jiangxi Integrated Agricultural
Modernization (FY04 to FY10);
P
Agricultural
Technology Transfer

private sector are
important areas for
follow-up activities.
Innovations encouraging
the adoption of improved

project areas,
with scale-up
potential

*

63

*

*
*

1.45 million farmers in 2010.
IFC AS assisted farming households in three
nature reserves develop sustainable income
generating activities as an alternative to logging
and poaching.
Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) for
agricultural technology are being piloted.
There are still weaknesses in agricultural
research, extension, and training of farmers.

(FY05); Changjiang and Pearl River
Watershed Rehabilitation (FY06);
Heilongjiang Dairy (FY06); Irrigated
Agriculture Intensification Loan III
(FY06)
IFC: Muyuan Pig (FY11): Deqingyuan
Egg (FY06); North Andre Juice
(FY05), Century Sunshine (FY07),
Xiwang Sugar (FY10); Koyo Fertilizer
(FYO9/1 1); Jiuda Salt (FY08)

technology in agriculture,
as well as concern for
environmental impacts,
provide a good basis for
future agricultural and
irrigation system
development.

Non-lending:
China's Compliance with Food Safety
Requirements for Fruits and Vegetables
(FY06); Farmer's Professional
Associations (FY07); Addressing
China's Water Scarcity:
Recommendations for Selected Water
Resource Management Issues (FY09);
Food Safety in China (FY09);
Chongqing Urban-Rural Linkages
Study (FY09); Adapting Agriculture
Production Systems to Climate Change
(FY10);

Outcome 2.6:
Reduced
transport,
utilities, and
communications
costs, improved
access to
relevant
information for
the poor in
selected areas

*

Projects piloted in
rural and small-town
transportation and
communications
infrastructure,
modeling new
approaches

Achieved.
WBG has supported rural road improvements,
providing better access to main road networks,
reducing travel time and increasing mobility.
Better road networks have also relieved traffic
pressure.
WBG has supported expansion of railway
capacity, which has resulted in eliminating
major bottlenecks and improved access to the
markets of eastern China for the poorest
provinces.
Bank projects supported institutional

64

IFC: Minshan Reserve (FYO5)Linkages
for Sichuan and Yunnan Milk Farmers
(FY06), North Andre Traceability and
Farm Management (FY07); Changyu
Grape Diseases Management Systems
(FY08), Kiwi Sector Linkages (FY09)
Lending:
Inland Waterway I1-V (FY98-FY1 1);
Wuhan Urban Transport I (FY04FY10; ICR-S; IEGMS) & 11 (FY10);
National Railway Project (FYO2-FYO8;
ICR-S; IEG-S); Hubei Shiman
Highway (FY04-FYI1; ICR-S;
IEG-S); Third Jiangxi Highway
(FYO6-FY1 1; ICR-S) Fujian Highway
Sector and AF (FY07 & FY11);
Shaanxi Ankang Road Development
(FY07); Anhui Highway Rehabilitation

Implementation of rural
roads components
requires close cooperation
between provincial and
local government
authorities.
Ongoing work on rural
information and
communications focuses
on ICT policy and
regulations, as well as
issues related to the

*

*

strengthening to help improve the management
of transportation systems.
Projects were piloted in rural and small-town
transportation and communications
infrastructure, modeling new approaches.
Bank-supported inland waterway projects
lowered transport costs.

Outcome 2.7:

Options identified for

Partially achieved.

More equitable
access to social

reforming urban
social policies to

*

services in
urban areas

reduce
discrimination
against migrants and
improve access to
information and
services

*

*

*

Outcome 2.8:
Better
employment

*

Labor-market led
skills training
programs

(FY08); Guiyang Transport (FY08);
ShiZheng Railway (FY08); National
Railway 3 (FY08); Ningxia Highway
(FY11)
Non-Lending:
China's Information Revolution:
Managing the Economic & Social
Transformation (FY07); Sustainable
Development of Inland Waterway
Transport in China (FY09); Tracks
from the Past, Transport for the Future:
China's Railway Industry 1990-2008
(FY09); Urban Rail Development in
China (FY09)
Lending:

*

*

digital divide. This work
should underpin any
future lending operations.
Experience with highway
projects show that they
can generate important
social benefits during
implementation through
well-designed and
implemented social
policies.
The benefits of technical
assistance can be
enhanced through the
conduct of seminars.
The unprecedented scale

WBG engagement on migrant worker skill
development and employment, urban transport,

Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure
2 (FY07); Rural Migrant Skills and

and pace of rural-urban
migration poses

and the housing market has contributed to the
outcome.
AAA at the provincial level has helped to
integrate and prioritize government
interventions to address inequality through
equalization of basic public services.

Employment Development (FY08)

opportunities and
challenges, and the Bank
can continue to play a role
in supporting policies and
innovative projects and
pilots.

A series of Supreme Court (SC) and ministerial
documents were issued to address the issues,

Integration (FY09); From Poor Areas
to Poor People: China's Evolving

*

Stronger emphasis on
evaluating sub-national

The Labor Contract Law was enacted in

Poverty Reduction Agenda (FY09);

*

pilots in areas such as

January 2008 which provides a stronger legal
framework for the protection of workers'

Urban Expansion, Land Conservation
& Affordable Housing (FY09);

rights, including those of migrants.

Reducing Inequality for Shared Growth

Increased sub-national experimentation in
integration of social security programs across
rural and urban areas has special benefits for

in Guangdong Province (FY09);
Compulsory Education for Migrant
Children in Guangdong (FY1 0); Rural

migrants.
O Experiments are underway with hukou reforms
with the objective of leveling the playing field
with respect to access to services for migrant
workers.
Partially achieved.
Projects have supported capacity building for
employment services for migrant workers,

Non-lending
China Urbanizes: Consequences,
Strategies, and Policies (FY08);
Chongqing-Guangdong Rural Urban

hukou reform would be
desirable.

to Urban Migration Social Policies
(FY0); ESMAP Urban Accessibility
Planning Wuhan Case Study (FY12);
SP and Labor Market Programmatic
AAA (FY12).
Lending:
Rural Migrant Skills and Employment
Development (FY08); Technical and

Greater focus on technical
assistance and capacity
building to improve the

opportunities

successfully piloted

worker protection activities, and pilots of

Vocational Education & Training

quality of skills training

for migrants,

and scaled-up

school-based reforms and innovations to

(FY09); Chongqing Urban-Rural

programs is needed going

65

and protection
of their rights in
selected areas

Outcome 2.9:
Strengthened
urban planning

Integrated
development
strategy/plan

improve TVET quality and relevance.
However, in some projects there has been a
more limited engagement in technical activities
to improve program quality or introduce new
thinking and best practice.
*
Increased attention to market demand with
higher levels of employer-ordered training in
some TVET programs
*
Systematic and rigorous review of impact is
still lacking. While there is increasing
awareness of migrant rights, the longer run
approach will also require deepening reforms
of the hukou system, and promotion of more
integrated rural-urban social programs.
Partially achieved.
Bank projects have helped to advance
integrated urban/municipal planning

Integration (FY10); Liaoning and
Shandong TVET (FY10)

Lending:
Fuzhou Nantai Island Pen-Urban
Development (FY06); Liaoning

forward.
The basis for the next
CPS program should be
formed from Banksupported analytic work
on migrant workers with
overviews of trends and
issues in social policies
towards migrant workers,
access to urban social
security, education for
migrant children, and the
experience of hukou
reform.
Lessons for engagement
under the next CPS can be
drawn from WBG-

Non-lending:
China Urbanizes: Consequences,
Strategies, and Policies (FY08); China's
Modernizing Labor Market (FY08);
Chongqing-Guangdong Rural Urban
Integration (FY09); Reducing
Inequality for Shared Growth in
Guangdong Province (FY09)

*

and

prepared for selected

approaches (Wuhan Urban Transport, Xian

Medium Cities I & 11 (FY06, FY07);

supported analytic work

management in
selected

jurisdiction(s)

Urban Development, Cultural Heritage
projects).

Sichuan Urban Development (FY07);
Xian Sustainable Urban Transport

on household urban
services, firm

The Government has initiated pilot programs

(FY08), Chongqing Urban-Rural

competitiveness surveys,

aggressively promoting integrated urban and
rural development covering regional planning,

Integrated Development (FY10);
Wuhan Urban Transport I (FY0

infrastructure, transport, labor market and
social protection, and social services including
health, education and housing.

FY10; ICR-S; IEG-MS); Anhui
Medium Cities Urban Transport
(FY1 0); Kunming Urban Rail Project

lending operation
experience, including
multi-sectoral programs to

China is trying to build the capacity of

(FY1 1); Cultural Heritage Projects (see

support pilot projects,

infrastructure service providers in small towns

Outcome 3.9)

municipal and metro

Non-lending:

proj ects, skills
development, and urban

Building Institutions for Sustainable

transport.

Urban Transport (FY06); China
Urbanizes: Consequences, Strategies,
and Policies (FY08); Improving the
Market Borrowing Practices of Urban
Development Investment Corporations
(FY09); Urban Expansion, Land
Conservation & Affordable Housing
(FY09); Urban Rail Development in
China (FY09); Urban Rail
Development in China: Prospects,
Issues and Options (FY160); WBI
programs (partnership with China

Western provinces with
weaker planning
capacities will require
particular attention going
forward, including
projects focused on multisector infrastructure
interventions.

jurisdictions

*

-

to support rapid urbanization.

Urban Planning Society)
66

and metropolitan
management, as well as

Pillar 3: Managing Resource Scarcity and Environmental Challenges
Outcome 3.1:
Examples piloted of
Partially achieved.
Opportunities
integrated
Under the Shanghai Urban Environment APL,
identified for
metropolitan area
the Bank has supported enhanced metro-area
metropolitan
planning, financing,
financial architecture through the District
areas to benefit
or managing through
Financing Vehicle, a new infrastructure finance
from planning,
transaction or new
option introduced for suburban areas.
financing,
institutional
Changsha-Zhuzhou-Xiangtan triangle in Hunan
managing
arrangements
Province is a main pilot for regional scale
investments on
planning and investment approach.
metro/regional
Shared environmental infrastructure facilities
scale
designed, constructed and operated jointly by

neighboring municipal districts are being
piloted in the Pearl River Delta.

Lending:
Guangdong Pearl River Delta Urban
Environment (FYO4-FY1O); Hunan
Urban Development Project (FY05);
Shanghai Urban Environment APL 11
(FY06) & III (FY09); Chongqing
Urban-Rural Integration (FY10)

Continued support is
needed to strengthen
Urban Development
Investment Corporations
(UDIC) for better
management and
financing options.
WBG support to help
small towns through
global experience sharing
is valued and should

Non-lending:
Also see Outcome 2.9; Chongqing
Urban-Rural Linkages Study (FY09);

Chongqing-Guangdong Rural Urban
Integration (FY09)

continue.

China has been relatively slow to formally
implement metropolitan-based management
systems.
Outcome 3.2:

Clean energy and

Achieved.

More efficient
energy supply

renewable energy
technologies piloted

*

systems

demonstrated

*

Lending:

This area will continue to

Studies and TA strongly influenced policy
development, RE laws and regulations. Among

Energy Conservation I (FY98-FYO6;
ICR=S; IEG=S) ; Renewable Energy

be a key focus for China
during the next CPS

and scaled-up

others, WBG supported domestic wind

Development (FY99-FYO7; ICRS;

More efficient ways

manufacturing (as well as biomass industry)

IEG=S); Renewable Energy Scale Up

of supplying and
using coal
demonstrated

and some of the first large scale on-grid wind
power projects. Also helped introduce the
market framework for PV sector
commercialization,
IFC' CHUEE program facilitated $1.4 billion

(FYor-FYt 1); Nanjing Steel Converter
Gas Recovery Project (FY06);
Guangdong Huizhou CCGT CDM
project (FY08); GEF Thermal Power
Efficiency (FY09); Shandong Energy

on renewables should
focus on reduction of
incremental costs,
efficiency improvements,
and smooth grid

investment for over 160 EE and RE projects

Efficiency (FY1 1)

integration.

resulting in 17.8 million tonSe of GHG
emissions avoided annually in steel, cement,
glass, and other key sectors. To date 14.4 mil
MWH/year avoided.
eIFC
financed renewable energy development
and the whole supply chain.
Demo projects supported by carbon financing
have advanced cleaner energy supply options,
including CCGT power plants and gas recovery
and power generation systems.
Projects supported household solar systems to

IFC: Zhongda Hydro (FY06, 09, 10 &
11); Beijing Shenwu (FY11); CHUEE
1 BOB (FY07); Xinao CTC FY07 &
(FY08); China
09); China Glass
Wind Power (FY10 & 11) EEC China
CBM (FY08); Asia Environment
Partners (FY08), Amkonzen Asia
Water Fund (FY10); New Elements
(FY11); Goldwind (FY10); Suntech
Solar (FY09); China Environment Fund

*

*

period.
*

Continued WBG support

million tons of GHG emissions achieved directly through the guarantee program and an additional 41 million S17.3
tons avoided indirectly through partner financial institutions.

67

*

*

increase electricity access to poor areas of
western China.
Lending and AAA supported coal bed methane
(CBM) and coal mine methane (CMM) as
substitutes to coal.
IFC supported projects contributed to
renewable energy (wind and hydro) supply and
use of energy efficient technology for

(FY09& 1)
Non-lending
Sustainable Energy in China (FY07);
Financing Energy Efficiency: Lessons
from Brazil, China, India, and Beyond
(FY08); Coal Bed Methane (CBM) and
Coal Mine Methane
(CMM) (FY08);
Development
and Utilization

commrcil
hosehld
ad ppliatins.Strengthening Energy Efficiency
(FY08); Economically, Socially, and
Environmentally Sustainable Coal
Mining Sector in China (FY09);
Energy Intensity Strategy (FY1 0);

Outcome 3.3:
More efficient
water supply

Water savings
concept piloted and
scaled-up

Partially Achieved
China is continuously increasing its wastewater
treatment capacity for urban areas, with Bank

IFC: FEEC China CBM; China Wind
Advisory (06); China Utility Based EE
Program (FY7-1 1); Yunnan
Whitewater Hydro Power Study (FY06,
FY07); CHUEE SME (FY1 1)
Lending: nModels
Liao
M River Basin (FYOI-FY9; ICR=S;
IEGS); Water Conservation (FY01-

for water services
focusing on how to bring
concessional finance to

systems piloted;
water

9

Bulk water markets
piloted

support in numerous projects. Recently, the
focus has shifted to secondary cities and towns.

FY06; ICR=HS; IEG=HS); Guangdong
Pearl River Delta I & 11 (FY04, FY07);

small towns to improve
their financing are being

productivity
increased in
selected
jurisdictions

0

Model urban water
supply and
wastewater
treatment facilities

Projects have helped raise productivity of water
use in low and medium yield farmland and
introduced climate-change sensitive farming
techniques to improve resilience to potential
water supply impacts. GEF-supported project

Irrigated Agriculture Intensification
A
Loan III (FYO6-FY1 1); Shanghai
Urban Environment APL S (FY06) &
III (FY09); Western Provinces Rural
Water Supply (FY07); Bengbu

developed.

components have helped enhance adaptation to

Integrated Environment Improvement

climate change in irrigation water management
practices through awareness-raising,
institutional and capacity strengthening, and
demonstration activities. Climate Change
adaptation recs have been integrated into
agricultural policy.
IFC supported investment projects provided 3.7
million customers with access to clean and
reliable water; 198 cubic meter of water has
been treated in water treatment plants.
Activities have been scaled up by domestic
programs under the ongoing National Irrigated
Agricultural Water Savings Program.

Project (FY08); Shandong
Environmental 2 (FY08); Han River
Urban Environment Improvement
Project (FY08); Xining Flood and
Watershed Management (FY09).

built

0

*

68

IFC: Asia Environment Hldgs (FY08),
Beijing Sound (FY07); Epure BOT
(FY10 & 11); Amkonzen Asia Water
Fund (AWF) (FY0)
Non-lending:
MIGA Support (including Zhenjiang

*
*

Outcome 3.4:
Viable policies

*

Roadmap identified
for liberalizing water

Additional time is needed to pilot bulk water
markets.
Strengthening of water rights is underway in
preparation for market development.

Achieved.
*
EL lending program is one of the largest in the

Golden State Water Company, Deqing
Darco Water Company, and Chongqing
Water Company Guarantees); Pro-Poor
Rural Water Reform Project Technical
Assistance (FYO4-FYO9; ICR=HS);
Water Quality Management (FY07);
North China Water Quality
Management Study (FY07);
Addressing Water Scarcity (FY09);
Water Supply Pricing in China (FY09);
Water Pricing & Water User
Associations Sustainability (FY12);
IFC: Water program (FY11)
Lending:
Second Beijing Environment (FY00-

Bank support is shifting
the focus from energy

and

and energy markets,

World Bank, with programs in direct

FY09; JCR-S); Huai River Pollution

intensive, high impact

technologies
identified to
help reduce
water and
energy
consumption
per unit of GDP

so prices reflect total
marginal cost
Appropriate
resource-use
standards
articulated, with TA
for improved

investments, support to energy management
companies, and financing mechanisms for
energy efficiency investments. Bank-supported
projects have played a key role in the
successful development of the nascent Energy
Management Company industry in China.
The World Bank has supported Chinese cities

Control (FYO2-FYO8; JCR-S; JEG-S);
National Railway (FYO2-FYO8;
JCR-S; JEG-S); Energy Conservation
11 (FY03-FYI1; JCR-S); The Wuhan
Urban Transport Project (FY04FY10); GEF Heat Reform and Building
Energy Efficiency (FY05-FY12);

road projects to lower
energy usage systems,
including public transport,
railways, and inland
waterways.
Complementary JBRDJFC activities provide

enforcement
* Approaches
identified to reducing
water use in
agriculture

in developing eco-friendly transport systems
and low-carbon growth strategies, and has
helped local governments build knowledge on
developing sustainable urban transport.
District heating investment programs focus on

Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure
Project (FY06); Mainstreaming
Climate Change Adaptation in Irrigated
Agriculture Project and Irrigated
Agriculture Intensification Loan III

Transport,
urbanization options
identified to reduce

substantial EE improvements and air quality
co-benefits.
Projects demonstrated sustainable participatory

(FYO6-FY1 1); China-GEF-World Bank
Urban Transport Partnership Program
(FY08); Energy Efficiency Financing I

potential additionality
(small enterprises); focus
more on activities with

transport-generated
pollution, fuel use.

rural water resources management and agroecological environmental management,
increasing the efficiency of on-farm irrigation
systems and boosting water and agricultural
productivity. County Groundwater
Management Plans and water use associations

(FY08); Xi'an Sustainable Urban
Transport Project and GEF (FY08)

greater emission reduction
potential (energy
efficiency for buildings);
reorient subsidies to areas
of market failure.

have also been supported.
AAA on water resource management and
adapting agricultural production to climate

Non-lending:
See also Outcomes 3.2 and 3.3;
Building Institutions for Sustainable

change (combined with experience gained from

Urban Transport (FY06); Addressing

GEF pilot programs) are shaping upcoming
lending projects.

China's Water Scarcity:
Recommendations for Selected Water

*

69

[IFC: See IFC Lending in Outcome
3.2]:

*

*

strong support for energy
efficiency.
Work building on IFC's
CHUEE program should:
emphasize areas with high

*

Outcome 3.5:
Environmental
concerns
mainstreamed

*

Strategic
environmental
assessments piloted
for selected sectors

The Government has piloted a program for
water trading in Gansu.

Achieved.
The Bank supported the development of pilot
Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEA)
and also training programs in the Ministry of

Resource Management Issues (FY09);
Sustainable Development of Inland
Waterway Transport in China (FY09);
Tracks from the Past, Transport for the
Future: China's Railway Industry 19902008 and its Future Plans (FY09);
Policy Notes for Railway Sector
(FY09); Accelerating Energy
Conservation in China's Provinces
(FY10); Energy Intensity Strategy
(FY10); Social Analysis of Heat
Reforms in Liaoning Province (FY10);
Adapting Agriculture Production
Systems to Climate Change (FY10)
[IFC: See IFC non-Lending in
Outcome 3.2]
Lending
Liao River Basin (FYO1-FYO9; ICR-S;
IEG-S); Sustainable Forestry
Development (FY03-FYI1; ICR-S);

Future support can build
on Bank analytic work,
including Green
Accounting (though there

into

and regions

Environment Protection to help promote the

Hai Basin Integrated Water and

has been some reluctance

development
plans and
activities,
resource
management

Improved
approaches to land,
forest, groundwater,
water basin, and
river management

application of SEA in development plans and
programs as required by the China EIA Law
but no systematic improvement of SEA
capacity at the local level yet.
Hai Basin project was highly successfully in

Environment Management (FY04FY11); Shanghai Urban Environment
APL 11 (FY06-FY12), III (FY09);
Shandong Environment 11 (FY07);
Second Guangdong Pearl River Delta

to implement the system),
and studies on building
community-based systems
for natural resource
management and

systems

piloted in selected
projects

advancing integrated water and environment
management approaches.

Urban Environment Project (FY07);
Changjiang and Pearl River Watershed

Forestry projects demonstrated new approaches

Rehabilitation (FY06); GEF

is crucial to the

to natural forest resource management,

Mainstreaming Climate Change

effectiveness of protected

emphasizing local community participation,
providing models for wider replication.

Adaptation in Irrigated Agriculture
Project (FYO6-FY 1); Guangxi

area management and
should continue to be

China's Industrial Bank adopted the Equator
Principles (EP) in 2008; China EXIM Bank is

Integrated Forestry Development
(FY07)

using a PS-based internal environmental and
social risks review process.
The Circular Economy Promotion law, drafted
through a Bank AAA support, was passed by
the Congress in 2008 and became effective in
2009. However, further improvement in the
existing legal and legislative system including
amending existing laws and regulations and
introducing new regulations and administrative

Non-lending:
Pro-Poor Rural Water Reform Project
Technical Assistance (FYO4-FYO9;
ICRHS); Water Quality Management
(FY07); Coal Bed Methane (CBM) and
Coal Mine Methane (CMM)
Development and Utilization (FY08);
Developing a Circular Economy in

*

S

*

f

70

*

*

economic empowerment.
Community participation

stressed.
Future support can also
work to address conflicts
between the Circular
Economy Promotion Law
and other existing laws or
regulations.

*

*

*

rules for promoting a circular economy is yet to
be done.
Bank projects have supported County
Groundwater Management Plans and there
have been attempts to transfer major urban
supplies from groundwater to alternative
sources (e.g., in Jiangsu). The Bank continues
to support the development of sustainable water
use associations.
Climate change adaptation measures,
techniques, and activities have been
mainstreamed into agricultural development
programs in project areas.
Capacity building for Environmental Protection
Bureaus (Sichuan) and Private Sector
(Guangzhou Development Industry Holdings)
in cleaner production and environmental and

China (FY09); Strengthening Chinas
Environmental Protection
Administrative System (FY09); Forest
Policy - Deepening the Transition,
Broadening the Relationship (FY09);
Forestry Policy Dialogue (FY10);
Water Pricing & Water User
Associations Sustainability (FY12);
China 2030 Study, Supporting Volume
3: Seizing the Opportunity of Green
Development in China.

social management.

to Define Business Practices in Wood

JFC: Quality and Sustainability
Performance of private enterprise
(FY06); ES Standards in ICT (FY07);
Carbon Finance Aggregation through
FIs (FY08); China-Fenglin Inter Study
Industry (FY06); Guangzhou

Development Industry Holdings CSR
(FY08); Sichuan Environmental
Compliance Project (FY06)
Outcome 3.6:
Improved waste

Roadmap identified
for increasing waste

management in
selected

jurisdictions

*

Achieved.
The Government's

thBFYP

identifies solid

Lending:
P
Liao River Basin (FYO-FYO9; ICRS;

Tackling the waste
separation problem facing

removal fees

waste management as a key target activity.

IEG-S); Guangxi Urban Environment

cities by building modern

Model urban solid

However, the limited institutional framework

(FY98-FYO7; ICRS; IEGS);

solid waste management

and liquid waste

for this agenda complicates Bank engagement.

Zhejiang Urban Environment Project

systems and addressing

Projects have expanded wastewater treatment

(FYO4-FY1 1; ICRS); Ningbo Water

inadequate waste

capacity, reducing pollution in key bodies of
water.

(FYO5-FY1 1; ICR-S); Liuzhou
Environment Management Project I

collection and
transportation

(FYO5-FYII); ShanghaiUrban
Environment APL (FYo6-FY12), III
(FY09); Second Guangdong Pearl
River Delta Urban Environment Project
(FY07); Shandong Environmental
ds
&
GEF (FY07); Han River Urban
Environment Improvement Project o
(FY08); GEF-Ningbo Water and
Environment Project (FY08)

removal systems

*

implemented
0 Policies, mechanisms
to address
agriculture non-point
pollution piloted and
scaled-up

IFC UEEV (FY08)

infrastructure, and low
public awareness and
participation, should be a
focus of WBG
engagement going
forward.
The experience from
implementing the WBGfinanced Eco-farming
Project, solid waste
components in urban

million customers with access to clean and

[IFC: See also IFC lending

projects, other urban

reliable water; 198 cubic meter of water has

interventions in water and waste water

water/sanitation projects,

Water supply, wastewater collection and
treatment, and solid waste services
investments, as well as river rehabilitation
works have improved environmental conditions
in project areas.
*
Bank TA has built capacity of national
agencies, experts and officials, as well as local
implementing agencies, to use integrated
approaches for water management and
pollution control in selected areas.
SIFC supported investment projects provided 3.7
*

71

*

Outcome 3.7:
Model land
administration

*

and
management
systems

*

developed

Integrated land
administration and
management system

Achieved.
Significant progress has been made towards
this outcome, including the revision of the

in Outcome Area 3.3]
Non-lending:
MIGA Support; Integrated Village
Poverty Reduction Planning and
Ecological Environment Protection
(FY06); Waste Management in China:
Issues and Recommendations (FY06)

and increasing
government recognition
of the severity of nonpoint source pollution will
guide next steps.

[IFC: See IFC Non-lending
interventions in water and waste water
in Outcome Area 3.3]
Non-lending:
Chongqing Urban-Rural Linkages
Study (FY09); Urban Expansion, Land

Results of a pilot
supporting rural land
registration (Anhui) can

piloted

Property Law to designate property rights, and

Conservation & Affordable Housing

be used to design future

Options identified for
revising property law

to differentiate between resettlement for public
projects and others,

(FY10)

support. The Chongqing
rural-urban linkages study

to recognize land
contracting rights,

*

been treated in water treatment plants.
IFC investment supports the construction and
operation of medical waste facilities.

*

rural land as
collateral
New land acquisition

The Rural,[Urban Planning Law has also been
revised to control transfer of rural land to

has also looked at land
issues.

urban, to offer greater social protection, and to
rationalize transfer of land.
Chongqing is being piloted as a city for

policy articulated

urban/rural reform including land reform.
*

*

Land Acquisition regulations are implemented
to strengthen control of conversion of basic

farmland to other usage.
Other achievements include the piloting of
pension schemes to recognize the collateral
value of rural land, restructuring of the

Ministry of Construction to cover both urban
and rural construction, and land development.
A policy announcement extends the rural 30-

year lease fights to perpetual rights. The rural
land registration pilot projects carried out in
eight provinces will be expanded to include all

provinces.
Outcome 3.8:

Options identified for

Achieved.
t

China continues

stabilizing GUG

*

to make
progress in
meeting its
commitments
under

emissions
Model projects
undertaken for
phasing out selected
POPs (PCBs,

i

nThe

Lending:

WBG can continue to

AAA and lending has identified options and

Third ODS Phase Out (FY95-FY09,

play a critical catalytic

suggested future directions for stabilizing
pGHG, renewable energy, energy efficiency, and
low carbon growth.
Bank AAA and policy dialogue supported
opening of CDM market in China. China is

ICR-S; IEG-S); Liaoning Medium
Cities Infrastructure (FY06); PCB
Management and Disposal
Demonstration (FY06); Shandong
Environment 2 (FY07); Shandong Flue

role by facilitating the
exchange of global
knowledge and
experience, helping China
to tap available resources

72

environmental
conventions

*

*

chlordane, mirex)
Options for
biodiversity
protection strategy
articulated
Model projects
implemented for
reducing land-based
pollution in coastal

*

about 70% of Bank's CDM portfolio. GEF
programs are piloting innovative low carbon
and GHG abatement approaches.
FC's CHUEE guarantee program directly
avoids 17.3 million tons of GHG emissions
annually via implementation of multiple EL/RE
projects and an additional 41 million tons
indirectly through partner financial institutions.
The PCB program has been successful and is

Gas Desuifarization (FY08); Shanxi
Coal Bed Methane Development and
Utilization Project (FY09); EcoFarming Project (FY09); Thermal
Power Efficiency (FY09); GEF
programs and Carbon Finance projects;

and funds (e.g., Carbon
Funds), and supporting
lending and non-lending
activities.
Programs should build on
the experience of Banksupported work in the
area of climate change
issues, CDM transactions,

[See also JFC Lending in Outcome
Area 3.2]

the development of the

now moving on to the termite irradiation

areas

chemical program and other programs. SEPA
(China's Environment Protection Agency) has
developed the biodiversity strategy supported
by UNDP.
ODS 3 phased out a total of 19 T Ozone
Depleting Potential through 87 subprojects.
With the combined ODS I- IV projects, China
met its 5000 reduction target for CFCs and
halons, and its 850%reduction target for CFCs -

fully compliant with its international
*

Non-lending:
National Climate Change Strategy and
Program (on-going); Sustainable
Energy in China (FY07); Shanghai:
Developing a Green Electricity Scheme
(FY07); Meeting the Challenges of
Offshore and Large Scale Wind Power
(FY09); Clean Development

Carbon Investment Fund,
the Climate Partnership
Fund, and programs for
implementation support
for biogas and JGCC.

Mechanism in China: Five Years of
Experience (FY09); China's Envisaged

obligations under the Montreal Protocol.
There has been a major increase in land-based
pollution control in coastal cities and full

Renewable Energy Target (FY11)

participation in regional cooperation efforts

interventions in Outcome Areas 3.2 and

such as Partnerships in Environmental
Management for the Seas of East Asia
(PEMSEA).
bChina's Industrial Bank adopted the Equator
Principles (EP) in 2008; China EXIM Bank is

3.5]
Performance Standards for Banking
Sector (FY1), China Utility-Based
Energy Efficiency Finance Program
(FY07)

JFC: See also JFC non-lending

using a PS-based internal environmental and
social risks review process; the ICBC is
applying the EP in its overseas investment

activities.
Outcome 3.9:

Listed heritage sites

Achieved.

Model heritage
and tourism
projects

piloted, with
environmental
protection in place

*

developed

Lending:

*

Strengthening the

Bank-supported projects integrated cultural
heritage into urban development. These
projects strengthened wastewater collection and

Zhejiang Urban Environment Project
(FYO4-FY1 1; ICR-S); Gansu Cultural
and Natural Heritage Project (FY08);

integration of cultural
heritage conservation and
tourism development is an

urban infrastructure, and also upgraded historic
residences.
China-World Bank partnership has focused on
supporting conservation institutions and
specialists through the development of such
tools as provincial cultural heritage strategies
and digital archives. The partnership has also

Guizhou Cultural and Natural Heritage
Protection (FY09); Shandong
Confucius and Mencius Culture
Heritage Protection (FY11)

area that can be improved
on in fture projects.
Helping local
communities capture the
economic benefits of
cultural heritage projects
should be a focus going

73

focused on more sustainable financial planning,
operation, and maintenance of heritage sites.

forward, as the quality of
locally-provided tourism
products and services are
low and generate only
small incomes.

Pillar 4: Financinr Sustained and Efficient Growth
Outcome 4.1:
*
Barriers to
Achieved.
Access to
commercial small0
The MSE Finance Project supported by the
selected
scale finance
WBG demonstrated that MSE lending can be
financial
identified
commercially sustainable in China and led to
services (rural
.
Market-oriented
more MSE lending by banks.
credit, smallrural finance scheme
9
WBG policy dialogues contributed to
scale credit,
piloted
liberalization of lending interest rates and
housing
0
PSRB Financing to
regulatory changes to promote MSE lending.
finance)
rural small
Most lending interest rates were liberalized
expanded in
businesses piloted
except those set by RCCs and UCCs (Rural and
selected
0
Secondary mortgage
Urban Credit Cooperatives).

IFC: Zhong An Credit (FY08);
MicroCred (FY08); IMMC (FY08);
CFPA (FY10); Renshou VTB (FY09);
Shenzhen VTB (FY10); Beichuan VTB
(FY10); Chengdu Small Enterprise
Credit Guarantee (FY09); Puhui
Guarantee (FY11); Deyang Bank,

Joint approach by the
Bank and IFC has worked
well and should be the
preferred modality going
forward.
Lack of capacity at all
levels of banks, including
management and credit
officers, stands out as a
major impediment, calling
for a systematic approach

jurisdictions

markets expanded in
0

0

Lending:
Micro and Small Enterprise Finance
(FY07)

IFC supported establishment of nation-wide

Binhai Rural Commercial Bank

to training and advisory

pilot jurisdictions

credit reporting system covering 792 million

(FY08); United Rural Commercial

services.

Pilot microfinance

individuals and 17.9 million legal entities. The

Bank (FY06)

financing-only

cumulative number of inquires by the end of

institutions
Pilot credit
information systems
established (inc. for
consumer credit)

*

*

2010 has reached 812 million. The system
supports lending of about $ 1.4 trillion per year
IFC has invested a total of $18.7 million in 9
microfinance institutions in this period.
Included the creation of the first foreigninvested micro-credit company, the first Sinoforeign joint venture village bank, and the first
NGO transformation company.
* $900 million mobilized for Banks serving
MSMEs while Advisory Service TA has
reached hundreds of thousands of SMEs.

M oDeveloped the landmark Low-Income Housi

Policy in 2008, allowing Central Government
and Regional Governments to increase lowrental housing development by 5- 10 times in
comaredto
20 1 207.MFI
2010compredto
207.Shenzhen

Vast and growing demand
for MSE finance suggests

Non-lending:
IFC: SME Access to Finance (FY06);
China Microfinance Pilots (FY07);
China Housing Finance Advisory
(FY07); TA to NCCM for small
business lending (FY07); China
Microfinance advisory program 1 and
11 (FY09; FY10); TA to CFPA
Microfinance Transformation (FY 10);
Credit Reporting System Development
(FY07);TA (Beichuan (FY1 1), Accion
(FY08), Renzhou (FY10), Harbin

(FY10), Zhong An FY08), MC
Nanchong (FY08)); Credit Reporting
System Development (FY07);Chifeng
-Inner Mongolia (FY08);
VTB (FY 10)
WBI programs including the
Microfinance Training of Trainers
course

74

*

*

the need for innovative
approaches that take hold
and spread faster.
Unraveling of subprime
mortgages has revealed
deep-rooted problems.
Continued work should
address standardization
and regulation of primary
housing finance
instruments.

Outcome 4.2:
Enabling
environment for
capital markets
and insurance
industry

improved

*

Options prudent
investor protection
scheme articulated
with view to adoption
by 2010
Legal framework and

appropriate
regulatory
institutions developed
in areas such as (e.g.)
securities law,
secured Financing
law, futures law,
leasing law,

Achieved.
JFC worked with the government and the
People's Bank of China (PBOC) to develop and
roll-out a secured transactions system to enable
and promote the use of movable assets as
collateral. According to a recent independent

*

*

securitization law

evaluation, as of June 2011 more than $3
trillion in credit had been distributed through
more than 385,000 loans to businesses,
including many small enterprises.
The successful reform of non-tradable shares
paved the way for further deepening of stock
markets and enhanced investor confidence,
The strategic vision of the capital market in the

Lending:
JFC: ANCHENG (Non-Life Ins)
(FY11); New China Life 2 (FY11)
Non-lending:
IFC: Promoting Enterprise-Led

Going forward, a
continued joint Bank-IFC
approach is preferred. IFC
investments and TA
provided support to NonBank Financial

Innovation in China; Secured
Transactions Reform ( FYO4-06);
Jiangsu Financial Leasing Co., Ltd.
Advisory Services (FY09); China
Personal Bankruptcy Law Phase I and
11 (FY0 8, FY1 1); Credit reporting
system Development in China (FY07)

Institutions (NBFI) and
assisted in addressing
distressed assets markets
while the Bank provided
TA support to selected
regulatory bodies (CSRC,
CIRC, PBoC).

Non-lending:
IFC Panda Bond (FY06 and FY07);

IBRD projects should
continue to support the

IFC Dim Sum Bond (FY1 0)

development of
municipal/enterprise

medium to long-term was formulated by China

Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) and
a securities investor protection scheme was
created.

0 The legal framework is being strengthened
(Securities Law was amended; the Real Rights

Law was enacted, providing the foundation for
modern secured transactions framework; a

Leasing Law is in the legislation pipeline).
Outcome 4.3:
More developed

Municipal and
enterprise bond

infrastructure
finance

markets developed in
selected jurisdictions

Achieved.
Corporate bond market regulations were

streamlined with CSRC given a more dominant
role, However, municipal debt issuance still

or lines of business
i

remains undeveloped,
In FY07, IFC issued its second Panda Bond in
the Chinese domestic market for RMB 870

million (approximately $110 million
equivalent); the bonds were placed with
institutional investors in the national interbank
market. The transaction followed the RMB
1.13 billion first Panda Bond issue in FY06 and
marked the first time a multilateral organization
has issued a follow-up bond in China. It builds
on the success of IFC's first Panda bond by
providing a model for future high-grade
issuers, helping deepen the capital markets and
supporting long-term local currency financing
for a number of Chinese companies engaged in
sectors including agribusiness, health care, and
small and medium enterprise finance.

75

infrastructure bond
markets and
securitization.
*

The IFC ("Panda Bonds")
has supported bond issues
in local currency to
enhance private
companies access to
financing.

Outcome 4.4:
Strengthened
corporate
governance,
including

Steps taken to
strengthen corporate
governance
framework in line
with OECD

*

improving

Partially achieved.
49 project-trained professional institutions
provided corporate governance consulting
services to 148 client companies, reviewed 172
corporate governance procedures for

principles

transparency

and
accountability

*

Non-lending:

China will likely continue
to look to its international
partners, including the
WBG, for support and
expertise in strengthening

improvement, and facilitated investments of

Promoting Enterprise-Led Innovation

private sector practices

$50 million into companies with improved CG.

in China (FY09); China ROSC

and regulatory oversight.

All three financial regulators promulgated
guidelines on corporate governance of financial

Accounting and Auditing Review
(FY10)

institutions in their jurisdiction in line with
OECD principles and best practice
recommended by international regulatory
bodies. Corporate governance m Financial

IFC: Strengthening of Lotus Corporate
Governance and Retail and SME
Finance (FY06); Environmental and

Institutions (FI) has taken shape, even though
effectiveness remains to be improved.

Outcome 4.5:
PBoC capacity
to identify,
assess and
mitigate
systemic risks
strengthened

Options identified for
reforming
ownership,
governance
structures of SCBs
(incl. sale of strategic
stakes)
Options for bank
failure resolution

Achieved.
Thee of the four state-owned banks completed
recapitalization and ownership transformation
and also made improvements in corporate
governance,
iConsensus was reached on creating and
installing a deposit insurance scheme,
*
Financial stability function is still to be
improved, with legislation and regulatory

Lending:
Accounting Reform & Development
(FY99-FY1O; ICR=HS; IEGHS)

Corporate Governance Support
Program (FY06); China Corporate
Governance Project (FY09); TB - Corp
Gov
Lending:
IFC: UBS Securities (FY06); Rongde
Asset Management (FY06); Cinda
(FY08); Orient Fortune (FY08)
Non-lending:
Bank TA

In the financial sector, the
WBG can continue to be
an effective partner in
coordination with others
by transferring knowledge
and international best
practice in areas such as

IFC: Technical Assistance Programme

depositor protection,
bailout policies, bank

policies and

frameworks lagging behind rapidly increasing

for Leshan City Commercial Bank

ownership and

associated
institutional capacity

integration of financial services, especially
mixed financial conglomerates led by industrial

(FY06); Establishment of NCSSF
Internal Risk Management System;

governance, exchange
rate risk, and financial

firms.
IFC AS interventions supported the China

SFMF CBA CHINA; City Commercial
Bank (FY06)

vulnerability.

identified
* PBoC financial

*

stability functions
improved to

Banking Association development of
certification programs, which certified 632,000

international

professionals. IFC developed training modules

standards

in 14 banking areas, including loan risk pricing,
credit analysis, SME banking diagnostics, and
microfinance, sustainable banking, student

loans, syndications, etc.
Pillar 5: Strengthening
Outcome 5.1:
China
implements

Public and Market Institutions
Model SOE
Achieved.
privatization
*
IFC Advisory Services assisted in
transactions
strengthening insolvency reforms with a joint

1999 GoC

completed

CBRC workshop in on issues related to private

76

________________

Lending: oSupreme
IFC: Changyu Group (FY06), Yaohua
Glass (FY09)

Court
interpretations cleared
way for enforcement of

new Enterprise

decision to 'let
go' of small and
medium-sized
SOEs

Outcome 5.2:
Selected
publicly listed
SOEs and large
private
corporations
adopt
international
best practice in
corporate
governance and
corporate social

responsibility

*

*

.

Enterprise
bankruptcy law
options articulated

Actions taken to
strengthen SOEs'
focus on efficiency of
using capital
Approaches
identified for helping
SOEs to establish
boards with
independent outside
directors
Assistance provided
to selected listed

sector stakeholders. Studies have also
addressed bankruptcy/exit of financial
institutions, state asset management reform,
and social protection.
*
Central State-Owned Assets Supervision and
Administration Commission (SASAC)
strengthened regulations covering privatization
transactions, largely in line with the 2002 Bank
policy note.
*
IFC investments supported the privatization,
restructuring and consolidation of three stateowned enterprises (Changyu Group,Yaohua
Glass, and Beifang Glass).
Achieved.
WBG (IFC in particular) support helped
companies improve standards in corporate
governance and in social and environmental
practices. TA was provided to SEPA, PBoC,
CBRC, select corporate directors and to IFC
clients to meet performance standards.
IFC projects have enhanced the financial
sustainability of its partners.
The Bank was invited to advise the National
Peoples' Congress (NPC) on performance
issues of large SOEs.

companies to

*

implement CSR code

Non-lending:
SOE Dividends: How Much and to
Whom (FY06); China 2030 study
(FY12)
IFC: China Personal Bankruptcy Law
Phase I and II (Fy08, FY11); CBRC
workshop

Lending:
[All IFC Lending during the CPS
period; All IFC investment services
operations require compliance with
IFC's Performance Standards on
Environmental and Social
Sustainability]
Non-lending:
SOL Dividend Policy (FY10); China
2030 study (FY12)

SASAC is committed to implementing

IFC Operations, Advisory Services and

Economic Value-Added (EVA)-based

TA: Strengthening of Lotus Corporate

performance evaluations, and information

Governance and Retail and SME

disclosure standards in all SOEs (consistent

Finance (06); Environmental and

with 2002 Bank policy note).
* Implementation underway of new (2008)
SASAC and Ministry of Finance policies for
SOE dividend collection.

Corporate Governance Support
Program (FY06); China Corporate
Governance Project (FY09); IB - Corp
Gov

Limited success in the central SASAC

experiment in 19 SOEs, with difficulties in
identifying qualified directors.

SI-China Green Securities (FyI 1)
Quality and Sustainability Performance
of private enterprise (FY06); ES
Standards in ICT (FY07); Carbon
Finance Aggregation through FIs

(FY08);
China-Fenglin Inter Study to Define
Business Practices in Wood Industry

(FY06)
CBRC,selectcorporateGDIH-AS-Corporate

77

Social

Bankruptcy Law, but
further actions are still
needed.

Responsibility Demonstration /
Cumulative Risk Assessment
Outcome 5.3:
Simplified
business entry
and regulation,
particularly in
the western and
northeastern

provinces

*

.

Options identified for
simplifying business
entry (including
licensing, access to
land)
Options identified for
simplifying, revising

Achieved.
*
JFCs financing of local projects (covering 29
provinces) addressed constraints of starting
businesses, with financing and supporting TA
available for the poorer areas.
Bank-supported firm surveys provide ratings,
promote awareness of competitiveness, and

selected business

support reforms to improve the investment

regulations to

climate.

prohibit
monopolization,

*

restraints on trade,

and practices that

*

inflows in west

strengthened in

and northeast
regions

lagging provinces
Approaches

identified to realizing
higher FBI inflows in

JFC: China Subnatl DB (07); TA to
NCCB Small Business Lending

The Anti-Monopoly Law was adopted (SOEs
The Government appointed special task forces
to review approval requirements and hundreds

firm-level innovation
Outcome 5.4:
Increased FsI

in 120 Cities (FY07)

were not excluded).
*

iMeans to improving
identified
Investment
promotion agencies

Non-lending:
Governance, Investment Climate, and
Harmonious Society: Competitiveness

improving the investment climate.

unreasonably limit

competition

The 120-city Investment Climate Assessment
(ICA) Report raised awareness nationally about

Lending:
JFC investments in frontier regions
(totaling 47) during the CPS period.

were abolished.
Achieved.
IFC has supported this objective with a

*

Lending:
IFC: investments in frontier regions

Joint efforts provide a
viable approach in

growing share of investments going to frontier

(totaling 42)during the CPS period

support of this outcome.

regions and an SME fund for equity
investments in high growth private companies

Non-lending:

in the west.
FIAS and MIGA are supporting the Ministry of

FIAS/MIGA Programs; A MarketOriented Approach to Northeast

west and

Commerce to assist in the central and western

Revitalization(FY06); Revitalizing the

northeastern
provinces (as % of

regions to attract more investment, and at the
provincial level, through Private Enterprise

Northeast Towards a Development
Strategy (FY06); Foreign Capital

total F I)

Partnership (PEP) - China collaboration for
workshops for provincial and municipal
investment promotion agencies in Sichuani
IAS has undertaken IPP capacity diagnosis
across 13 provinces.
Ongoing program with Ministry of Commerce

Utilization in China (FY06); Capacity
Building of Sichuan Investment
Promotion Bureaus (FY04-FY08);
MOFCOM Investment Promotion
Support for lesser-developed regions
(FY06)

*

to develop Independent Power Producer (IPP)
strategies for the central and western provinces
with implementation aimed for the next phase
of the Ministry of Commerce/China Investment
Promotion Agency (CIPA) program, including
improvin_the_inin
the North-East.

78

IFC: Study on Private Sector Financing
and External Borrowing in China
(FY07)

*

Outcome 5.5:
Improved
accountability
in model PSUs

*

*

Outcome 5.6:
Better
alignment
between fiscal
responsibilities
and revenue
assignments at
sub-national
levels, including
improved
equity and
efficiency in
public funding

Categorization of
PSUs initiated,
according to
type/level of GoC
involvement
Policy actions to
privatize PSUs
articulated
Reform options
articulated for
allowing not-forprofit private entities
to be public service
providers.

**Expenditure

*

assignments clarified
across levels of
government
New local revenue
sources (e.g.,
property, local
personal income tax)
identified, selected
piloting
for new
transfer law
identified;
consolidating
transfer programs
with improved
equalization impact

IFC established 2 pilot investor-focused
institutions (Industry Transfer Center and
Yinchuan Investment Promotion Office) and
facilitated $43 billion of new investment into
central and western provinces in 2010.
Achieved.
*
The Bank followed up on the 2005 PSU report
to strengthen reforms. Other WBG activities
included support for local e-government, and
private health and education service providers.
*
There was some success in local experiments
(Wuxi, Chongqing) on demand-side financing
and purchases of services from non-public
providers.
*
IFC-supported investments in health and
education demonstrated efficient private sector
participation in the provision of healthcare and
education.
Partially achieved.
*
The Bank has supported a sub-provincial pilot
on intergovernmental fiscal system, learning on
fiscal management, and public sector
performance (with WBI).
*
Health policy notes were completed on health
insurance flow-offunds and a study on Rural
Compulsory Education Reform assesses the
initial effects of central fiscal transfer on
county and school-level finance.
The central government has taken some
responsibility for specific spending
assignments (e.g., compulsory education) but
little progress or reforms in overall changes in
revenue policy.
Government transfers to poor provinces
increased significantly during the five-year
plan period, including progressive weighting of
transfers for new Health Insurance and Social
Protection (SP) initiatives on social insurance
and assistance.

79

Non-lending:
Governance, Investment Climate, and
Harmonious Society: Competitiveness
in 120 Cities (FY07)
IFC: UFH1 (FY06); UHF2(FYO8);
Aier Eye (FY07), Bioveda I and 11
(FY08); Healthway (FY10); Q&M
(FY11)

Lending:
Non-lending:
Public Finance in China: Reform and
Growth for a Harmonious Society
(FY08); TA on Intergovernmental
Fiscal System; Bank TAs; WBI
Programs; Health Policy Notes (FY10);
Rural Compulsory Education Reform
(FYI0); China 2030 study (FY12)
AOptions

The next CPS can build
on WBG's strong
engagements with
decentralized entities to
further support centersubnational relations.

Outcome 5.7:
Improved link
between
planning,
budget, service
delivery
demonstrated in
selected areas;
greater budget
transparency

*

.

.

Appropriate
revisions to the
budget law
articulated
Measures identified
for expanding
national treasury to
subnational level
Broader use of
performanceteth

Partially achieved.
*
The Bank has supported the development of the
M&E framework for the 1 1 h FYP, studies on
sub-national finance and rural public finance,
and also conducted a mid-term review of
China's 1 Ith FYP and provided inputs to
China's 1 2 th FYP.
*
Progress was made in classifying fiscal
spending.

indicators
encouraged in M&E
of public programs

80

Lending:
Economic Reform Implementation
(FY06); Macro-Fiscal Policy Notes
(FY10)
Non-lending:
JDF on M&E Framework; Mid-Term
Evaluation of the Implementation of
Chinas 11th Five Year Plan (FY09);
M&E for the
Five Year Program
(FY09); Public Services for Building
the New Socialist Countryside (FY08)

*

WBG is well-positioned
to continue to respond to
client requests in these
areas.

CPS Completion Report Attachment 2
Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FYO6-FY11)
CPS PLANS (May 2006)

CPS PROGRESS REPORT (2008)
IBRD

Board

Projects

US$M

Projects

FY06 Program

1,455

FY06 Actual Total

Date

IBRD
US$M
1,454.3

Shanghai Urban APL 2

180

Delivered as Shanghai Urban Environment APL Phase 2

Inland Waterways 5

100

Delivered

10/11/05

100.0

Integrated Agricultural Irrigation 3

200

Delivered as Irrigated Agriculture Intensification Loan 3

10/11/05

200.0

Fuzhou Urban Transport

100

Delivered as Fuzhou Nantai Island Per-Urban Development

12/15/05

100.0

Renewable Energy Scale-up 2

87

Delivered

2/7/06

86.3

Heilongliang Dairy

100

Delivered

1/24/06

100.0

Economic Reform Implementation

20

Delivered

4/11/06

20.0

Henan Towns Water

150

Delivered as Henan Towns Water Supply & Sanitation

6/27/06

150.0

Liaoning Urban Infrastructure I (transport)

218

Delivered as Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure

6/27/06

218.0

Jiangxi Highway 3

200

Delivered

6/27/06

200.0

Changiang/Pearl River Watershed Rehabilitatiion

100

Delivered

6/27/06

7/5/05

FY07 Actual Total
FY07 Program

1,475

180.0

100.0
1,641.0

FY07 Program Delivery

1,468.0

National Railway 3

200

Delivered

1/23/07

200.0

Sichuan Urban Development 2

180

Delivered as Sichuan Urban Environment

9/7/06

180.0

Guanxi Integrated Forestry

100

Delivered

12/14/06

100.0

Fujan Transport SWAp

320

Delivered as Fujan Highway Sector Investment

10/12/06

320.0

Shaanxi Highway 3

300

Delivered as Shanxi Ankang Road Development

3/13/07

300.0

Western Rural Water

25

Delivered as Western Provinces Rural Water Supply

6/26/07

25.0

Shandong Urban Environment 2

150

Delivered as Shandong Environment 2

2/27/07

147.0

Guangdong Pearl River Delta (Foshan)

100

Delivered as Guangdong Pearl River Delta Urban

3/21/07

96.0

Micro and Small Enterprises

100

Delivered as Micro and Small Enterprise Finance

6/19/07

100.0

Standby

Standby subtotal

Liaoning Cities Urban Infrastructure 2

200

Delivered as Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure 2

Shandong Flue Gas Desulfurization

60

Postponed to FY08

Eco-Farming

120

Postponed to FY09

173 0
6/26/07

FY08 Actual Total
FY08 Program

1,490

173.0

1,513.4

FY08 Program Delivery

922.4

Rural Health

50

Delivered

Huai River Basin

150

Postponed to FY 10

Gansu Cultural Heritage

40

Delivered as Gansu Cultural and Natural Heritage

3/20/08

38.4

Xan Urban Transport

150

Delivered as Xfan Sustainable Urban Transport

6/25/08

150.0

Jilin Food Safety

100

Postponed to FY10

Guiyang Urban-Rural Highway

100

Delivered as Guryang Transport

1/8/08

100.0

National Railway 4

300

Delivered as Shizheng Railway

6/25/08

300.0

Anhui Provincial Highway Network

200

Delivered as Anhui Highway Rehabilitation & Improvement

4/22/08

200.0

Guizhou Cultural Heritage

60

Postponed to FY09

Yunnan Urban Environment

150

Postponed to FY09

Hubei Han River Environment

100

Delivered as Han River Urban Environment

4/29/08

84.0

Shanxi Coal-bed Methane Development

90

Postponed to FY09

Standby
Taryuan Urban Transport

6/25/08

Standby subtotal

50.0

250 0

150

Postponed to FY10

Migrant Skills and Employment

50

Delivered as Rural Migrant Skills Development

6/25/08

50.0

Energy Efficiency and Development

200

Delivered as Energy Efficiency Financing

5/27/08

200.0

Additional deliveries

341 0

Shandong Flue Gas Desulfurization

5/27/08

50.0

Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure 3

5/27/08

191.0

3engbu Integrated Env. Improvement

3/11/08

100.0

81

Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FYO6-FY11), continued
FY09 Actual Total

CPS PROGRESS REPORT
FY09 Program

2,130

2,360.0
1,760.0

FY09 Program Delivery

Xining Flood and Watershed Management

100

Delivered

6/2/09

2nd Yunnan Urban Environment

90

Delivered as Yunnan Urban Environmental

5/5/09

90.0

Eco-Farming

120

Delivered

12/2/08

120.0

Guihou Cultural and Natural Heritage Protection

60

Delivered

5/5/09

60.0

Huai River Basin Flood Management

200

Postponed to FY10

Hubei Yiba Highway

150

Delivered

5/31/09

150.0

Jiangsu Water and Wastewater

150

Delivered

6/2/09

130.0

Jiangxi Inland Waterways

100

Delivered as Jiangxi Shihutang Navigation & Hydro

9/25/08

100.0

Shanghai APL 3

200

Delivered as Shanghai Urban Environment

6/25/09

200.0

5/19/09

80.0

100.0

Shanxi Coal Bed Methane

80

Delivered as Shanxi Coal Bed Methane Dev. and Util.

Taryuan Urban Transport Project

150

Postponed to FY10

Technical and Vocational Education & Training

20

Delivered

6/2/09

20.0

Wenchuan Earthquake Recovery

710

Delivered

12/12/08

710.0

Standby

Standby subtotal

Guliguang Railway

300

Delivered

Jilin Food Safety

100

Postponed to FY10

300 0
4/16/09

Additional deliveries
Nanguang Railway
FYIO Program

300 0
6/25/09

FYI0 Actual Total

CPS PROGRESS REPORT
1,214

300.0

300.0
1,414.0

FYIO Program Delivery

1,024.0

Nanning Urban Environment

100

Delivered

6/1/10

100.0

Small Town Development in Ningbo

50

Delivered as Ningbo New Countryside Development

2/25/10

50.0

Shandong Ecological Afforestation

60

Delivered

5/6/10

60.0

Anhui Medium Cities Urban Transport

100

Delivered

5/20/10

100.0

Chongqing Urban-Rural Integrated Development

84

Delivered

6/3/10

84.0

Henan Yellow River Eco-Livestock Production

80

Delivered as Henan Ecological Livestock

5/27/10

80.0

Forestry Development

100

Postponed to FY 11

Ningxia Highway

250

Delivered

5/13/10

250.0

Shanxi Saline Land Improvement

90

Name changed to Shanxi Saline Alkali Land Improvement

Sustainable Development in Poor Rural Areas

100

Delivered

6/10/10

100.0

Wuhan Second Urban Transport

100

Delivered

3/30/10

100.0

Xingiang Water Conservation

100

Delivered as Ximiang Turfan Water Conservation

6/17/10

Additional deliveries

100.0
390 0

Jilin Agricultural Product Safety & Quality

5/13/10

Liaoning and Shandong TVET

6/1/10

40.0

Taiyuaan Urban Transport

6/10/10

150.0

Energy Efficiency Financing 11

6/22/10

100.0

FYI1 Actual Total

100.0

1,740.0

Huai River Basin Flood Management and Drainage Improvement

7/6/10

200.0

Integrated Forestry Development Project

7/6/10

100.0

Yunnan Urban Environment Phase 11AF

7/6/10

60.0

Zhejang Qiantang River Basin Small Town Environmental

1/20/11

100.0

Liuzhou Environment Management Project Phase 11

3/10/11

150.0

Anhui Shaying River Channel Improvement Project

4/12/11

100.0

Kunming Urban Rail Project

5/10/11

300.0

Sichuan Small Town Development

5/10/11

100.0

Unimqi Ditsrict Heating Project

5/17/11

100.0

Fujan Highway Sector Investment Project AF

5/19/11

50.0

Shandong Confucius and Mencius Culture Heritage Protection

5/24/11

50.0

JiTuHan Railway

5/24/11

200.0

Bayannaoer Water Reclamationand Environment Improvement

5/24/11

80.0

Shandong Energy Efficiency Project

6/9/11

150.0

82

CPS Completion Report Attachment 3
Major Non-Lending Services
Product

Status

Access to Finance FY06

Completed: FY06

Urban Transport Policy Guidance

Completed: FY06

China's Compliance with Food Safety Requirements for Fruits and Vegetables
Environmental Concerns in Poverty Alleviation Projects - the Guidebook for Poverty
Reduction Staff

Completed: FY06

Evaluation of Liaoling Social Security Pilot

Completed: FY06

NE China Invest. Climate

Completed: FY06

Foreign Capital Utilization in China: Prospects and Future Strategy

Completed: FY06

Railway Restructuring

Completed: FY06

SOE Dividends: How Much and to Whom

Completed: FY06

Waste Management in China: Issues and Recommendations

Completed: FY06

China Water Quality Management: Policy and Institutional Considerations

Completed: FY07

China: Farmer's Professional Associations: Review and Policy Recommendations

Completed: FY07

China: Research Report on Gender Gaps and Poverty Reduction

Completed: FY07

China's Development Priorities

Completed: FY07

China's Information Revolution: Managing the Economic & Social Transformation

Completed: FY07

Enhancing China's Competitiveness through Lifelong Learning

Completed: FY07

Cities

Completed: FY07

Study of Capacity Building of the Electricity Regulatory Agency (SERC)

Completed: FY07

Sustainable Energy in China: The Closing Window of Opportunity

Completed: FY07

Access to Finance FY08

Completed: FY08

China Urbanizes: Consequences, Strategies, and Policies

Completed: FY08

China: Public Services for Building the New Socialist Countryside

Completed: FY08

Social/Eco Impacts of HIV/AIDS

Completed: FY08

China's Modernizing Labor Market: Trends and Emerging Challenges

Completed: FY08

Financing Energy Efficiency: Lessons from Brazil, China, India, and Beyond

Completed: FY08

Health Reform in Rural China: Where Next?

Completed: FY08

Public Finance in China: Reform and Growth for a Harmonious Society

Completed: FY08

Strengthening Energy Efficiency

Completed FY08

Promoting Circular Economy

Completed FY08

Trade and Poverty

Completed: FY08

Affordability
Addressing China's Water Scarcity: Recommendations for Selected Water Resource
Management Issues

Completed: FY08

China and the World Bank: A Partnership for Innovation

Completed: FY09

China Road Traffic Safety

Completed: FY09

Chongqing-Guangdong Rural Urban Integration

Completed: FY09

Clean Development Mechanism in China: Five Years of Experience (2004-2009)

Completed: FY09

83

Completed: FY06

Completed: FY09

Major Non-Lending Services, continued
Competition Provisions in Regional Trade Agreements: Lessons for China

Completed: FY09

Compulsory Education Finance Reform Policy Notes
Economically, Socially, and Environmentally Sustainable Coal Mining Sector in
China

Completed FY09

Education Sector Review

Completed FY09

Food Safety in China

Completed: FY09

Forest Policy - Deepening the Transition, Broadening the Relationship

Completed: FY09

From Poor Areas to Poor People: China's Evolving Poverty Reduction Agenda

Completed: FY09

Growth through Innovation: An Industrial Strategy for Shanghai

Completed: FY09

Corporations

Completed: FY09

Labor Mobility Provisions in Regional Trade Agreements: Lessons for China

Completed: FY09

Meeting the Unprecedented Challenge for Wind Power Scale-up in China

Completed: FY09

Mid-Term Evaluation of the Implementation ofChina's 11th Five Year Plan

Completed: FY09

National Investment Policy for Railway Construction

Completed: FY09

Outsourcing Social Services to CSOs: Lessons fromAbroad

Completed: FY09

Promoting Enterprise-Led Innovation in China

Completed: FY09

Public Services in Rural Areas

Completed: FY09

Sino-Singapore Tianjin Eco-City
Strengthening China's Environmental Protection Administrative System Analysis
and Recommendations

Completed: FY09

Sustainable Development of Inland Waterway Transport in China
Tracks from the Past, Transport for the Future: China's Railway Industry 1990-2008
and its Future Plans

Completed: FY09

Urban Rail Development in China: Prospects, Issues and Options

Completed: FY09

Access to Finance FY10

Completed FY10

Adapting Agricultural Production System to Climate Change

Completed FY10

China ROSC Accounting and Auditing Review

Completed FY10

Compulsory Education for Migrant Children in Guangdong

Completed: FY10

Energy Intensity Strategy

Completed FY10

Forest Policy Dialogue

Completed FY10

Health Policy Notes

Completed: FY10

Macro-Fiscal Policy Notes

Completed FY10

Market-Based Railway Pricing Policies

Completed FY10

Policy Notes on Higher Education

Completed: FY10

Rural Compulsory Education Reform (formerly Promoting Basic Education)

Completed: FY10

Reforming China's Rural Health System

Completed FY10

Rural Pension and SSN

Completed FY10

Rural to Urban Migration Social Policies

Completed: FY10

Social Assistance in Rural China: Tackling Poverty Through Rural Dibao

Completed: FY10

SOE Dividend Policy

Completed FY10

84

Completed: FY09

Completed: FY09

Completed: FY09

Major Non-Lending Services, continued
Access to Finance FY11

Completed FY11

China PSD Program

Completed FY11

Early Childhood Development

Completed FY11

Ensuring Financial Stability FY10

Completed FY11

FSAP China

Completed FY11

Integrated Flood Risk Management: Key Lessons

Completed FY11

Land Transfer and Registration TA

Completed FY11

Local Government Finance and Debt

Completed FY11

Macro-Fiscal Policy Notes FY11

Completed FY11

Ningbo: China Climate Resilient City Program

Completed FY11

Non-Communicable Diseases TA

Completed FY11

Policy and Institutional Reforms for thel2th Five Year Plan

Completed FY11

Reaping Benefits of FDI in Shanghai

Completed FY11

Rural Wastewater Management Study

Completed FY11

Study on State-owned Financial Assets Administration Systemin China

Completed FY11

WaterPricing& Water User Associations Sustainability

Completed FY11

China Partnership with Africa

Continuous

Policy Notes

Continuous

Quarterly Updates

Continuous

South-South Learning

Continuous

85

CPS Completion Report Attachment 4
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) Projects Undertaken During the CPS Period
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY09
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY07
FY07
FY06
FY06

Jiangxi Shihutang Navigation and Hydropower Complex
Dashiqiao Central Heating Supply
Yingkou Economic Dev Zone Heating
Reforestation on Degraded Lands in Northwest Guangxi
Baotou Iron & Steel Energy Efficiency
Hubei Eco-Farming Biogas
Huizhou Combined Cycle Gas Turbine Thermal Power
Shandong Minhe Poultry Manure Biogas
Hubei Guangrun Hydropower Development
Tianjin Landfill Gas Recovery
Facilitating Afforestation Program
Nanjing Steel Convertor Gas Recovery
China GEF Projects Undertaken During the CPS Period

Approval
FY

Closing
FY

Grant
Amt

China Energy Efficiency Promotion in Industry
Guangdong Green Freight Demonstration Project
Provincial Energy Efficiency Scale-up Program
Sino-Singapore Tianjin Eco-City
Sustainable Management and Biodiversity Conservation of the Lake Aibi
Basin
Shanghai Agricultural and Non-point Pollution Reduction Project

FY11
FY11
FY11
FY11
FY11

FY15
FY15
FY16
FY16
FY16

4.0
4.2
13.4
6.2
3.0

FY10

FY14

4.8

Sustainable Development in Poor Rural Communities (GEF)
Thermal Power Efficiency
Rapid Assessment of Chemical Contamination of the Wenchuan Earthquake
China-GEF-World Bank Urban Transport Partnership Program Project
China Energy Efficiency Financing
Mainstreaming Climate Change Adaptation in Irrigated Agriculture Project
Guangxi Integrated Forestry Development and Conservation Project
Second Shandong Environment Project

FY10
FY09
FY09
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY07
FY06

FY16
FY13
FY10
FY13

FY13
FY14

4.3
19.7
1.0
21.0
13.5
5.0
5.3
5.0

Ningbo Water and Environment Project

FY06

FY12

5.0

Demonstration of alternatives to Chlordane and Mirex in Termite Control
Project
PCB Management and Disposal Demonstration Project
China - Renewable Energy Scale-up Program (CRESP)
Heat Reform and Building Energy Efficiency Project
China-GEF-Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure

FY06

FY12

14.4

FY06
FY05
FY05
FY05

FY13
FY11
FY13

18.3
40.2
18.0
5.0

Hai River Basin Integrated Water Resources Management

FY05

FY11

33.3

Guangdong - Pearl River Delta Urban Environment

FY04

FY12

10.0

Gansu and Xinjiang Pastoral Development Project
Lake Dianchi Freshwater Biodiversity Restoration Project
Energy Conservation Project, Phase II
Sustainable Forestry Development Project
Second Beijing Environment Project
Renewable Energy Development
Energy Conservation

FY04
FY03
FY03
FY02
FY00
FY99
FY98

FY10
FY08
FY10
FY11
FY11
FY08
FY07

12.5
0.8
26.0
16.0
25.0
35.0
22.0

FocalArea

PROJECTNAME

Climate Change
Climate Change
Climate Change
Climate Change
Multi Focal Area
International
Waters
Multi Focal Area
Climate Change
POPs
Climate Change
Climate Change
Climate Change
Biodiversity
International
Waters
International
Waters
POPs
POPs
Climate Change
Climate Change
International
Waters
International
Waters
International
Waters
Multi Focal Area
Biodiversity
Climate Change
Biodiversity
Climate Change
Climate Change
Climate Change

86

CPS Completion Repor Attachment 5

80%

DOTSDevelopmnent OutcomeScore FY07 -FYI1
China,EAPand IFC

77%

75%

6%

70%

'-m,-::-:s67

.65%

1

%

63%

-60%
,55%

54%

50%
-~IFC

45%

-~China

-~EAP

43%
40%
F,a07

FV08

F,s09

FY10

F,a11

Developmrent Reach by WFC's Insaestment Clernts.

IFc
Employment(mlllionsotjobs)
MWME
N,mber(,,mln

EaP
2A1

0.655

9.70

2.GN5
22.8

Amoun($bilions)140A

31.99

Pc,serdiatrbution{fmlisans)

waterdistribution(mllfions)"*
Gas distrfbution{llns
ph~one .. nneconsimlli.ns)
Patient~r
Inche imlns
studentgsetshed (milllnns)
Farm.ersrea~Grhed(miln)

20.13
17.24
179.72
7.51
0.98
2.31

~mnss
~p,irsarl~
Pamnlt~
Ds'tkep,rlhas...ogpod .andserukces5$b,illns
Contritont g,sve mmentmve nuasawrsavings $bilons)

29.31
20.28

87

Chn

lk.85
1003
1m.5
19.192/
1.9
0.00~5
1.453

1I.719
1.5%4

~CKa/F
05572%

0531
21.a

5%
15%

f
3. 69118
16.0

9m

L227s6
L45918

100113
0916

25%
a&

Annex 4: Country Partnership Strategy Consultations
From July 3-11, 2012, the World Bank Group discussed a draft CPS document with a wide range of
government counterparts: the Ministry of Finance (MOF), the National Development Reform
Commission (NDRC), 24 additional ministries and agencies, and local officials from Guangdong,
Beijing, Hubei, Anhui, Jiangxi, Yunnan, Sichuan, and Gansu. Consultations were also held with
academia, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and development partners. Comments from
participants included the following:

*
*

*

*

*

*

Agreement with CPS themes. Participants unanimously supported the proposed CPS themes
and outcomes, noting their close alignment with China's own priorities as articulated in the 1 2 th
Five-Year Plan.
Strong demand for continued World Bank Group engagement. The consultations revealed an
ongoing high level of demand for both financial and non-financial services from both provinces
and central ministries and agencies. Participants noted the importance of pilots and demonstration
projects, and that Bank-financed projects have also helped improve project management
techniques, such as project appraisal and performance evaluation. Projects can also help promote
reforms.
Increasing importance of knowledge cooperation. Many participants pointed out that nonfinancial services will be increasingly important. They noted and agreed with the intention to
strengthen knowledge cooperation during the CPS period. Knowledge cooperation should take
place at both the provincial and national levels.
Shift to interior provinces. Participants noted that the Bank Group's increased emphasis on
central and western China and the old industrial bases in the northeast is consistent with China's
Western Region Development Strategy. Some participants pointed out that coastal provinces are
best suited to be testing grounds for innovative demonstration projects.
Need to simplify operational procedures. NDRC and provincial representatives acknowledged
some improvement in operational processes, such as shorter project preparation time, but
emphasized the need for the Bank to further simplify operational procedures to improve
efficiency and address hidden transaction costs. They called for a wider application of
streamlined processes and use of national systems. There should be better communication and
coordination regarding problem projects. Concern was expressed about the turnover of Bank
staff, noting that staff need to be familiar with the Chinese context. Ministries and agencies asked
to be better informed about projects at the provincial level.
Give more attention to dissemination. Many participants highlighted the importance of
disseminating the findings of projects and studies. The annual Innovation Workshops are thought
provoking. Provincial finance bureaus noted that they could play a role in disseminating within
provinces. Line ministries noted that they could help disseminate project experiences if they are
kept better informed.

Consultations were also held in July 2010 in Beijing, Kunming, and Hangzhou with central line
ministries (except NDRC) and provincial finance bureaus to discuss the impact of the 2006 CPS and
provide early input for the new CPS.

88

Annex 5: Standard Country Assistance Strategy Annexes
Standard CAS Annex A2: China at a Glance

China at a glance

927/12
East

Key Development Indicators
China

Asia&
Pacific

Upper
middle
income

Agedistribution, 2010

(2011)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

1,344.1
9,600
0.4
51

1962
16,302
0.7
46

2,452
59,328
0.7
57

Tnz

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Alas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, intemational $)

6,644.3
4,940
7,640

7,249
3,696
6,657

14,429
5,884
9,970

11

9.3
8.8

9.7
8.9

7.8
7.1

Povertyheadcountratioat$1.25aday(PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)

13
30
73
16
3

14
33
72
20
6

73
17
3

Adult literacy, mate (% of ages 15and older)
Adult literacy, female (%of ages 15andolder)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

97
91
110
113

96
91
111
112

96
91
111
111

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

91
64

90
66

93
73

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

Female

n

*

-0

percentoftotalpopulatin

(most recent estimate, 2005-2011)

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
NetODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 201V):
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1980

Under-5mortalityrate(perl,000)

m
w
w0
10
o

I
190

000

2=010

1990

2000

2011

66

2,032

1712

648

GrowthofGDP and GDP per capita(%)

7
0
0

229
88
33

213
46
83

322
317
87

1o

0.0
0

0.6
2

0.1
1

0.0
0

8

14
12

2

o

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual %change)

6.0
3.8

3.1
5.8

0.4
2.1

5.4
7.8

Exchange rate(annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 130)

2.4
69

5.2
94

8.3
100

6.5
78
1980-90 1990-2000
2000-11
(average annual growth %)

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

981.2
139,400

1,135.2
356,937

1,262.6
1,344.1
1,158,475 6,650,942

15
ID.3

11
ID.6

0.6
15.8

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

30.2
48.2
40.2
21.6

(% of GDP)
27.1
41.3
32.7
31.5

15.1
45.9
32.1
39.0

15.0
46.6
32.1
43.3

5.9
111
13.8
14.0

4.1
13.7
12.9
110

4.4
117
112
114

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov'tfinal consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

50.3
14.9
35.2

46.7
14.1
36.1

46.7
15.8
35.1

34.9
13.3
49.2

12.1
7.3
12.9

15.3
9.1
12.0

5.3
9.0
13.5

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

10.6
11.0
33.8

13.1
13.1
35.6

23.3
20.9
37.3

314
27.3
52.7

2.2
6.5

15.5
15.7

15.0
15.3

Note:Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
Aid data are for 2010.

'a.

Development Economics, Development DataGroup (DECDG).

89

China
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2011

249,210
225,097
28,873

1,898,600
1,743,460
270,641

20,519

201,714

Governance indicators,2000 and 2010
(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

Voice and accountability
Political stability and
absence of violence

Current account balance

1.7

as a % of GDP

Regulatory quality

3.0

Ruleof law

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

202

Reserves, including gold

171753

16,600

Control ofcorruption

3,254,674

0

25

50

75

100

Countrys percentile rank 10-100)

Central Government Finance

(% of GDP)
(www.govindicators.org)
Sorce: WoridwideGovernancelndicators

20.7

Current revenue (including grants)

13.8

Tax revenue
Current expenditure

12.7
13.3

16.9
16.8

Overall surplus/deficit

-3.3

-1.1

Technology and Infrastructure
Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

45
33

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

45
25

2000
..

2010
53.5

18

86

19.0

27.5

57
19.0
15.5

56
22.2
16.6

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

145,648
26,607
-

Total debt (%of GDP)
Total debt service (%of exports)

12.2
9.1

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

38,399
6,912

685,418
78,049
-

Agricultural land (%of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (%of land area)

10.3
3.5

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

170,449
19,639

Composition of total external debt, 2011

2.7

5.3

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

3.1

3.7
1695

dter4,14,129

World Bank Group portfolio

Pive., 130,935

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements

Principal repayments
Interest payments
US$millions

Private Sector Development

2010

11,118 12,962
1528

1,282

578
713

1,086
143

8,771
379
131

9,000
0
416

565
274
55

2,014
1,721
278

38

139

113
0

223
24

IDA

2000

2011

-

38
4.5
29

2000

2010

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start abusiness (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(%of managers surveyed who agreed)
'
Tax rates
Economic and regulatory policy uncertainty

2000

(US$ millions)

S Iern,

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

867

Odhe mult-

R

Bileral, 32,202

r

2,113

C02 emissions per capita (mt)

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)
IDA,

2,197

36.8
32.9
48.5
4.1

Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service
IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

..

83.6
6.1

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011
data are preliminary.
..indicates data are not available. - indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

90

97/12

7

Millennium Development Goals

China

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

China

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $125 aday (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (%of children under 5)

1990
60.2

1995
47.8
6.0
7.2
10.7

..

8.0
12.6

2000
35.6
4.6
6.4
7.4

2010
13.1
5.0
3.4

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

97
104
38
94

92
98
52
..

62
99

81
99

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

85
38
21

92
39
21

99
39
22

103

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

48
38
98

43
34
80

33
27
84

18
16
99

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 10,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

120
94
85

84
89
90

61
97
87

37
99
85

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 10,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

..

153
21

129
33

109
33

0.1
78
87

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

67
24
16.8
13.5
2.2
14

74
34
14.0
2.8
2.1

80
44
19.0
15.5
2.7
3.1

91
64
22.2
16.6
5.3
3.7

0.6
0.0
0.0

3.4
0.3
0.0

11.5
6.8
1.8

22.0
64.2
34.4

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 10 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100people)
Internet users (per 10 people)
Computer users (per 10 people)

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (%of 1-year olds)

125

100

75

75

25

25

50
2000

2005

2010

L.

Jfl

..

21

ICT indicators (per 100 people)
100

70
60

n

20

30

.i.1..J.L1I[

0 4

2010

1990

1995

2000

2010

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

91

2000

20D5

2010

9/27/12

Standard CAS Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of end of FY2012
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resourcesf (total US$)
Average Supervisionf (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by IEG (Number)
Proj Eval by IEG (Amount, US$ millions)
% of IEG Projects Rated U or HU (Number)
% of IEG Projects Rated U or HU (Amount)

2009

2010

2011

2012

78
3.7
5.1
3.4
6.4
5.1
28.2

79
3.4
15.2
11.6
17.7
14.4
21.0

84
3.2
15.5
9.4
19.0
17.9
18.9

89
3.2
12.4
7.1
13.5
7.9
20.1

No
6313.0
68

No
7267.0
74

No
7517.0
77

No
7442.0
77

Since FY80
253
33,790.0
8.0
7.4

FYO8-12
31
3,693.1
3.2
1.8

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
f. Includes all sources of funds (BB, GEF, CF, MP, CBF, FAO, etc)
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

92

Standard CAS Annex B3: Indicative 1BR) Financing FYI3-15 (as of September 2012)
Strategic Theme 1: Supporting Greener Growth
Fiscal
Year
Q3-Q4
FY12

Outcomes
Project Names
1.2
Energy Efficiency Phase III with EximBank
1.2/1.6
Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure Improvement
1.3
Changzhi Sustainable Urban Transport
1.3
Hubei Xiangyang Urban Transport
1.3
Xinjiang Yining Urban Transport
1.4
Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agriculture Developnent
1.5
Second Water Conservation
1.5
Ningxia Desertification Control and Ecological Protection
Total Number of Projects: 12 Total Loan Amount in US$ million (Actual): 1260
FY13

1.1/1.6

Beijing Energy Efficiency and Emission Reduction Demonstration

Strategic Theme 2: Promoting More Equitable Development
Amt
($m)
100
100
100
100
100
100
80
80
120

Amt
Outcomes
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4

Project Names
Second Chongqing Urban-Rural Integration - Health
Yunnan Technical and Vocational Education and Training
Integrated Economic Development of Small Towns
ZhangHu Railway

2.1/2.2

Guangdong Urban-Rural Social Security Integration & Migrant Workers
Training

($m)
100
50
150
200

80

1.1
Shandong Renewable Energy
100
2.4
1.1
Shanghai Building Energy Efficiency and Low Carbon District
100
2.4
1.2
Liaoning Coastal Economic Belt Infrastructure and Environment
150
2.4
1.2
Jiangxi Small Towns Infrastructure Development Domenstration
150
1.2/1.5
Shaanxi Yan'an Water Supply
60
1.2/1.6
Ningbo Donestic Waste Collection and Recycling Demonstration
80
1.4
Integrated Modem Agriculture Developnent (SOCAD)
200
1.5
Hunan Forest Ecosystem Restoration and Development
80
1.5
Anhui Ma'anshan Cihu River Basin Environment
100
Total Number of Projects: 14 Total Loan Amount in US$ million (including standby operations): 1620

Fujian Meizhou Bay Waterways
Harbin-Jiamusi Railway
Jiangxi Shangrao Sanqingshan Airport Development

50
300
50

FY14

Concentrated SolarPower
80
2.3
Jiangxi NanChang Urban Rail
250 2.3
Qinghai Xining Urban Transport
120
2.3
1.3
Zhengzhou Urban Rail
250 2.4
1.3
Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Transport
150
2.4
1.4/1.6
Guangdong Non-point Source Agricultural Pollution Cleanup
100
1.5
Jiangxi Jingdezhen Wuxikou Integrated Water Scheme
100
1.5
Guangxi Laibin Water & Environment Management
80
Total Number of Projects: 13 Total Loan Amount in US$ million (including standby operations): 1790

AnhuiXuancheng Infrastructure forIndustrialRelocation fromCoastalArea
Anhui Yellow Mountain New Countryside Demonstration

150
100

Guiyang Rural Roads
Fujian Fishing Ports Denonstration
Yinchuan-Xi'an Railway

150
60
200

FY15

1.1
1.3
1.3

1.1
1.1
1.2

Shanxi Coal-bed Methane Utilization
Hebei New Energy Developnent in Rural Areas
Qinghai Xining Integrated Environment Managenint

100
100
150

2.2/2.3
2.2/2.3
2.3

Industry-based Poverty Alleviation Demonstration
Economic ReformPromotion and Capacity Strengthening
Guizhou Rural Development

150
35
100

1.2

Guilin Integrated Environment Management

100

2.3

Sichuan-Chongqing (GuangAn) Cooperation Demonstration Zone
Infrastructure

100

1.2
1.2/2.3

Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure
Zhejiang Rural Area Wastewater Management

150
200

2.4
2.4

Hubei XiaoGan Logistic Infrastructure
Yunnan Highway Assets Management

100
150

1.3/2.4

Jiaozuo Safe and Green Transport Dev. in Transforming Economy

100

2.4

Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System

200

1.5
1.5/1.6

Chongqing Small Towns Water Resources Integrated Management
Huainan Coal Mining Subsidence Area Rehabilitation

100
100

2.4

Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Infrastructure

150

Total Number of Projects: 17 Total Loan Amount in US$ million (including standby operations): 2085

93

Standard CAS Annex B3: Global Environment Facility (GEF) Pipeline and Active Portfolio
(as of September 2012)

GEF Pipeline (US$m)
Biodiversity
Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conservation in Northeast China

3.0

Climate Change
China Renewable Energy Scale-up Program (CRESP) Phase II

27.3

Climate Smart Agriculture: Low Emission Technologies for Foodgrain Crop Production
(proposed)

5.1

Green Energy Schemes for Low-carbon City in Shanghai

4.6

Large-City Congestion and Carbon Reduction

18.2

Monitoring, Verification and Reporting in Energy Efficiency

17.8

Urban Scale Building Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy

13.2

Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs)
-

Contaminated Site Remediation and Redevelopment (under discussion)
Reducing POPs from Municipal Solid Wastes

20.0

International Waters
Guangdong Non-Point Pollution Control

5.1

Total

114.3
GEF Active Portfolio (US$m)

Biodiversity
Guangxi Integrated Forestry Development and Conservation

5.3

Sustainable Management and Biodiversity Conservation of the Lake Aibi Basin

3.0

Climate Change
China-GEF-World Bank Urban Transport Partnership Program
City Cluster Eco-Transport

21.0
5.0

Energy Efficiency Financing

13.5

Energy Efficiency Promotion in Industry

4.0

Green Freight Demonstration

4.2

Heat Reform and Building Energy Efficiency

18.0

Provincial Energy Efficiency

13.4

Sino-Singapore Tianjin Eco-City

6.2

Sustainable Development in Poor Rural Communities

4.3

Thermal Power Efficiency

19.7

Technology Needs Assessment

5.0

Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs)
Dioxins Reduction from the Pulp and Paper Industry

15.0

PCB Management and Disposal

18.3

International Waters
Huai River Basin Marine Pollution Reduction

5.0

Liaoning Bohai Sea Pollution

5.0

Second Shandong Environment

5.0

Shanghai Agricultural and Non-point Pollution Reduction

4.8

Total

175.7

94

Annex B3
China: IFC Investment Operations (as of September 2012)
2009

2010

2011

2012

278
406

447
546

448
671

577
637

11%
0%
14%
10%
0%
0%
0%
0%
2%
40%
0%
16%
0%
7%
100%

42%
0%
0%
4%
6%
0%
8%
0%
18%
4%
9%
7%
0%
2%
100%

42%
0%
2%
4%
4%
2%
8%
0%
1%
21%
0%
0%
3%
13%
100%

61%
9%
8%
8%
6%
3%
3%
1%
1%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%), IFC Own Account only
Equity
39%
Quasi-Loan
18%
Quasi-Equity
7%
Loan
31%
Guarantee
5%
Total
100%

58%
1%
0%
41%
0%
100%

63%
1%
0%
15%
20%
100%

16%
3%
0%
29%
51%
100%

Original Commitment (US$m)
IFC Own Account
IFC Own Account and Mobilization
Original Commitments by Sector (%), IFC Own Account only
Finance & Insurance
Education Services
Chemicals
Collective Investment Vehicles
Health Care
Agriculture and Forestry
Utilities
Transportation and Warehousing
Electric Power
Industrial & Consumer Products
Food & Beverages
Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing
Pulp & Paper
Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
Total

95

CAS Standard Annex B4 - China Non-Lending Services
As of September 2012
Completion FY

Product
Completed
China's Challenge: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative High-income Society (China 2030)
Country Water Resources Partnership Strategy
Design of Water Consumption-based Water Rights Administration System for Turpan Prefecture
Development Impacts of Climate-Induced Changes in China's Water Resources
Economic, Financial, and Commercial Review of Urban Water Supply Utilities
Energy Efficiency & Climate Change Management Agenda in the Urban Transport Sector
Evaluate the Incentive Mechanism for Wind Power in China
Government Facilities Energy Efficiency
Health System Reform Programmatic AAA on Implementation, M&E
High Speed Rail System Integration
Promoting Access to Finance
Quarterly Update and Macro-fiscal Policy Notes
Review and Upgrade National Design Codes of Urban Water and Supply Drainage
Revision of National Guidelines on Dam Safety Mgmt and Risk Informed Dam Safety Mgmt
Social Protection and Labor Market Programmatic AAA
Urban Transport Climate Change Strategy
Water and Wastewater Sector from Middle Income Country to High Income Country

FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12

FY13
Capacity Building for Smart Grid Development in China
Carbon Capture and Sequestration (CCS) Capacity Building Technical Assistance
Clean Stove Initiative
Collective Property Institutions and Policies Reform Options
Food Safety Engagement
Green Energy Scheme for Low-Carbon City in Shanghai
Financial Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy in China
Financial Sector Activities
Financial Sector Reform Roundtable
Financial Sector Reform Strategy
Heat Regulation Phase II
Housing Policies, Urban Planning and Integration in China
Inclusive Finance Academy in China (IFA)
Innovation Model of Affordable Housing Investment and Financing
Municipal Financing and Debt Management
Promoting Inclusive Innovation in China
Provincial Energy Efficiency Practitioners Forum
Rail Financial Futures Analysis
Risk Assessment of China's Agriculture Product Quality and Safety
Skills Development in Four Economic Sectors in Yunnan Province
State Forest Reform
Sub-national Public Finance and Debt Management
Support Chinese Participation in the 2011 WB-Singapore Infrastructure Finance Summit
Sustainable Financing Mechanism for Small Town Infrastructure Development
The Mortgage of the Right to Contract for Management in Rural Area
Transport System Safety
Trial Conservation of Cultural Heritage Assets inthe Shandong Province

FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13

FY14 (indicative)
Demand Analysis of Old Age Health Services in Both Demand and Supply Sides
Developing and Improving China's Pension System
Early Child Development
Electricity Regulation to Integrate Climate Change Considerations
Establishing a Comprehensive Financial Statistics Information Platform
Health and Medicine System Reform
Improving China's Social Assistance System
Issues and Options in Monitoring, Verification and Reporting in Energy Efficiency
Low-carbon Eco-city Financing Models and Low-carbon Industry Development
Modeling Regional Economic Benefits of Railway Projects
Urban Transport Programmatic Knowledge Management Platform

FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14
FY14

96

Standard CAS Annex B6

China: Key Economic Indicators

Inidicator

Actual
2008
2009

2007

Estimate
2011

2010

Projected
2013
2014

2012

2015

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Agriculture

11

11

10

10

10

10

9

9

9

Industry

47

47

46

47

47

44

44

43

43

Services

42

42

43

43

43

46

47

48

48

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

49
39
2
37

47
41
3
38

47
46
4
42

48
46
4
42

47
46
3
43

49
46
3
43

49
46
3
42

50
45
3
41

50
45
3
41

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

41
32

39
31

28
23

31
27

31
27

27
25

26
24

25
23

24
23

Gross domestic savings

51

53

53

52

53

51

51

50

50

Gross national savingsc

53

55

53

52

53

48

48

49

49

8511561 9451875

10436095

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNIper capita (US$, Atlas method)

3255086 4015926 4815692 5695217 6650942 7529478
3050

3610

4240

4940

5570

6250

6900

7570

9.6
7.0

9.2
13.8

10.4
5.3

9.3
7.8

7.7

8.1

7.5

7.0

8.6
8.3
8.3

9.8
7.3
7.7

8.8
9.0
8.9

7.0
7.8
7.3

7.4
7.9
7.4

6.8
7.3
7.5

6.3
6.9
6.8

1342206 1581713 1333300 1743565 2086660 2241380 2406635 2581000
1220000 1434601 1203800 1581400 1899340 2038750 2189620 2348700

2742560
2493800

1034729 1232843 1113200 1520538 1898300
904618 1073919 954300 1327238 1660272
307477 348870 220100 223027 188400
38634
45781
33700
42900
78400
353183 420569 243257 237810 201714

2452500
2158000
290000
39800
209010

2480

rReal annual growth rates (%, calculated from 90 prices)
Gross domestic product at market pric
14.2
Gross Domestic Income
13.5

..

rReal annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 90 prices)

Gross domestic product at market pric
Total consumption
Private consumption
Balance of Payments (US$)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Change inreservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
FReal annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

13.6
10.3
10.0

143100

9.0
7.8
7.6

121700

70300

185750

170449

1933760 2085000 2274000
1747200 1865500 2017900
307620
321610 307000
49820
54800
49800
215000 229456 222915
141400

113500

90000

55000

-464804 -440860 -380557 -464998 -359839 -327600 -413397 -321581

-290143

9.4

8.7

4.6

3.9

4.1

2.4

2.2

1.7

1.3

19.1
13.4

7.9
3.3

-10.5
2.4

28.2
22.0

9.4
9.7

4.2
6.0

5.3
6.4

5.2
5.0

4.2
3.9

(Continued)

97

Standard CAS Annex B6
China: Key Economic Indicators, continued

Actual

lIdicator

'~2008

PF2007

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
19.4
15.7
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(
3.7
Capital expenditure
3.0
Foreign financing
0.0

'1

2009

Estimate
2011

2010

Projected
2013 ' 2014

2012

2015

19.6
16.5
3.1
3.4
0.0

20.1
19.0
1.1
3.5
0.0

20.7
20.2
0.5
3.2
0.1

21.9
19.4
2.5
3.0
0.1

22.1
21.0
1.1
3.0
0.1

21.9
21.7
0.2
2.9
0.0

21.6
21.1
0.5
2.8
0.0

21.1
20.5
0.6
2.8
0.0

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth ofM2 (%)

151.8
16.6

151.3
17.8

179.0
28.4

180.8
18.9

175.5
14.3

186.5
14.6

191.5
15.0

196.6
14.0

201.2
13.0

rPrice indices( YR90 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index

126.7
129.6
97.7

137.7
148.8
92.6

129.4
129.0
100.3

132.5
146.6
90.4

145.8
167.1
87.2

150.2
167.9
89.4

153.2
168.8
90.7

156.2
173.9
89.8

159.2
179.0
88.9

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

117.1

127.1

120.7

..

..

..

4.8
7.6

5.9
7.8

-0.7
-0.6

3.3
6.7

5.4
7.8

2.8
3.0

3.3
3.6

3.0
3.3

3.0
3.2

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at market prices
'VNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU"denotes 'local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

98

Standard CAS Annex B7
China: Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

'2007

Total debt outstanding and

200

Actual 2007-2011
209
'2010

2011

2012

Pmeced
'2014
'2015

21

373,457

380,165

443,155

558,344

685,418

644,785

617,958

203,698

187,188

240,509

347,524

476,911

451,550

432,646

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)
Short-termdebt (USSm)
Net disbursements (USSm)n

46,823

(2,280)

43,521

119,928

126,951

129,014

123,614

Total debt service (TDS)

31,823

33,259

39,804

63,638

78,049

73,538

70,460

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)
TDO/XGSb

26.1

22.3

30.5

29.4

30.5

28.9

25.8

TDO/GDP

11.5

9.5

9.2

9.8

10.3

7.8

6.6

TDS/XGS

2.2

2.0

2.7

3.4

3.5

3.3

2.9

10.1

10.8

9.8

7.0

5.6

5.3

4.9

Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS

18.2

16.3

15.7

9.9

8.3

13.6

16.3

Preferred creditor DS/public

29.3

27.1

27.4

18.9

24.5

28.7

34.9

DS (%)c

IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

11,762

12,464

12,756

12,962

13,026

12,930

0.1
13,215

Ofwhich present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share ofIBRD portfolio(%)

11.7

12.2

10.7

9.5

9.5

8.8

8.4

10,151

9,786

9,521

9,000

7,489

6,712

5,953

Loans

694

930

920

994

1,038

1,067

1,105

1,145

1,186

Equity and quasi-equity /c

493

589

527

727

793

746

756

766

776

49

0

75

24

0

57

67

50

50

IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use ofIMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports ofgoods and services, including workers'remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

99

CASAnnex B8- China
Operations Portfolio (IBRDIIDAand Grants)
As Of Date 912712012

Closed Projects

281

IBRDlDA*
Total Disbursed(Actim)
ofwhich has beenrepaid
Total Disbursed(Closed)
ofwhich has beenrepaid
Total Disbursed(Actiw + Closed)
ofwhich has beenrepaid

3,599.53
77.42
9,891.01
16,368.59
13,490.53
16,446.01

Total Undisbursed(Active)

6,371.24

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed(Active + Closed)

6,371.24

Active Projects
Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Nam

P121263
P120932
P096707
P118597
P112626
P108627
P106956
P110632
P114138
P039838
P101829
P096925
P084874
P098654
P087318
P086515
P111421
P118647
P115695
P124978
P126210
P086446
P125528
P096556
P085124
P113766
P091020
P070519
P091949
P123133
P119357
P098916
P119654
P114182
P098915
P072721
P108592
P090375
P090377
P090376
P082993
P101844
P090335
P081776

China GEF City Cluster EccS
China Technology Needs A#
CN - GD Tech&Vocational IS
CN - Integrated Eco. Devol#
CN - Liuzhou Environment IS
CN - Nanning Urban Enviro S
CN - Ningbo New Countrysi MS
CN - Sichuan Small Towns S
CN - Water Conservation IS
CN ODS IV PHASE OUT PIS
CN Xining Flood and Water S
CN- Bengbu Integrated EnvS
CN- Energy Efficiency Fine S
CN- GEF-Thermal Power El MS
CN--GEF-Guangd IntegrateS
CN-3rd National Railway
S
CN-Anhui Medium Cities Ur MS
CN-Anhui Shaying River CtS
CN-Bayannaoer Water Re,S
CN-Changzhi Urban TranspS
CN-Chongqing Urban Rural#
CN-Chongqing Urban-Rural MS
CN-DioAns Reduc. from Pi S
CN-Eco-Farming
S
CN-Economic Reform ImplES
CN-Energy Efficiency FinaiS
CN-Fujian Highway Sector IS
CN-Fuzhou Nantai Island PS
CN-Gansu Cultural & Natur, S
CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban #
CN-GEF Egy Efficiency Pr S
CN-GEF Energy Efficiency S
CN-GEF Green Freight DerS
CN-GEF Povincial Energy ES
CN-GEF Sino-Singapore Ti MS
CN-GEF-Heat Reform & Bic S
CN-GEF-IF Huai Rver BasiS
CN-GEF-IF-LIAONING
MS
CN-GEF-IF-SHANDONG El MS
CN-GEF-IF-Shanghai Agric MU
CN-GEF-PCB Mgnt & Dispt MU
CN-GEF-Sust Dev in Poor I MS
CN-GEF-WB Urban Transp MS
CN-GUANGDONG/PRD2
MS

Developient
gURectives

Original Amountin US$ Millions

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

S
#
S
#
S
S
MS
S
S
S
S
S
S
MU
S
S
MS
S
S
S
#
MS
S
MS
S
MS
S
MS
MS
#
S
S
S
S
MS
S
S
MS
S
U
MS
MS
U
MS

2012
2012
2009
2012
2011
2010
2010
2011
2012
1998
2009
2008
2008
2009
2007
2007
2010
2011
2011
2012
2012
2010
2012
2009
2006
2010
2007
2006
2008
2012
2011
2008
2011
2011
2011
2005
2012
2007
2007
2010
2006
2010
2008
2007

100

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

5
5
20
150
150
100
50
100
80
440.35
100
100
300
19.7
5.25
200
100
100
80
100
100
84
15
120
20
100
370
100
38.4
100
4
13.5
4.2
13.386363
6.16
18
5
5
5
4.788
18.34
4.265
21
96

0.1

Undisb.

5
7.875348
150
141.2564
40.26359
32.32303
99.75
80
16.70079
52.85294
55.04541
134.63
9.322856
0.936507
8.860376
92.13486
99.75
79.8
99.75
100
75.79
15
60.86104
9.745718
79.75
65.01369
17.16157
12.76325
100
3.6
10.45957
3.4
12.1327
3.509188
7.985694
5
0.713208
4.066578
6.054178
3.925
16.48252
41.79198

Active Projects
Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Nam

P088964
P093963
P091950
P107559
P087224
P100455
P081348
P098078
P119071
P101258
P075730
P105872
P096926
P101988
P101716
P122321
P117656
P110661
P092618
P099224
P099992
P085376
P112359
P121289
P096920
P084437
P120234
P112759
P114069
P077752
P096923
P075732
P100968
P099062
P083322
P121414
P099751
P081615
P117107
P120664
P095315
P114107
P112838
P092631
P111163
P122008
P096812
P122319
P116656
P126454
Overall Result

Developrent
Objectives

CN-Guangxi Integrated Fort S
CN-Guiyang Transport
S
CN-Guizhou Cultural and N; MU
CN-Guizhou-Guangzhou Re MS
CN-Han River Urban Eniro MS
CN-Henan Ecological LivesiS
CN-HENAN TOWNS WATE U
CN-Huai River Basin Flood S
CN-Hubei Xiangyang Urbar S
CN-Hubei Yiba Highway
S
CN-HUNAN URBAN DEV MS
CN-Integrated Forestry DevS
CN-Jiangsu Water and Wa S
CN-Jiangxi Shihutang Navi S
CN-Jilin Food Safety
S
CN-Jilin-Hunchun Railway S
CN-Kunming Urban Rail
S
CN-Lake Aibi Conservation S
CN-LIAONING MED CITIEf MS
CN-Liaoning Med. Cities (LI MS
CN-Liaoning Medium Cities S
CN-Migrant Skills Dev. and S
CN-NanGuang Railway
S
CN-Ningda Desertification (S
CN-Ningda Highway
S
CN-Rural Health
S
CN-Shandong Confucius & S
CN-Shandong Ecological AS
CN-Shandong Energy Effic S
CN-SHANDONG ENVIVIT2 S
CN-Shanghai APL Ill
MS
CN-SHANGHAI URBAN AP MS
CN-Shansi Coal Bed Metha MU
CN-ShiZheng Railway
HS
CN-SICHUAN URBAN DEV MS
CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigatec S
CN-Sustainable Dev. in Poc MS
CN-Taiyuan Urban Transpo MU
CN-Tech Vocational Ed
MU
CN-Urumqi District Heating S
CN-W. Region Rural Water U
CN-Wenchuan Earthquake MS
CN-Wuhan Second Urban S
CN-Xi'an Sustainable Urbar S
CN-Xinjiang Water Conser S
CN-Yunnan Tech Voc Ed #
CN-Yunnan Urban Env
S
CN-Zhangjiakou-Hohhot RaiS
CN-Zhejiang Qiantang River S
Xinjiang Yining Urban Trant #

Original Amountin US$ Millions

Imementation
Progress

FiscalYear

IBRD

S
MS
U
MS
MS
S
U
S
S
S
MS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
MU
MS
MS
S
S
HS
S
S
S
S
S
MS
MS
U
S
MS
S
MS
U
MU
S
U
MS
MS
MS
MS
#
S
S
S
#

2007
2008
2009
2009
2008
2010
2006
2011
2012
2009
2005
2011
2009
2009
2010
2011
2011
2011
2007
2008
2006
2008
2009
2012
2010
2008
2011
2010
2011
2007
2009
2006
2009
2008
2007
2012
2010
2010
2010
2011
2007
2009
2010
2008
2010
2012
2009
2012
2011
2012

100
100
60
300
84
80
150
200
100
150
172
100
130
100
100
200
300

101

IDA

GRANT

2.976
173
191
218
50
300
80
250
50
50
60
150
147
200
180
80
300
180
100
100
150
40
100
25
710
100
150
100
50
150
200
100
100
10118.4

615.915363

Cancel.

Undisb.

0.832668
14.75572
52.7567
299.25
41.81108
71.8
79.36204
152.9813
100
76.89612
23.91556
68.45613
50.70131
17.48871
91.71174
196.089
283.25
2.976
113.407
134.7551
79.45495
35.32778
243.1787
80
33.64597
19.43038
44.875
39.40839
134.625
28.42343
115.6321
53.15108
71.8
125.5142
11.05083
99.75
82.29009
149.625
33.9
89.75
5.793495
351.6121
81.93402
113.3563
89.75
50
120.041
199.5
81.28121
99.75
0.1 6498.505

\

O-E

90E

100E

RUSSIAN

120T

110E

130E

FEDE RATION

\

TO
- -- Chit.

KAZAKHSTAN
CHINA

.-

'

HELOFGJI N,
Harbin..

S MONGOLIA
.... Biskek
40-i .

KYRGYZ REP.

T. Bishkek

?Du
honbe

TO

i1

.

Urumqi.

.

Chan

hun

U

L

~

a

G XI

AFGHANISTAN >gHe

gO

NJl AN G

MAON

Ba touHhhot

s n

p

a

8
BfO
jianjin

ar on

Yinchuan

M rdanH
Taiyuan

Hai

Dalian

TIA

E7BJ E
ang

shilizh.y

REP. OF

KOREA

Y-9 
Thismaop ~e prociuced
by
theMp D.,ign Unitof Th.
WorldBcnk.Thebondaries,
colors, denorninations
andQ
ny otherinformation
sho

ining
*
anzhouS

SQingdo

A

INGHA*

YeIow
uoyan

on ths .n.p d. not npl, onXlZANG

theport of TheWorldBank
Grop,
anyent..
rWro
loge] tto of :ny territory,W
~o ny endo

G

A ~5S1LJ

Xi'an

H EN A

ning .San
Nu ANHUISHATa

3TA

SU

I

Hefei

300 Kilometers

200

JAPAN

A

reent o

Lhasa

0 100

Sea

enz



6ondes

0

Sea of

B/lGO

S INC H U A

C-C.-hengdu

300 Miles

|

u
0E

.

ca

|

|

wHhan

angzhou

N n C o n g q in g

1 0 0

East

fZHEJANGChina

t...'

- ,

N

nch a n g

S

-hangsha
91UNAN

0 u Z
N ROAS

CHINA
0

CITIES AND TOWNS

Knming

0

PROVINCE CAPITALS

Y'1U N NA-N

A

H

GUANc

')8NG

Gu .

V|ET

MA| RAD
MAINROADS
RAILIROADS

..

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES
D

gzhnou

HONG
KONGSAR,

n'''Nanning

RIV ERS

Fuzhou

TAIWAN
G U A NG X i

 NATIONAL CAPITAL

- --

1
JANGXI

GLlZFUJhiANr.

AM

CHINA

.MACAO) SAR, CHINA

AHaikou

THAL.AND.

D.

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
100E_110E120

Ta
110-E

PHiLIPPINES
120.E

w

ea

