Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No: 71713-CG

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE REPUBLIC OF CONGO
FOR THE PERIOD FY13–FY16

September 24, 2012

Central Africa Country Cluster 2 (AFCC2)
Africa Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

THE LAST COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY: May 13, 2009 (Report No: 48404-CG)
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS (Exchange Rate Effective May 31, 2012)
US$1.00 = 529.47 FCFA (Central African Francs)
FISCAL YEAR:
January 1–December 31
ABREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AfDB
AFD
BADEA
BEAC
BDEAC
CEEAC
CEMAC

African Development Bank
Agence Française de Développent (French Development Agency)
Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa
Banque des Etats de l'Afrique Centrale (Bank for Central African States)
Banque de Développement des Etats de l‘Afrique Centrale (Central African
Development Bank)
Communauté Economique des Etats de l'Afrique Centrale (Economic Community for
Central African States)

Communauté Economique et Monétaire de l'Afrique Centrale (Central African
Economic and Monetary Community)
CFCO
Chemin de Fer Congo Océan (Congolese Railway)
CFE
Centre de Formalités des Entreprises
CNSS
Caisse Nationale de Sécurité Sociale (National Social Security Fund)
CPS
Country Partnership Strategy
CRF
Caisse de Retraite des Fonctionnaires (Civil Service Retirement Fund)
CSO
Civil Society Organization
DIME
Development Impact Evaluation
DO
Development Objective
DRC
Democratic Republic of Congo
EITI
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
EU
European Union
FCFA
Central African Franc
FDI
Foreign Direct Investment
FSC
Forest Stewardship Council
FY
Fiscal Year
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GEF
Global Environment Facility
GNI
Gross National Income
HiA
Health in Africa Initiative
HIPC
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
HIV/AIDS Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
IBRD
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICT
Information and Communications Technology
IDA
International Development Agency
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IP
Implementation Performance
IMF
International Monetary Fund
MEC
Maison de l‘Entreprise
MIGA
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MSMEs
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
MTEF
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
OHADA
Organisation pour l‘Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des Affaires
PCT
Parti Congolais du Travail (Congolese Labour Party)

PER
PMI
PRSP
PV
RBF
REDD
SDR
SEZ
SME
SNDE
SNPC
SSA

Public Expenditure Review
Public Investment Management Index
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Present Value
Results-Based Financing
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
Special Drawing Rights
Special Economic Zone
Small and Medium Enterprise
Société Nationale de Distribution d‘Eau (National Water Distribution Company, Congo)
Société Nationale des Pétroles du Congo (National Petroleum Company of Congo)
Sub-Saharan Africa

TBD

To Be Determined

Vice President:
Country Director:
Team Leader:

Makhtar Diop
Eustache Ouayoro
Sylvie Dossou Kouamé

The core team was composed of: Sylvie Dossou Kouamé, Olivier Godron, Eustacius Betubiza, Johannes Herderschee,
Monthe Bienvenu Biyoudi, Milaine Rossanaly. Support was provided by Nadege Bicoumou and Alicia Hetzner.
Substantive inputs were received from: Abderrahim Fraiji, Amadou Dem, Amadou Oumar Ba, Antoine Lema, Bella
Diallo, Bourama Diaite, Brian Pinto, Carole Baker (IMF), Chiara Bronchi, Christophe Rockmore, Clement Tukeba, Enias
Baganizi, Etaki Wa Dzon, Jean Jacques Frere, Linda Carole Tiemoko, Mahine Diop, Michel Duret, Mohamadou
Hayatou, Mohamat Goadi Louani, Nicolette DeWitt, OPCS, Rachidi Radji, Remi Pelon, SDN, Silvana Tordo, and Simon
Rietbergen.

REPUBLIC OF CONGO
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
CONTENTS
Page
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....................................................................................................... i
I.

INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................... 1

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT............................................................................................................ 1
A. Political and Institutional Context ...................................................................................... 1
B. Poverty Profile, Progress toward Millennium Development Goals, and Gender ............... 2
C. Recent Economic Developments and Medium-Term Prospects ........................................ 3
III. COUNTRY OPPORTUNITIES, CHALLENGES, AND STRATEGIC PRIORITIES ........... 5
A. Main Growth Opportunities and Challenges ...................................................................... 5
B. Government‘s Strategic Priorities and Programs ............................................................. 11
IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY ..................................................... 15
A. Performance of the FY10–FY12 CPS and Lessons Learned ........................................... 15
B. Proposed Country Partnership Strategy for FY13–FY16 ................................................. 17
C. Partnerships …………………………………………………………………………….. 29
V. MANAGING RISKS .............................................................................................................. 30
Tables
Table 1. Proposed New Lending Activities for FY13–FY16 ........................................................ 25
Table 2. Activities under the Lending Program, Categorized as Ongoing or New ....................... 26
Table 3. Analytical and Advisory Activities ................................................................................. 27
Figure
Figure 1. Fiscal Revenues and Expenditures by Category, 2007–12 .............................................. 4
Annexes
Annex 1: Results Framework for the Congo CPS (FY13–FY16) ................................................. 32
Annex 2: IFC Program Summary…..……………………………………………………..…….. 39
Annex 3: Progress Toward Millennium Development Goals ....................................................... 40
Annex 4: Government Programs in Transportation Infrastructure ................................................ 41
Annex 5: Doing Business Indicators ............................................................................................. 42
Annex 6: IBRD/IDA Program Summary ...................................................................................... 43
Annex 7: Performance Assessment of the Country Partnership Strategy FY10-FY12 ................. 44
Annex 8: Summary of Consultations ............................................................................................ 64
Annex 9: Country at a Glance ....................................................................................................... 65
Annex 10: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ........................ 66
Annex 11: Selected Social Indicators ............................................................................................ 67
Annex 12: International Partners ................................................................................................... 68
Annex 13: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators ............................................................................ 69
Map of the Republic of Congo No. IBRD 33390……………………………………………….. 70

REPUBLIC OF CONGO
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
As the effects of civil strife of the 1990s fade, Congo continues to rebuild its state
institutions. In 2009, the second post-war presidential election was held peacefully.
Parliamentary elections were held in July and August 2012, and the Congolese Labor
Party (PCT), obtained 89 seats out of 136 in the National Assembly, maintaining a
parliamentary majority.
ii.
With a population of 4.1 million, located primarily in the three largest urban
centers, Congo is poised to become an emerging economy over the next 15 years. In the
last five years, economic growth rates were high, and on the back of rising oil production
in 2010 the country posted the second fastest rate of economic growth in Sub-Saharan
Africa (SSA). The fiscal situation remains strong following HIPC debt cancelation in
2010 and large oil windfalls. However, the country remains fragile. The high poverty
rate, unemployment, and inequality remain significant threats to the country‘s nascent
peace. The country‘s principal challenge is how to use its large oil revenues to stimulate
broad-based non-oil growth that would generate employment and reduce poverty.
Similarly, much needs to be done to improve the country‘s social outcomes.
iii.
Opportunities for non-oil growth include: (a) light manufacturing to take
advantage of the huge regional market; (b) agriculture given the country‘s large reserves
of arable land; (c) transit services buttressed on Congo‘s deep sea port of Pointe Noire;
(d) mining; and (e) forestry, including environmental services.
iv.
The country has many opportunities for growing without jeopardizing
environmental goals, provided environmental aspects are addressed in a timely and
considered manner. Spatial planning and other public investment decisions that the
country will take in the coming decade will be instrumental in either furthering––or
hindering––socially inclusive, environmentally sustainable growth for present and future
generations.
v.
However, progress on these non-oil growth opportunities remains hampered by
multiple factors. They include limited government capacity and effectiveness in
managing a growing public investment program; poor infrastructure, especially energy
and transportation; a poor business climate (Congo was ranked 181st of 183 countries in
ease-of-doing-business ahead of Central African Republic and Chad); inadequate skills
that need to be adapted to meet private sector needs; and weak governance.
vi.
The Government is aware of these weaknesses and has produced a new PRSP for
2012–2016 to address these challenges. The objective of the government‘s strategy paper
is to stimulate inclusive economic growth aimed at diversifying the economy from its oil
dependence. The PRSP emphasizes governance (political and economic), diversification
of the economy, infrastructure development, social inclusion, and equity.
i

vii.
To achieve these objectives, the government has initiated a massive public
investment program. Overall, the Government‘s capital expenditure increased from 7.6
percent of GDP during 2001–2005, to 9.9 percent of GDP during 2006–2010.
Furthermore, the 2012 investment budget, revised in order to reflect reconstruction
expenses following the March 4, 2012 ammunitions depot explosions in Brazzaville, is
up by 94 percent over the previous year. However, efficiency in public investment
spending remains a challenge.
viii. In view of the above, the objective of the Bank‘s partnership with the Republic of
Congo for FY13–FY16 is to help Congo use its large oil revenues to diversify its
economy and improve its social outcomes. The Bank‘s support is aimed at creating a
dynamic that will set the stage for a sustainable and inclusive green growth trajectory that
should increase equality of opportunities and spread the benefits of growth, while
safeguarding the environment. The ultimate goal of the Bank‘s support is to contribute to
propelling Congo from a low middle-income country to a medium middle-income
country.
ix.

The Bank will play largely a catalytic role in helping Congo to:
a. Better target its public investment program and increase its efficiency and
effectiveness;
b. Improve the performance of key infrastructure to better serve the population as
well as private sector needs;
c. Strengthen the investment climate to accelerate domestic investments and attract
foreign direct investment;
d. Develop key primary sectors such as agriculture and sustainable forestry;
e. Promote regional integration to exploit the vast regional market opportunities;
f. Strengthen human capital; and
g. Strengthen governance and government capacity.

x.
Implementing this strategy will build on lessons drawn from executing the Bank‘s
FY10–FY12 partnership strategy with Congo. These lessons include the need to:
a. Improve the quality of the government‘s investment spending;
b. Sustain the reform momentum, especially regarding the procurement code, the
business climate, transparency and governance in oil, and the human development
sectors;
c. Build the capacity of the public administration, including putting in place
performance-based mechanisms; and
d. Deepen the knowledge agenda.
xi.

On the operational level, lessons learned include:
a. Finding a lasting solution to the irregular and arduous release of counterpart
funding;
b. Emphasizing early project restructuring to avoid prolonged stays in problem
status; and
ii

c. Focusing on implementation readiness.
xii.
Implementing this new strategy faces some risks. As a catalyst, the Bank will be
contributing limited financing to largely government-funded programs. In the past, this
arrangement has been a source of implementation delays due to slow releases of
government funding. Efforts to find a lasting solution are underway. Delays to rapid
implementation after effectiveness will be addressed with better project preparation.
However, lengthy delays in government ratification remain a challenge. Restructurings
will be carried out at early signs of stalled implementation.
xiii. Also, World-Bank-funded projects still face some fiduciary risks. An April 2012
fiduciary assessment mission identified internal controls as well as accounting issues in
some projects. Efforts will be stepped up to address these issues, including ensuring full
implementation of the internal and external auditors‘ recommendations, and strict
adherence to fiduciary procedures and processes.
xiii. Other risks include possible political instability arising from disaffection over lack
of jobs, a sense of growing inequality, and limited access to basic services as a result of
weak governance.
xiv. Finally, the Government‘s ongoing attention to the reconstruction efforts
following the March 4, 2012 multiple explosions in a munitions depot in Brazzaville
could exert macroeconomic pressures as well as create opportunities for poor governance
practices, while detracting officials from other urgent policy and development program
imperatives.

iii

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF CONGO
I. INTRODUCTION
The Republic of Congo is classified as a low middle-income country, largely
due to its large oil revenues and small population of 4.1 million. However, Congo still
faces challenges in stimulating a broad-based, diversified economy that generates jobs,
especially for the youth. It also continues to face challenges in improving social
outcomes, most especially in health, but also in education. The FY10–FY12 Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) between the Bank and the Republic of Congo was based on
the Government‘s 2008–2012 Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The latter put a
greater emphasis on laying the foundation for broad-based growth and better service
delivery. The Government has elaborated a new PRSP for 2012–2016. Its objectives are
to consolidate the gains in governance reforms and intensify Congo‘s efforts toward
economic diversification and better service delivery. It is against this backdrop that the
following FY13–FY16 Bank-Congo partnership strategy has been formulated (the
expected outcomes of which are summarized in Annex 1).
1.

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT
A.

POLITICAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT

Since the cessation of active civil conflict in 2000, the political climate in the country
has stabilized significantly. The second post-conflict presidential elections, which were
held in 2009, were largely peaceful and it is now possible to freely access the whole
country. The results of the second round of legislative elections were published on
August 7, 2012 and the Congolese Labor Party (PCT), obtained the majority. However,
the low voter turnout witnessed could be a worrisome signal requiring close monitoring.
Indeed, the country remains fragile. High youth unemployment, inequality, or
events, such as the March 4, 2012 deadly explosions that killed hundreds of people, could
easily trigger widespread discontent and possible social unrest.
2.

The country is also characterized by weak institutions, which have slowed
progress on social and economic transformation. The many years of conflict and
unstable governments have severely weakened the country‘s administration, eroded
public accountability, and undercut publicly funded services. Similarly, Congo‘s
administration has been historically centralized. This tradition has, so far, limited the
benefits of decentralization as well as the role of local communities in improving service
delivery.
3.

1

B.

POVERTY PROFILE, PROGRESS TOWARD MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS,

AND GENDER

Poverty Profile
Preliminary data from the 2011 Household Survey (ECOM 2011) reveal that
over the 2005-11 period, the poverty rate has dropped by 4 percentage points to 46.5
percent. The average decline masks important regional differences; urban poverty
declined rapidly and is now below 30 percent in the main urban centers of Brazzaville
and Pointe Noire. In contrast, rural poverty increased by 10 percentage points to almost
three quarters of the rural population, as explained by the high and rising poverty levels
among subsistence farmers. Poverty rates declined for those engaged in the modern
sectors as well as for female-headed households.
4.

The absence of comprehensive and final poverty information remains a
major concern as well as the lack of updated data on unemployment, earnings and the
quality of public services, especially in education and health. For instance, a 2009 survey
put general unemployment at 16.1 percent. However, when discouraged job seekers were
included, it reached 26.6 percent for the general population and 42.2 percent among the
youth. In addition, the economy is characterized by low earnings, with the situation
particularly dire for those in the informal sector, where monthly earnings are barely over
US$100 a month, in a country with a high cost of living. Furthermore, with a Gini
coefficient of 0.39, Congo remains a country where the differences in wealth among rich
and poor are still significant.1 Although primary education enrollment indicators are high
and trending upward, quality remains a deep concern. In the health sector, there has been
little improvement in access rates, and child malnutrition remains high.
5.

The above assessment highlights priority areas for Government policy and
poverty alleviation programs moving forward. These include, among other things: (a)
addressing the issue of gainful employment, especially among the youth; and (b)
improving the quality and equity of services in human development sectors, especially
through a results-focused approach.
6.

Progress toward Millennium Development Goals
Congo has made some progress in primary education enrollment and the
reduction of under-five and maternal mortality rates. The country may be able to
meet MDG4 if it continues to improve the reduction of under-five mortality at this
pace. However, significant challenges remain in utilizing its significant oil revenues to
stimulate broad-based, inclusive growth, and to improve the delivery of basic social
services. As a result, progress on reducing poverty and improving access to safe water
has been particularly slow (see Annex 3 for details). Government is beginning to focus its
attention on these critical issues, but this focus will need to be sustained for several years
to make significant progress.
7.

1

Preliminary data from ECOM 2011. A Gini coefficient is an equality measure that ranges from 0 for
perfect equality to 1 for perfect inequality.

2

Gender
Congo has a high gender inequality index of 0.628 in 20112. The high gender
inequality mirrors the existing challenges for women, especially in reproductive health,
such as high maternal mortality; and relatively low women empowerment, including
inadequate political representation and unequal access to economic opportunities.
8.

Maternal mortality remains high, at 426 per 100,000 live births, according to
DHS 2011/ 2012 preliminary data. Similarly, the adolescent fertility rate for 15–19 year
olds remains high (27 percent), and HIV-AIDS prevalence among young women (15–24)
is more than three times higher than prevalence among males of the same age. In
addition, there are gender inequalities in access to education, especially at higher levels.
For instance, although the female-to-male index for primary-level enrollment is
approximately 0.97, it is only 0.53 at the tertiary level.
9.

Similarly, huge disparities remain regarding women representation in
administrative and political life, and access to economic opportunities. For instance,
women hold only 9.5 percent of the seats in the newly elected National Assembly. In the
same vein, women have less access to credit and new technology than men, despite their
active involvement in economic activities, particularly in the informal sector.
10.

The Government is making efforts toward gender equality but more needs to
be done. The Government adopted the National Gender Policy and Plan of Action for
2009–2013. The plan‘s overall objective is to reduce gender inequalities by giving
women greater economic, social, cultural, and political power. Ongoing programs include
ensuring a high percentage of births attended by a trained attendant3, promoting prenatal
care, providing free malaria treatment and free caesareans, distributing insecticide-treated
mosquito nets to mothers, and carrying out systematic vaccination of pregnant women
and children. However, to maximize impact, policies, programs, and projects need to be
mainstreamed across a wider spectrum of Government agencies.
11.

C.

RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS

Congo has realized sustained growth with modest inflation and achieved its
HIPC completion point in 2010. After reaching middle-income country status in 2006,
the country‘s growth continued, averaging 4.7 percent during 2006–11. During this
period, oil output grew by 2 percent a year, compared to almost 6 percent for the non-oil
sector, which was led by the construction and public works sector. However, the share of
the oil sector in nominal GDP remained stable as international oil prices increased by an
average of 10 percent per year. The fall in the oil price in the wake of the international
financial crisis reduced fiscal revenues but Congo‘s existing buffers were sufficient to
absorb the shock. HIPC debt relief in January 2010 further supported Congo‘s strong
12.

2

UNDP, 2011 Human Development Report. A scale of ―0‖ denotes total equality, and ―1‖ denotes total
inequality.
3
A trained attendant refers to a doctor, nurse, midwife, health assistant, matron, or community health
agent.

3

fiscal position. Inflation remained subdued thanks to the fixed FCFA/Euro exchange rate,
an open trade regime, and appropriate fiscal policies.
Oil dominates exports and investment income, while also financing imports.
Congo is the fourth largest oil producer in Sub-Saharan Africa, with an annual output of
over 100 million barrels. Nominal oil export revenues are over 80 percent of GDP,
providing financing for imports of goods and services (50 percent of GDP), investment
income (25 percent of GDP), and a healthy balance of payment surplus (5 percent of
GDP). As the wealth stored in its natural resources is being extracted, Congo is
accumulating net foreign assets. Gross reserves are now at US$5.8 billion at end 2011,
equivalent to 9.1 months of imports and 40 percent of GDP. At the same time, imports
are rising rapidly, being pulled in by a sharp increase in public investment (up by 6
percentage points of GDP during 2006–11) that more than offsets a modest decline in
private investment (down by 3 percentage points of GDP).
13.

Figure 1. Fiscal Revenues and Expenditures by Category, 2007–12
(FCFA, mil.)

Revenues

Expenditures

4,000

4,000

3,500

Other revenues

3,500

3,000

Oil revenue

3,000

Budget surplus

2,500

2,500

2,000

2,000

1,500

1,500

1,000

1,000

500

500

0
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012
(proj.)

0
2007

Investment
Current expenditures

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012
(proj.)

Fiscal policy has been prudent during recent years, with fiscal surpluses
approximately 16 percent of GDP in 2010–11. Revenues are dominated by oil; and
non-oil revenues, are below 10 percent of GDP. Expenditures were contained over the
years but were expanded recently to address poor infrastructure and social indicators,
areas in which Congo is lagging its peers. As a result, public investment represented 16
percent of GDP in 2011 and is projected to rise to 25 percent in 2012. Public spending
contributes to economic growth, but the immediate impact on poverty is yet to be seen.
Over the years, sound fiscal policies have been abetted by prudent monetary policy in the
context of the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (Communauté
Economique et Monétaire de l'Afrique Centrale - CEMAC).
14.

4

The medium-term prospects for Congo are good based on mining and gas
projects to come on stream and sustained non-oil economic activities. According to
conservative macroeconomic forecasts, non-oil GDP growth is projected to grow by
almost 8.4 percent between 2012 and 2015, driven by accelerated momentum resulting
from both private and public investments. The completion of several ongoing public
investment projects is projected to ease transport and supply bottlenecks. Notably,
improved transport conditions will help ease the supply of basic products in local
markets, complemented by additional efficiency gains as a result of better trade
facilitation procedures. The same conservative forecasts project oil sector growth to slow
down by 2.9 percent due to a projected decline in oil production, which is partly offset by
an uptake in gas production. Inflation is expected to remain low and consistent with the
three percent annual inflation fixed by the CEMAC convergence criterion.
15.

The main policy challenge is to address (a) human capital shortages to
support private sector competitiveness and (b) cost-effective implementation of the
public investment program. The available training and education does not match the
needs of the growing private sector. Similarly, in the public sector, skills required to
manage the massive public investment program are scarce. At the policy level, the
challenge will be to design policies that quickly develop human capital.4
16.

III. COUNTRY OPPORTUNITIES, CHALLENGES, AND STRATEGIC
PRIORITIES
A.

MAIN GROWTH OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

(1) Opportunities for Non-Oil Growth
Congo has the potential to diversify its oil-dominated economy into
additional non-oil sectors. Non-oil opportunities with high growth potential include
light manufacturing and construction, services, agriculture, mining and forestry.
17.

(a)

Light manufacturing and construction. The manufacturing and construction
sectors remain small, although construction is picking up, buoyed in part by the
Government‘s large capital spending. Manufacturing potential is mainly in the
light consumer goods (including agro-based products), taking advantage of the
regional market. Growth in light manufacturing is critical for Congo to rise from
its current low middle-income status to a medium middle-income status and
beyond. Light manufacturing could be developed in the new Special Economic
Zones (SEZ), taking advantage of the increasing availability of electric power,
and learning from the experience of countries such as Ethiopia.

(b)

Services. Over the last decade (2001–10), the services sector experienced an
average growth rate of 10 percent, driven mainly by transport and

4

World Bank, Republic of Congo, Employment and Growth Study from Jobless to Inclusive Growth,
Report No. 61999-CG, Washington, DC, 2011.

5

telecommunications. There is still room for growth, especially in regional transit
services, by tapping on the existence of the deep sea port of Pointe Noire. In
addition, the installation of the fiber optical cable, which is expected to be
completed within the next two years, will provide access to high speed internet,
creating opportunities for the development of new ICT companies, products,
services, and employment. There also is room for growth in the financial service
sector, which is still very small, by building on the opportunities offered by a
sizeable regional market.
(c)

Agriculture. Congo has between 10 million and 12 million hectares of land with
good agricultural potential. However, less than 10 percent of it is farmed, mostly
with rudimentary tools. The country imports up to 85 percent of its food needs.
There is great potential to address not only the local needs but also those of
neighboring countries, including the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).
Agricultural intensification also is essential to enable Congo to reap the benefits
of the Government‘s REDD (―Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation‖) program under preparation. The agricultural sector is also
beginning to attract foreign investors. For instance, in early 2012, some South
African farmers were reported to be already producing maize on 1,200 hectares in
the Niari and Bouenza Departments. Congo‘s framework agreement with
Singapore regarding SEZ includes developing agribusiness in high potential
zones. While these developments are encouraging, it is important for the
Government to ensure that current and future arrangements are consistent with
emerging norms of responsible investments that respect traditional rights to land.

(d)

Mining. Congo's industrial mining potential consists mainly of potassium, iron
ore, copper, lead, and zinc. Artisanal mining of gold, diamonds, and industrial
minerals is present in several regions and has potential for growth. Since the
promulgation of the 2005 Mining code, mining exploration has increased. Several
major investors have demonstrated interest. A selected number of projects have
gone through the feasibility stage. Congo should also take advantage of the fact
that many international mining companies have made commitments to enhance
biodiversity in the countries in which they work. Such ―biodiversity offsets‖ could
give a major boost to Congo‘s poorly funded National Parks network.

(e)

Forestry. Congo‘s forests cover over 22 million ha, or 65 percent of the country‘s
land area. In 2010, the forestry sector contributed 10 percent to the country‘s
exports. Logs constitute over 60 percent of export value. The Government aims to
increase to 85 percent the proportion of harvested timber that is processed locally
for the growing construction industry and other uses, especially by taking
advantage of the regional market. There also are opportunities to develop
plantations in deforested or severely degraded areas closer to transport hubs and
consumer centers and increase the sustainability of forestry operations. Many
forestry sector investments are likely to generate carbon credits. The country is
also trying to position its forests as providers of global ecosystem services,
especially greenhouse gas emission reductions (under the REDD mechanism) and
biodiversity.
6

(2) Principal Constraints to Non-Oil Growth
Tapping into the above potential will take a concerted effort to address a
number of constraints. These include: (i) lack of reliable infrastructure, especially for
electricity and transportation; (ii) an unfavorable business environment; (iii) a shallow
financial sector; and (iv) weak human capital.
18.

(i) Poor Infrastructure
Over the past decade, the contribution of infrastructure to Congo’s per
capita growth averaged a mere 0.5 percentage points. This average is considerably
lower than in other countries in the region, and in Sub-Saharan Africa in general, in
which infrastructure contributes 0.99 percentage points on average. In fact, in the future,
infrastructure could contribute more than 3 percentage points a year to per capita GDP
growth, if access to, and quality of, infrastructure services were improved to the level
seen in Mauritius, a lead performer in Africa5. The main challenges are in energy and
transportation.
19.

(a) Energy. According to the World Bank 2009 Investment Climate Policy Note for
Congo, more than 70 percent of companies report lack of reliable electricity as a
major constraint. The system suffers from frequent power cuts that cost some 19
percent of firms‘ turnover. Approximately 82 percent of firms have to rely on
generators, a costly alternative, making them uncompetitive. There are many
ongoing efforts by the Government to improve the production, transmission, and
distribution of electricity (see Annex 4 for details), although the sector‘s
management remains a challenge.
(b) Transportation. Surfaced roads constitute less than 10 percent of the total road
network, including urban roads. The 500 km road between Pointe Noire and
Brazzaville is still under construction, with completion expected in 2016. Freight
transport between the two cities is largely by rail, but often by costly air cargo (even
for heavy construction materials such as cement). Congo‘s rail network is among
the worst performers in Africa in terms of service quality and safety, and tariffs are
among the highest (for instance, three times those of South Africa). Poor
performance is due to insufficient rehabilitation and maintenance of tracks, outdated
and insufficient rolling stock, weak internal supervision, and human resource
limitations. River transportation is vital for communication and trade along the
Congo River and its tributaries, and is much used by the poor. However, the current
deterioration of the river‘s infrastructure and equipment undermines its fluidity,
creating significant delays and inefficiencies in the trade of timber and fish
products.

5

Nataliya Pushak and Cecilia M. Briceno-Garmendia, ―The Republic of Congo‘s Infrastructure: A Continental
Perspective,‖ World Bank Africa Region, October 2011.

7

(ii) Poor Business Climate
Congo has one of the most difficult business operating environments in the
world. It was ranked 181st of 183 countries in the 2012 Doing Business Report. The
particularly problematic areas are: (a) the difficulties associated with paying taxes and the
large amounts involved, especially the numerous fees (parafiscalité)6; (b) the challenges
of trading across borders; (c) the numerous procedures and the cost of starting a business;
(d) poor and onerous enforcement of contracts; and (e) inadequate protection of investors.
A list of Congo‘s 2012 doing business performance is presented in Annex 5.
20.

(iii) Weak Financial Sector
Access to financing for entrepreneurial activity remains poor. Although
commercial bank deposits have been growing fast over the past years, access to financial
services including credit (particularly for SMEs) is still limited. A large number of SME
projects are deemed non-bankable by the banks (e.g. lack of suitable collateral or
business plans), explaining the high liquidity in the banking sector. Otherwise, all
commercial banks are broadly in compliance with the prudential ratios set by the regional
regulatory body. In 2009, Congo‘s banking sector was rated by the Central African
Banking Commission as one of the best in the CEMAC zone. A few microfinance
activities also have been initiated.
21.

(iv) Limited Technical and Managerial Skills
In a recent survey, 51 percent of the surveyed firms consider inadequate
workforce skills a major obstacle. There is a significant mismatch between the skills
offered by skills training institutions and the skills required by the private sector.
Similarly, a number of local enterprises lack adequate managerial skills for business
planning and financial management.
22.

(3) Other Key Challenges to Congo’s Development
(v) Human Development
23.

Health. Access to health and the overall performance of the health sector
remains relatively poor. Access to health services has virtually remained unchanged at
65.8 percent in 2011, compared to 68.7 percent in 2005, and the utilization rate declined
from 26.7 percent in 2005 to 23.8 percent in 2011. The quality of health services
provided in the rural areas remains of concern due to weak staff motivation and low
accountability. Problems associated with the pyramidal organization of the health care
system, weak capacity, inadequate human resource management, weak governance and
inefficiency in drug procurement and distribution continue to constrain the sector‘s
performance. In addition, Congo suffers from a general chronic malnutrition prevalence
of 24.4 percent (stunting), including areas in which 38.6 percent of all children less than 5
6

Parafiscalité refers to taxes and fees not levied by the State but by various state entities with autonomous
accounting. These taxes and fees tend to constitute an undue burden on businesses.

8

years old are chronically malnourished. The private sector offers opportunities for
complementing public sector efforts, but this sector is poorly regulated and insufficiently
involved in the provision of health services.
Education. Performance indicators for Congo’s education system have
trended upward since the end of the civil conflict in 2000. In 2011, the gross
enrollment rate at the primary level was 117 percent. However, improving internal
efficiency and the quality of education remains a challenge. Repetition rates are holding
at 23 percent, and student learning remains low. The effectiveness of service delivery
continues to be limited by capacity and governance issues. The 2010 budget allocation of
3.4 percent of GDP (or 12.7 percent of the total budget) remains low and needs to be
increased. To maximize the impact of education outcomes, greater attention to spending
efficiency will be critical. This includes better human resource management as well as a
more balanced allocation of resources among the various education levels.
24.

Social Protection. Awareness about social protection issues has increased in
recent years, but the scope and content of social protection programs remain
limited. The main programs target civil service workers and private sector employees in
the form of contributory social insurance schemes (Caisse de Retraite des
Fonctionnaires, or CRF, and Caisse Nationale de Sécurité Sociale, or CNSS). In the past,
these agencies have been characterized by low and irregular payments of benefits and,
more generally, cover only a small part of the population. Other programs are sponsored
and funded mostly by the Ministry of Social Affairs. Because of the ministry‘s very small
budget (only 0.63 percent of the 2012 national budget), the scope and content of the
existing programs are limited and insufficiently developed to respond to the needs of the
poor and vulnerable population (the elderly and those afflicted with specific post-conflict
vulnerabilities, stigmas, and traumas). There is limited knowledge of the efficacy and
impact of existing programs.
25.

(vi) Limited Government Effectiveness
The Government has shown limited effectiveness at the national, subnational and sectoral level. After the conflicts of the 1990s, the administration‘s
capacity to handle public affairs was considerably weakened. This decline is reflected in
the inability of the administration to transform its fast-paced economic growth into better
and increased access to basic services for the majority of the population. In addition,
policy implementation suffers from low capacity at the local level (deconcentration).
Mindful of the need to modernize public administration and its human resources, the
Government of Congo has initiated a civil service reform and has allocated more
resources to the civil service apparatus. Improving the sectoral coherence of programs
and activities, establishing agencies to combat corruption and increasing local staff
capabilities have been at the heart of the renewed attention to civil service reform.
Despite these efforts, public administration continues to show serious dysfunctions partly
due to outdated laws and regulations, unclear and confusing institutional mandates and
structures, skills mismatch, low managerial capacity of resources and staff, and
inadequate remuneration. These dysfunctions manifest themselves in several ways,
26.

9

including: (i) inefficient government programs; (ii) poor public financial management;
and (iii) inability to evaluate government policy/program outcomes, among other things.
(a)

Efficiency of Government programs. Public investment management in Congo
remains highly inefficient due to poor planning and implementation. According to
the Public Investment Management Index (PMI), developed by the International
Monetary Fund, the Republic of Congo ranked 70th of 71 countries surveyed. The
PMI measures public investment management performance in four areas: appraisal,
selection, implementation, and evaluation. Congo fared particularly badly in the
appraisal and evaluation categories. According to some estimates, an appropriately
modulated pace of investments, with a greater focus on improving the efficiency of
investment spending, could add 1.3 percent to GDP growth while relieving
pressures on domestic prices.

(b)

Public financial management. A series of public financial management (PFM)
reforms have been implemented. The 2008 Public Financial Management action
plan and the 2009 Public Investment Management Improvement action plan set the
stage for the elaboration of a medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) for
budget preparation and the design and implementation of the Financial Management
Information System. A new Procurement Code was adopted in 2009 and the
institutions responsible for its implementation established. There has been
significant progress in its implementation, although the audits of past procurement
activities have not taken place yet. However, the MTEF for budget preparation has
stalled.

(c)

Measuring investment outcomes. The performance of the national statistical system,
whether for routine data or periodic surveys/censuses is a major constraint to the
Government‘s ability to assess the impact of its programs and policy interventions
and to move to a results-based management culture. The current system severely
falls short on four quality dimensions, namely timeliness, relevance, accuracy, and
interpretability, with additional concerns about accountability and inefficiency of
resource use (such as uncoordinated surveys). Although the Government finances
statistics, it is still not doing enough to ensure systematic use of the resulting
information.

(vii) Governance
Corruption. Allegations of widespread corruption, including in the award of
Government contracts and in customs administration are common. According to the
2011 Ibrahim Index of African Governance, Congo ranks 40th of 53 African countries.
Transparency International‘s 2011 Corruption Perception Index places Congo in the 154th
position of 178 countries worldwide and in the 35th position of 47 Sub-Saharan African
countries.
27.

Congolese organizations engaged in the fight against corruption are
generally weak. The Independent Governance Observatory is an independent structure
created in 2007 with a mission to monitor and evaluate progress made by the Government
28.

10

in the implementation of anti-corruption measures. The Anti-Corruption Commission,
created in 2004 and restructured in 2007, is a government technical organ in charge of
implementing the Government‘s anti-corruption policy. Both of these structures are
funded by the Government budget. Their activities are often constrained by inadequate
resources. Civil society also is still very weak, and the poor availability of public
information on government activities and programs hampers the effectiveness of civil
society organizations (CSOs).
Transparency in the oil and forestry sectors. Whereas a series of transparency
and governance measures were initiated during the HIPC process, more and
sustained progress is still needed. Some of the measures that were implemented
included reforming the accounting system of the Congolese National Petroleum
Company (SNPC), quarterly certification of oil revenues, improving oil
commercialization procedures, implementing the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI), and conducting and publishing on time the annual audits of SNPC‘s
financial reports. These reforms were adopted, and implementation generally has been
improving. However, conducting and publishing on time the annual audits of the
financial reports of the SNPC group has been particularly slow. The latest reports (2010
and 2011) are not yet available. The Independent Observer in the Forestry Sector,
supported by the European Union (EU), also has been making progress but has a long
way to go. On June 9, 2011, the EITI International Board decided to renew Congo‘s EITI
Candidate status for 18 months (until 9 December 2012), by which time Congo will be
required to have completed an EITI Validation that demonstrates compliance with the
2011 edition of the EITI Rules.
29.

B.

GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGIC PRIORITIES AND PROGRAMS

The Government’s objective is to reduce poverty from the 2005 rate of 50.7
percent to 35 percent by 2015. To do so, the Government‘s new PRSP for 2012–16 is
organized around five pillars: (a) improved governance/government effectiveness
characterized by strong state institutions and a good investment climate; (b) economic
diversification through industrialization (based on existing primary commodities) and
regional integration; (c) improved infrastructure; (d) human development; and (e)
territorial development and environmental protection.
30.

(a) Governance/State Effectiveness
Government Capacity. In addition to state functions of maintaining order and
peace, the Government wants to restore state capacity. Actions envisaged include: (a)
improving human resource management; (b) improving staff capacity; (c) developing
results-focused management tools; (d) putting in place a remuneration system that will
encourage performance and improve efficiency in public service; and (e) putting in place
the decentralized civil service.
31.

Investment Climate. In November 2009, the Government adopted an action
plan to improve the investment climate. The plan includes carrying out institutional
and regulatory reforms; establishing a platform for public-private dialogue; and taking
32.

11

measures to improve access to finance, professional training, and the promotion of
entrepreneurship.
(b) Diversification
Industrialization. The Government intends to promote industrialization based
on a set of primary activities. This includes promoting: (i) agricultural production by
increasing smallholder productivity and promoting commercial production; (ii) the oil
sector by increasing refining capacity; (iii) the mining sector by carrying out geological
surveys, and constructing the needed basic infrastructure; and (iv) the forestry sector by
enforcing the country‘s legal and regulatory frameworks, and promoting environmental
services and local processing. Finally, in collaboration with Singapore and other foreign
partners, the Government intends to develop four Special Economic Zones: (a) the Pointe
Noire SEZ focusing on petrochemicals, iron, steel, and minerals; (b) the Brazzaville SEZ
focusing on transportation and other services (finance, commerce, hotels); (c) the OyoOllombo SEZ dedicated to agro-food industry, services, transport and agriculture; and (d)
the Ouesso SEZ dedicated to agricultural activities, forestry, mining, and ecotourism.
33.

Regional Integration. Congo’s exports to other Sub-Saharan countries
represent only three percent of its exports. However, Congo recognizes that its future
prosperity will largely depend on its ability to tap into regional markets. As a result, the
country is looking at a series of strategic investments, including in the port of Pointe
Noire, to serve as a gateway to the sub-region. Similarly, the Government is investing in
the railway and road link between Pointe Noire and Brazzaville. Discussions have been
initiated among Congo, DRC, and Central African Republic on possible joint programs to
improve the performance of the Pointe Noire–Brazzaville/Kinshasa transport corridor,
and onward to Bangui along the Congo River to revitalize the transportation connection
that thrived during the colonial period. Congo also is investing in a national optical fiber
telecommunication network, which will be linked to the regional network through Gabon,
the Central African Republic, and Cameroun. The Government plays an active role in
regional bodies, such as the Organization for Harmonization of Business Law in Africa
(Organisation pour l‘Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des Affaires - OHADA), the
Economic Community for Central African States (Communauté Economique des Etats de
l'Afrique Centrale - CEEAC), and CEMAC; and Brazzaville hosts the headquarters of the
Central African Regional Development Bank and the Central African Power Pool.
However, implementation of the regional commitments under these institutions has often
been slow.
34.

(c) Infrastructure
35. The Government has embarked on an ambitious program to improve the

infrastructure in the country. This program includes major investments in power
generation, transmission, and distribution, and transport infrastructure, mostly rail,
port, and roads (see Annex 4 for details). Overall, the Government‘s capital
expenditure increased from 7.6 percent of GDP during 2001–05, to 9.9 percent of
GDP during 2006–10. Public investment represented 16 percent of GDP in 2011 and
is projected to rise to 25 percent in 2012.
12

The most recent upward adjustment to the investment budget reflects reconstruction
expenses associated with the March 4, 2012 ammunitions depot explosions in
Brazzaville. The rapid rise in these investments could also pose a big challenge to the
country‘s limited absorptive capacity and, therefore, could compromise the efficiency of
the Government‘s public investment program. In addition, increased investments in
infrastructure could also exert upward pressures on prices, especially those pertaining to
construction materials. Furthermore, most infrastructure investments require land
acquisition, thus, induce environmental and social impacts. Adverse environmental and
social impacts of the accelerated investment program, could impair, not only immediate
social gains, but also compromise lasting benefits and trigger long term environmental
and social challenges; unless addressed systematically. In this context, the use of the new
procurement code, including annual audit requirements, and capacity building in
environmental and social safeguards needs to be scaled up.
(d) Human Development
Health. The Government has declared 2012 the Year of Health, underpinned
by doubling the amount for health in the investment budget, from US$96 million in
2011 to US$197.6 million in 2012. The Government‘s strategy for the sector has six
priorities: (a) strengthening the management and overall leadership of the health sector;
(b) improving quality of health services and geographic coverage; (c) addressing issues of
access, especially for vulnerable members of society and pregnant mothers; (d)
undertaking a communication campaign on health issues; (e) improving the management
of medical drugs, including better coordination of drug distribution; and (f) intensifying
the fight against communicable diseases, especially among mothers and children.
36.

Education. Regarding pre-primary, primary, and secondary education, the
Government will focus its attention on equity and outcomes. Its strategy includes: (a)
improving access and the quality of education; (b) addressing the problem of the unequal
geographic distribution of education staff; (c) encouraging girls to enter fields in which
they are poorly represented; and (d) intensifying the campaign to fight HIV/AIDS.
Technical and professional training will be strengthened by, among other things,
modernizing the infrastructure and curriculum, including working very closely with the
private sector through dynamic partnerships. Higher education reforms will include
aligning programs with national development needs and providing scholarships to
women.
37.

Social Protection. The Government is running some social safety net
programs for vulnerable groups, although much still needs to be done. These
programs include provision of school kits to orphans and children from vulnerable
families, and scholarships to the most vulnerable students for higher education. The
Government has prepared a strategy to guide its various social protection interventions.
The strategy will be an opportunity to, among other things, define specific
outcomes/results and prioritize interventions to achieve those outcomes/results to
maximize the impact of Government programs. In addition, the Government has initiated
reforms for CNSS and CRF, although this work is still in progress.
38.

13

Indigenous People. In early 2010, Congo adopted a new law on the rights of
indigenous people, but the country needs help to implement it. Indigenous people
make up a sizeable minority, at least 10 percent of the overall population––and as much
as 50 percent of the population living in the north of the country. It will not be possible
for Congo to achieve several of the Millennium Development Goals, especially in health
and education, without investing in effective strategies for indigenous people. These
strategies would entail matching ―modern‖ services with their (semi-) traditional
lifestyles. Some of the Latin American countries with large indigenous forest-dwelling
populations, such as Brazil, have made significant headway with service delivery to
indigenous people in remote areas. Brazil‘s experience demonstrates the great potential
for South-South exchange and learning to support indigenous groups in Congo.
39.

(e) Equitable Growth and Sustainable Development
Territorial Development. The Government policy is to improve territorial
development, especially under the “accelerated municipalization” program.
Envisaged actions include, among other things, improving transport access, especially in
areas of high production potential, as well as improving sanitation and the quality of
public services.
40.

Forestry Management and Climate Change. The Republic of Congo is a leader
in a number of indicators related to sustainable forest management. At only 0.07
percent per annum, the country‘s deforestation rate is among the lowest in Africa. Over
50 percent of forestry concessions in Congo have approved management plans. It is
estimated that, by the end of 2012, approximately 75 percent of Congo‘s 13.5 million ha
of production forests will have approved plans. By February 2012, approximately 2.5
million ha had been certified by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), accounting for
nearly half of all FSC-certified forests in the Congo Basin. FSC certification provides
improved access to European markets, whose customers increasingly are demanding
timber from sustainably managed forests. In addition to continuing and scaling up these
programs, the Government‘s strategy is to consolidate these gains by improving benefits
derived by local communities from forest concessions, strengthening the National Forest
Inventory, forest management planning, timber traceability, and timber tracking.
41.

The Republic of Congo also intends to position itself as a provider of
environmental services in emerging global markets. It is participating in the Forest
Carbon Partnership Facility to facilitate access to funds under REDD+, an emerging
program that will enable developing countries to be paid for conserving or restoring
forests that store carbon and mitigate the impact of climate change. Congo views forest
management as a major tool in climate change adaptation. Congo also has a substantial
system of protected areas. Over 12 percent of its land area has been classified as national
parks. The Government also intends to develop sectoral strategies, review its legal and
regulatory framework, and put in place effective coordination mechanisms in its
comprehensive approach to climate change.
42.

14

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
A.

PERFORMANCE OF THE FY10–FY12 CPS AND LESSONS LEARNED

The Bank’s partnership with Congo over the past three years has been
largely focused on economic diversification and service delivery. The goal was to lay
the foundation for the long-term process of creating a broad-based economy, and
improving service delivery, especially in the health and education sectors, while
consolidating governance—including in the oil sector. The Partnership Strategy was
implemented through a series of operations (Annex 6), as well as technical assistance and
country dialogue.
43.

Congo has experienced mixed progress toward attaining the CPS global
objectives. On economic diversification, it was previously indicated that the non-oil
sector had grown by almost 6 percent per annum in recent years, led by construction and
public works. Indeed, the share of the non-oil sector in GDP, which was 3.9 percent in
2009, was estimated at 6.5 percent in 2010, and has been preliminarily estimated at 7.4
percent for 2011. However, the non-oil sector remains narrow. Its growth is hampered by
many factors such as infrastructure, as discussed earlier, although major efforts are
underway to alleviate these constraints. Regarding service delivery, the education
enrollments are improving, although quality remains a concern. The biggest challenges
remain in health, in which access and quality remain poor.
44.

Similarly, there has been mixed progress toward attaining the specific CPS
outcomes. On the positive side, a series of reforms were undertaken, especially in the
final drive to attain the Completion Point under the HIPC initiative in January 2010.
These reforms covered public expenditure management, particularly on procurement
reforms; the legal and regulatory framework for improving forestry sector transparency
and social and environmental performance; and liberalization of the telecommunications
sector. Likewise, a Bank-supported platform for Public-Private Dialogue was created to
help drive the reform process, which will support private sector development and
investment promotion.
45.

On the other hand, implementation of the investment program had some
setbacks. Most challenges were related to slow institutional reforms (Health Project),
slow release of counterpart funding (Agriculture Project), and long effectiveness delays
(Economic Diversification Project). These setbacks curtailed the progress anticipated for
these activities. Similarly, less progress was achieved in public investment management,
improving the business climate and health, and strengthening oil governance and
transparency.
46.

A series of measures to accelerate project implementation has been
undertaken. For instance, (a) the health and agriculture projects have been restructured
to simplify implementation, adapt scope, and sharpen focus on easily measurable
outcomes; (b) budget monitoring has been intensified to ensure that the Government‘s
counterpart funding is included in the annual budget and that funds are released in a
timely manner, including examining the possibility of transferring the full year‘s
47.

15

contribution to the project accounts instead of making quarterly releases; (c) bi-monthly
meetings are held with Project Coordinators to quickly address implementation issues as
they arise; and (d) project performance reviews are held annually to address generic
issues. Almost all the Task Team Leaders are field-based, in either Brazzaville or
Kinshasa, to facilitate on-time support to Government project teams. The Country
Manager, and the Kinshasa-based Country Director have identified improvement in
implementation performance as a top priority and, to this effect, have intensified dialogue
with the Government.
As a result of these efforts, the portfolio has registered good improvement in
recent months. Congo has a strong portfolio with no unsatisfactory projects; proactivity
stands at 100 percent; and the disbursement ratio of 35.6 percent as of June 30, 2012, is
among the highest in the Africa Region.7 Moreover, there are no overdue audits reports.
48.

Several lessons that were learned from the implementation of the FY10–
FY12 CPS (including those drawn from Analytical and Advisory Activities) will be
taken into account in the new CPS. On the strategic level, key lessons include (a)
intensifying support for improving the quality of the Government‘s investment spending
is a long-term endeavor; (b) sustaining the reform momentum, especially regarding the
procurement code, the business climate, oil governance and transparency, and the human
development sectors, requires a continuous engagement and real champions on the
Government side and the involvement of civil society; (c) building the capacity of the
public administration is critical and could be deepened and implemented at a faster pace
if linked to performance-based mechanisms; and (d) knowledge is essential to support
evidence-based policy reforms if they are to have transformational impacts.
49.

On the operational level, lessons include (a) finding a lasting solution to the
irregular and arduous release of counterpart funding, which had caused enormous
implementation delays in some projects; (b) emphasizing early project restructuring to
avoid prolonged stays in problem status; and (c) focusing on implementation readiness
regarding new projects. See Annex 7 for more details on the evaluation of the
performance of the FY10-12 CPS.
50.

7

Against the Regional average of 16%.

16

B.

PROPOSED COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR FY13–FY16

(i) Consultations
Starting in March 2011, and more recently in February 2012, the Bank held
extensive consultations with all stakeholders to prepare the new CPS. These
consultations included academics, civil society organizations, parliamentarians, the
private sector, development partners, and Government officials. The goal was to solicit
their views on the key challenges facing the country and to identify areas in which the
Bank‘s contribution could have greater impact. The consultations, which were well
attended and characterized by candid discussions, covered a range of issues and
suggestions (Annex 8).
51.

Participants affirmed the need for a sustained focus on economic
diversification, greater transparency, and accountability. They: (a) emphasized the
role of the private sector in generating employment; (b) called for concerted efforts to
promote a better investment climate; (c) stressed the need for suitable skills on the local
market and for addressing the managerial capacity weaknesses of private operators; (d)
underscored the importance of timely and credible statistics to inform public debate and
scrutiny; and (e) underlined the need for supporting civil society in their fight against
corruption. Participants appreciated the usefulness of this dialogue with the Bank and
called for more frequent interactions.
52.

(ii) Objective of the New CPS and Its Major Themes
The overall strategy of the Bank in Congo will be to support the Congolese
Government to diversify its economy away from oil domination, focusing on privatesector-led growth and employment generation. Equally, the strategy also aims at
assisting the country achieve better outcomes in basic public services, especially in
health and education. The strategy will set the stage for a firm, rapid and sustainable
growth trajectory that, ultimately, should propel Congo from low middle-income country
to medium middle-income status. Achieving this breakthrough will require a competitive
economy that is driven more and more by a manufacturing sector that takes full
advantage of the larger regional market. The vision is of an economy whose benefits are
widely shared and whose opportunities are available to the majority of the population.
53.

The Bank will support the Government to better target its public investment
program while increasing its efficiency in a context of improved governance. This
will entail supporting the Government in (a) improving investment programming and
management; (b) strengthening the investment climate to accelerate domestic investments
and attract foreign direct investment (FDI); (c) promoting regional integration to exploit
the vast regional market opportunities; (d) supporting selected sectors with high potential
for growth and poverty reduction; (e) strengthening human development; and (f)
strengthening governance and Government capacity.
54.

17

(iii) Main Themes of the CPS
This support will be organized around the two pillars and the foundation of
the new World Bank Strategy for Africa. These two pillars are competitiveness and
employment, vulnerability and resilience. Good governance and capacity building is the
foundation. Although framed slightly differently, the Government PRSP deals with
virtually the same themes.
55.

A) Pillar 1: Competitiveness and Employment
Under this pillar, the Bank will provide support toward (a) improving the
investment climate; (b) facilitating regional integration; and (c) promoting agriculture.
56.

Improving the Investment Climate. The Bank will continue its ongoing support,
which is aimed at both promoting the local private sector and creating the
conditions to attract FDI. Specifically, the Bank, under the ongoing Support to
Economic Diversification Project, which has been prepared and is being implemented
jointly with IFC (see Annex 2), is assisting Government in: (a) carrying out critical
doing-business reforms; (b) promoting Public-Private dialogue; (c) putting in place the
needed legal and regulatory framework for Special Economic Zones, and carrying out
investment promotion activities, with particular focus on the Pointe Noire SEZ; and (d)
strengthening SME managerial capacity. A Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS) is
ongoing to underpin the Bank‘s support for improved cross-border trade. A financial
sector study also will be prepared to identify credit access issues facing SMEs in Congo
and develop an action plan. Additionally, the Bank will support the development of skills
that are relevant to the needs of current and potential employers. This support is meant to
respond to the growing demand by the private sector for suitable skills and to improve the
employability of the active population in certain specific sectors with high potential (oil,
mining, forestry).
57.

Promoting regional integration. The Bank will continue to support Congo in
preparing itself to take full advantage of the regional market. In this regard, the Bank
will continue to encourage the Congolese Government to invest in regional activities
through targeted infrastructure, improved logistics, and dismantling of non-tariff trade
barriers. In addition to country dialogue, the Bank will continue to support these efforts
through the (a) ongoing Regional Telecommunication Project, which is aimed at creating
an enabling policy and regulatory environment for growth in Information and
Communications Technology (ICT), facilitating connectivity, and promoting a local ICT
sector; and (b) the ongoing Global Environment Facility (GEF)-funded activity aimed at
enhancing institutional capacities on REDD issues for sustainable forest management in
the Congo Basin. The Bank also will continue to facilitate the discussions among the
Republic of Congo, DRC, and the Central African Republic on how to develop the Congo
Basin-Atlantic Growth Corridor.
58.

Supporting Agriculture. The Bank will continue its support for agriculture,
given its great potential for green growth and poverty reduction, especially in rural
areas. The Bank‘s current support to the agricultural sector under the ongoing
59.

18

Agricultural Development and Rural Roads Rehabilitation Project entails (a)
strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries in
policy formulation, budgeting and public expenditure management, (b) rehabilitating
rural roads, and constructing or rehabilitating rural market infrastructure in selected high
potential areas; (c) supporting the generation and dissemination of improved production
technologies and market information; and (d) strengthening the capacity of selected
producer organizations. The Bank will support a follow-up operation to consolidate these
gains and allow a scaling up based on the lessons learned. The current operation targets
smallholders. The new operation will target both subsistence-oriented farmers who
require assistance in making the transition to commercial farming, and commercial
farmers and agribusiness firms that require assistance in increasing productivity and
competitiveness in domestic, regional, and eventually international markets, with a target
on specific, high-potential value chains and/or specific locations (growth poles approach).
B) Pillar 2: Vulnerability and Resilience
Strengthening Health Service Delivery. In recognition of the seriousness of the
country’s health situation, the Bank will strengthen its support for the sector. First,
the ongoing Health Project has been restructured to focus on high-impact services,
particularly on malaria, renovating and equipping some health centers, and training health
workers, such as midwives in rural areas. The restructured project also will focus on
supporting a pilot on results-based financing (RBF) to improve outputs and outcomes.
Lessons learned from this experience will inform the design of the planned follow-up
health operation. This new operation will be preceded by a Public Expenditure Tracking
Survey to be carried out during the project‘s preparation to help improve the allocative
and operational efficiency of the health system.
60.

Deepening Reforms in the Education Sector. Ongoing Bank support is aimed at
improving efficiency, quality, and equity in the provision of basic education in
Congo. This support, provided under the ongoing Support to Basic Education Project,
includes (a) helping the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education in charge of
Literacy in better planning, human resource management, and fiduciary and budget
management; (b) strengthening the capacity of the regional departments of education to
provide support to their school systems; (c) promoting equity by providing free textbooks
and supporting infrastructure expansion efforts in underserved areas; (d) improving the
quality of education by training teachers, schools directors, and inspectors, improving
curricula, and introducing standardized tests; and (e) providing support to out-of-school
youth and excluded populations––such as indigenous peoples. The Bank envisages a
follow-up operation to sustain the reform momentum in this critical sector and
consolidate the gains already achieved.
61.

Strengthening Social Protection. The Bank envisages providing advisory
assistance to the Ministry of Social Affairs with implementing its newly developed
social policy strategy, in close cooperation with partners already working in this
sector. The goal is to support the Government in laying the foundation to strengthen its
social protection system as well as to devise effective targeting mechanisms to cater to
each of the identified priority vulnerable groups. In particular, opportunities for South62.

19

South learning within the continent will be facilitated to enable Congo to learn from other
countries‘ experiences and strengthen its capacity to design, implement, and monitor
social protection programs to enhance their efficiency and effectiveness.
C) Foundation: Strengthening Government Capacity and Governance
Strengthening Public Sector Management
Strengthening Public Finance and Human Resource Management. Support will
be provided to strengthen Government institutions to better manage public finances
and human resources. Support, under the ongoing Transparency and Governance
Capacity Building Project, will be provided for, among other things, (a) budget
management by completing the computerization of the financial management information
system, and facilitating progressive decentralization of public expenditure management;
(b) updating macroeconomic data for all sectors to prepare a suitable medium-term
expenditure framework (MTEF); (c) rolling out application of the new procurement code;
(d) completing the integration of the payroll with the human resource management
system; and (e) extending the results-based management approach to other ministries.8
63.

Improving Investment Programming and Management. The Bank will continue
its ongoing assistance to the Government in two ways: (a) improving the efficiency of
its investment programs through much more targeted selection and better programming
and management; and (b) improving the operational performance of the energy and water
utilities, and of the railway company, given their critical importance for economic
diversification and non-oil growth.
64.

Strengthening Government Statistics. Support also will be provided for
production and dissemination of reliable and timely data. This assistance, to be
provided under the planned Statistical Development Project, includes strengthening the
Government‘s capacity to generate and use statistics, particularly gender informed data
for analysis, policy, as well as monitoring and evaluation; improve coordination and
develop sector statistical development strategies. Quality and timely data is important for:
(a) enabling the Government to better target its interventions (for instance, addressing
pockets of poverty and gender inequalities) and make informed policy and investment
decisions; (b) measuring the impact of its programs, and more generally, adopt a resultsbased culture; (c) nurturing public debates on matters of national or local interest; and (d)
ensuring transparency and accountability.
65.

Promoting Demand for Good Governance
Strengthening Public Accountability Structures. The Bank will continue to
support the Independent Governance Observatory and the Anti-Corruption
Commission. This support, to be provided under the ongoing Transparency and
Governance Capacity Building Project, will enhance their capacity to monitor
66.

8

This was successfully piloted in the Ministry of Civil Service and will be extended to another set of
ministries: Planning, Finance, Health, Transport, Energy, Trade, and Small and Medium Enterprises.

20

governance and anticorruption measures, especially regarding budget execution and
procurement of public contracts. The Bank also will promote synergies with transparency
initiatives supported by other development partners, such as the Independent Observatory
for the Forestry Sector, supported by the European Union. In addition, technical
assistance is envisaged for public accountability structures, such as the Economic and
Finance Commission of Parliament, the Supreme Audit Authority, and the State Inspector
General, to enhance their capacity to monitor and evaluate implementation of key public
reforms and programs.
Engaging Parliament and Civil Society. Bank support will aim at reinforcing
capacity of Parliament, selected CSOs, and the media, to exercise greater public
scrutiny. This support, to be provided under the Transparency and Governance Capacity
Building Project, will allow them to, among other things, (a) monitor governance reforms
and public finances––including procurement; (b) gather feedback on quality of public
services; (c) articulate local economic and social development needs and priorities in the
development of national budgets and monitor budget execution; and (d) collaborate with
the existing anticorruption structures to establish an effective coalition to pursue
transparency, accountability, and integrity in public administration. Efforts that have been
initiated to involve civil society in monitoring projects financed by the Bank with
government‘s counterpart funding, will be extended and systematized.
67.

Stimulating Open Debates on Development Issues. The Bank will leverage its
capacity to produce major knowledge products and its convening power to stimulate
in-country debates on challenges and opportunities facing the country, and to
promote coalitions for change. In this regard, the Bank will continue to produce its bimonthly information bulletin, Tosolola (―Let‘s Discuss‖). The Bank also will launch the
Congo Development Dialogue Series intended to be a platform for exchanging
knowledge and discussing results by bringing together World Bank staff, national
policymakers, academics, the media, and other stakeholders.
68.

Improving Sector-Level Governance
The Bank will provide more focused support for improved governance in
selected sectors. The principal focus for this sectoral effort will be the human
development (health and education) and forestry sectors. Some support also will be
provided to the mining and oil and gas sectors.
69.

Human Development Sectors (Health and Education). The Bank is supporting a
Public Expenditure Review (PER) of the health and education sectors. This review
will assess: (a) the alignment of budget allocations to sectoral priorities; (b) spending
efficiency; (c) equity, especially with respect to gender, geographic location, and
inclusion (such as for indigenous peoples); and (d) institutional aspects of service
delivery. The results of this analysis will complement the outcomes of the other ongoing
analyses, such as the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), in guiding policy and
planned operations in the health and education sectors.
70.

21

Forestry. The Bank is supporting reforms in the forestry sector. Specifically,
Bank support, to be provided under the ongoing Forest and Economic Diversification
Project, is aimed at: (a) institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Sustainable
Development, Forest Economy and Environment; (b) improving the enabling
environment for private sector and smallholder activities in the forestry sector; and (c)
enhancing the participation of local communities in forest management.
71.

Mining. The Bank will provide some advisory assistance to the Government
on how to manage this nascent industry. The Bank has completed a major study of the
Congolese mining sector, which has enormous potential but is a sector in which Congo
does not have much experience or many skills. The Bank will provide advice to the
Government in its efforts to: (a) enlarge the knowledge base about the country‘s mineral
potential; (b) strengthen the legal and regulatory framework and its capacity to manage
the growing mining sector; and (c) tighten the environmental and social safeguards
associated with mining.
72.

Oil and Gas. The Bank will advise the Government on implementing key
reforms to improve transparency and efficiency of revenue collection and
management. These reforms relate to an appropriate fiscal regime for petroleum
activities, accounting rules and intercompany transfers, the licensing of petroleum
exploration and production rights, the management of oil revenue, and the preparation of
a fiscal responsibility law (the last being among the reforms financed by the recently
signed Grant Agreement funded under the Multi-donor Trust Fund for the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). The Bank will continue to encourage timely
publication of SNPC audits.
73.

(iv) Principles of Bank Engagement
The Bank will pursue the following basic principles of engagement with
Congo over the FY13–16 period:
74.

(a)

Playing a Catalytic Role. The Bank recognizes its limited allocation in
comparison to the Government‘s large revenues. Consequently, the Bank‘s role
in the country will mostly relate to helping the country use its significant oil
revenues for economic transformation and poverty alleviation. Bank-financed
projects and programs will be designed to maximize synergy, clearly
demonstrate best practices in the country setting, and encourage knowledge
transfer. More broadly, the Bank will endeavor to promote a culture of results
within government programs and policies. Finally, the Bank will accentuate the
global knowledge dimension of its support

(b)

Acting Flexibly. In keeping with a dynamic relationship, the Bank will seek to
maximize flexibility in its relationship with Congo. Thus, the Bank will stand
ready to support the Government in new ways as the need arises during the
CPS‘ implementation. In addition, the Bank will endeavor to discern early any
project implementation difficulties and act boldly and swiftly to undertake
22

corrective actions, including early project restructuring to avoid prolonged stays
of projects in problem status.
(c)

Use of Country structures. All new activities supported by the World Bank in
Congo will be implemented through government structures, that is, there will be
no stand-alone project implementation units. Similarly, the Government will
continue, consistent with the World Bank‘s Procurement and Consultant
Guidelines, to use the national procurement institutions and the national
procurement code for those contracts that are not advertised internationally. Use
of these procurement arrangements under Bank-funded projects would,
however, be contingent upon receipt of acceptable audits of ongoing
procurement under this code and will continue to be subject to adaptations, to
ensure that the procedures and bidding documents are consistent with the World
Bank‘s Procurement and Consultant Guidelines. In addition, the Bank is
assessing the public financial management system to provide a solid basis for
increased use of financial management country systems in investment projects,
in the future. By focusing on the use of country structures and institutions, the
Bank expects to help improve the efficiency of the bulk of government
expenditures, increase country ownership and facilitate harmonization.
Ultimately, using this approach would lead to improvements of the country‘s
institutional capacity and facilitate the reduction of the country‘s transaction
costs related to program funding. An appropriate level of technical assistance
and support will be provided, especially for budgeting, accounting, asset
management, and internal and external audits. All these interventions will be
closely coordinated with other reforms in areas that are relevant to the public
sector, such as the judiciary and civil service transformation.

(d)

Using the “Program for Results‖ (PforR) Instrument. In view of the current
weak governance and public financial management context, the use of the PforR
instrument is not deemed suitable in the short run, until significant progress is
made in both areas. The Bank will continue to work with the Government to
improve the quality of existing systems in order to prepare the country for
eventually taking advantage of this new instrument.

(e)

Promoting South-South Cooperation. The Bank has already facilitated SouthSouth cooperation in different sectors, such as energy and water. This
cooperation will be extended to other areas, especially those related to
employment generation and social safety nets.

(f)

Mainstreaming Gender. To close the gender gap, the Bank will put a particular
focus on gender in its policy advice, in all Bank-supported activities, and its
overall dialogue with the country. All lending or ESW/TA activity proposed in
this CPS will systematically consider and address gender inequalities in the
underlying analysis, in the actions proposed, and/or in the monitoring and
evaluation arrangements. Gender will be not only a cross-cutting theme but also
a specific area of analysis, covering such topics as access to opportunities,
vulnerability (such as an HIV/AIDS rate twice as high for women as men), and
23

poverty. The information generated will help the Government in developing
suitably adapted policies and in implementing its National Gender Action Plan.

(v) CPS Funding
Lending Activities
The World Bank will support the new strategy mainly through its existing
portfolio. At the end of FY12, there are seven ―national‖ projects to which the Bank is
contributing, for a total US$170 million in commitments, of which 58 percent has been
disbursed (Annex 5) as of May 31, 2012. There also are two ongoing regional projects
with some, or all, of their activities within Congo, one of which is GEF-funded. Five new
or follow-up lending activities will be funded over the next 4 years (Tables 1 and 2).
75.

The first two years of the CPS period fall under IDA16, namely FY13 and
FY14. From the IDA16 envelope9 of about SDR 27.5 million (approximately US$41.2
million) allocated to the Republic of Congo, US$15 million have already been committed
to the governance (US$5 million) and Forestry projects (US$10 million), which have
been approved in FY12. Approximately, US$26 million remains available to support IDA
assistance in FY13-14. This amount will be applied to the following new activities: (a) a
Skills Development Project to respond to the strong need that has been expressed by all
stakeholders in Congo and has been corroborated by the Bank‘s analytical work; (b) a
Statistics Development Project to respond to a major constraint to inform policymaking
and to the need for a results-oriented culture; and (c) a Health Project to address the
country‘s poor health situation. Although the Bank‘s financial contribution to these
programs would be limited, IDA can leverage its knowledge and expertise to assist the
country and help utilize the substantial Government counterpart funding (which is still
under discussion) to deliver results more effectively. Indeed, the approach used for these
projects is to catalyze more efficient use of the government‘s important resources.
76.

9

The IDA16 resource envelope is provided for the 3-year replenishment cycle of FY12-14. As of July 1,
2012, the FY12-13 allocations are firm while the FY14 allocation is indicative and can change depending
on: (i) total IDA resources available in FY14; (ii) the country‘s performance rating; (iii) the terms of IDA's
assistance to the country (grants or credits) based on its debt sustainability position; (iv) MDRI debt relief
amount and the redistribution of the MDRI compensatory resources as applicable; (v) the performance and
assistance terms of other IDA borrowers; and (vi) the number of IDA-eligible countries. Also, IDA
envelope is provided in SDR terms, and the US dollar equivalent amounts are converted using the IDA16
replenishment rate of 1 SDR=US$1.50233; however, the exchange rate for each IDA operation depends on
the applicable prevailing rate at the time of project approval.

24

Table 1. Proposed New Lending Activities for FY13–FY16
(US$ mil.)
IDA16
FY
Project
IDA-16
FY13
Skills Development Project
10
FY14
Statistics Project
6
FY14
Health Project
10
Total
26
Outer Years
FY15
Education
-FY16
Agriculture
-Note: * = These amounts are still under discussion with Government.

Est. Govt. fin.*
tentative numbers
22
30
100
152

Total
32
36
110
178

The Bank’s contribution to the programs for FY15 and FY16 will be
determined at the strategy’s mid-term review, when country allocations will be
known. The strategy proposes an Education Project to consolidate gains in this important
sector, and an Agriculture Project, given the importance of this sector in poverty
alleviation and economic diversification.
77.

The Bank’s contribution to the post-explosion rehabilitation in Brazzaville
will be “funding-neutral.” The Bank has been requested by the Government to assist in
the rehabilitation of the infrastructure caused by the March 4, 2012 explosion in
Brazzaville. Savings from the recently closed HIV/AIDS project will be applied to the
Urban-Water-Electricity project to carry out activities that are consistent with the
objectives of the receiving project, which already operates in Brazzaville.
78.

25

Table 2. Activities under the Lending Program, Categorized as Ongoing or New
Ongoing

New

I. COMPETITIVENESS AND EMPLOYMENT
A. Improving the Investment Climate
1. Carrying out Doing Business reforms, promoting stakeholder dialogue,
promoting Special Economic Zones, strengthening SME managerial
capacity (Support to Economic Diversification Project)

x

2. Promoting labor skills development (Skills Development Project)

x

B. Supporting Regional Integration
1. Telecommunications (Central African Backbone Project)
2. REDD Preparedness (Enhancing institutional capacities on REDD
Project)

x
x

C. Promoting Key Primary Sectors
Agriculture (Agriculture Development and Rural Roads Rehabilitation
Project)

x

x

x

x

x

x

II. VULNERABILITY AND RESILIENCE
A. Education Sector (ongoing Support to Basic Education Project and new
Education Project)
B. Health Sector (ongoing Health Sector Services Development Project and new
Health Project)
GOVERNMENT CAPACITY AND GOVERNANCE*
1. Public Financial Management, Human Resource Management, Public
x
Investment Management, Demand for Good Governance, Sector-Level
Governance (Transparency and Governance Capacity Building Project II)
2. Forestry (Forestry and Economic Diversification Project)
x
3. Statistics (Statistics Project)
x
Note: * = Advisory support to mining and the oil sector are not included in this list, which pertains to investment
lending activities only.

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Analytical activities. The strategy proposes a limited set of analytical activities
to underpin the Bank’s policy advice to Government and lending program. The
FY10–FY12 CPS supported four seminal analytical pieces that were critical in either
informing government policy or Bank-funded activities. These are: (a) a spatial
infrastructure development analysis that greatly enriched the discourse on transport
corridor development by providing empirical data on the economic gains from various
infrastructure development alternatives; (b) an economy-wide PER that sharpened the
focus on the need for greater efficiency in the Government‘s public investment program;
the results of this analysis informed the preparation of the Governance and Capacity
Building Project that is supporting the Government in improving the efficiency of public
investments; (c) a growth and employment study, which culminated in the Skills
Development Project, which is under preparation for support by the Bank in FY13; and
(d) a mining sector review that will serve as the basis for the Bank‘s technical assistance
to the Government, regarding this nascent industry.
79.

26

Table 3. Analytical and Advisory Activities

A. Analytical Activities
FY13
Trade Policy and Facilitation (DTIS)
FY13
Social Sector Policy Operationalization
FY13–FY16
FY14

Series of Short Policy Notes (combined est. over 4 years)
HD Public Expenditure Review (over 2years, FY13 and FY14)

FY13
FY14

Gender Study
Financial Sector Study

FY16

TBD

Total

Estimated Cost
(US$)
50,000
100,000
100,000
200,000
50,000
60,000
90,000
650,000

B. Advisory Activities
FY13–FY14
Mining Sector Management (for 2 years)

150,000

FY13–FY14
FY14

Oil Sector Management (for 2 years)
Social Protection Policy Implementation Support

100,000
100,000

FY15
FY16

TBD
TBD

100,000
100,000

Total

550,000

However, knowledge gaps remain, especially in: (a) understanding the key
constraints to regional trade and proposing ways to eliminate them; this knowledge is
crucial in our dialogue with Congo to help the country tap into the immense regional
market; this knowledge is also needed in the implementation of the ongoing Economic
Diversification Project which is promoting private sector development, including creating
a conducive business climate, of which easing cross border trade is a critical element; (b)
ascertaining effective ways of supporting the Government in operationalizing its
fledgling, but otherwise badly needed, social protection framework; this is related to the
CPS objective of promoting the delivery of basic social services, especially to the poor;
(c) determining ways of enhancing private sector access to credit to boost non-oil growth,
as a complement to the ongoing Bank-financed activities, which is in line with the
economic diversification objective of the CPS; (d) establishing ways of improving
resource use efficiency in the human development sectors, whose improved performance
is a major CPS objective; and (e) coming up with practical and effective ways, not only,
of informing Government‘s gender policies and programs, but also, of informing Bank
teams and their Congolese counterparts on how to more adequately integrate gender
activities in Bank-funded projects, which is also a principal IDA-16 objective. To that
effect, the Gender Assessment envisaged in FY13 will provide the country gender profile
and recommend a set of prioritized policy reforms or operational interventions. Following
the study, a review of the country portfolio including ongoing and planned activities will
be carried out to ensure that increased attention is given to the key gender issues and gaps
identified. The FY13–FY16 CPS will support these analytical activities (which are
summarized in Table 3) as well as several policy notes on various topical issues such as
political economy analysis surrounding governance issues, fragility, etc. Additional areas
of analytical support will be determined at the strategy‘s mid-term review. These
activities will be financed through a combination of the Bank‘s administrative budget and
trust funds, when available.
27
80.

Advisory Activities. The strategy also proposes a limited advisory program,
especially on natural resource management and social protection. The proposed
activities include providing advice on (a) the mining sector to assist the Government in
managing a rapidly growing new sector, a potential source of economic diversification
(b) the oil sector to improve its management, which is the principal source of government
revenue and without which little public investment will take place; (c) and social
protection to enhance government programs in this sector and address poverty reduction
issues, especially for the most vulnerable members of Congolese society.
81.

(vi)

Monitoring CPS Implementation and Outcomes

Monitoring Implementation Progress. There will be a very strong focus on
monitoring implementation progress. As indicated earlier, the field-based staff and
Country Management Unit are monitoring very closely the portfolio of activities and will
maintain heightened attention to the quality of the dialogue with the authorities. This
monitoring includes bi-monthly meetings with Project Coordinators and annual portfolio
performance reviews for early detection of implementation challenges; a strong focus on
implementation readiness for new projects; and timely restructuring for projects
encountering implementation difficulties. A mid-term review is planned for early in
FY15 to assess progress, determine corrective actions, and define the activities for the
remaining period.
82.

Evaluating Strategy Outcomes. Congo’s statistical system does not allow for
timely and reliable statistics on Government policy and program outcomes. The
proposed project to support the statistical system, while not a panacea, will go a long way
in laying a foundation for a functional statistical system. Indeed, evaluating the outcomes
of this strategy will largely depend on the monitoring arrangements in the projects
supported under this strategy. These projects have defined monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) arrangements and have set aside funding for them. The strategy‘s performance
indicators are presented in Annex 1. In addition, the team will work closely with the
Development Impact Evaluation (DIME) initiative to assess the impact of the health,
education, and water programs.
83.

(vii)

Congo’s Transition to Middle-Income Country Status

Congo’s elevated level of budget resources, its current GNI per capita, and
the low IDA allocation for Congo create opportunities for exploring other financing
arrangements for the country. These opportunities include examining possibilities of
cost-sharing as well as preparing for the transition from IDA to the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD).
84.

(a) Exploring the use of fee-based services. Up to now, the Bank‘s analytical and
advisory (AAA) support to Congo has been funded largely from the Bank‘s own
administrative resources. However, due to the Bank‘s limited administrative
budget, and in view of the country‘s growing level of resources, the Government
has shown openness to the notion of fee-based Bank advice in certain situations.
These discussions are ongoing and will be intensified during the course of
28

implementing this partnership strategy. The relevant experience accumulated in
Africa and elsewhere will be drawn from.
(b) Transition from IDA to IBRD. With a GNI per capita of US$2,310, Congo is rated
as a low middle-income country and has had this status for the last four years.
Given the expectation that this income level will likely be maintained or increased
in the future, Congo will move progressively toward graduating from IDA. The
Government has expressed interest in tapping into IBRD resources. The transition
to IBRD, however, is a long process and will require the country to meet clear
eligibility criteria (including debt sustainability) to ensure that it is creditworthy.
In this regard, IBRD will undertake an assessment mission early on in the period
of this CPS. In the event that Congo becomes eligible for IBRD resources, the
CPS program will be adjusted at mid-term review to take into consideration this
opportunity.
C.

PARTNERSHIPS

Generally, external financial support to Congo is small. The Government itself
finances most public spending. Apart from the World Bank, Congo‘s main international
partners include the European Union (EU), the French Development Agency (AFD), the
African Development Bank (AfDB), India, Singapore and China. The United Nations, the
Central Africa Regional Development Bank (BDEAC), and the Arab Bank for Economic
Development in Africa (BADEA) also are active and have initiated programs in Congo.
The Bank works very closely with the AfDB, AFD, EU, and UN in promoting economic
diversification, as well as in the health and education sectors (see Annex 12).
85.

IFC has become increasingly more active in the development of
Congo’s private sector, and in doing so, is closely collaborating with the Bank (see
Annex 2). IFC investment services as well as its advisory services are in increasing
demand in Congo. IFC is working on prospective investments with companies in the
agribusiness, mining, forestry, infrastructure and financial sectors. Advisory services
currently deployed include Business Edge in the agribusiness sector. IFC is also
exploring ways to facilitate SMEs access to finance in partnership with local banks that
have the liquidity and are willing to extend financing to SMEs. IFC is collaborating with
the Bank through an existing bank-financed operation, the Support to Economic
Diversification Project (SEDP), which is designed to drive non-oil private sector
investment by improving the business climate. The project aims also at building both the
public and private sector capabilities, to absorb and realize these job creating
investments.
86.

The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) has a limited
exposure in Congo. On June 30, 2011, the first MIGA-supported project in Republic of
Congo was signed with a private company. The project objective is to contribute to trade
facilitation, to the development of the private sector, by speeding up the customs
clearance of goods and to secure government revenues through the elimination of
opportunities for fraud and fiscal evasion. This project complements the Bank and IFC
programs to support the economic diversification agenda. Congo has been a MIGA
87.

29

member since 1991 and contributed to the General Capital Increase in March 2003.
During the course of implementing the CPS, the Bank will work closely with MIGA to
explore opportunities for the agency‘s further involvement in Congo.
The Bank will enhance its collaboration with China in Congo. China has
strengthened its partnership with Congo in recent years, especially in infrastructure and
energy. The Bank will endeavor to collaborate with China, especially in promoting the
development of transport corridors.
88.

V. MANAGING RISKS
A new global economic crisis could affect Congo (Low). The impact of the
2008–09 global financial crisis on Congo was mild and short-lived. However, oil prices
and forestry activities rebounded sooner than expected. Given the weak trade channels
and low integration of Congo‘s economy into the rest of the world, the risk of contagion
in the event of a new global crisis is low. In addition, Congo has built up considerable
reserves to fall back on to in case of a deep and prolonged crisis. According to IMF
analysis, the price of oil would have to fall well below $50 per barrel on average, and
remain there for at least two years (that is, a massive and persistent oil shock) for Congo
to be deeply affected. A massive oil shock is assumed not very likely. Nevertheless, the
Congolese economy‘s overdependence on extractive industries keeps it exposed to
fluctuations in international commodity prices over the long term. Thus, the Bank will
continue to support the country‘s diversification agenda. In addition, the Bank, together
with the Government, will continue to monitor very closely for signs of any global
contagion.
89.

Disaffection over jobs and the political dispensation could cause political
instability (Medium). While Congo has come a long way in consolidating peace and
rebuilding public institutions, the situation is still fragile. Nevertheless, the high rate of
youth unemployment in a country without effective social protection mechanisms and
perceived inequality could trigger disaffection and possibly unrest.
90.

The ongoing attention to the reconstruction efforts following March 4, 2012
could exert macroeconomic pressures, while detracting from other urgent policy
and program imperatives and could open avenues for misuse of public funds and
poor governance (High). In addition to the many deaths, the March 4, 2012
ammunitions explosion caused extensive property damage in Brazzaville. The
Government has launched a major reconstruction effort. As a result, public investment,
which represented 16 percent of GDP in 2011, is projected to rise to 25 percent in 2012.
One unfortunate outcome of these efforts could be upward pressure on prices, especially
on construction-related materials and services. Moreover, the urgency of the situation
could undermine efforts to promote resource use efficiency since regular procurement
procedures and oversight might not be adhered to. In addition, the Government‘s
attention to handling the aftermath of this event might slow progress on other policy
fronts. The Bank and the Fund will continue monitoring the macroeconomic situation
with a view to advising the Government as needed.
91.

30

Irregular/inadequate counterpart funding will continue to cause major
implementation delays (High). However, the Government‘s irregular release of its
contributions has disrupted the smooth implementation of project activities. Project
coordinators and task teams have been sensitized to understand how the budget process
works and to monitor the funding cycle very closely. The bi-monthly meetings with
Project coordinators will provide the opportunity to know where any delays are occurring
for a given project and take up the matter immediately with the authorities.
92.

Inadequate project preparation and slow parliamentary approval could slow
projects’ start-up (Medium). In the past, projects have experienced delays in
effectiveness and disbursements. Delays are associated largely with: (a) the need for time
to complete key project documentation, procurement, and staffing; and (b) very slow
parliamentary ratification processes. The first risk will be mitigated through thorough
project preparation and implementation readiness. The second risk will be mitigated by
frequently briefing parliamentarians during project preparation, and coordinating better
Bank‘s processing schedules with those of the Parliament.
93.

The reform process could slow down or be derailed due to political economy
factors and weak leverage (High). The pace of reforms in sectors such as energy,
transportation (CFCO), and oil management could be much slower than anticipated
because of vested interests. The Bank will intensify dialogue on these reforms. In
addition, sector-specific political economy analysis will be conducted to understand the
various forces and possible entry points for sustaining reforms. Finally, the private sector
will be particularly enlisted in the dialogue on reforms in sectors critical to them, such as
energy and transportation.
94.

Although some progress has been made in improving public financial
management, World-Bank-funded projects still face some fiduciary risks (Medium).
An April 2012 fiduciary assessment mission identified some internal controls as well as
accounting issues in some projects. These issues related to (a) lack of supporting
documents for missions and workshops, (b) absence of non objection by the Bank to
some transactions, and (c) delays in bookkeeping and improper filing. Efforts will be
stepped up to address these issues, including ensuring full implementation of the internal
and external auditors‘ recommendations, and strict adherence to fiduciary procedures and
processes.
95.

31

Annex 1. Results Framework for the Congo CPS (FY13–FY16)
Country
Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

CPS Outcomes and Indicators (FY13-FY16)
Unless otherwise stated, the baseline is end-2011
data; the target is end-2015.

Milestones

Bank Program and
Partners

- Fonds d’études is fully operational
and the capacity of Government
staff responsible for project
appraisal is reinforced
- Training program for staff
involved in public procurement
process is in place and
implemented.

Transparency and
Governance Capacity
Building Project II

- Strategies for key sectors are
updated
- Macroeconomic data for all
sectors are updated in order to
prepare a suitable medium term
expenditure framework starting with
2013 budget

Transparency and
Governance Capacity
building Project II

Action Plan for the reform of the
power utility (Société Nationale
d’Electricité) is completed and
approved by the Government

Water, Electricity and
Urban Development
Project

New water legal and regulatory
framework fully defined and
enforced

Water, Electricity and
Urban Development
Project

I. WBG Pillar: Competitiveness and Employment
Outcome 1.1: Improved Investment
Programming and Infrastructure
Management
1) Administrative
governance,
infrastructure
development

1) (a) Low efficiency
in the management
of Government‘s
public investment
program

(i) Better Project Selection. At least 50% of
Government projects, each in excess of FCFA
250 million, have a feasibility study prior to
incorporation into the budget

(ii) Better Budget Planning. The
global/government-wide MTEF is fully
operational

(b) Poor
performance of key
economic
Infrastructure
(Energy, Water,
Railway)

(i) Improved Operational and Financial
Performance of Energy Utility. Revenue
collected per kilowatt hour delivered to the
Brazzaville distribution network increases by
10% from 2012 levels

Other Partners:
French Cooperation

Other Partners:
- European Union
- French Cooperation

(ii) Improved Operational and Financial
Performance of Water Utility:
- Connections with operating water meter in
Brazzaville up from 4% to 30%; and in
Pointe Noire from 37% to 53%

32

- Collection ratio (cash income per billed
revenue) increases from 47% to 70%

(iii) Increase in Railway Traffic. CFCO traffic
increases from 0.8 million tons to 1.0 million
tons

Water service contract in place

Water, Electricity and
Urban Development
Project

CFCO 5 year business plan
approved by Management

Support to Economic
Diversification Project
Other Partners:
AFD

Outcome 1.2: Improved Business Climate
2) Growth and
Diversification

2) Weak Business
Climate
characterized by:
(i) Bureaucratic
delays in
business
registration

(i) Faster Business Registration. Number of
procedures to start a business reduced from
10 to 5

(ii) Long export
delays

(ii) Reduced time to export goods. The time to
export goods reduced from 50 to 20 days

The one-stop window is effective )
with an information technology
system designed and implemented
to interconnect the five (5)
nationwide CFE agencies among
themselves and with all contributing
government agencies to streamline
the business registration process

Support to Economic
Diversification Project

The import and export one stop
shop is operational

Support to Economic
Diversification Project

Other Partners:
AfDB (PACADEC
Project)
European Union
(PRCCE Project)

Other Partners:
European Union
(PRCCE Project)
BDEAC
AFD

(iii) Long import
delays

(iii) Reduced time to import goods. The time to
import goods reduced from 62 days to 30
days

The import and export one stop
shop is operational

Support to Economic
Diversification Project
Other Partners:
European Union

33

(PRCCE Project)
BDEAC
AFD
(iv) Complex and
unevenly
applied tax
system

(iv) Streamlined Tax System. The number of tax
payments reduced from 61 to below the SubSaharan average of 30

(v) Institutional
weakness in
supporting
SMEs

(v) Supported MSEs. Support the development
of national database of nonfinancial services
providers accessible by SMEs nationwide
through the CFE and ultimately the MEC.

A ―train the trainer‖ program is set
up to help build the capabilities and
help professionalize 120-150 of
these non financial services
providers.

Support to Economic
Diversification Project

(vi) Investment is
mostly oriented
in the oil sector

(vi) Attracted investment in others potential
sectors. Increased investments in
agribusiness, transit related services, wood
transformation and mining

2–4 investment promotion activities
a year organized for the next 3 years
to educate and attract potential
investors in key priority value
chains. 12-15 anchor investors
(from project inception to
realization) in the agribusiness value
chains including palm oil,
horticulture, corn and cassava
supported.
250-300 SMEs supported with
capacity building programs to
improve managerial capabilities and
productivity in the agribusiness,
transit, and wood transformation
sectors. The development of
domestic non financial services
supported with training programs

Support to Economic
Diversification Project

(vii) Deficit of non
financial
services to
support SME
development
and growth

Streamlined tax framework adopted

Support to Economic
Diversification Project
Other Partners:
AfDB (PACADEC
Project)
European Union
(PRCCE Project)

(vii) Broadened the types of support to private
enterprises. Improved SME access to nonfinancial services

34

Other Partners:
AfDB (PACADEC
Project)
European Union
(PRCCE Project)

Other Partners:
AfDB (PACADEC
Project)
European Union
(PRCCE Project)

Support to Economic
Diversification Project
Other Partners:
AfDB (PACADEC
Project)
European Union
(PRCCE Project)

for 120-150 services providers with
the development of a national
database .
3) Infrastructure
Development,
Growth and
Diversification

3) Weak Regional
Integration

Outcome 1.3: Improved Regional
Telecommunications

(i) Higher volume of international telecomm
traffic (international internet bandwidth).
Bits per second increase from 75 to 200
4) Growth and
Diversification

Regional and international optical
fiber connections installed

Central African
Backbone project APL3

Agriculture
Development and Rural
Roads Rehabilitation
Project

4) Weak performance
in key primary
sectors:

Outcome 1.4: Improved agricultural
production

Poor market linkages
in zones with high
agricultural potential

(i) Improved market access. Transportation time
in areas with rehabilitated rural roads reduced
by at least 30%

-1000 km of priority roads
rehabilitated
- Market access improved in areas
with built market infrastructure (18
markets with the ongoing project)

Limited access to
agricultural
technologies (mainly
improved seeds and
seedlings) to develop
the high agricultural
zones to improve food
security and revenues
for rural populations

(ii) Increase Food Production. Increase food
production in targeted zones by 20%

30% of farmers in targeted zones
adopt improved technologies
(seeds).

Agriculture
Development and Rural
Roads Rehabilitation
Project
Other Partners:
IFAD (PRODERs)
AFD (under preparation)

II. WGB Pillar: Vulnerability and Resilience
Social
1) High child and
Outcome 2.1: Better Health Outcomes
Development and
maternal mortality
Inclusion
due to:
Malaria

(i) Better protection against malaria. %age of
children under five years of age sleeping
under an insecticide-treated net the previous

35

Insecticide and treated nets
distribution to households

Health Sector Services
Development Project, Transparency and ---

night increases from 67% in 2011 to 80% in
2015

Governance Capacity
Building Project II
Other Partners:
UN agencies, French
Development Agency,
European Union

Low immunization

(ii) Higher immunization rates.% of children
fully immunized for Penta3 (DTP, Hep. B,
and Hemovirus) increases from 65% to 75%

Capacity building for immunization
carried out, and the vaccine
distribution system operational and
approved.

Health Sector Services
Development Project,
Transparency and
Governance Capacity
Building Project II
Other Partners:
UN agencies, French
Development Agency,
European Union

Unsafe motherhood

(iii) Higher professionally aided delivery.%age
births attended by skilled health personnel
increases from 93.6% in 2011 to 97% by
2015

Equipment of Health centers and
retraining staff are completed.

Health Sector Services
Development Project,
Transparency and
Governance Capacity
Building Project II
Other Partners:
UN Agencies, French
Development Agency,
European Union

2) Need to sustain
gains in primary
education while
improving quality

Outcome 2.2: Better Education Outcomes

(i)

Maintain or increase high primary
completion Rates. Increase primary
completion from 83% in 2010/2011 school
year to 90% by 2015/16

36

-Action plans to improve school
access and retention for children
living in under-served and
disadvantaged areas are developed
(2013) and implemented. Annual
reviews are completed.
-Learning assessment is organized

Support to Basic
Education Project (ongoing and its successor
in FY16);
Transparency and
Governance Capacity
Building Project II

periodically and actions developed
to address observed shortcomings
(as of 2013)
(ii) Improved girl-boy ratio. Increase in girl-boy
ratio of primary school enrollment from
0.97% in 2010/11 to 100% in 2015/16

-Targeted programs for girl‘s
education put in place in 2014
-Performance-based management
system introduced and gradually
extended (as of 2014)

Other Partners:
UN Agencies, French
Development Agency
Support to Basic
Education Project
Other Partners:
UN agencies, French
Development Agency

III. WGB Pillar: Capacity Building and Governance
Economic
Outcome 3.1: Improved Transparency and
Governance
Accountability
i) Improving but still
weak procurement
management

ii) Weak budget
control resulting in
overruns

iii) Inadequate
information to
allow civil society
to effectively
engage in fighting
corruption
iv) Inadequacies in the
management and
transparency of the
petroleum sector

(i) More Competitive Procurement. At least
80% of public contracts in excess of FCFA
250 million are subjected to competitive
bidding (from the current 60%)

- Annual Training programs of
procurement staff in the ministries
are completed on time.
- Production of annual procurement
audit reports six (6) months after the
end of the budget year.

Transparency and
Governance Capacity
Building Project II
Other Partners:
European Union
IMF
Transparency and
Governance Capacity
Building Project II

(ii) Better budget management. Deviation
between actual and budgeted expenditure by
targeted ministries reduced from 40% to less
than 10%

Automatic budget execution system
with habilitation to reject all
overruns in place and functioning.
Staff trained in the use of this
system.

(iii) Greater government transparency. Annual
report of the Supreme Audit Authority and
the State General Inspectorate are publicly
available

Annual Training program developed
and implemented.

Transparency and
Governance Capacity
Building Project II

- Attain EITI Validation
- Timely publication of SNPC audit
reports
- Timely publication of quarterly oil

Transparency and
Governance Capacity
Building Project II

(iv) Improvement in petroleum revenue
transparency and governance of sector
institutions. Attain EITI compliance and
remain compliant

37

Other Partners:
IMF

revenue reports

v) Limited capacity in
managing the
nascent mining
sector

(v) Better mining sector management. A modern
mining cadastre is in place.

vi) Poor statistical
quality

(vi) Better statistical system management. Key
data produced in a timely manner

vii) Poor forestry
sector management

(vii) Better timber export management.
Percentage of timber exports covered by a
Forest Law Enforcement Governance and
Trade (FLEGT) legality license increased to
70%.

38

- Analytical work on mining code
and advice on geo-data management
provided
- Legal and institutional frameworks
strengthened
- Guidelines to optimize mining
benefits and social safeguards
adopted
- National Statistics Institute
evaluation of capacity made in 2013
- Preparation of two key sectors data
development strategies in 2014

Other sources to be
explored: (i) trust fund
(e.g. Extractive
Industries Technical
Advisory Facility); (ii)
fee-based service

- Revised forest law incorporating
FLEGT regulatory framework
adopted
- National timber tracking and
legality verification systems fully
operational

Forestry and Economic
Diversification Project.

Statistics Project and
continued dialogue

Other Partners:
European Union

Annex 2. IFC Program Summary
IFC retains a multi-sector approach in Congo and its current activities are as follows:
(i) Support the improvement of the country’s business environment; as Congo stands as
one of the most difficult environments for businesses (ranked 181 out of 183 in the 2012
Doing Business Report), IFC is working with the Bank as part of the response of the World
Bank Group to the request from the Government of the Republic of Congo (GoC) to
improve the investment climate in the country, in particular in the areas measured by the
Doing Business report of the World Bank Group.
(ii) Provide integrated support to SMEs; IFC has held ongoing discussions with two of the
leading commercial banks to help them put in place dedicated units for SME Banking. A
Trade finance line of up to US$10 million has been signed in April 2012 for Credit du
Congo, a subsidiary of the Moroccan Attijariwafa Bank Group (AWB), under the IFC
Global Trade Finance Program (GTFP). To facilitate access to finance for MSMEs, IFC is
in discussion with another commercial bank which currently serves corporate clients and
aims to grow its SME Banking franchise in Congo. IFC may offer Advisory support under
the Africa MSME program, in combination with an equity investment in the bank.
(iii) Proactively engage in the financial, forestry & manufacturing and mining sector
development to identify bankable opportunities. In the Mining sector specifically IFC is
willing to complement the World Bank work aiming at (i) addressing sector governance
issues; and (ii) helping with contract negotiation and capacity building. IFC efforts would
be at firm level, with the prospective investees. IFC is also considering direct investments
in the Forestry and Manufacturing sectors.
(iv) Develop high development impact Advisory Services programs

a) Implement the Health in Africa Initiative (HiA) in Congo: through this joint
initiative, IFC and the World Bank aim at reaching the following objectives (i) assist
the Congolese government in revising the legal and regulatory framework for the
health sector and reform the current inspection regime; (ii) Promote Public Private
contracting; (iii) develop financing opportunities for health businesses; and (iv)
improve health policy and ensure the sustainability of the newly-created Public Private
Dialogue Platform for the health sector during the period 2012-2015.
b) Business Edge projects: In line with its strategy to stimulate private sector growth,
IFC is implementing the Business Edge training to improve the performance of SMEs
by providing them access to practical training solutions. Business Edge aims to
improve the business performance and competitiveness of firms and individuals, and to
create jobs in developing countries. A first project is currently being implemented with
Minoteries du Congo.
c) Focus on OHADA Business Law Reform Program – Under the umbrella of the
Investment Climate Advisory Services Program, the WBG has been supporting
OHADA member countries since 2007 in modernizing the OHADA laws ("Uniform
Acts") and developing registries for companies and secured transactions. IFC offered
its assistance to take the necessary measures, both on the regulatory and the operational
sides, to translate into concrete improvements on the ground for the private sector the
recent reform of the OHADA General Commercial Law and Secured Transactions
Law.

39

Annex 3. Progress toward Millennium Development Goals

Millennium Development
Goals
1. Poverty and Hunger
- Eliminate extreme poverty.
2. Achieve universal primary education
- Increase completion rate to 100%.
3. Promote gender equality
- Raise ratio of girls/boys in primary school to 100%.
4. Reduce child mortality
- Reduce child mortality in children under 5 by twothirds.
5. Improve maternal health
- Reduce the rate of maternal mortality by threefourths.
6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
- Fight against HIV/AIDS.

1990 Millennium
Development Goal
benchmark

Current status
(year)

Likelihood of
achieving
target by 2015

40% (est.)

50.7 (2005)

Low

59%

83% (2010–11)

Medium

0.85

0.97 (2010–11)

Medium

103/1,000 live births

68 /1000 live births
(2011)

Medium

390/100,000 live births
(est.)
3.8%

426/100,000 live
births (2011)
3.2% among 15–49year-olds; 1.7%
among 15–24-yearolds (2009)
50% urban

Low

Low

90% urban
7. Ensure environmental sustainability
- Halve the proportion of individuals without access
Low
to safe water.
75% rural
16% rural
Sources: Enquête sur la Consommation des Ménages; Enquête démographique et de santé du Congo (2011); Rapport d’Etat d’un
Système Educatif National.

40

Annex 4. Government Programs in Transportation Infrastructure

Power
The Government has constructed or renovated a number of power facilities including a
350-megawatt gas-fired power plant in Pointe Noire, a 120-megawatt hydro power plant at
Imboulou, a 70-megawatt hydropower facility at Moukoukoulou, and a 32.5 megawatt
thermal plant in Brazzaville. A high-voltage power transmission line is under construction
from Pointe Noire to Brazzaville. A US$45 million rehabilitation program of the
Brazzaville and Pointe Noire distribution networks is underway. Over the next few years,
the Government plans to invest US$320 million to modernize the electricity supply
networks in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire. The key challenge is to maintain this
infrastructure, which will require strengthening the technical and managerial capacity of
the Société Nationale d'Electricité, the national power utility.
Rail
The Government has put in place a stabilization plan of FCFA 80 billion (US$160 million)
for the state-owned railroad company (CFCO), which is under implementation. Beyond
stabilization, CFCO needs a long-term plan for its development in addition to a better
management of the company.
Port
A priority investment program for the deep sea Port of Pointe Noire of approximately
FCFA 500 billion (US$1 billion) is underway to improve the operational performance of
the port and expand it.
Roads
The Government has embarked on a major program for developing the country‘s road
network over the next five years. The program includes (a) asphalting 1,500 kilometers of
roads at the rate of 300 km per year, and building 2,500 linear meters of bridges at the rate
of 500 linear meters per year, for a total amount of FCFA 1,620 billion (US$3.25 billion);
(b) rehabilitating 750 km of asphalted roads at the rate of 200 km per year, rehabilitating
earth roads interconnecting various districts at the rate of 700 km per year, and replacing
old bridges, for a total of FCFA 750 billion (US$1.50 billion); and (c) maintaining the
asphalted roads network for an amount of FCFA 122.4 billion (US$0.25 billion).

41

Annex 5. Doing Business Indicators
Republic of Congo
Congo
181

CEEAC

170

Rwanda
45

175

151

8

10

9

2

Time (days)

160

61

3

Cost (% of income per capita)

85.2

144.5

4.7

Minimum capital (% of income per
capita)

88.0

147.1

0.0

Dealing with construction permits
(rank)
Procedures (number)

103

110

84

Paying taxes (rank)

14

14

12

186
157.7

184
1374.8

164
312.0

Payments (number per
year)
Time (hours per year)
Total tax rate (% of profit)

152

121

50

5

5

4

129
5,224.0

101
9930.2

30
4,696.8

Ease of doing business (rank)
Starting a business (rank)
Procedures (number)

Time (days)
Cost (% of income per capita)
Getting electricity (rank)
Procedures (number)
Time (days)
Cost (% of income per capita)

Registering property (rank)

156

132

61

Procedures (number)
Time (days)
Cost (% of property value)

6
55
20.6

6
72
11.0

5
25
6.3

98

123

8

Getting credit (rank)
Strength of legal rights index (0-10)
Depth of credit information index (06)
Public registry coverage (% of adults)

6
2

5
2

8
6

8.2

4.5

1.4

Private bureau coverage (% of adults)

0.0

0.0

0.0

42

Rwanda
29

6

6

7

1

2

9

3

4

3

3.3

4.0

6.3

182

157

19

61

41

18

606
65.9

479
79.6

148
31.3

181

156

155

11

9

8

50
3,818

40
2,851

29
3,275

10

10

8

62
7,709

51
3,873

31
4,990

159

160

39

44
560
53.2

43
802
56.6

24
230
78.7

Resolving insolvency
(rank)
Time (years)
Cost (% of estate)

134

164

165

3.3
25

4.7
35

3.0
50

Recovery rate (cents on the
dollar)

17.9

6.2

3.2

Trading across borders
(rank)
Documents to export
(number)
Time to export (days)
Cost to export (US$ per
container)
Documents to import
(number)
Time to import (days)
Cost to import (US$ per
container)
Enforcing contracts
(rank)
Procedures (number)
Time (days)
Cost (% of claim)

Congo
155

CEEAC

129

Protecting investors
(rank)
Extent of disclosure index
(0-10)
Extent of director liability
index (0-10)
Ease of shareholder suits
index (0-10)
Strength of investor
protection index (0-10)

Annex 6. IBRD/IDA Program Summary
Republic of Congo
as of 05/31/2012

Closed Projects 27

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

93.95
0.00
128.54
50.38
222.49
50.38

72.00
0.00
72.00

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P118561
P095251
P084317
P106851
P077513
P106975
P122990
P124085
Overall Result

CG-Econ. Diversification
CG-Agr Rehab SIL (FY07)
CG-Basic Education (FY05)
CG-Health Sector (FY08)
CG-HIV/AIDS & Health (FY04)
CG-Water, Elect., & Urban Dev
CG-Transparency & Governance
CG-Forestry Sector (FY12)

DO

MS
MS
MS
MS
S
S
#
#

IP

Approv.
FY

MS
MS
MS
S
S
S
#
#

2011
2007
2005
2008
2004
2010
2012
2012

43

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions
IBRD

IDA GRANT Cancel. Undisb.

10
20
35
40
24
25.5
5
10
169.5

0.69

0.69

8.9
7.8
5.6
13.4
2.5
18.5
5.1
10
72

Orig. Frm Rev'd

2.5
5.6
-10.4
15
-3.1
3.6

13.2

4.4
1.9

6.3

Annex 7. Performance Assessment of the Country Partnership Strategy FY10-FY12

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This report assesses the performance of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for
the Republic of Congo for FY10–FY12, which was discussed at the Board on May 13,
2009. This CPS completion report (CR) describes an integrated package of financial
support and knowledge services; evaluates the strategy‘s outcomes and the Bank‘s
performance, and draws lessons for the new FY13–FY16 CPS. The May 2, 2011 CPS
Progress Report slightly adjusted the original CPS program and strengthened the CPS
results matrix. This completion report uses the updated results matrix as the reference for
assessing the CPS program‘s performance.
A. Key Drivers of the FY10-FY12 CPS
2.
When the CPS was formulated in late FY09, its driving forces included (a) Congo‘s
excessive dependence on highly volatile oil revenues to fund its budget; (b) social
indicators that were significantly lower than those of comparator countries at similar per
capita income levels; and (b) a huge infrastructure gap, especially in transportation, energy,
and telecommunications. The CPS also recognized Congo‘s immense potential, especially
(a) providing regional transit services thanks to its deep sea port at Pointe-Noire; (b)
significantly increasing agricultural production due to its vast arable land and suitable
climate; and (b) adding value to its forestry and mineral resources through managing them
judiciously.
B. World Bank’s Program Support
3.
In view of the above, the CPS‘ primary objectives were to make a critical
contribution to promote diversified and inclusive economic growth and to improve social
outcomes. The cross-cutting themes were improved governance and institutional capacity
building. In addition to analytical and advisory activities (AAA), this strategy was
implemented via three pathways:
a. An investment lending program for education, health, HIV/AIDS, governance,
agriculture, private sector development, and urban infrastructure/water/energy
development
b. A regional program to support the telecommunications and the financial sectors
c. Support to Congo‘s preparedness for the Reduced Emissions from Deforestation
and Degradation (REDD) initiative, a GEF-funded activity.
The strategy was adapted at mid-term on the basis of the analytical work undertaken during
the CPS‘ implementation,10 the country context (such as persistent youth unemployment)
and lessons drawn from the program‘s implementation. The changes are reported below.

10

―Prioritizing Infrastructure Investments: A Spatial Approach‖; Public Expenditure Review, Mining Sector
Review; and Growth and Employment Study.

44

4.
Under the lending program, a new professional skills development project was
added, and civil society involvement in monitoring World-Bank-funded projects was
scaled up. Under the analytical program, a mining sector review and a public expenditure
review of the human development sectors were added. The advisory services program was
strengthened with an activity to facilitate the dialogue among Congo, Democratic Republic
of Congo (DRC), and the Central African Republic (CAR) concerning the development of
the Congo Basin-Atlantic growth corridor.
II.

CPS PROGRAM PERFORMANCE
A. Overview of Principles of Engagement

5.
In developing its relationship with Congo, the Bank followed three basic principles
of engagement. These were to: (a) move away from a conditionality-based relationship,
which had characterized the Interim Strategy Note preceding this CPS (particularly in the
context of fulfilling the triggers for obtaining debt relief under the Highly Indebted Poor
Countries, or HIPC, initiative), to a relationship that focused on knowledge transfer and
technical assistance; (b) in view of the country‘s rapid pace of events and to be more in
keeping with a dynamic relationship, act flexibly in implementing the CPS; and (c) given
the Government‘s large oil revenues relative to the Bank‘s limited allocation, recognize
that the Bank’s role in the country would be largely that of a “catalyst” for change. The
Bank would leverage its relatively small allocation for Congo to help the country use its
significant oil revenues for economic transformation and poverty alleviation. This
recognition also implied greater selectivity and leveraging Bank resources with the
Government‘s own resources, as well as the Bank‘s reinforcing the global knowledge
dimension of its support.
B. Progress toward CPS Outcomes, by CPS Pillars
6.
Progress toward attaining the CPS global objectives has been moderately
satisfactory. Regarding economic diversification, in recent years, the non-oil sector has
grown by almost 6 percent per annum, led by construction and public works. Indeed, the
non-oil sector‘s share of GDP, which was 3.9 percent in 2009, was estimated at 6.5 percent
in 2010 and had preliminary estimates of 7.4 percent in 2011. However, the non-oil sector
remains narrow. Its growth was hampered by many factors such as infrastructure, although
major efforts are underway to alleviate these constraints. Regarding service delivery,
education enrollments are increasing, although quality remains a concern. However, the
biggest challenge remains in health, for which access is limited and quality remains poor.
7.
Similarly, progress toward attaining the specific CPS outcomes is partially
satisfactory. On the positive side, the Bank supported the Government to undertake a series
of reforms, especially in the final drive to attain the HIPC Completion Point in January
2010. As a result, progress was good on oil commercialization and public expenditure
management, particularly on procurement reforms and liberalization of the
telecommunications sector. The education sector also demonstrated improvement in some
indicators.

45

8.
However, less progress was achieved in improving the business climate,
agriculture, and health. Project implementation was particularly constrained by long
effectiveness delays, slow and inadequate releases of counterpart funding, and low
implementation capacity. The following is a succinct summary of the progress attained for
each CPS outcome.
B.1. CPS Theme 1: Economic diversification and growth agenda
Outcome 1.1: Rendering more effective the management of oil revenue and public
expenditure
As set out under the CPS, the goals for rendering the management of oil revenue more
effective were mostly achieved, although challenges remain. The Bank‘s role was to advise
the Government on carrying out a series of reforms to improve oil commercialization and
oil revenue management. Oil commercialization practices were improved by (a) increasing
competition through a larger number of clients, (b) ending prepayments for petroleum
cargo shipments, and (c) transferring receipts to the Treasury within 15 days. A new set of
procedures that met international standards was adopted; an oil commercialization database
was established; and COTRADE (the oil marketing subsidiary) was integrated in Société
Nationale des Petrole du Congo (SNPC) (Congolese National Oil Company) to streamline
operations. A statistical analysis of data showed that prices received by Congo for oil sales
were broadly in line with those received by international oil companies selling similar oil
on their own behalf. There also was some progress toward Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI) validation. However, the SNPC‘s new accounting system
still needs to be fully implemented. Furthermore, since the completion date of the HIPC
initiative, problems remain in the timely production of independent financial audits and the
certification of oil revenue by a firm of international reputation.
9.
As set out, to render public expenditure more effective, the CPS targets were, for
the most part, although not entirely, achieved. These targets were to (a) eliminate ex-post
regularizations of payments from the Treasury, apart from exceptions stipulated in the
budget law and (b) introduce competitive tendering of large public contracts. The
introduction of quarterly budget plans and improved budget commitment control
drastically reduced ex-post regularizations. Regarding procurement, approximately 60
percent of large contracts are tendered publicly. Although this share is less than the CPS
target of 80 percent, it is a major improvement over the sole-source practices that prevailed
at the beginning of the CPS period.
Outcome 1.2: Enhancing agricultural production and productivity in high potential zones
10.
The set objectives have not been achieved. The CPS targets were to (a) increase the
yield of selected crops by 10 percent in selected high agricultural potential zones and
(b) reduce transportation time on rehabilitated roads by 30 percent. First, it is not yet
possible to measure incremental yield because the baseline was only established in October
2011. Second, similarly, although 559 km of 1050 km of feeder roads were rehabilitated by
May 31, 2012, the impact analysis of rehabilitated roads has not yet been carried out.
Third, the Agriculture Project has suffered severe implementation delays due to the
Government‘s slow release of counterpart funding. As large Government contributions to
projects have become the norm (sometimes multiple times the Bank‘s contribution), the
46

issue of timely release of the Government‘s contributions will be a key determinant of
whether a project attains its objectives.
Outcome 1.3: Putting in place tools for improved forestry management
11.
The objectives as set out were not achieved. Bank support was aimed at assisting
the Government to (a) establish a new transparent and competitive system for awarding
forest concessions; (b) operationalize the revised forest taxation system; (c) operationalize
the new environmental impact assessment regulations; and (d) end the indiscriminate
expansion of mining into national parks and other protected forest areas. Although the
Government adopted the relevant legal and regulatory instruments to improve sector
transparency, and social and environmental performance, implementation either has not
started or is still uneven.
Outcome 1.4: Laying the foundation for the growth of micro, small, and medium
enterprises
12.
The set objectives were partially achieved. Bank support was aimed at (a) ensuring
that banks accounting for 80 percent of the banking sector‘s assets comply with regionally
agreed financial norms; (b) reducing the total tax rate on total profits of small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) from 65 percent to 30 percent; and (c) reducing the average time to set
up a business from 37 days to 7 days. On the positive side, all commercial banks are
broadly in compliance with the prudential ratios, in particular, those pertaining to liquidity,
risk coverage, and the ceiling on risks. Congo‘s banking sector was rated by the Banking
Commission for Central Africa as one of the best in the Economic and Monetary
Community for Central Africa (CEMAC) zone in 2009 and 2010. The market is highly
liquid. Moving forward, the challenge is to help businesses, particularly SMEs, become
―bankable‖ and take advantage of this liquidity.
13.
On the other hand, there was little progress on Doing Business reforms, including
streamlining business taxation and accelerating business registration. In fact, time to
register a business increased from 37 days to 160 days. Taxes on SMEs are at 65.9 percent
(2012 Doing Business report). The Government has developed an action plan to address
these issues. The principal vehicle for the Bank‘s support was the Economic
Diversification Project, whose effective date was delayed (the project is now effective).

47

Outcome 1.5: Improving the services from the Government’s ongoing/planned
infrastructure program
14.
Performance was mixed. Bank support was aimed at (a) modernizing the
telecommunications sector by, among other things, setting up an autonomous, functional
regulator; (b) increasing road maintenance by at least 10 percent annually; and (c)
improving the operational and financial performance of the energy utility, as manifested by
an increase of at least 10 percent in its revenue. On the positive side, the Government
carried out the agreed critical reforms in the telecommunications sector, including the
liberalization of the international gateway and establishment of an independent
telecommunications regulatory authority. Similarly, road maintenance increased by 22
percent in 2010 and by 27 percent in 2011. However, as indicated by the last available
information, during 2009–10, the energy utility was able to raise its revenue by only 5
percent. The needed capacity building has not yet taken place, except for some SouthSouth exchanges that have been facilitated.
Outcome 1.6: Laying the foundation for increasing Congo’s market share in regional
transit services
15.
The foundation for transit was partially achieved. The primary result to be achieved
was the Government‘s adoption of action plans for principal transport corridors. In this
regard, the Bank‘s role was, first, to support the underlying analytical work that would
endow Congo with a prioritization framework for investments along the principal
transportation corridors. This task was achieved through a seminal study, ―Prioritizing
Infrastructure Investments: A Spatial Approach,‖ completed in October 2009. A key result
of this analysis was the importance of the Pointe Noire-Brazzaville railway. The
Government has formulated a short-term stabilization plan for the railway company.
However, a long-term ―action plan‖ is not yet in place, and the process generally has been
very slow. The Bank is assisting the Government‘s efforts with this plan through the
Economic Diversification Project. The Bank also is facilitating the dialogue among the
Republic of Congo, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and the Central African Republic
to examine options for developing the Congo Basin-Atlantic corridor.
B.2. CPS Theme 2: Basic service delivery agenda
Outcome 2.1: Improving the delivery of basic services
16.
Overall, the CPS‘ human development targets were partially achieved. On the
positive side, in the education sector, performance reached close to or surpassed targets.
The CPS‘ education targets were to (a) increase primary-education completion rates from
73 percent to 85 percent and (b) increase the girl-boy ratio from 0.90 to 0.95. As of 2011,
the actual primary education completion rate was 83 percent, and the girl-boy ratio stood at
0.97. The remaining challenges in the sector relate to improving the quality of learning,
and addressing geographic and social disparities in access and performance.
17.
Performance in the health sector was generally mixed, with good progress on the
fight against HIV/AIDS but unclear outcomes on other health indicators. Bank support was

48

meant to culminate in (a) a reduction in the under-5 mortality rate from 126 per 1,000 to
105 per 1,000 and (b) a 20 percent increase in the use of condoms and anti-retroviral in the
fight against HIV/AIDS. Infant mortality rate estimates are not yet known because the
Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) is still ongoing. Generally, the health sector is still
beset by inefficiency in the use of its financial and human resources, and a lack of reliable
statistics. The Government is concerned about this poor performance of the health sector
and has declared 2012 the Year of Health to give it a sharper focus. The health sector will
need sustained Bank support to improve service delivery.
18.
Regarding HIV/AIDS, condom use among men engaged in casual sex increased
from 29 percent in 2009 to 33.3 percent by September 2011. During the same two years,
women reported an increase from 21.0 percent to 38.7 percent. In 2011, sex workers
reported a condom use rate of 81 percent (females) and a 64 percent (males). There was no
baseline in 2009, although the rates were believed to be much lower then. From 2009 to
2011, the number of children using anti-retroviral increased by 2.5 times, while the number
of adults increased by almost two times. During the same period, pregnant women living
with HIV who receive anti-retroviral to reduce the risk of mother-to child transmission
increased from 47.6 percent to 64 percent.
III.

WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE

19.
The World Bank‘s performance is rated moderately satisfactory. The reasons are
linked to the challenges in sustaining the reform momentum after the HIPC completion
point in January 2010, and the slow implementation progress on some activities such as the
Economic Diversification, the Agriculture, and the Health Projects. As indicated earlier,
project implementation was particularly constrained by long effectiveness delays, slow and
inadequate releases of counterpart funding, and low implementation capacity. In some
cases, effectiveness delays were compounded by complicated project design and the
inability to carry out early restructuring to simplify design. As a result, there have been a
series of project extensions. On the positive side, in the last year, project performance
improved markedly resulting from stepped-up portfolio monitoring, project restructuring,
and implementation support.
20.
The FY10–13 CPS was relevant. It addressed the critical issues facing the country,
particularly oil management, economic diversification, and a push to improve social
outcomes that reflect the country‘s growing income level. The CPS‘ design was
appropriate, although slow Government processes and difficulties with disbursements of
counterpart funds hamstrung implementation.
21.
CPS implementation also was well coordinated with other development partners,
especially the AfDB, European Union, French Cooperation, IFC, and IMF. IFC helped the
Government to define the Doing Business action plan. The Bank, AfDB, and EU are
assisting the Government to implement the action plan. The Bank also worked very closely
with the French Cooperation, European Union, and IMF to support governance and public
financial management (including procurement) reforms. The Bank also worked with
French Cooperation in education, and with the European Union and other UN agencies in
health.

49

A. CPS Design
22.
The CPS was fully in line with the Government‘s Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP). The design also recognized the Bank‘s limited country allocation and the
growing Government revenues and sought to maximize selectivity and leverage the Bank‘s
resources to raise counterpart funds. In some cases, the Government‘s contribution has
been up to five times the IDA contribution. Overall, this arrangement is a very good
development and will be the modus operandi moving forward.
23.
However, this arrangement has not been without risks. In certain situations,
extended delays in the Government‘s release of its contribution have hampered faster
implementation. The recent Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) sought to
resolve this persistent problem, including by ensuring adequate budgeting for project
activities during budget preparation, and proper and timely fund requisitions and releases
during disbursements.
24.
The CPS‘ flexibility allowed for timely adaptation to changing circumstances and
priorities. For instance, at one point, it became clear that the management of the energy
sector was going to be a hindrance to fully benefiting from the massive government
investments in power generation capacity. A technical assistance activity quickly was
introduced in the Urban and Water Development Project to help the energy utility look at
ways to improve its performance, although subsequent progress has been slow. Similarly,
the analytical work on growth and employment and country consultations highlighted the
critical importance of skills development as part of the fight against youth unemployment.
A project to address skills development shortcomings readily was introduced into the
program.
25.
Most of the indicators in the Results Matrix correlated directly with the Bank‘s
program of support. However, some indicators did not––a lesson for the next CPS. In
addition, three years to implement the CPS seem to have been rather too short. The next
CPS should consider four years.
B. Implementing the Strategy
26.
The Bank laid a strong emphasis on improving portfolio quality through various
mechanisms:
a. Country Portfolio Performance Reviews (CPPR). These reviews were held
annually and very collaboratively with the Government, including jointly preparing
the background materials as well as managing the event‘s proceedings. The goal
was to cement country ownership and to make all the parties accountable for the
outcomes.
b. Bi-monthly portfolio reviews. These reviews were held with Government
counterparts, project coordinators, and task team leaders (TTLs). They were an

50

opportunity to follow up on the CPPR recommendations, identify key constraints
affecting the performance of the projects, and take corrective decisions.
c. Field-Based Team Leadership. Almost all team leaders are based either in
Brazzaville, or across the river in Kinshasa (Democratic Republic of Congo). This
proximity has facilitated country dialogue and close project monitoring.
d. Adoption of e-signature Disbursement Arrangements. E-signature has greatly
facilitated disbursements and is greatly appreciated by the client.
27.
Because of all these efforts, the portfolio‘s disbursements have begun to pick up.
This movement has taken place despite initial challenges due largely to delayed
effectiveness caused primarily by slow parliamentary ratification processes and slow
release of counterpart funding. The portfolio does not have unsatisfactory projects; proactivity is at 100 percent; and, as of June 30, 2012, a disbursement ratio of 35.9 percent.
This rate is among the highest in the Africa Region against the Regional average of 16
percent. There are no overdue audits or interim financial reports.
Partnership with IFC and MIGA
28.
While capitalizing on each institution‘s comparative advantage and mandate, the
Bank worked very collaboratively with IFC to ensure synergy. MIGA had no exposure in
Congo during the CPS period.


IFC. The Bank is working closely with the IFC in the field. IFC continues to
pursue prospects for involvement in projects/programs in Congo in the following
strategic areas: (a) agribusiness and manufacturing; (b) information
communication technology; (c) access to finance for micro, small, and medium
enterprises (MSMEs); and (d) infrastructure (through public-private partnerships).
On the advisory side, IFC is engaged in (a) providing support to the Government
to improve key areas of the business climate as measured by the Doing Business
report; (b) the OHADA Business Law Reform Program, aimed at supporting
OHADA's efforts to modernize its business law framework and improve the
effectiveness of its implementation11; (c) implementing a capacity building
program in partnership with a local flour mill (Minoterie du Congo) to provide
Business Edge training to 150 bakeries in Pointe Noire and Brazzaville; and (d) the
Health in Africa Initiative in Congo, aimed at improving the health sector in the
country. The Bank coordinated with IFC on these issues.



MIGA. Congo has been a MIGA member since 1991, and contributed to the
General Capital Increase in March 2003. MIGA has no exposure in Congo, and
there is no active application.

11

Organisation pour l'Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des Affaires (OHADA) is an organization to
harmonize business law in the 17 African countries that are signatories to the OHADA treaty.

51

C. Managing the Risks
29.
The CPS (including updates at mid-term review) had defined six risks: (a) possible
fallout from the 2008–09 global financial crisis; (b) breakdown in the fragile peace,
especially arising from the 2009 presidential elections; (c) social tensions from growing
unemployment; (d) vested interests undermining reforms; (e) environmental concerns
arising from the Government‘s massive infrastructure program; and (f) fiduciary issues in
Bank-supported projects.
30.
The risks as identified were appropriate, although some of the assigned
probabilities of occurrence were higher than turned out to be the case. Just as predicted at
mid-term review, the fallout from the global crisis was mild, and the aftermath of the 2009
presidential elections remained peaceful. Fortunately, the predicted medium-high
likelihood of unemployment-related social unrest, willfully orchestrated resistance to
reforms by vested interests, and reports of major environmental breaches associated with
the Government‘s infrastructure program did not materialize as feared. On the other hand,
concerns over fiduciary issues in Bank-supported projects did materialize as feared.


Global financial crisis. The impact of the 2008–09 global financial crisis was mild
and short-lived, because oil prices and forestry activities rebounded sooner than
expected. In the long term, the Congolese economy‘s over-dependence on
extractive industries keeps it exposed to fluctuations in international commodity
prices.



Fallout from presidential elections. The concern of possible fallout from the
general elections held in July 2009 did not materialize. The remaining belligerents
were integrated in the Government in late 2009. Legislative elections took place in
July 2012.



Tensions from high unemployment and inequality. No violent expressions of social
discontent occurred arising from the large number of unemployed youth and the
high levels of income inequality. The Government is cognizant of this challenge
and is increasing its focus on stimulating non-oil growth and improving access to
employment. Several programs, including the Economic Diversification Program,
the development of Special Economic Zones (SEZs), and skills training, are aimed
at creating employment opportunities. The World Bank will continue to support
the Government in these efforts.



Pace of reform process. The pace of reforms has been mixed but generally
positive, aided by the push toward the HIPC completion point in January 2010.
There have been no signs of resistance willfully orchestrated by vested interests.
The pace of reforms has been dictated largely by the complexity of the reforms
and/or insufficient capacity for their implementation but at times, delays in moving
forward have been experienced as a result of resistance to full transparency in the
oil sector.

52



Environmental concerns. Although no major risks manifested themselves during
the CPS period, the concern that the Government‘s ambitious infrastructure
investment program could pose social and environmental challenges remains.
Support to the Government to strengthen environmental management will
continue. Environmental opportunities, such as biodiversity offsets, watershed
protection programs linked to hydropower developments and carbon credits that
can be gained from adopting low greenhouse gas emissions practices, also should
be explored.



Fiduciary issues. Although fiduciary performance at the project level remained
good during most of the CPS period, an April 2012 fiduciary assessment mission
identified some internal controls as well as accounting issues in some projects.
These issues related to (a) lack of supporting documents for missions and
workshops, (b) absence of non objection by the Bank to some transactions, and (c)
delays in bookkeeping and improper filing. These issues are currently being
addressed, including ensuring full implementation of the internal and external
auditors‘ recommendations, and strict adherence to fiduciary procedures and
processes.

IV. LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS
At the strategic level
31.
Intensifying support for improving the quality of the Government’s investment
spending. From 2009–11, the Government‘s investment spending grew at an average
annual rate of 30 percent. The management of this investment program could overwhelm
the country‘s limited absorptive capacity. In addition to public procurement, future World
Bank support needs to focus on project planning, preparation, and selection, as well as
ensure adequate provisions for proper operation and maintenance of this infrastructure.
32.
Accentuating the Bank’s knowledge agenda. Analytical work carried out during the
CPS period significantly facilitated informed decisions on policy options including the (a)
―Prioritizing Infrastructure Investments: A Spatial Approach,‖ (b) Public Expenditure
Review, (c) Mining Sector Review, and (d) Growth and Employment Study. Such seminal
analytical pieces should remain one of the tools to guide policy choice, particularly when
dealing with issues including ensuring greater selectivity and efficiency in investment
spending, and youth unemployment. Knowledge sharing, including fostering South-South
cooperation, also will be critical in capacity building efforts for both the public and private
sectors. In view of the declining IDA allocation to Congo and the Bank‘s limited operating
budget, some of this support will have to be provided on a fee basis.
33.
Continuing the focus on improving the capacity and working conditions for the
public administration. Capacity in the public administration continues to be a constraint to
the conception, execution, and monitoring of government programs. As the Government
moves toward a results-based approach, it will need more performing statistical systems to
better evaluate outcomes, which currently is not the case. In addition, the Bank‘s

53

progressive move from a project approach to sectoral support, with no more project
implementation units (PIUs), will necessitate stronger government capacity.
34.
Maintaining the reform momentum. Significant progress was achieved in areas such
as public procurement and oil commercialization. Nevertheless, a great deal of support is
still needed in these and in other areas, such as improving the business climate, in which
little progress has been registered so far.
At the operational level
35.
Finding a lasting solution to counterpart funding. Largely due to the phasing out of
the special post-conflict allocation, the IDA allocation to the Republic of Congo has been
reduced drastically from approximately US$65 million under the IDA-15 three-year cycle
to approximately US$35 million under the IDA-16 cycle. On the other hand, government
investment spending is growing rapidly as indicated above. Consequently, the IDA
contribution toward jointly funded government programs is far lower than the
Government‘s contribution. The main challenge of this otherwise very welcome
development is the disruption caused to project implementation by belated releases of the
government contributions. Moving forward, it is critical that a lasting solution be obtained
to ensure a smooth flow of funds to jointly funded programs.
36.
Focusing on implementation readiness. The Water, Electricity, and Urban
Development Project was able to start disbursing immediately upon effectiveness because
of the significant procurement work done during project preparation. This result
underscores the need to focus on implementation readiness during project preparation to
avoid lengthy effectiveness delays (especially those of a technical nature), as well as to
facilitate early implementation and disbursement. However, an additional significant cause
of the effectiveness delays was slow parliamentary ratification of credit agreements. To
alleviate this constraint, it is important that parliamentarians be briefed frequently during
project preparation and that parliamentary session cycles are coordinated with projects
processing schedules.
37.
Early project restructuring to avoid prolonged stay in problem status. The health
project had a particularly extended stay in problem status. This delay was due to, among
other things, the complexity of the project and the absence of a project coordinator. The
project was restructured––but belatedly––to simplify the design, target interventions, and
expedite implementation. Other projects also experienced disbursement delays and have
had to be extended past their original closing dates. More generally, it is critical that
project implementation difficulties be discerned early and corrective actions taken as
quickly as possible. The Country Management Unit (CMU) and the concerned Sector
Management Units should be bolder in taking corrective actions.
38.
Establishing a clear linkage between the CPS Program and the CPS Outcomes. For
instance, strong support was envisaged and eventually provided for improving oil
management, but no associated indicators had been defined in the CPS Results Matrix.
Conversely, an indicator was defined in the CPS Results Matrix to reduce the primary non-

54

oil deficit, although accomplishing this depended on many factors, some of which were
beyond the influence of the Bank.
39.
Building synergies within the WB group. IFC and the Bank worked very
collaboratively on improving Doing Business in Congo, with IFC preparing a reform
memo that served as a basis for the Government to prepare a Doing Business action plan.
The Bank supported the implementation of this action plan through the Economic
Diversification Project. This level of collaboration needs to be enhanced, especially in
strengthening SME capacity. This collaboration also could be extended to MIGA in
attracting investment, especially in the proposed SEZs.

55

Attachment 1. Summary of CPS Program Self-Evaluation
CPS expected
outcomes and
outcome indicators

WBG
instruments
used

Status and evaluation summary

Lessons and suggestions for new CPS

CPS Theme 1. Diversifying the economy to spur broad-based growth
CPS Outcome 1.1 : More
effective management of oil
revenue and public
expenditure

1.

Outcome 1.1: Partially achieved.
There were significant improvements in oil
commercialization and public expenditure management,
with several reforms implemented in lead-up to HIPC
completion point in January 2010. However, non-oil
deficit and performance in public procurement fell short
of their targets.

Nonoil primary deficit
reduced from 45% in 2008
to 30% of nonoil GDP.

1.

Partially Achieved. Nonoil primary deficit as
percent of nonoil GDP declined to 36% in 2009 but
then remained stable at 35% in 2010 and 34% in
2011.

2.

No ex-post regularization
of payments apart from
exceptions as defined by
budget law.

2.

Achieved. Incidence of ex-post regularization of
payments, apart from exceptions as defined by
budget law, have significantly declined since 2009
due to establishment of quarterly budget execution
plan as well as improved budget commitment‘s
control.

3.

At least 80% of public
contracts in excess of
FCFA 250 million subject
to competitive bidding.
(Currently, most contracts
are sole-sourced.)

3.

Partially Achieved. Percentage of contracts over
FCFA 250 million that were subjected to
competitive bidding was estimated at 60% in 2011.
Various bids came in at well below original
estimate, resulting in Government savings
compared to direct contracting. This progress is
significant given fact that most contracts had been
sole-sourced before the new Code came into effect.

56

AAA
a) Oil Revenue
Management Review
(FY08–09)
b) Policy dialogue on
oil revenue
management
c) Public
Expenditure Review
(FY10)

Projects
Transparency and
Governance Capacity
Building Project
(FY04–12; Rated S
at closing).
New Governance and
Capacity Building
Project was approved
in January 2012.

There is need for establishing a clear linkage between
CPS Program and CPS Outcomes. For instance, strong
support was envisaged and eventually provided for
improving oil management, but no associated indicators
had been defined in CPS Results Matrix.
Conversely, an indicator was defined in CPS Results
Matrix to reduce primary nonoil deficit. Accomplishing
this indicator depended on many factors, some of which
were beyond influence of Bank.
AAA can underpin dialogue in tough sectors. AAA was
essential in providing elements for a constructive and
well-informed dialogue on oil management that
facilitated progress in an otherwise difficult sector with
many vested interests.

CPS Outcome 1.2: Enhanced
agricultural productivity and
marketing

Outcome 1.2: Not Achieved. Some farm inputs and
training were provided, and some feeder roads
rehabilitated. However, project implementation was
slow, mainly due to delays in releasing counterpart
funding. Low Government capacity also a factor.

1.

Average yields for
cassava, maize, banana,
and groundnuts among
farmers benefiting from
project interventions
increased by 10% over
2009 levels.

1. Not Rated. Survey launched in 2009 to obtain
baseline indicators was completed only in October
2011. Therefore, it is not yet possible to measure
comparative changes in yields. First such measurements
will be conducted later in 2012.

2.

Transportation time in
areas with rehabilitated
rural roads is reduced by
30%.

2. Not Achieved. So far, only 559 km out of 1050 km of
planned priority rural roads are rehabilitated under
Bank-funded Agriculture Project. It is assumed that
transportation cost and time have been reduced, but no
survey has been done yet to assess impact.

CPS Outcome 1.3: Tools put
in place for improved forestry
management

Outcome 1.3: Partially Achieved.

1.

New transparent and
competitive award system
for forest concessions is
established.

1.

Partially Achieved. Decree on forest concessions
that allows greater competition and transparency in
their award was adopted in Sept. 2009.
Transparency in concession awards has improved,
but application is not yet consistent.

2.

Revised forest taxation
system is operational.

2.

Partially Achieved. Parliament adopted a legal
package on forest taxation (passed as an
amendment to the Forest Law), but implementation
is not yet effective.

3.

New Environmental

3.

Not Achieved. Decree on social and EIA, which

New tools to improve forestry management were
adopted in 2009 by Government and Parliament in
context of HIPC initiative, but implementation remains
a challenge.

57

Projects
Agricultural
Development and
Rural Roads
Rehabilitation
Project (FY07–13;
Rated MS)

AAA
Strong advisory
support was provided
in drive to HIPC
point. Putting in
place a forestry legal
and regulatory
framework was one
trigger.

There is a strong need to improve release of counterpart
funding. Plans have been put in place for better
monitoring of budget planning and execution.
To ascertain impact of government programs, it is
necessary to continue strengthening government
capacity, including for M&E.

Instituting major reforms is a long process that requires
sustained support. As a follow-up to the strong advisory
support provided to the Government to enact the
forestry reforms, a new Forestry Project was approved
in May 2012 to support the implementation of the
reforms.

Impact Assessment (EIA)
regulations are operational.

4.

Indiscriminate expansion
of mining into national
parks and other protected
forest areas ended.

provides full environmental and social assessment
of projects to be implemented in forest areas, was
adopted in Sept 2009 but it is not yet operational.
4.

Partially Achieved. Decree on contradictory use
of forest lands, which helps address cases in which
concessions or other permits have been issued for
conflicting use of forest lands (that is, cases in
which mining permits were awarded in national
parks) was adopted in Sept 2009. However, the
Commission for resolving conflicts regarding
forest land use is not yet operational. Effective
implementation of the decree requires a strong
coordination within the Government.

CPS Outcome 1.4:
Foundation laid for MSME
growth

Outcome 1.4: Not Achieved.
Although the banking sector‘s compliance with banking
regulations is generally good, Congo‘s ranking in Doing
Business has deteriorated from 178 of 181 to countries
in 2009 (fourth position from bottom) to 181 of 183
economies in 2012 (third from bottom). The
Government recently adopted a comprehensive Doing
Business action plan, which will be supported by Bank‘s
ongoing Economic Diversification Project.

1.

1.

Banks accounting for 80%
of sector assets comply
with regionally agreed
financial norms.

Achieved. All commercial banks are broadly in
compliance with prudential ratios and Congo‘s
banking sector was rated by Commision Bancaire
pour l’Afrique Centrale (COBAC) as one of the
best in the Communauté Economique et Monétaire
de l’Afrique Centrale (CEMAC) zone in 2009 and
2010. Market is highly liquid.

Projects
Support to Economic
Diversification
Project (FY11–16;
Rated MS) became
effective in Nov
2011 and is
supporting key
Doing Business
reforms.

AAA
IFC prepared a
Doing Business
reform memo that
highlighted key
reform areas.
Growth and
Employment study
(FY12) underscored
importance of nonoil
growth.

58

2.

Total tax rate as a
percentage of total profits
is reduced from current
65% to 30%.

3.

Average time required to
start a business is reduced
from 37 days to 7 days.

CPS Outcome 1.5: Improved
infrastructure services
delivery

1.

2.

Existence of a functional
autonomous
telecommunications
regulator.
Revenue collected per
kWh delivered to the
Brazzaville distribution
network increases by 10%
from 2009 levels
(additional increases to
occur beyond CPS period).

2.

Not Achieved. Total tax rate as a percentage of
total profits is estimated at 65% in Doing Business
2012. Congo has declined by 2 positions in paying
taxes indicator from 180 in Doing Business 2011 to
182 in 2012.

3.

Not Achieved. Average time required to start a
business is 160 days in the 2012 Doing Business
report compared to 37 days in 2008. Increase in
time to start a business is due to inefficiencies in
process to start a business since 2008 reform. Time
to deliver the carte de commercant from the Centre
des Formalités des Entreprises increased to 3
months and time to register with social security and
for taxes increased to 1 month each.

Outcome 1.5: Partially Achieved.
Although road maintenance is improving and
telecommunications sector is growing, the energy sector
(and the energy utility in particular) still is performing
poorly and is a major focus of government attention.
1.

2.

Achieved. Independent telecommunications
regulatory authority was established and is fully
operational.

Not Achieved. Revenue collected per kWh
delivered to the Brazzaville distribution network
increased by 5% between 2009 and 2010, latest
figures available. In 2010 total revenue collected
increased by 9% from CFAF 8,499 million to
CFAF 9,226 million, partly explained by the
increase in the number of subscribers from 79,144
in 2009 to 82,482 in 2010.

59

Projects
Regional Telecom
Project (FY12–14;
Rated S)
Water, Electricity
and Urban
development Project
(FY10–16; Rated S)
AAA
Policy dialogue on
Telecom sector

In view of government‘s growing investment program
and considering its weak implementation capacity,
there is need to support it in investment planning and
management.

3.

Km of roads maintained
annually increase by 10%
over 2009 levels.

CAS Outcome 1.6: Congo lays
foundation for increasing its
market share in regional
transit services

1.

Action plans for the
principal corridors
identified in the analysis
are adopted (their
implementation falls
beyond this CPS period)

3.

Achieved. Number of km of roads maintained
increased by 22% from 450 km in 2009 to 550 km
in 2010 and more than 700 km in 2011.

Outcome 1.6: Partially Achieved.
While a Corridor study completed in 2009 shed light on
prioritization and sequencing issues of infrastructure
investments, reforms for some of the critical
infrastructure, especially the Brazzaville-Pointe Noire
Railway (Chemin de Fer Congo Océan, or CFCO) have
been very slow.
1.

Achieved. In 2009 completed corridor study,
―Prioritizing Infrastructure Investments: A Spatial
Approach,‖ which shed light on the prioritization
and sequencing issues of infrastructure
investments.

Projects
Support to Economic
Diversification
Project (SEDP)
(FY11–16; Rated
MS)
AAA
Corridor study,
―Prioritizing
Infrastructure
Investments: A
Spatial Approach‖
(FY09)

CPS Theme 2: Improving public service delivery, particularly to most vulnerable groups
CPS Outcome 2.1: Basic
services delivery improved

1.

2.

Increase in primary
education completion from
73 in the 2006–07 school
year to 85% in the 2011–
12 school year.
The girl-boy ratio of
primary school enrollment
has increased from 0.90 in
the 2006–07 school year to
0.95 in the 2010–11 school
years.

Outcome 2.1: Partially Achieved.
Whereas some progress has been made in improving
service delivery in the education sector, the health sector
remains a challenge.
1.

2.

Partially Achieved. Primary education completion
rate has increased from 73 in the 2006–07 school
year to 83% in the 2010–11 school year.

Achieved. Girl-boy ratio of primary school
enrollment has increased from 0.90 in the 2006–07
school year to 0.97 in the 2010–11 school year.

60

Projects
Support to Basic
Education
Project (FY05–
12; Rated MS)
Health Sector
Services
Development
(FY09–12; Rated
S)
Water, Electricity
and Urban
Development
Project (FY10–
15; Rated S)

Generally, there is need to consolidate gains in human
development sectors, especially focusing on spending
efficiency and equity issues, particularly health, in
which progress has been slower.

3.

Not Rated. Data are not available to measure
progress made since 2007 (Demographic and Health
Survey is underway, with data expected later in
2012). However, according to the 2010 Millennium
Development Goals report, Congo is unlikely to
meet the 2015 targets in the health sector.

4.

Percentage of (a) women
4.
and men aged 15–49 years
who have had more than
one sexual partner in the
past 12 months reporting
the use of a condom during
their last sexual intercourse
increased by 20% (against a
2009 baseline); (b) female
and male sex workers who
report using a condom with
their most recent client (of
those surveyed having sex
with any clients during the
last 12 months) increased
by 20% (against a 2009
baseline).

Not Achieved. Condom use is up from 29% in 2009
to 33.3% among men, and from 21% to 38.7%
among women.

5.

Percentage of (a) adults and 5.
children diagnosed with
advanced HIV infection
receiving antiretroviral
combination therapy
increased by 20% (against a
2009 baseline); (b) pregnant
women living with HIV
who receive antiretroviral
to reduce risk of mother-tochild transmission is
increased by 20% (against a
2009 baseline).

Achieved. Number of children on anti-retroviral
increased by 2.5 times between 2009 and 2011,
while the number of adults doubled.

3.

Under-5 mortality rate
from 126/1,000 (2007) to
105/1,000.

61

HIV/AIDS and
Health Project
(FY04–12; Rated
S at closing)

Attachment 2. Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY10-FY12)
CPS PLAN

Status
US$mil.
IBRD

2010

2011

US$mil.

IDA

IBRD

Economic Diversification
Support Project
Urban, Water, and Energy

10.0

Actual

10.0

22.5

Actual

25.0

Subtotal

32.5

Subtotal

35.0

Regional
Telecommunications Project
Subtotal

15.0

Actual

15.0

15.0

Subtotal

15.0

Total FY2010–2011

47.5

50.0

PROGRESS REPORT PLAN (April 12, 2011)
2012

IDA

Forestry Project
Supplemental to Governance
Project

STATUS
20.0
5.0

Subtotal

25.0

Total FY 2010–2012

72.5

62

Actual
Actual (was
converted into a
standalone project)
Subtotal

10.0
5.0

15.0
65.0

Attachment 3: Planned Non-Lending Services and Actual Deliveries (FY10-FY12)

CPS Plan
2010 HIPC Completion Report
Support to the Forestry Sector
Public Expenditure Review
Support for Preparation of a
National Statistical
Development Strategy
Oil Revenue Management
Support

2011
2012

Growth and Employment
Study
None

Status
Completed in January 2010
Completed in January 2010
Completed in May 2010
Completed in June 2012

Ongoing (to be completed in August 2012)
Additional actual products: Support for the
development of the strategy on the Technologies
of Information and Communication (ICT),
completed in 2010
Corridor study, ―Prioritizing Infrastructure
Investments: A Spatial Approach,‖ completed in
October 2009
Completed in October 2011
Additional actual products: Trade Policy and
Facilitation (DTIS): Ongoing (to be completed in
March 2013)
Additional product added at mid-term: PER in
HD Sectors: Ongoing (to be completed in April
2013)

63

Annex 8. Summary of Consultations
Country Partnership Strategy

Promoting SME Development







Strengthening managerial and finance capacity for existing SMEs.
Promoting access to credit, especially mid- to long term, the lack of which is exacerbated by
the paucity of bankable projects and concerns about SMEs‘ low managerial capacity.
Streamlining the tax system, specifically, the multiple levels of taxation as well as the large
number of administrative units with which companies must contend, both of which are
operational and cost burdens.
Addressing lack of suitable skills in the labor market because current training programs not
suitably adapted.
Strengthening industry associations and professional societies.
Promoting sectors with a significant potential, such as agribusiness and construction.

Improving Oversight of Government Programs







Strengthening the monitoring and evaluation of government programs, including (a) regular
production of credible statistical data to establish sound baselines, and improve budget planning
and monitoring; (b) consulting direct beneficiaries especially by leveraging cell phone
technology.
Promoting transparency by making available to the public greater access to information,
including publication of budget reports, natural resource contracts (such as for mining) and the
related social and environmental studies, and government revenue, including the oil stabilization
account.
Enhancing student employability by aligning training curricula with private sector needs.
Participants cited the paucity of skills on mining and oil as a case in point.
Prioritizing gender equity, particularly regarding access to education and jobs.

Other Key Strategic Considerations






Ensuring access to electricity and water.
Promoting regional integration, especially through cross border trade.
Improving urban sanitation, a critical health issue.
Promoting decentralization for better conception, implementation, and monitoring of programs.
Fighting against corruption by strengthening the capacity of those involved in fighting
corruption.

Strengthening Collaboration with the Bank





Consulting more through exchanging views more often with civil society, academics, and
parliamentarians.
Communicating more by explaining more about the Bank‘s activities in the country.
Partnering more through involving local think thanks more in Bank-funded activities such as
ESWs.
Strengthening civil society to enable them play a bigger role in Congo‘s development.

64

Annex 9. Country at a Glance

Republic of Congo - As of 03/29/12

65

Annex 10. Selected Indicators of World Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Republic of Congo
As of 05/31/ 2012
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
a
Number of Projects Under Implementation

2009

2010

2011

5

6

6

2012
7

4.1

4.3

3.8

4.1

Percent of Problem Projects by Number

a, c

20.0

33.3

33.3

0.0

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount

a, c

14.2

36.1

39.0

0.0

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number

a, d

20.0

50.0

33.3

57.1

Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount

a, d

14.2

49.4

39.0

65.7

20.7

14.9

22.9

31.8

Disbursement Ratio (%)

e

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum Item

Since FY 80

Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number

Last Five FYs

20

1

475.0

39.7

73.7

0.0

86.2

0.0

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
Notes:

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

66

Annex 11 Selected Social Indicators
Republic of Congo
As of 04/17/2012
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Grow th rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per w oman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Low est quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net prim ary school enrollm ent rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an im proved w ater source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Im m unization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2004-10

SubSaharan
Africa

Low erm iddleincom e

2.1
2.9
52.2
5.8

2.7
2.7
56.4
5.1

4.0
2.7
62.1
4.5

853.4
2.5
37.4
4.9

2,518.7
1.6
39.4
2.9

..
..
..

..
..
..

50.1
..
57.7

980
43

430
70

2,240
123

1,188
147

1,623
140

..
..
..

..
..
..

47.3
5.0
53.1

..
4.6

1.9
..

1.6
6.2

2.9
5.0

1.7
4.0

89
90
88

..
..
..

91
92
89

75
77
73

85
87
83

..
..
..

..
95
..

71
95
32

61
83
49

87
93
83

67
54
..

38
50
..

76
90
12

75
77
22

80
79
25

57
56
59

55
54
56

57
56
58

54
53
55

65
64
67

77
122

70
110

61
93

76
121

50
69

..
..
..
..

..
..
520
..

335
301
580
83

379
346
650
46

244
175
300
57

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series betw een 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 17 April 2012.

67

Annex 12. International Partners
Ongoing and Planned Activities

Activities
VI. Agency
AFD
Infrastructure (mostly the port of Pointe Noire), primary and professional
education, environment/forestry/biodiversity, health, and, to a limited extent,
support to the private and banking sectors. In addition, since 2011, a specific
initiative named ‗Debt-Cleaning Development Contract‖ is being implemented. It
includes a large infrastructure component for Brazzaville (run-off management,
solid waste management, and roads).
AfDB
Drinking water and sanitation, energy, economic management, and improving
business climate.
BDEAC
Private sector development support planned in 2012, particularly in
entrepreneurship, business creation, and vocational training.
China
Transportation, energy and water sectors, among others.
EU
Regional integration (mainly transport infrastructure), governance (public finance
management), economic diversification (improving business climate, forestry
management), health, and the judiciary.
FAO
Food security, covering natural resource management, agricultural intensification,
diversification of production systems, and early warning systems, among others.
India
Rural electrification.
UNDP
Governance, energy and environment, climate change (―UN-REDD‖ with FAO
and UNEP), crisis prevention, women‘s empowerment, and general poverty
reduction.
UNICEF
Malnutrition, immunization programs, especially against polio, social protection
among other issues.

68

Annex 13. Selected Macroeconomic Indicators

GDP growth
Oil
Non-oil
Inflation

Gross national savings
Gross investment
Public investment
Private investment
Current account balance

Exports, merchandise
Imports, merchandise
Non-factor services, balance
Income, investment and labor
Gross international reserves
GDP

2007

2008

2009

-1.6
-17.2
6.6
2.6

5.6
6.1
5.4
6.0

7.5
16.2
3.9
4.3

15.3
21.8
10.4
11.4
-6.5

20.6
18.3
8.9
9.4
2.3

15.1
22.5
10.8
11.7
-7.4

6,287
2,165
(2,020)
(2,620)
2,163

8,549
2,919
(2,276)
(3,091)
3,791

6,400
2,453
(2,003)
(2,615)
3,874

8,407

11,915

9,618

(*) Projections as of April 2012.
Source: Congolese authorities, IMF and Bank staff calculations.

69

2010
2011
2012*
(Percent annual changes)
8.8
3.4
5.7
13.8
-4.8
-3.4
6.5
7.4
9.7
5.0
1.8
5.1

2013*

2014*

2015*

5.6
-0.6
8.0
4.5

5.4
-1.2
7.8
3.0

4.7
-6.3
8.2
2.9

34.8
34.7
25.7
9.0
0.1

31.9
29.7
20.6
9.1
2.2

30.2
29.1
19.6
9.5
1.1

29.3
28.9
18.8
10.0
0.4

(in US$ million)
9,800
12,092
12,479
3,525
4,934
6,187
(2,614)
(2,633)
(2,760)
(2,985)
(3,716)
(3,791)
4,433
5,776
8,536

13,028
5,852
(2,934)
(3,879)
11,624

13,007
6,094
(2,974)
(3,700)
14,351

12,375
6,124
(2,867)
(3,246)
16,768

12,030

16,485

17,094

17,039

(in percent of GDP)
25.5
30.8
20.5
25.4
10.0
16.0
10.5
9.3
5.1
5.5

14,440

15,301

Map of the Republic of Congo
No. IBRD 33390

70

